[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05056)  [Next](cc05058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.x"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p1"></span><span id="vi.x-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
33](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#000)<span id="vi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p2"></span><span id="vi.x-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
33:1-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)<span id="vi.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord said unto Moses, Depart,
*and* go up hence, thou and the people which thou hast brought up out of
the land of Egypt, unto the land which I sware unto Abraham, to Isaac,
and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it:

<span id="vi.x-p4"></span>**1.** Loquutus autem fuerat Jehova ad Mosen:
Vade, ascende hinc tu et populus quem eduxisti e terra *A*Egypti in
terram de qua juravi ipsi Abraham, Isaac, et Jacob, dicendo, Semini tuo
dabo eam.

<span id="vi.x-p5"></span>**2.** And I will send an Angel before thee;
and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Arnorite, and the Hittite, and
the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite;

<span id="vi.x-p6"></span>**2.** Et mittam ante to Angelum, et ejiciam
Chananaeum, et Amorrhaeum, et Hitthaeum, et Perizaeum, Hivaeum, et
Jebusaeum.

<span id="vi.x-p7"></span>**3.** Unto a land flowing with milk and
honey: for I will not go up in the midst of thee; for thou *art* *a*
stiff-necked people: lest I consume thee in the way.

<span id="vi.x-p8"></span>**3.** Ad terram scilicet fluentem lacte et
melle. Non enim ascendam in medio tui (nam populus durae cervicis es) ne
forte consumam to in via.

<span id="vi.x-p9"></span>**4.** And when the people heard these evil
tidings, they mourned: and no man did put on him his ornaments.

<span id="vi.x-p10"></span>**4.** Audiens autem populus verbum hoc
malum, luxerunt: nec posuit quisquam ornamentum suum super se.

<span id="vi.x-p11"></span>**5.** For the Lord had said unto Moses, Say
unto the children of Israel, Ye *are* a stiff-necked people; I will come
up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee: therefore now
put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee.

<span id="vi.x-p12"></span>**5.** Dixerat enim Jehova ad Mosen, Die
filiis Israel, Vos estis populus durae cervicis: momento uno ascendam in
medium tui, et consumam te. Nunc ergo depone ornamentum tuum a te, et
sciam quid faciam tibi.

<span id="vi.x-p13"></span>**6.** And the children of Israel stripped
themselves of their ornaments by the mount Horeb.

<span id="vi.x-p14"></span>**6.** Et spoliaverunt se filii Israel
ornamentis suis a monte Horeb.

<span id="vi.x-p15"></span>**7.** And Moses took the tabernacle, and
pitched it without the camp, afar off from the camp, and called it The
Tabernacle of the Congregation. And it came to pass, *that* every one
which sought the Lord went out unto the tabernacle of the congregation,
which *was* without the camp.

<span id="vi.x-p16"></span>**7.** Moses autem accepit tabernaculum, et
extendit illud sibi extra castra, procul a castris: (vocaverat autem
illud tabernaculum conventionis) et quicunque requirebat Jehovam,
egrediebatur ad tabernaculum conventionis quod erat extra castra.

<span id="vi.x-p17"></span>**8.** And it came to pass, when Moses went
out unto the tabernacle, *that* all the people rose up, and stood every
man *at* his tent-door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into
the tabernacle.

<span id="vi.x-p18"></span>**8.** Praeterea quando egrediebatur Moses ad
tabernaculum, assurgebat universus populus: stabantque singuli ad ostium
tentorii sui, et aspiciebant post Mosen, donec ingrederetur
tabernaculum.

<span id="vi.x-p19"></span>**9.** And it came to pass, as Moses entered
into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar descended, and stood *at* the
door of the tabernacle, and *the* *Lord* talked with Moses.

<span id="vi.x-p20"></span>**9.** Erat autem quando egrediebatur Moses
tabernaculum, descendebat columna nubis, stabatque ad ostium
tabernaculi, et loquebatur eum Mose.

<span id="vi.x-p21"></span>**10.** And all the people saw the cloudy
pillar stand *at* the tabernacle-door: and all the people rose up and
worshipped, every man *in* his tent-door.

<span id="vi.x-p22"></span>**10.** Videns vero universus populus
columnam nubis stantem ad ostium tabernaculi, assurgebat universus
populus, et adorabat quisque ad ostium tentorii sui.

<span id="vi.x-p23"></span>**11.** And the Lord spake unto Moses, face
to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And he turned again into the
camp: but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, departed not
out of the tabernacle.

<span id="vi.x-p24"></span>**11.** Et loquebatur Jehova facie ad faciem,
quemadmodum alloquitur quispiam amicum sumn: postea revertebatur ad
castra, at minister ejus Jehosua filius Nun juvenis non recedebat e
medio tabernaculi.

<span id="vi.x-p25"></span>**12.** And Moses said unto the Lord, See,
thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people: and thou hast not let me know
whom thou wilt send with me: yet thou hast said, I know thee by name,
and thou hast also found grace in my sight.

<span id="vi.x-p26"></span>**12.** Et dixit Moses ad Jehovam, Vide tu
dicis mihi, Educ populum hunc, et tu non indicasti mihi quem missurus
sis mecum. Atqui tu dixisti, Novi te ex nomine, atque etiam invenisti
gratiam in oculis meis.

<span id="vi.x-p27"></span>**13.** Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have
found grace in thy sight, shew me now thy way, that I may know thee,
that I may find grace in thy sight; and consider that this nation *is*
thy people.

<span id="vi.x-p28"></span>**13.** Nunc ergo si modo inveni gratiam in
oculis tuis, ostende quaeso mihi viam tuam et cognoscam to, atque
inventare gratiam in oculis ruts, et vide quod populus tuus sit gens
ista.

<span id="vi.x-p29"></span>**14.** And he said, My presence shall go
*with* *thee,* and I will give thee rest.

<span id="vi.x-p30"></span>**14.** Et dixit, Facies mea praecedet, et
requiescere faciam te.

<span id="vi.x-p31"></span>**15.** And he said unto him, If thy presence
go not *with* *me,* carry us not up hence.

<span id="vi.x-p32"></span>**15.** Cui respondit, Nisi facies tua
praecedat, ne educas nos hinc.

<span id="vi.x-p33"></span>**16.** For wherein shall it be known here
that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? *Is* *it* not in
that thou goest with us? so shall we be separated, I and thy people,
from all the people that *are* upon the face of the earth.

<span id="vi.x-p34"></span>**16.** Et (certe) qua in re notum erit hic
quod invenerim gratiam in oculis tuis ego, et populus tuus? nonne quum
ambulaveris nobiscum, et separabimur ego et populus tuus ab omni populo
qui est super faciem terrae?

<span id="vi.x-p35"></span>**17.** And the Lord said unto Moses, I will
do this thing also that thou hast spoken; for thou hast found grace in
my sight, and I know thee by name.

<span id="vi.x-p36"></span>**17.** Et dixit Jehova ad Mosen, Etiam rem
hanc quam dixisti faciam: quia invenisti gratiam in oculis meis, et novi
te ex nomine.

<span id="vi.x-p37"></span>**18.** And he said, I beseech thee, shew me
thy glory.

<span id="vi.x-p38"></span>**18.** Adjecitque, Ostende mihi quaso
gloriam tuam.

<span id="vi.x-p39"></span>**19.** And he said, I will make all my
goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord
before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will
shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.

<span id="vi.x-p40"></span>**19.** Cui respondit, Ego praeterire faciam
omnem decorem meum ante faciem tuam, et vocabo ex nomine Jehovae coram
te: et miserebor, cujus miserebor: et clemens ero in quem clemens ero.

<span id="vi.x-p41"></span>**20.** And he said, Thou canst not my face:
for there shall no man see me, and live.

<span id="vi.x-p42"></span>**20.** Dixit praeterea, Non poteris videre
faciem meam: quid non videbit me homo, et vivet.

<span id="vi.x-p43"></span>**21.** And the Lord said,: Behold, *there*
*is* a place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock:

<span id="vi.x-p44"></span>**21.** Dixit postremo Jehova, Ecce, locus
apud me, et stabis supra petram.

<span id="vi.x-p45"></span>**22.** And it shall come to pass, while my
glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will
cover thee with my hand while I pass by:

<span id="vi.x-p46"></span>**22.** Erit autem quum pertransibit gloria
mea, ponam te in spelunca petrae, et protegam te manu mea donec
transiero.

<span id="vi.x-p47"></span>**23.** And I will take away mine hand, and
thou shalt see my back parts; but my face shall not be seen.

<span id="vi.x-p48"></span>**23.** Postea removebo manum meam, et
videbis posteriors mea, facies vero non videbitur.

<span id="vi.x-p49"></span> 

<span id="vi.x-p50"></span><span id="vi.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p51"></span>**1.** *Depart, and go up hence, thou and the
people* I have used the pluperfect tense;  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) for the reason is here given, whereby
Moses was stirred up to such vehemence in prayer, viz., because,
although God had not altogether abandoned the care of the people, still
He had renounced His covenant, and had proclaimed to them that, after He
had once performed His engagement of giving them possession of the land,
He would have no more to do with them. Wherefore, what is here related,
preceded, in order of time, the prayer of Moses; for, being astonished
at the sad and almost fatal message, he burst forth into that confused
and wild request, that he might be blotted out of the book of life.

<span id="vi.x-p53"></span>Let us now endeavor to elicit the true
meaning of the passage. It is plain, that when God bids Moses depart
with the people, He utterly renounces the charge which He Himself had
hitherto sustained. He only promises that He will cause them to attain
the promised inheritance, and not that He will preside over them, will
there preserve them in safety, and even cherish them, as a father does
his children; in fact, that he will merely fulfill the promise He had
made to their fathers. And thus He anticipates their complaints; for
they might reply, that consequently His promise would be rendered vain
and ineffectual; but by way of anticipation, He says, that although He
should renounce them, still He should maintain this truth, because He
will cast out the inhabitants of the land of Canaan, so that their abode
would be vacant for them. In sum, He repudiates them, that they may no
longer count themselves to be His peculiar people, or expect more from
Him, than as if they were strangers, He mentions His oath, lest they
should accuse Him of faithlessness; as if He had said that He should be
discharged from His engagement when they had obtained the land. And
thus, whilst depriving them of the hope of salvation, and the grace of
adoption, He still asserts the stability and stedfastness of His
covenant. I, therefore, understand the word *angel* in a different sense
from that which it has just before, and in many other passages of this
book; for, when mention was before made of the angel, the familiar
presence of God was denoted by it, nay, it was used interchangeably with
the name of God itself. But here God is said to be so about to send the
angel, as to separate Himself from the people. “I will not go up (He
says) in the midst of thee;” and the reason is subjoined, viz., because
it could not be that He could endure any longer their perverse spirits.
Again He uses a similitude taken from refractory oxen, which cannot be
broken to bear the yoke. The sum is, that because they are so
intractable, God cannot perform the office of their guide without
straightway destroying them.

<span id="vi.x-p54"></span><span id="vi.x-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p55"></span>**4.** *And when the people heard these evil
tidings* Hence it more clearly appears that, as I have said, it was like
a thunderbolt to them when God withdrew Himself from the people; for
this divorce is more fatal than innumerable deaths. It might indeed at
first sight seem delightful to be the masters of a rich and fertile
land; but dull as the people generally were, God smote them suddenly, so
that all its delights became insipid, and its fruitfulness like famine
itself, when they perceived that they would be but fatted unto the day
of slaughter. A useful piece of instruction is to be gained from hence,
viz., that if we neglect God’s favor and are captivated by the sweetness
of His blessings, we are ensnared like fishes on a hook. God promised
the Israelites what might attract them for a little season: He denied
them what they should have alone desired, that He would be their God.
The evil tidings affected them with sorrow, for they felt that men
cannot be happy unless God be propitious; nay, that nothing can be more
wretched than to be alienated from Him. “It is good for me to draw near
to God,” (<span id="vi.x-p55.1"></span>[Ps
73:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028)<span id="vi.x-p55.1"></span>,)
says David; and elsewhere, “Blessed is the nation whose God is the
Lord,” (<span id="vi.x-p55.2"></span>[Ps
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#012)<span id="vi.x-p55.2"></span>,
and <span id="vi.x-p55.3"></span>[Ps
144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015)<span id="vi.x-p55.3"></span>;)
again, “the Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, my lot is fallen in
pleasant places.” (<span id="vi.x-p55.4"></span>[Ps.
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)<span id="vi.x-p55.4"></span>.)
This, therefore, is the climax of all miseries to have God against us,
whilst we are fed by His bounty; and consequently the Israelites began
to shew some wisdom, when, awaking from their lethargy, they counted all
other things as naught, unless God should pursue them with His paternal
favor. We infer from the grossness of their stupidity, that it was
brought to pass by a special gift of God, that they were affected with
such sorrow as to conduct them to a solemn mourning. First, Moses says
that they did not put on their ornaments, and then that they were
commanded by God to put them off; but this will be perfectly consistent
if we take the latter as explanatory, as if he had said that they did
not wear their ornaments because God had forbidden it, by enjoining them
to mourn.

<span id="vi.x-p56"></span>God here assumes the character of an angry
judge, preparing to inflict vengeance in His wrath, in the words, “I
will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee;” in
order that their alarm may humble them the more, and stir them up to
earnest prayer. It was avisible sign of mourning to He in squalidhess
and uncleanness, that thus their penitence might be openly testified;
for there was no efficacy in the rite and ceremony to propitiate God,
except in so far as the inward affection of the mind manifested itself
by a true and genuine confession. For we must bear in mind what God
requires by Joel, (<span id="vi.x-p56.1"></span>[Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013)<span id="vi.x-p56.1"></span>,)
that we should “rend our heart, and not our garments;” nevertheless,
whilst He cares not for the outward appearance, nay, whilst He
abominates hypocrisy, still, if the sinner has truly repented, it cannot
be but that, humbly acknowledging his guilt, he will add the outward
profession of it. For if Paul, who was guiltless of any offense, deemed
that the Corinthians were to be mourned for by him when they had not
“repented of their uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness,”
because God humbled him in their sin, (<span id="vi.x-p56.2"></span>[2Co
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021)<span id="vi.x-p56.2"></span>;)
how should not those mourn publicly who are conscious of their own
guilt, especially when, being convicted by the judgment of men, they are
summoned to the tribunal of God? And therefore it is not without reason
that he elsewhere teaches, that the sorrow which worketh repentance
should also bring forth these other fruits, viz., carefulness, clearing
of themselves, indignation, fear, vehement desire, zeal, revenge. (<span
id="vi.x-p56.3"></span>[2 Cor. 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#011)<span id="vi.x-p56.3"></span>.) For
the sake of example also, sinners should not only grieve in silence
before God, but willingly undergo the penalty of ignominy before men, so
as by self-condenmation to confess that God is a just Judge, to provoke
others to imitate them, and, by this warning of human frailty to prevent
them from a similar fall.

<span id="vi.x-p57"></span>After, however, God has inspired them with
fear, He allays His anger as it were, and declares that He will consider
what He will do with them, in order that they may gather courage to ask
for pardon; for, although he does not actually pardon them, He
sufficiently arouses them to hope, by giving them some taste of His
mercy; for, by seeming to leave them in suspense, it is not with the
intention that they should approach Him hesitatingly to ask forgiveness,
but that their anxiety may urge them more and more to earnest prayer,
and keep them in a state of humility.

<span id="vi.x-p58"></span><span id="vi.x-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p59"></span>**7.** *And Moses took the tabernacle* <span
id="vi.x-p59.1"></span> This was a sign of the divorce between God and
the Israelites, that the tabernacle should be removed from the camp and
pitched at a distance, as if God were tired of His connection with them.
He had promised as a special blessing that He would dwell in the midst
of the people; and now, by departing elsewhere, He declares them to be
polluted. In a word, the removal of the tabernacle was like the breaking
of the tables; for, just as by the breaking of the tables Moses
dissolved the covenant of God, so he thus deprived the Israelites for a
time of His company and presence.  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) <span id="vi.x-p60.9"></span>The
explanation which some give that it was Moses’ own tabernacle, is
refuted by many sound arguments. First, it is not said that he took away
his own tabernacle, but the word tabernacle is used simply and without
any affix, <span id="vi.x-p60.10"></span>κατ ᾿ ἐξοχήν<span
id="vi.x-p60.11"></span> Secondly, he did not change his own place of
habitation, but only went out thither from time to time for the purpose
of worshipping, or, at any rate, of consulting God. Thirdly, it would
have been by no means lawful to assign the sacred name which God had
bestowed on His Sanctuary to a private tabernacle. Fourthly, God, by
manifesting His glory there, testified that it was His own
dwelling-place. Fifthly, it would have been absurd that the people
should have sought God in that direction, unless the place had been
sacred. Sixthly, the object (of its removal,) which I have above
adverted to, must be taken into consideration, for Moses did not
withdraw himself from the people, but rather continued, as was his
custom, in the midst of the camp, and merely wished to shew that God
withdrew Himself from that profane place lest He should be infected by
the contagion; so that it was a kind of excommunication. It is said,
indeed, that he pitched it for himself, yet not for his private use, as
is plain from the context, but in accordance with the common form of
expression,<span id="vi.x-p60.12"></span>  <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) <span id="vi.x-p61.6"></span> in which
<span id="vi.x-p61.7"></span>לו<span id="vi.x-p61.8"></span>, *lo,*<span
id="vi.x-p61.9"></span> is often redundant; still properly speaking, he
did pitch it for himself, for he alone, had access to it, apart from
others. Those who understand it to have been his private tabernacle,
suppose that their opinion is supported by what follows, viz., that he
called it, the tabernacle, *Moed;*  <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) <span id="vi.x-p62.6"></span> for they
thence infer that it had not before been distinguished by that honorable
title. But this objection is easily got over, since it is more probable
that this was inserted parenthetically in the text, and therefore may be
properly rendered in the pluperfect tense. For by this clause the reason
is alleged why God had betaken Himself elsewhere, viz., that the place
which He had appointed for covenanting with the people should remain
deserted. Nevertheless, if we should refer it to this actual time, it
will not be unsuitable that the people, at the present moment, should be
reminded of their sad separation, and that Moses, in order to inflict
more ignominy and shame upon them, should have called it the tabernacle
of convention, though it was now far distant from the camp. As to the
word *Moed,*<span id="vi.x-p62.7"></span> I will not repeat what I have
elsewhere said. Let my readers, therefore, refer to it at the end of
chapter 29.  <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363)

<span id="vi.x-p64"></span>**7** *and it came to pass that every one
which sought the Lord* Some translate it, “asked counsel;” but, in my
opinion, the ordinary signification is preferable. Whether, therefore,
they desired to testify their piety by public worship, or to pray, or to
seek counsel in doubtful matters, they went out towards that sanctuary
in order that their eyes might rest upon it. Moses does not mean that
they actually came to the place, from access to which they knew
themselves to be prohibited on account of their pollution. But their
thus going out was in token of repentance; as though they acknowledged
that they were unworthy to receive an answer from God, unless they
departed from that place which they had defiled by their atrocious
crime. Now, it was useful for them to be thus humbled, in order that
idolatry might be held in greater detestation. Nor is there any
contradiction in what follows, viz., that they “stood, every man at his
tent-door,” whenever Moses went out; for the glory of God, which at that
time was more manifest, was such as then to inspire them with greater
reverence and terror. Whensoever, therefore, the mediator presented
himself before God, they were permitted to do no more than behold from
afar the pillar of cloud which then enveloped Moses, so as to separate
him from them. Meanwhile, it must be observed, that though God at this
time departed from them, it was only so far as to reject them from close
access to Him, and not that they were altogether alienated. For their
worship was a sign of faith; they were allowed to pray to God and
implore His favor; and they knew that they were heard in the person of
Moses. Their separation, therefore, was not such as totally to cut off
the hope of pardon, but such as to quicken their anxiety, and to
exercise them to repentance. Thus God often designedly hides His face
from sinners in order to invite them to Him in true humiliation. And
this we nmst carefully attend to, lest, when He chastises us either by
word or deed, terror, or a sense of our criminality, should hinder our
prayers; but rather let us seek Him from however great a distance. The
object of excommunication is nearly similar; for those whom the Church
rejects from the company of the faithful,are delivered to Satan, but
only “for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord;” (<span id="vi.x-p64.1"></span>[1Co
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span id="vi.x-p64.1"></span>;) and
hence Paul would not have them counted as enemies, but admonished as
brethren. (<span id="vi.x-p64.2"></span>[2Th
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#015)<span id="vi.x-p64.2"></span>.)

<span id="vi.x-p65"></span>When it is said that “the people rose up, and
stood every man at his tent-door,” some improperly, as I conceive, refer
it to mere respect to him as a civil magistrate, as if honor was thus
paid to their leader; but I rather suppose that:, when at stated hours
Moses presented himself before God in the name of all, they partook in
his service and worship. Wherefore also they followed him with their
eyes, until the cloud covered him. To the same effect this rising up is
repeated immediately afterwards, where reference is made to the cloudy
pillar. Wherefore I have no question but that both verses must be
expounded as relating to spiritual worship. But we have elsewhere shewn
how they testified their piety before the visible sign, without
worshipping God therein in any gross imagination.

<span id="vi.x-p66"></span><span id="vi.x-p66.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p67"></span>**11.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses face
to face* Moses will hereafter be dignified by this distinction, where
God would declare the difference between him and other Prophets. (<span
id="vi.x-p67.2"></span>[Nu 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#008)<span
id="vi.x-p67.2"></span>.) Familiar intercourse is therefore described in
this phrase, as if it were said that God appeared to Moses by an
extraordinary mode of revelation. If any object that there is a
contradiction between this statement and what we shall presently see,
“Thou canst not see my face,” the solution is easy, viz., that although
God revealed Himself to Moses in a peculiar manner, still He never
appeared in the fullness of His glory, but only so far as man’s
infirmity could endure. For this expression contains an implied
comparison, *i.e.,* that no man was ever equal to Moses, or arrived at
such a pitch of dignity. And this tends to magnify the Law, that Moses
its minister reported what he had familiafly learnt, so that no
ambiguity might be suspected. When it is said that Joshua departed not
from the tabernacle, we gather that the dwelling-place of Moses was in
the camp; and perhaps the fact of his being a young man is mentioned,
 <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) in order more highly to
illustrate God’s grace, in choosing that he should have the charge of
the sanctuary. It is true that Joshua at this time was of mature age;
but God’s special blessing was manifested in him, in that God passed
over many old men, and set him who was younger to be the keeper of His
tabernacle.

<span id="vi.x-p69"></span><span id="vi.x-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p70"></span>**12.** *See, thou, sayest unto me, Bring up
this people* Moses is still diligently engaged in endeavoring to
reconcile the people, for the fuller promise was inserted by way of
anticipation. Since the revolt, however, God had promised no more than
that He would give the land to the people; but although wishing only to
assure them that they should possess the land, He had added that His
angel should lead them, still this was but a temporary blessing, and one
which He is wont to confer promiscuously on other nations also. Thus
Moses saw that he and the people were deprived of a special privilege
which they had previously enjoyed; for that same angel who had gone
before them was frequently called the God of hosts, in order that they
might perceive that God was present with them in a peculiar manner.
Hence Moses complains not without cause that God had not signified whom
He would send, inasmuch as, when He spoke generally of an ordinary
angel, He had withdrawn that special Deliverer, the guardian of the
people, and the perpetual maintainer of their safety. He does not,
therefore, request that Aaron should be restored to him, or that any
companion should be associated with him in his difficult and arduous
task; but he desires to be assured of the continuance of God’s previous
favor. As the ground of his confidence in asking, he adduces nothing but
the promises of God. He rests, then, on no dignity of his own, nor
alleges any duties performed, whereby he had merited so great favor; but
contents himself with this brief statement, Lord, cause the event to
correspond with Thy words. We have already shewn  <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) what it is to “know by name,” viz., to
choose from amongst others, or to hold in peculiar honor. After,
however, Moses had made mention of what had been promised by God, he
implores him by this grace, “if (says he) I have found grace in thy
sight,” confirm or ratify it by this proof, *i.e.,* by again undertaking
the care of us; for by the *way* of God he means that guidance in which
He had declared that He would go before them to shew them the way. In a
word, he requests that this token of favor should be given them, that
God should continually guide His people. Therefore, He says, thus shall
I know thee, and it will appear that I am acceptable to thee. Finally,
he refers to the Covenant of God with the whole people; as much as to
say, that although God should be unwilling to grant this to him alone
individually, still there was a weightier reason, viz., because God had
adopted that people; and, consequently, it was just that he should
distinguish it from other nations by peculiar marks.

<span id="vi.x-p72"></span><span id="vi.x-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p73"></span>**14.** *And he said, My presence shall go
with thee* We gather from this answer what the desire of Moses was, for
God, in accepting his prayer, affirms in one word that He will go before
them as He was wont, and this was a sure pledge of His presence in no
ordinary manner. For although the whole world is governed by His
providence, still His face does not therein appear so conspicuously as
in His protection of the Church’s welfare. And, in fact, since the same
Angel, who had before presided over the camp, now undertakes the charge
of guiding the people, the eternal divinity of Christ is clearly proved
from hence.

<span id="vi.x-p74"></span>This clause, “My face  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) shall go before,” is equivalent to his
saying, I will so go before thee, that thou shalt truly perceive that I
am with thee, as if thou shouldst see my face set before thine eyes in a
mirror. Now, since this was fulfilled in Christ, it follows that He is
the eternal God, whose glory, power, and majesty is far above all
creatures. The *rest* which He promises has reference to the
perseverance of His grace, and its final accomplishment,  <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) as if it were said, when the people
shall have entered the land, they shall be under God’s protection and
guardianship; for what was common to the whole people is ascribed to the
person of Moses.

<span id="vi.x-p77"></span><span id="vi.x-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p78"></span>**15.** *And he said unto him, If thy
presence go not* Moses accepts what is accorded to him, whilst at the
same time he signifies that it would be better and more desirable for
him to perish in the desert than to go any further without the manifest
token of God’s presence; and this he confirms in the following verse,
and therefore I have inserted the expletive particle *certe* (indeed,)
although the copula might also be resolved into the causal particle
*nam* (for.) For he declares that the paternal favor wherewith God had
embraced the people could not be known unless He should remain with
them. They are mistaken who suppose that something different is here
indicated from what was said just before, for exactly in the same sense
God is said to go before, and to dwell in the midst of His people; but
Moses refers to the promise already given, the symbol of which was the
Tabernacle of the Covenant, which just before had been removed from its
proper place to punish the people’s sin. What he adds at the end of the
verse,  <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) “and we shall be
separated,” may also be resolved, “that thus we may be separated,” or,
“because in this way we shall be separated.” Whence it is abundantly
clear that the favor which is mentioned refers to their election or
gratuitous adoption, and is its fruit or effect. For it was the
intention of Moses to restore the Covenant which had been violated by
the people to its original force, as if the people were reinstated in
that honorable condition from whence they had fallen. And surely this is
our real happiness after all, to be separated from heathen nations as
God’s own property; as it is said in <span id="vi.x-p79.1"></span>[Ps
106:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#004)<span id="vi.x-p79.1"></span>,
“Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bearest unto thy people:
O visit me with thy salvation.”

<span id="vi.x-p80"></span><span id="vi.x-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p81"></span>**17.** *And the Lord said unto Moses, I will
do this thing also* He adds nothing new, but confirms by repetition what
He had just said, in order to remove all doubt. Still He declares that
He is induced by no other reason than by the gratuitous favor wherewith
He had embraced Moses. This, therefore, is a kind of renewal of the
Covenant, when the people is consecrated to God, so as to recover again
the sacerdotal kingdom.

<span id="vi.x-p82"></span><span id="vi.x-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p83"></span>**18.** *And he said, I beseech thee, shew me
thy glory* Thus far the desires of Moses had been confined within the
limits of moderation and sobriety, but now he is carried beyond due
bounds, and longs for more than is lawful or expedient; for it is plain
from his repulse that he had inconsiderately proceeded further than He
should. He desires that God should be revealed to him more closely, and
in a more manifest form than before. Still it is not foolish curiosity
that impels him to this, which so often tickles men’s minds, so that
they daringly attempt to penetrate into the deepest secrets of heaven;
for he had no other design than to be animated to confidence, whereby he
might more cheerfully go on with his charge. But that the desire itself
was improper though its object was correct, we learn from the reply of
God, wherein He shows that it would be injurious and fatal to Moses, if
he should obtain that which he seeks as great privilege.  <span
id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) How, then, will it be with us, if the
vanity of our nature tempts us to investigate God’s glory more deeply
than is right? Wherefore let this passage act as restraint upon us, to
repress the speculations which are too wild and wanton in us, when we
desire to know what God would have concealed from us. This is the rule
of sound and legitimate and profitable knowledge, to be content with the
measure of revelation, and willingly to be ignorant of what is deeper
than this. We must indeed advance in the acquisition of divine
instruction, but we must so keep in the way as to follow the guidance of
God.

<span id="vi.x-p85"></span><span id="vi.x-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p86"></span>**19.** *And he said, I will make all my
goodness pass* <span id="vi.x-p86.1"></span> At the outset He declares
how far He has listened to Moses; but a limitation is presently added to
prevent excess. Thus his prayer is not altogether rejected, but only so
far as he was too eagerly set on beholding the perfection of God’s
glory. The *passing* *by*<span id="vi.x-p86.2"></span> signifies a
vision of brief duration; as if He had said, Let it suffice thee to have
seen once, as for a moment, my glory, when it shall pass before thine
eyes. The word <span id="vi.x-p86.3"></span>טוב<span
id="vi.x-p86.4"></span>, *tub,*<span id="vi.x-p86.5"></span> which I
have rendered beauty, *(decorem,)*<span id="vi.x-p86.6"></span> others
translate good, *(benum;)*<span id="vi.x-p86.7"></span> and hence, some
take it to mean goodness; but the expression beauty *(pulchritudinis,*
*vel* *decoris)*<span id="vi.x-p86.8"></span> is more suitable, in which
sense we find it used more than once. Hence that which is pleasing and
delectable is said to be good to be looked upon.

<span id="vi.x-p87"></span>“To call in the name of the Lord,”  <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) I understand thus, to declare in a
clear and loud voice what it is useful for us to know respecting God
Himself. It had been said before to Moses, “I am the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob, — but by my name, — was I not known to them.”
(<span id="vi.x-p88.1"></span>[Ex
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003)<span id="vi.x-p88.1"></span>.)
Whereas, then, Moses was already superior to the patriarchs, he is now
still more highly exalted, inasmuch as God makes Himself more fully
known to him, and carries His manifestation of Himself to its very
utmost. First, therefore, it must be borne in mind that God was now
known to Moses more familiarly than heretofore; still, at the same time,
let it be observed, that although a vision was exhibited to his eyes,
the main point was in the voice; because true acquaintance with God is
made more by the ears than by the eyes. A promise indeed is given that
he shall behold God; but the latter blessing is more excellent, that God
will proclaim this name, so that Moses may know Him more by His voice
than by His face; for speechless visions would be cold and altogether
evanescent, did they not borrow efficacy from words. Thus, therefore,
just as logicians compare a syllogism to the body, and the reasoning,
which it includes, to the soul; so, properly speaking, the soul of a
vision is the doctrine itself, from whence faith takes its rise.

<span id="vi.x-p89"></span> *and will be gracious to whom I will be
gracious* It will be well to consider how this sentence is connected
with the foregoing, which has been either altogether neglected, or not
sufficiently attended to. As to me, although I think that God’s mercy is
magnified by the fact, that He deals so indulgently to this guilty
people, still I have no doubt but that He desired purposely to cut off
occasion from the audacity of men, lest they should exclaim against his
unwonted and as yet unheard of liberality; for, whether God executes His
judgments, or mercifully pardons sins, profane men never cease to
quarrel with Him;  <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) thus, out of
mere disputatiousness, they ask why He delayed the advent of His Son for
so many ages; why He has deigned to bring forth the light of the Gospel
out of darkness in our own days; nay, they take flight even to the
creation of the world, inasmuch as it seems absurd to them that God
should have been idle for so many ages, and therefore they inquire, in
ridicule, why it at length entered His mind to make the world, which has
not yet reached its sixth millennium? Especially, however, does the
frowardness of many advance beyond all due bounds on this point, viz.,
because the reason does not appear, why God should be merciful to one
nation or one age, and severe both to other ages and other nations.
Hence the admirable counsel of God, whereby He has chosen some, and
reprobated others, has always been exposed to the calumnies of ungodly
men; for unless they see the cause of the diversity, they do not
hesitate to condemn the injustice of God in making this distinction
between the two.  <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) God here
checks this insanity, and asserts His power, which men, or rather worms
of the earth, would gladly deprive Him of, viz., that according to His
own will He exercises peculiar mercy towards whomsoever He pleases. When
the Prophet relates how the fathers obtained possession of the land of
Canaan, he assigns no other reason except that God “had a favor unto
them.” (<span id="vi.x-p91.1"></span>[Ps
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003)<span id="vi.x-p91.1"></span>.)
And this doctrine, which filthy dogs endlessly assail with their
barking, everywhere occurs in the Scriptures. Especially, however, do
they rail when God shews Himself to be propitious, and beneficent
towards the unworthy. For this reason Paul reminds believers of the
incomprehensible counsel of God, because, by the preaching of the
Gospel, He revealed the mystery, which was kept secret from all
eternity. (<span id="vi.x-p91.2"></span>[Ro
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span id="vi.x-p91.2"></span>.)
Again, because by ingrafting the Gentiles into the body of the Church,
from which they had so long been aliens, He commends the depths of that
mystery, which, though hidden even from angels, He made known to all men
in the fullness of time. (<span id="vi.x-p91.3"></span>[Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009)<span id="vi.x-p91.3"></span>.)
With the same intent, He here expressly declares that the cause why He
manifests Himself to Moses more fully than of old to the patriarchs, is
only to be sought in His own counsel or good-pleasure. Now, although
this in the first place relates to Moses, still, inasmuch as he beheld
the glory of God for the common good of the people, this mercy, which is
referred to, extends to them all. And assuredly it was an inestimable
proof of God’s grace that, after this most disgraceful fall and wicked
apostasy of the people, He nevertheless revealed Himself more clearly
than before to Moses for their spiritual good. This, indeed, is certain,
that by this reply a restraint is put upon whatever carnal feelings
might allege in consideration of the novelty of the act; as if God had
declared in one word that the dispensation of His grace is in His own
sole power; and that men not only do amiss: but are carried away by
impious and blasphemous madness when they endeavor to interfere with
Him; as if it were their business to arraign that supreme Judge whose
subjects they are. The mode of expression simply tends to this, that
God’s will is superior to all causes, so as to be the reason of all
reasons, the law of laws, and the rule of rules. And surely, as long as
men permit themselves to inquire into the secret counsels of God, there
will be no bounds to their seditiousness. God, therefore, does not
correct this insanity by disputing with it, but by the assertion of His
right to be free in the dispensation of His grace; for in His
sovereignty He says that He will be merciful to whomsoever He will. Let
us beware, then, lest, when He is kind, our eyes should be evil.

<span id="vi.x-p92"></span>Further, the better to convince dissatisfied
men of their pride and temerity, He sets forth His mercy and compassion;
as much as to say, that He is under obligation to none; and hence that
it is an  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) unworthy thing in them
to murmur, because He does not indiscriminately do good to them to whom
He owes nothing. Hence it is clear how appropriately Paul, when treating
of gratuitous election, accommodates this passage to the matter in hand,
(<span id="vi.x-p93.1"></span>[Ro
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)<span id="vi.x-p93.1"></span>,)
viz., that God must be by no means accounted unjust, because He passes
by some and elects others; for the words loudly proclaim that God’s
grace is destined to a certain number of men, so as not to appear
equally in all. The phrase itself needs no exposition, for it is common
in all languages when we wish to prevent our reasons from being
investigated, to repeat the point in question; thus, a person, wishing
to rid himself of the censures of others, would say, I will go whither I
will go, or I will do what I will do.

<span id="vi.x-p94"></span><span id="vi.x-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p95"></span>**20.** *And he said, Thou canst not see my
face* Moses had indeed seen it, but in such a mode of revelation, as to
be far inferior to its full effulgence. Long before the birth of Moses,
Jacob had said, “I have seen God face to face,” (<span
id="vi.x-p95.1"></span>[Ge 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)<span
id="vi.x-p95.1"></span>;) and to Moses, as I have lately shewn, a still
clearer vision was vouchsafed. Now, however, he obtains something better
and more excellent; and yet not so as perfectly to see God such as He is
in Himself, but so far as the human mind is capable of bearing. For,
although the angels are said to see God’s face in a more excellent
manner than men, still they do not apprehend the immense perfection of
His glory, whereby they would be absorbed. Justly, therefore, does God
declare that He cannot be seen by a mortal man; for we shall not see him
as He is, until we shall be like Him. (<span id="vi.x-p95.2"></span>[1Jo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="vi.x-p95.2"></span>.) For
it must needs be that that incomprehensible brightness would bring us to
nothing. God, therefore, whilst He withholds us from a complete
knowledge of Him, nevertheless manifests Himself as far as is expedient;
nay, attempering the amount of light to our humble capacity, He assumes
the face which we are able to bear.

<span id="vi.x-p96"></span><span id="vi.x-p96.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p97"></span>**21.** *And the Lord said, Behold, there is
a place by me* This description may illdeed appear puerile, but it is
well adapted to our imperfection; nor will any despise it who is duly
conscious of his own imbecility and ignorance. There seems to be a
contradiction between these two things, that the beauty of God should be
shewn to Moses, and still that the sight of Him should be refused. This
difficulty is here solved, for Moses was to see God only from behind. It
is a similitude taken from men, whom we only partially recognise, if
their face be turned away; for clear recognition is only obtained by
seeing the face and countenance.

<span id="vi.x-p98"></span>The fissure or hole in the rock was like a
narrow and oblique window, which so far admits the sun’s rays as that
one, who is shut up in a deep and obscure place, may receive some
advantage from the light, yet never see the sun itself nor enjoy its
brightness. Thus we, imprisoned as it were in our bodies, cannot behold
God’s glory freely and directly; but He illuminates us obliquely, so
that at least we see Him from behind. I do not speak of all, but of the
most perfect amongst us, such as Moses was, who, although he obtained
the extraordinary privilege which is here recorded, yet could not endure
God’s glory through the infirmity of his flesh; and therefore the hand
of God was interposed, so that he should only see Him in part. By God’s
*hand* is meant the darkness wherewith He was covered, lest the eyes of
Moses should be stretched in curiosity to see further than was lawful.
Some  <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) refer “my back parts” to
the fullless of time, when Christ was manifested in the flesh, as if it
were said, Thou shalt not see me until clothed in human nature; this is
a subtle speculation, but by no means sound, nay, altogether wide of the
genuine meaning.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_359"></span>[360](cc05057.htm#fr_359) <span
id="vi.x-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p52"></span> See *Lat.,* “Locutus autem fuerat Jehova;”
but the Lord had spoken, etc. Prof. Bush says, “The right adjustment of
the events of this chapter in the chronological order of the narrative,
is a matter attended with some difficulty. From the rendering of our
established version, it would seem that what was now said to Moses was
posterior in point of time to the incidents recorded in the close of the
preceding chapter; but from an attentive consideration and collation of
the tenor of the whole, we are persuaded, with Calvin, and other critics
of note, that the proper rendering of <span id="vi.x-p52.1"></span>[Ex
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001)<span id="vi.x-p52.1"></span> is
in the pluperfect, ‘The Lord *had* said,’ and that the appropriate place
for the interview and incidents here related is *prior* to the order and
the promise contained in <span id="vi.x-p52.2"></span>[Ex
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034)<span id="vi.x-p52.2"></span> of
chap. 32. In that verse God declares his purpose of sending his angel
before the people, and we naturally inquire how it happens that such an
assurance was necessary? Was there any danger that an angel would not be
sent? Had any intimation been given that his guidance and protecting
presence would be withdrawn? To this the correct answer undoubtedly is,
that all that is related in chap. 33 had occurred *anterior* to the
promise made in <span id="vi.x-p52.3"></span>[Ex
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034)<span id="vi.x-p52.3"></span>.
God had threatened to send Moses and the people forward without the
accompanying presence of the angel of the Shekinah, and it was only in
consequence of the fervent intercession of Moses that He was induced to
retract this dread determination. In the foregoing chapter, therefore,
the historian merely, states in a summary way the fact of his earnest
prayer, and the concession made to it; in the present, he goes back and
relates minutely the train of circumstances which preceded and led to
the declaration above mentioned. In doing this he virtually makes known
to us one main ground of the urgency of his supplications. He was afraid
that God would withdraw the tokens of his visible presence. As a
punishment for the mad attempt of the people to supply themselves with a
false symbol of his presence, he was apprehensive that God might be
provoked to take from them the *true,* and hence his impassioned
entreaty that He would not visit them with so sore a judgment.”

<span id="fn_360"></span>[361](cc05057.htm#fr_360) <span
id="vi.x-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p60"></span><span id="vi.x-p60.1"></span> So the *LXX.,*
<span id="vi.x-p60.2"></span>Καὶ λαβὼν Μωυσὢς τὴν σκηνὴν αὐτοῦ <span
id="vi.x-p60.3"></span>the Syriac, Grotius, and many other commentators
quoted in Poole. The greater number, however, even although disagreeing
with *C.*<span id="vi.x-p60.4"></span> in his notion that the tabernacle
was already built, (see vol. 2, p. 143<span id="vi.x-p60.6"></span>,
*et* *seq.,)*<span id="vi.x-p60.7"></span> are satisfied with his
reasons why it should not be the private tent of Moses. “Wherefore, this
was some peculiar tabernacle which Moses erected specially for the
service of God, as it may appear by the name of it, (for) it hath the
same name which the other great tabernacle was to be called by; there
was the cloud, the visible sign of God’s presence, and the people
worshipped towards that place. Simlerus, Osiander, Tostatus,” in Willet.
So also Rosenmuller, “after Michaelis, and some of the Hebrews,” in
Brightwell; and Prof. Bush, who adopts *C.’s*<span
id="vi.x-p60.8"></span> opinion as to the clause, “he called it the
Tabernacle of the Congregation.” — *Vide* *infra.*

<span id="fn_361"></span>[362](cc05057.htm#fr_361) <span
id="vi.x-p60.13"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p61"></span> <span id="vi.x-p61.1"></span>לו<span
id="vi.x-p61.2"></span>, is properly either. *for* *him,*<span
id="vi.x-p61.3"></span> or, *for* *it.*<span id="vi.x-p61.4"></span> —
*W.*<span id="vi.x-p61.5"></span> Ainsworth’s literal translation is,
“And Moses took a tent, and pitched it *for* *him.”*

<span id="fn_362"></span>[363](cc05057.htm#fr_362) <span
id="vi.x-p61.10"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p62"></span> <span id="vi.x-p62.1"></span>מועד
*moed,*<span id="vi.x-p62.2"></span> or, *mogned.* *A.V.,*<span
id="vi.x-p62.3"></span> “The tabernacle of the congregation.” The noun
is formed from <span id="vi.x-p62.4"></span>יעד<span
id="vi.x-p62.5"></span> to call together, to appoint either a place, or
time of meeting; and hence it means either an appointed place, or time
of meeting. — *W.*

<span id="fn_363"></span>[364](cc05057.htm#fr_363) <span
id="vi.x-p62.8"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p63"></span> See vol. 2, p. 297, on <span
id="vi.x-p63.2"></span>[Exodus
29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042)<span id="vi.x-p63.2"></span>,
where *C*. gives his reason for translating the words, *Tabernaculum*
*conventionis.*

<span id="fn_364"></span>[365](cc05057.htm#fr_364) <span
id="vi.x-p67.3"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p68"></span><span id="vi.x-p68.1"></span> “So called
(says Ainsworth) in respect of his service, not of years, for he was now
above fifty years old, as may be gathered by <span
id="vi.x-p68.2"></span>[Jos 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029)<span
id="vi.x-p68.2"></span><span id="vi.x-p68.3"></span>. But because
ministry and service are usually by the younger sort, all servants are
called young men. See <span id="vi.x-p68.4"></span>[Ge
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#024)<span
id="vi.x-p68.4"></span><span id="vi.x-p68.5"></span>.” “Perhaps, (adds
Adam Clarke,) <span id="vi.x-p68.6"></span>נער *naghar,*<span
id="vi.x-p68.7"></span> here translated *young* *man,*<span
id="vi.x-p68.8"></span> means a *single* *person,*<span
id="vi.x-p68.9"></span> one *unmarried.”*<span id="vi.x-p68.10"></span>
Others suppose that he was so called as being *integer,*<span
id="vi.x-p68.11"></span> upright, and without guile; and De Lyra, as
being young in respect to Moses.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[366](cc05057.htm#fr_365) <span
id="vi.x-p70.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p71"></span> See *ante* *on* <span
id="vi.x-p71.1"></span>[Exodus
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#002)<span id="vi.x-p71.1"></span>, p.
291.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[367](cc05057.htm#fr_366) <span
id="vi.x-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p75"></span> “My presence shall go with thee.” — *A.V.*

<span id="fn_367"></span>[368](cc05057.htm#fr_367) <span
id="vi.x-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p76"></span> “Et au but ou Moyse pretendoit;” and to the
object at which Moses aimed. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_368"></span>[369](cc05057.htm#fr_368) <span
id="vi.x-p78.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p79"></span> “Le mot que, j’ay translate,. *Afin* *que*
*nous* *soyons* *glorifiez,* signifie aussi estre separez;” the words
which I have translated, *To* *the* *end* *that* *we* *may* *be*
*glorified,* signifies also to be separated. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_369"></span>[370](cc05057.htm#fr_369) <span
id="vi.x-p83.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p84"></span> This interrogative sentence is entirely
omitted in *Fr.*

<span id="fn_370"></span>[371](cc05057.htm#fr_370) <span
id="vi.x-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p88"></span> “Proclaim the name of the Lord.” — *A.* *V.*

<span id="fn_371"></span>[372](cc05057.htm#fr_371) <span
id="vi.x-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p90"></span> “Voyla, comme aujourd’huy beaucoup de
gaudisseurs pour debatre de toutes choses;” behold, how now-a-days many
jeerers, to dispute about everything. — *Fr.* *C.* discusses the third
question, as to the creation of the world, in his Inst., Book I., chap.
14, sec. 1. It is also very neatly met in Pet. Martyr. Loci. Com. C1.
I., chap. 12, sec. 2. “Sunt qui quaerant, Cum potuerit Deus longe prius
mundum producere, cur tam sero? Est petulans, et procax haec inquisitio,
nec humanae curiositati, nisi illam retundendo, satisfieri potest: nam
quoeunque puncto temporis ante ficti vel imaginati dedissem tibi factum
mundum, tu adhuc conqueri posses id sero fuisse factum, si tuam
cogitationem referres ad Dei aeternitatem. Igitur hic pie est agendum,
non hac procaci, et temeraria, curiositate.”

<span id="fn_372"></span>[373](cc05057.htm#fr_372) <span
id="vi.x-p90.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p91"></span> Addition in *Fr.,* “Seulement pour son
plaisir;” only for his pleasure.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[374](cc05057.htm#fr_373) <span
id="vi.x-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p93"></span> “C’est trop grande presomption;” it is too
great a presumption. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_374"></span>[375](cc05057.htm#fr_374) <span
id="vi.x-p98.1"></span>

<span id="vi.x-p99"></span> “Tertullian referreth these backer or latter
parts to the latter times of the Messiah: My glory which thou desirest
to see, shall be revealed in the latter times.” — Willet *in* *loco.*
Owen’s exposition of this passage is worthy of quotation: “The face of
God, or the gracious majesty of his Being, his essential glory, is not
to be seen of any in this life; we cannot see him as he is. But the
glorious manifestation of himself we may behold and contemplate. This we
may see as the back parts of God; that shadow of his excellencies which
he casteth forth in the passing by us in his works and dispensations.
This Moses shall see. And wherein did it consist? Why, in the
revelation, and declaration of this name of God. <span
id="vi.x-p99.1"></span>[Exod. 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)<span id="vi.x-p99.1"></span>. To be
known by this name, to be honored, feared, believed, as that declares
him, is the great glory of God.” — Owen’s Expos. of <span
id="vi.x-p99.2"></span>[Psalm 130](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#000)<span
id="vi.x-p99.2"></span>. (Edin., edit. 1851, vol. 6, p. 481.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 34:1-10,27-35](cc05058)
