[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05069)  [Next](cc05071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xi"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p1"></span><span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Numbers
2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#000)<span id="vii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p2"></span><span id="vii.xi-p2.1"></span>[Numbers
2:1-34](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001)<span id="vii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p3"></span>**1.** And the Lord spake unto Moses and
unto Aaron, saying,

<span id="vii.xi-p4"></span>**1.** Et loquutus est Jehova Mosi et
Aharon, dicendo:

<span id="vii.xi-p5"></span>**2.** Every man of the children of Israel
shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father’s
house: far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they
pitch.

<span id="vii.xi-p6"></span>**2.** Singuli juxta vexillum suum, juxta
signa domus patrum suorum, castrametabuntur filii Israel: procul, circum
tabernaculum conventionis castrametabuntur.

<span id="vii.xi-p7"></span>**3.** And on the east side, toward the
rising of the sun, shall they of the standard of the camp of Judah
pitch, throughout their armies: and Nahshon the son of Amminadab *shall*
*be* captain of the children of Judah.

<span id="vii.xi-p8"></span>**3.** Hi autem castrametabuntur ad
orientem, a d exortum vexillum exercitus Juda per turmas suas: et
princeps filiorum Juda erit SaMson filius Amminadab.

<span id="vii.xi-p9"></span>**4.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* threescore and fourteen thousand and six
hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p10"></span>**4.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique
eorum, quatuor et septuaginta miIlia, atque sexcenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p11"></span>**5.** And those that do pitch next unto
him *shall* *be* the tribe of Issachar: and Nethaneel the son of Zuar
*shall* *be* captain of the children of Issachar.

<span id="vii.xi-p12"></span>**5.** Castrametabuntur vero juxta eum
tribus Issachar: et princeps filiorum Issachar erit Nethanel filius
Suar.

<span id="vii.xi-p13"></span>**6.** And his host, and those that were
numbered thereof, *were* fifty and four thousand and four hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p14"></span>**6.** Et exercitus ejus numeratique ejus,
quatuor et quinquaginta millia atque quadringenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p15"></span>**7.** *Then* the tribe of Zebulun: and
Eliab the son of Helon *shall* *be* captain of the children of Zebulun.

<span id="vii.xi-p16"></span>**7.** Tribus Zebulon, et princeps filiorum
Zebulon, Eliab illius Helon.

<span id="vii.xi-p17"></span>**8.** And his host, and those that were
numbered thereof, *were* fifty and seven thousand and four hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p18"></span>**8.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique ejus,
septem et quinquaginta millia atque quadringenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p19"></span>**9.** All that were numbered in the camp
of Judah *were* an hundred thousand, and fourscore thousand, and six
thousand and four hundred, throughout their armies: these shall first
set forth.

<span id="vii.xi-p20"></span>**9.** Omnes numerati in exercitu Juda,
centum octoginta sex millia atque quadringenti, per exercitus suos:
primum proficiscentur.

<span id="vii.xi-p21"></span>**10.** On the south side *shall* *be* the
standard of the camp of Reuben, according to their armies: and the
captain of the children of Reuben *shall* *be* Elizur the son of
Shedeur.

<span id="vii.xi-p22"></span>**10.** Vexillum exercitus Reuben erit ad
meridiem per turmas suas: et princeps filiorum Reuben erit Elisur filius
Sedeur.

<span id="vii.xi-p23"></span>**11.** And his host, and those that were
numbered thereof, *were* forty and six thousand and five hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p24"></span>**11.** Exercitus ejus, numeratique ejus,
sex et quadraginta millla atque quingenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p25"></span>**12.** And those which pitch by him
*shall* *be* the tribe of Simeon: and the captain of the children of
Simeon *shall* *be* Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

<span id="vii.xi-p26"></span>**12.** Castrametabuntar autem juxta enm
tribus Simeon: et princeps filiorum Simeon, Selumiel, fillus Surisaddai.

<span id="vii.xi-p27"></span>**13.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* fifty and nine thousand and three hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p28"></span>**13.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique
eorum, novem et quinquaginta millia atque trecenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p29"></span>**14.** Then the tribe of Gad: and the
captain of the sons of Gad *shall* *be* Eliasaph the son of Reuel.

<span id="vii.xi-p30"></span>**14.** Tribus item Gad: et princeps
filiorum Gad, Eliasaph filius Reuel:

<span id="vii.xi-p31"></span>**15.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* forty five thousand and six hundred and fifty.

<span id="vii.xi-p32"></span>**15.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique
eorum, quinqne et quadraginta millia atque sexcenti et quinquaginta.

<span id="vii.xi-p33"></span>**16.** All that were numbered in the camp
of Reuben *were* an hundred thousand, and fifty and one thousand, and
four hundred and fifty, throughout their armies: and they shall set
forth in the second rank.

<span id="vii.xi-p34"></span>**16.** Omnes numerati in excreitu Reuben,
centum quinquaginta millia, mille et quadringenti quinquaginta, per
exercitus suos: et secundi proficiscentur.

<span id="vii.xi-p35"></span>**17.** Then the tabernacle of the
congregation shall set forward, with the camp of the Levites in the
midst of the camp: as they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man
in his place, by their standards.

<span id="vii.xi-p36"></span>**17.** Turn proficiscetur tabernaculum
conventionis in castris Levitarum, in medio castrorum: quemadmodum
castrametabuntur, sic proficiscetur quisque in loco suo, juxta vexilia
sua.

<span id="vii.xi-p37"></span>**18.** On the west side *shall* *be* the
standard of the camp of Ephraim, according to their armies: and the
captain of the sons of Ephraim *shall* *be* Elishama the son of Ammihud.

<span id="vii.xi-p38"></span>**18.** Vexilium excreitus Ephraim per
turmas suas erit ad occidentem: et princeps filiorum Ephraim erit
Elisarea filius Ammihud.

<span id="vii.xi-p39"></span>**19.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* forty thousand and five hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p40"></span>**19.** Et excreitus ejus, numeratique
eorum, quadraginta millia et quingenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p41"></span>**20.** And by him *shall* *be* the tribe
of Manasseh: and the captain of the children of Manasseh *shall* *be*
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

<span id="vii.xi-p42"></span>**20.** Et juxta eum erit tribus Manasse:
et princeps filiorum Manasse erit Gamliel filius Pedahsur.

<span id="vii.xi-p43"></span>**21.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* thirty and two thousand and two hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p44"></span>**21.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique
eorum, duo et triginta millia atque ducenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p45"></span>**22.** Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the
captain of the sons of Benjamin *shall* *be* Abidan the son of Gideoni.

<span id="vii.xi-p46"></span>**22.** Tribus item Benjamin, et princeps
filiorum Benjamin erit Abidan filius Gidoni.

<span id="vii.xi-p47"></span>**23.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* thirty and five thousand and four hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p48"></span>**23.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique,
eorum, quinque et triginta millia atque quadringenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p49"></span>**24.** All that were numbered of the camp
of Ephraim *were* an hundred thousand, and eight thousand and an
hundred, throughout their armies: and they shall go forward in the third
rank.

<span id="vii.xi-p50"></span>**24.** Omnes numerati in excreitu Ephraim,
centum et octo millia atque centum, per excreitus suos: et tertii
proficiscentur.

<span id="vii.xi-p51"></span>**25.** The standard of the camp of Dan
*shall* *be* on the north side by their armies: and the captain of the
children of Dan *shall* *be* Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.

<span id="vii.xi-p52"></span>**25.** Vexilium castrorum Dan erit ad
Aquilonem, per exercitus suos: et princeps filiorum Dan, Ahiezer filius
Ammisaddai.

<span id="vii.xi-p53"></span>**26.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* threescore and two thousand and seven hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p54"></span>**26.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique
eorum, duo et sexaginta millia atque septingenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p55"></span>**27.** And those that encamp by him
*shall* *be* the tribe of Asher: and the captain of the children of
Asher *shall* *be* Pagiel the son of Ocran.

<span id="vii.xi-p56"></span>**27.** Castrametabuntur autem juxta eum
tribus Aser; et princeps filiorum Aser erit Pagiel filius Ochran.

<span id="vii.xi-p57"></span>**28.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* forty and one thousand and five hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p58"></span>**28.** Et exercitus ejus, numeratique
eorum, unum et quadraginta millia et quingenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p59"></span>**29.** Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the
captain of the children of Naphtali *shall* *be* Ahira the son of Enan.

<span id="vii.xi-p60"></span>**29.** Tribus item Nephthali: et princeps
filiorum Nephthali, Ahira filius Enan.

<span id="vii.xi-p61"></span>**30.** And his host, and those that were
numbered of them, *were* fifty and three thousand and four hundred.

<span id="vii.xi-p62"></span>**30.** Et exercitus ejus numeratique
eorum, tria et quinquaginta millia atque quadringenti.

<span id="vii.xi-p63"></span>**31.** All they that were numbered in the
camp of Dan *were* an hundred thousand, and fifty and seven thousand,
and six hundred: they shall go hindmost with their standards.

<span id="vii.xi-p64"></span>**31.** Omnes numerati in exercitu Dan,
centum millia et quinquaginta septem millia, atque sexcenti: postremi
proficiscentur per vexilla.

<span id="vii.xi-p65"></span>**32.** These *are* those which were
numbered of the children of Israel, by the house of their fathers: all
those that were numbered of the camps, throughout their hosts, were six
hundred thousand, and three thousand, and five hundred and fifty.

<span id="vii.xi-p66"></span>**32.** Isti sunt numerati filiorum Israel
per domos patrum suorum, omnes numerati qui erant in castris per turmas
suas, sexcenta tria millia atque quingenti quinquaginta.

<span id="vii.xi-p67"></span>**33.** But the Levites *were* not numbered
among the children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vii.xi-p68"></span>**33.** Craterum Levite non fuerunt
numerati inter filius Israel quemadmodum praceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="vii.xi-p69"></span>**34.** And the children of Israel did
according to all that the Lord commanded Moses: so they pitched by their
standards, and so they set forward, every one after their families,
according to the house of their fathers.

<span id="vii.xi-p70"></span>**34.** Et fecerunt filii Israel juxta
omnia qum praecepit Jehova Mosi: sic castrametati sunt per vexilia sua,
sicque profecti sunt quisque per familias suas, per domum patrum suorum.

<span id="vii.xi-p71"></span> 

<span id="vii.xi-p72"></span><span id="vii.xi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p73"></span>**1.** *And the Lord spake unto Moses, and
unto Aaron* This distribution into separate bands must have served to
prevent contention; for, had not God thus assigned to each their proper
position, so natural is ambition to man, that they would have quarrelled
for the place of honor. It would have been grievous to the family of
Reuben, the first-born, to resign his dignity; and, even if they had
patiently submitted to the punishment inflicted upon them, they would
have been made to take the lowest place, as being condemned to ignominy.
Disputes would also have arisen respecting the children of the
concubines, for they would not have thought it consistent that; those
who sprang from Leah and Rachel should yield them the superior place.
Besides, in proportion as they severally had the advantage in numbers,
they would have thought themselves injured unless they preceded others.

<span id="vii.xi-p74"></span>Thus the children of Simeon would never
have suffered themselves to be ranged under the standard of Reuben.
Again, dispute would also have arisen between the children of Ephraim
and Manasseh. God, therefore, at once put a stop to all these
disturbances by so arranging their ranks that each one knew his own
band. Consequently, Judah, although the fourth son of Leah, received the
first standard as an honorable distinction, that he might thus in a
manner begin to fulfill the prophecy of Jacob by anticipation; and two
tribes were united with him which would willingly submit to his rule,
Issachar and Zebuhm; because they derived their origin from the children
of the  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) handmaid whom Leah had
substituted in her own place.

<span id="vii.xi-p76"></span>Although Reuben had been deprived of his
primogeniture, still, that some consolation might remain for his
posterity, he was set over the second standard; two tribes were
associated with him, which on account of their connection would not be
aggrieved at fighting under his command, the tribe of Simeon his uterine
brother, and the tribe of Gad, which also sprang from the handmaid of
Leah.

<span id="vii.xi-p77"></span>It was necessary that God should interpose
His authorify, in order that two tribes should be formed of a single
head, Joseph; otherwise the fact would have led to contention, because
the inequality was odious in itself, and that family might appear to be
elevated not without disgrace to the others. Besides, the children of
Manasseh, who were superior by the law of nature, would never have been
induced to obey, unless a divine decree had interposed. But thtat
division could not have been better formed than of the sons of Rachel,
because their consanguinity was closer; for a sharp contest might also
have arisen for the leadership of the fourth band, because it was unjust
that the son of a handmaid should have been placed at its head, and thus
preferred to a legitimate son of Leah, and to the other son of Rachel,
especially when Benjamin was so singularly beloved by Jacob, the common
father of them all.  <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) The sole
will of God, indeed, was sufficient, and more than sufficient to prevent
all quarrels; but, inasmuch as He chose rather to rule over them
generously and paternally, than in a despotic manner, He rather
conformed Himself to their wishes than drove them by compulsion. Still,
however, because their contentions could not be prevented by mere human
decisions, it is again said at the end of the chapter that Moses did
nothing except by God’s command. At the same time the obedience of the
people is noticed in that they peaceably obeyed Moses, since thus they
ratified their acknowledgment of Moses as a true and faithful minister
of God; for this submissiveness is the inseparable companion of sincere
piety towards God, that whatever is proposed by His approved ministers
the people should reverently accept.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc05070.htm#fr_420) <span
id="vii.xi-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p75"></span> This is a singular oversight of *C*.,
which is also copied in the French; “Pource qu’elles estoyent descendues
de la chambriere de Lea;” because they were descended from the handmaid
of Leah. It is perhaps still more strange that Attersoll in his
Commentary on the Book of Numbers should have adopted it, evidently
following *C*.; “He (Judah) was the fourth son of Jacob by Leah, with
whom he associateth such two tribes as were in reason most likely to
submit themselves to him, inasmuch as Zebulun and Issachar were the sons
of Zilpah, Leah’s maid, whom she gave to her husband, and set in her own
place.” I need scarcely remind my readers that Gad and Asher were the
sons of Zilpah, and Zebulun and Issachar of Leah herself.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc05070.htm#fr_421) <span
id="vii.xi-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xi-p78"></span> Attersoll seems to have correctly, though
somewhat quaintly, interpreted here the meaning of *C*., which else
perhaps may not be quite clear; “from hence might hurly-burlies and
heart-burnings arise, which are all pacified and compounded by the
express commandment of God, who joineth to Dan, Naphtali his mother’s
son, (for both of them were the sons of Bilhah, Rachel’s maid,) and
Asher, the son of Zilpah, Leah’s maid.” — Commentary on numbers *in*
*loco.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers 3:1-51](cc05071)
