[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05044)  [Next](cc05046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#000)<span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p2"></span><span id="v.xi-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
29:10-28](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010)<span id="v.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p3"></span>**10.** Ye stand this day all of you before
the Lord your God; your captains of your tribes, your elders, and your
officers, *with* all the men of Israel,

<span id="v.xi-p4"></span>**10.** Vos adstatis hodie omnes vos eoram
Jehova Deo vestro, principes vestri tribuum vestrarum, seniores vestri,
et praefecti vestri, omnes viri Israel:

<span id="v.xi-p5"></span>**11.** Your little ones, your wives, and thy
stranger that *is* in thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the
drawer of thy water;

<span id="v.xi-p6"></span>**11.** Parvuli vestri, uxores vestrae, et
peregrini tui qui habitant in medio castrorum tuorum, a caesore lignorum
tuorum usque ad haurientem aquas tuas:

<span id="v.xi-p7"></span>**12.** That thou shouldest enter into
covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath, which the Lord thy
God maketh with thee this day;

<span id="v.xi-p8"></span>**12.** Ut transeas in pactum Jehovae Dei tui,
et in jusjurandum ejus quod Jehova Deus tuus pangit tecum hodie:

<span id="v.xi-p9"></span>**13.** That he may establish thee today for a
people unto himself, and *that* he may be unto thee a God, as he hath
said unto thee, and as he hath sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob.

<span id="v.xi-p10"></span>**13.** Ut statuat te hodie sibi in populum,
et ipse sit tibi in Deum, quemadmodum loquutus est tibi, et quemadmodum
juravit patribus tuis, Abraham, Isaac, et Jacob.

<span id="v.xi-p11"></span>**14.** Neither with you only do I make this
covenant and this oath;

<span id="v.xi-p12"></span>**14.** Neque vobiscum solis pango pactum
istud, et jusjurandum istud.

<span id="v.xi-p13"></span>**15.** But with *him* that standeth here
with us this day before the Lord our God, and also with *him* that *is*
not here with us this day:

<span id="v.xi-p14"></span>**15.** Sed cum eo qui est hic nobiscum stans
hodie coram Jehova Deo nostro, et cum eo qui non est hic nobiscum hodie.

<span id="v.xi-p15"></span>**16.** (For ye know how we have dwelt in the
land of Egypt, and how we came through the nations which ye passed by;

<span id="v.xi-p16"></span>**16.** Vos enim nostis quomodo habitavimus
in terra Aegypti, et quomodo transivimus per medium gentium quas
transistis:

<span id="v.xi-p17"></span>**17.** And ye have seen their abominations,
and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which *were* among
them:)

<span id="v.xi-p18"></span>**17.** Et vidistis abominationes earum, et
idola earum, lignum, et lapidem, argentum et aurum, quae sunt apud
illas.

<span id="v.xi-p19"></span>**18.** Lest there should be among you man,
or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turneth away this day from
the Lord our God, to go *and* serve the gods of these nations; lest
there should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood;

<span id="v.xi-p20"></span>**18.** Ne forte sit inter vos vir, aut
mulier, aut familia, aut tribus, cujus cor avertat sese hodie a Jehova
Deo vestro, et abeat ad colendum Deos gentium harum: ne forte sit in
vobis radix fructificans venenum et absinthium.

<span id="v.xi-p21"></span>**19.** And it come to pass, when he heareth
the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst:

<span id="v.xi-p22"></span>**19.** Sitque quum ipse audierit verba
maledictionis hujus, ut benedicat sibi in corde suo, dicendo, Pax erit
mihi, etiamsi in cogitatione cordis mei ambulavero: ut addat ebriam
sitienti.

<span id="v.xi-p23"></span>**20.** The Lord will not spare him; but then
the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the
Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven.

<span id="v.xi-p24"></span>**20.** Non placebit Jehovae parcere illi,
sed tunc fumabit furor Jehovae, et zelus ejus in eum virum: et recubabit
in eo omnis maledictio quae scripta est in libro isto, et delebit Jehova
nomen ejus de sub coelo.

<span id="v.xi-p25"></span>**21.** And the Lord shall separate him unto
evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the
covenant that are written in this book of the law.

<span id="v.xi-p26"></span>**21.** Et separabit eum Jehova in malum ab
universis tribubus Israelis, juxta omnes maledictiones pacti scripti in
libro Legis hujus.

<span id="v.xi-p27"></span>**22.** So that the generation to come of
your children that shall rise up after you, and the stranger that shall
come from a far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land,
and the sicknesses which the Lord hath laid upon it;

<span id="v.xi-p28"></span>**22.** Et dicet generatio postera, filii
vestri qui surgent post vos, et alienigena qui veniet e terra longinqua,
quum viderint plagas terrae hujus, et morbos quibus aegrotare fecerit
Jehova in ea:

<span id="v.xi-p29"></span>**23.** *And* *that* the whole land thereof
*is* brimstone, and salt, *and* burning, *that* it is not sown, nor
beareth, nor any grass groweth therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger, and
in his wrath;

<span id="v.xi-p30"></span>**23.** Sulphur, et sal, combustionem in toto
solo ejus, ut non seratur, neque germinet, neque ascendat in ea ulla
herba, ut in subversione Sodomiae, Gomorrhae, Admae, et Seboiim, quas
subvertit Jehova in excandescentia sua et ira sua:

<span id="v.xi-p31"></span>**24.** Even all nations shall say, Wherefore
hath the Lord done thus unto this land? what *meaneth* the heat of this
great anger?

<span id="v.xi-p32"></span>**24.** Dicent, inquam, omnes gentes, Quare
fecit sic Jehova terrae huic? quae est ira excandescentiae hujus magnae?

<span id="v.xi-p33"></span>**25.** Then men shall say, Because they have
forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their fathers, which he made
with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt:

<span id="v.xi-p34"></span>**25.** Et dicent, Eo quod dereliquerunt
pactum Jehovae Dei patrum suorum, quod pepigit cum eis, quum educeret
eos e terra Aegypti:

<span id="v.xi-p35"></span>**26.** For they went and served other gods,
and worshipped them, gods whom they knew not, and *whom* he had not
given unto them:

<span id="v.xi-p36"></span>**26.** Et abeuntes coluerunt deos alienos,
incurvaveruntque se eis: deos, inquam, quos non noverant, et qui nihil
impertiti fuerant illis:

<span id="v.xi-p37"></span>**27.** And the anger of the Lord was kindled
against this land, to bring upon it all the curses that are written in
this book:

<span id="v.xi-p38"></span>**27.** Et irata est excandescentia Jehovae
in terram ipsam, ut induceret super eam omnem maledictionem scriptam in
hoc libro:

<span id="v.xi-p39"></span>**28.** And the Lord rooted them out of their
land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them
into another land, as *it* *is* this day.

<span id="v.xi-p40"></span>**28.** Extirpavitque eos Jehova e terra
ipsorum in ira, et indignatione, et excandescentia magna, et projecit
eos in terram aliam, sicut hodie.

<span id="v.xi-p41"></span> 

<span id="v.xi-p42"></span><span id="v.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p43"></span>**10.** *Ye stand this day all of you before
the Lord your God*. Again does Moses, as God’s appointed  <span
id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) representative, sanction the doctrine
proclaimed by him by a solemn adjuration. With this design he says that
the Israelites stood there not only to hear the voice of God, but to
enter into covenant with Him, in order that they might apply themselves
seriously, and with becoming reverence, to perform the promise they had
given. Nor does he only address their chiefs, but, after having begun
with the officers, the elders, and men,  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) he descends to the little children and
the wives, in order that they might understand that their whole race,
from the least to the greatest, were bound to keep the Law: nay, he adds
all the strangers, who had devoted themselves to the service of the God
of Israel, and states particularly that the very porters and lacqueys
 <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) were included in the covenant,
in order that the minds of those, who derive their origin from the holy
Patriarchs, should be more solemnly impressed. Moreover, in order that
they may accept the covenant with greater reverence, he says that it was
established with an oath. Now, if perjury between man and man is
detestable, much less pardonable is it to belie that which you have
promised God by his sacred name. Finally, he requires that the covenant
should be reverenced, both on account of its advantages and its
antiquity. Nothing was more advantageous for the Israelites than that
they should be adopted by God as His people; this incomparable
advantage, therefore, ought deservedly to render the covenant
gratifying; and, besides the exceeding greatness of this blessing, God
had prevented them by His grace many ages  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) before they were born.

<span id="v.xi-p48"></span>It would have been, therefore, very
disgraceful not to embrace eagerly and ardently so signal a pledge of
his love. Nevertheless, the question here arises, how the little
children could have passed into covenant, when they were not yet of a
proper age to learn (its contents;  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) ) the reply is easy, that, although
they did not receive by faith the promised salvation, nor, on the other
hand, renounce the flesh so as to dedicate themselves to God, still they
were bound to God by the same obligations under which their parents laid
themselves; for, since the grace was common to all, it was fitting that
their consent to testify their gratitude should also be universal; so
that when the children had come to age, they should more cheerfully
endeavor after holiness, when they remembered that they had been already
dedicated to God. For circumcision was a sign of their adoption from
their mother’s womb; and therefore, although they were not yet possessed
of faith or understanding, God had a paternal power over them, because
He had conferred upon them so great an honor. Thus, now-a-days, infants
are initiated into the service of God,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) whom they do not yet know, by baptism;
because He marks them out as His own peculiar people, and claims them as
His children when He ingrafts them into the body of Christ. Moses goes
further, stating that their descendants were bound by the same covenant,
as if already enthralled to God; and surely, since slavery passes on by
inheritance, it ought not to appear absurd that the same right should be
assigned to God which mortal men claim for themselves. What he says,
then, is tantamount to reminding the Israelites that they covenanted
with God in the name of their offspring, so as to devote both themselves
and those belonging to them to His service.

<span id="v.xi-p51"></span><span id="v.xi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p52"></span>**16.** *For ye know how we have dwelt in the
land of Egypt*. We know how greatly men’s minds are tickled by novelty;
and this might occur to the Israelites when, upon entering the land of
Canaan, they would see many forms of idolatry hitherto unknown, which
would be so many snares to entangle them. Although, therefore, they were
not as yet accustomed to such corruptions, he exhorts them to beware by
former instances; for they were not ignorant that God had held in
abomination the superstitions of Egypt, and also of other nations, which
He had punished in terrible ways. Consequently Moses reminds them that
there was no reason why the people should be carried away to imitate the
rites of the Gentiles with which they were unacquainted, since they knew
by extraordinary proofs that whatever imaginations had been invented by
heathen nations were hateful to God. This argument, then, is drawn from
experience, whereby the Israelites had been abundantly admonished, that
they should hereafter beware of all delusions. But, when he passes from
individual men and women to families and tribes, he indicates that those
who are associated with others in sin, seek to excuse themselves in vain
by their numbers; since a whole nation is as much to be condemned as a
single person.

<span id="v.xi-p53"></span>The conclusion of verse 18, “*lest there
should be among you a root*,” etc., seems to be tamely explained by
some,  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) lest there should be
venomous men, who should bring forth bitter fruits to God; for by the
word *root* I rather under stand the hidden principles of sins, which,
unless they be prevented in good time, spring up with collected vigor
and lift themselves on high; for indulgence in sin increases by
concealment and connivance. And to this the author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews seems to allude when he exhorts believers lest, through their
negligence, “any root of bitterness, springing up, trouble them, and
thereby many be defiled.” (<span id="v.xi-p54.1"></span>[Heb
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015)<span id="v.xi-p54.1"></span>.)
As soon, therefore, as any one should endeavor to excite his brethren to
worship false gods, God commands him to be plucked up, lest the poison
should burst forth, and the bitter root should produce its natural
fruits in the corruption of others. Wormwood  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) (*absinthium*) is here used, as often
elsewhere, in a bad sense, on account of its unpleasant savour; unless
perhaps it is some other herb, as is more probable.

<span id="v.xi-p56"></span><span id="v.xi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p57"></span>**19.** *And it come to pass when he heareth
the words*. He shews that it is not without reason that he has used so
solemn and severe an adjuration; since nothing is more common than for
men to flatter themselves, and by levity to evade the decision of God.
He therefore repeats, that they are standing before God, who neither
deceives, nor is deceived, nor even allows Himself to be thought lightly
of; in order that they may tremble at His threats. Let the majesty of
God, he says, be dreaded by you; so that none who despises Him, and
wantons in his own lusts, should promise himself impunity. “To bless
himself in his heart,” is to hope in his secret imaginations that all
will go well; as the hypocrites do, who, in their foolish
self-adulation, applaud themselves deceitfully, lest they should hear
God thundering.  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268)

<span id="v.xi-p59"></span>From this passage, therefore, let us learn
that nothing is worse than to hope for peace, whilst we wage war with
God; and to promise ourselves that He will let us alone, when we provoke
Him by the impetuosity of our lusts.

<span id="v.xi-p60"></span><span id="v.xi-p60.1"></span>The conclusion
of the verse, “to add the drunken to the thirsty,” is variously
explained on account of its ambiguity.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) <span id="v.xi-p61.3"></span> I am
ashamed to repeat the silly triflings of the Hebrew interpreters. To me
it seems unquestionable that Moses, by a proverbial figure of speech,
forbids us to excite the appetites of the flesh, already sufficiently
heated, by new stimulants. As, therefore, they are said to add oil to
the grate, who add more flames to a fire already lighted,  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) <span id="v.xi-p62.1"></span> so they
are said to add the drunken to the thirsty who seek provocatives of
their audacity, in order to sin more freely; for lust in a man is like
an insatiable dropsy; and if any one indulges in such intemperance, he
adds the drunken to the thirsty, *i* *e*<span id="v.xi-p62.2"></span>.,
the madness of his own folly to unrestrained desire. <span
id="v.xi-p62.3"></span>רויה<span id="v.xi-p62.4"></span>, *ravah*<span
id="v.xi-p62.5"></span>, however, is, in my opinion, used actively, as
elsewhere. In <span id="v.xi-p62.6"></span>[Ps
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)<span id="v.xi-p62.6"></span><span
id="v.xi-p62.7"></span>, it is said, “My cup <span
id="v.xi-p62.8"></span>רויה<span id="v.xi-p62.9"></span>, *revayah*<span
id="v.xi-p62.10"></span>, runneth over;” and, in like manner, in <span
id="v.xi-p62.11"></span>[Ps 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012)<span
id="v.xi-p62.11"></span><span id="v.xi-p62.12"></span>, a well-watered
land  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) <span
id="v.xi-p63.2"></span> is expressed by the same word, because it
abundantly moistens the corn and grass. It is very appropriate that the
desires of the flesh, that we burn with, should be compared to thirst;
and the licentious impetuosity, which carries us away without
reflection, to drunkenness; because the sinner stupifies himself into
forgetfulness of the distinction between good and evil. And thence Paul
calls those who are plunged in brutal forgetfulness of God and
themselves, <span id="v.xi-p63.3"></span>ἀπηλγηκότες<span
id="v.xi-p63.4"></span> (past feeling.) (<span
id="v.xi-p63.5"></span>[Eph 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)<span
id="v.xi-p63.5"></span><span id="v.xi-p63.6"></span>.)

<span id="v.xi-p64"></span><span id="v.xi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p65"></span>**20.** *The Lord will not spare him*<span
id="v.xi-p65.1"></span>. Moses here teaches us that the obstinacy in
which the wicked are willfully hardened, shuts against them the door of
hope, so that they will find that God is not to be appeased. And
assuredly it is the climax of all sins that a wretched man, who is
abandoned to vice, should extinguish the light of his own reason, and
destroy the image of God within him, so as to degenerate into a beast:
and not only so, but also that he should dethrone God, as if He were not
the Judge of the world. And this is the insult which they put upon Him
who abandon themselves to sin in the confident expectation of impunity.
 <span id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) <span id="v.xi-p66.1"></span>
Thus, by Isaiah, God swears that this was an inexpiable crime, that,
when He called them to baldness and to mourning, the Israelites
encouraged each other to gladness; and, whilst feasting luxuriously,
said in ridicule, “Tomorrow we shall die.” (<span
id="v.xi-p66.2"></span>[Isa. 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span id="v.xi-p66.2"></span><span
id="v.xi-p66.3"></span>.) By the word, <span
id="v.xi-p66.4"></span>אבה<span id="v.xi-p66.5"></span>, *ahab*<span
id="v.xi-p66.6"></span>, Moses altogether shuts out the grace of God.
 <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) <span id="v.xi-p67.8"></span>
Meanwhile he contrasts God’s fixed purpose, — that He will not be
willing to pardon, — with the depraved pleasures of those who take too
much delight in their sins. Behold, then, what poor sinners gain by
their proud contempt when they endeavor to cast off God’s judgment
together with His fear!

<span id="v.xi-p68"></span>Further, in order the better to express that
God will be irreconcilable to such great perversity, he declares that He
will exterminate from the earth those who have so wantonly exulted in
iniquity; and finally adds, that He will give them up to be accursed
(*in* *anathemata*,) so that they shall no longer hold a place among the
people of Israel. Now, it is a much more grievous thing to be cut off
from the elect people, and to be set apart unto evil, as it is here
said, than to be deprived of natural life.

<span id="v.xi-p69"></span><span id="v.xi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p70"></span>**22.** *So that the generation to come of
your children*. God enforces what we have already seen, that the
punishments which He would inflict would be no ordinary ones, or such as
should fall into contempt from their common use; but like portents,
which should awaken astonishment among their posterity. For the question
which is here put is such as refers to something extraordinary, and what
is not easily comprehended. It is not, however, confined to the
preceding clause, but refers to the whole list of curses; not as if each
of them by itself had awakened such horror, but because, when heaped one
upon another, they compelled all men to wonder, both on account of their
number and their severity and duration, and thus were for a sign and a
prodigy. For it everywhere occurs that men are afflicted with diseases,
and barrenness for a single season is a common evil; but that sicknesses
should cleave as it were to the marrow of a whole people, and that the
earth should be dried up as if it were burnt with sulphur, this is an
awful spectacle, in which God’s vengeance, which else would be
incredible, manifestly appears; and therefore the cases of Sodom and
Gomorrah are adduced, in whose destruction it might be seen what end
awaits all the reprobate.  <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274)
(<span id="v.xi-p71.1"></span>[Jude
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span id="v.xi-p71.1"></span>.) Now
the Israelites always had their desolation before their eyes, from the
time that they entered the land, in order that they might be warned by
so terrible a judgment, and might tremble at it. It is also worthy of
notice, that strangers are introduced making inquiry; in which words
Moses signifies that this vengeance would be terrible even to heathen
nations; and with this corresponds what we read in Jeremiah; “many
nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say every man to his
neighbor, Wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this great city? Then
they shall answer, Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord
their God, and worshipped other gods, and served them.” (<span
id="v.xi-p71.2"></span>[Jer. 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#009)<span id="v.xi-p71.2"></span>.) A
similar divine menace is recorded in <span id="v.xi-p71.3"></span>[1
Kings 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#009)<span id="v.xi-p71.3"></span>; “And
at this house,” referring to the Temple brought to desolation, “every
one that passeth by it shall be astonished and shall hiss; and they
shall say, Why hath the Lord done thus to this house? And they shall
answer, Because they forsook the Lord their God, and have taken hold
upon other gods,” etc. What we find further on is still more fearful;
“Behold, I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that
whosoever heareth of it, both his ears shall tingle.” (<span
id="v.xi-p71.4"></span>[2Ki 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012)<span
id="v.xi-p71.4"></span>.)

<span id="v.xi-p72"></span>Moses amplifies the crime of their rebellion,
when he says, that forsaking the God of their fathers, God their
deliverer, God who had made a covenant with them, they had gone and
served strange and unknown gods, from  <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275) whom they had received no benefits to
induce them. For God had bound them to Himself for ever, both by His
instruction  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) and the
incomparable manifestation of His power; there could therefore be no
pretense of ignorance, or mistake to excuse their defection from Him,
and their prostitution of themselves to unknown idols.

<span id="v.xi-p75"></span>In the meantime, let us learn from this
passage anxiously to inquire who is the true God, and what is His will;
because there is no true religion without knowledge; and again, if He
convicted His ancient people of wicked ingratitude on account of their
deliverance, that we also are now much more inexcusable, unless we
constantly abide in the faith of our eternal Redeemer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc05045.htm#fr_260) <span
id="v.xi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p44"></span> “Stipulator.” — *Lat*. “Un notaire
stipulant.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc05045.htm#fr_261) <span
id="v.xi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p45"></span> “Peres de famille.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc05045.htm#fr_262) <span
id="v.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p46"></span> “Calones, et lixas.” — *Lat*. “Les
buscherons, porteurs de bagages, et gouiats;” the wood-carriers,
baggage-porters, and soldiers’-boys. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc05045.htm#fr_263) <span
id="v.xi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p47"></span> “Quatre cens ans;” four hundred years. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc05045.htm#fr_264) <span
id="v.xi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p49"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc05045.htm#fr_265) <span
id="v.xi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p50"></span> “Luy sont consacrez par le baptesme, pour
estre siens;” are consecrated to Him by baptism, to be His own. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc05045.htm#fr_266) <span
id="v.xi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p54"></span> Amongst others, De Lyra, whose gloss is,
“Some one corrupted by idolatry, who should further corrupt others by
his wicked persuasions.” Dathe says, “It is a proverbial expression, and
its meaning is: lest there should be any rebel against the primary law
of worshipping one God, and he should think within himself the things
which follow in the next verse.”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc05045.htm#fr_267) <span
id="v.xi-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p55"></span><span id="v.xi-p55.1"></span> “The word <span
id="v.xi-p55.2"></span>לענה<span id="v.xi-p55.3"></span> certainly
denotes an extremely disagreeable and bitter plant; and that it was
wormwood is a well-supported and probable interpretation. We therefore
give a cut of the *Artemisia* *absinthium*<span id="v.xi-p55.4"></span>.
It must be confessed, however, that the Scripture seems to attribute to
the <span id="v.xi-p55.5"></span>לענה<span id="v.xi-p55.6"></span>
stronger effects than the wormwood of Europe will produce. We may
therefore understand that some more hurtful species is intended: unless,
as suggested by Gesenius, in the strong passages which seem to call for
such an explanation, the name of the plant is employed figuratively to
express poison.” — Illust. Comment. on <span id="v.xi-p55.7"></span>[Pr
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#004)<span id="v.xi-p55.7"></span>

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc05045.htm#fr_268) <span
id="v.xi-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p58"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “par maniere de dire.”

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc05045.htm#fr_269) <span
id="v.xi-p60.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p61"></span> *Lat*., “Ut addat ebriam sitienti.”
*A*.*V*., “To add drunkenness to thirst;” *Margin*, “The drunken to the
thirsty.” So Ainsworth, “To add the drunken, *to* *wit*, the drunken
*soul* to the thirsty, or the moist to the dry, meaning to add sin unto
sin in abundance, as in <span id="v.xi-p61.1"></span>[Isa
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#001)<span id="v.xi-p61.1"></span>.”
Dathe follows Le Clerc, and explains it, “to add water to a thirsty
soul;” and compares it to <span id="v.xi-p61.2"></span>[Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003)<span id="v.xi-p61.2"></span>,
where, he says, the same metaphor is used, though in a good sense.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc05045.htm#fr_270) <span
id="v.xi-p61.4"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p62"></span> “Que ceux, qui augmentent le mal, mettent
l’huile en la cheminee;” that those who augment an evil put oil into the
chimney. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc05045.htm#fr_271) <span
id="v.xi-p62.13"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p63"></span> *A*.*V*., “a wealthy (*margin*, moist)
*place*.” See Cal. Soc. Comment. on Psalms, vol. 2, p. 473.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc05045.htm#fr_272) <span
id="v.xi-p65.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p66"></span> “Car ceux qui sous ombre d’eschapper son
jugement s’abandonnent ‘a pecher, luy font ce dishonneur de le
despouiller de son empire;” for those who abandon themselves to sin
under cover of escaping His judgment, do him this dishonor of despoiling
him of his empire. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc05045.htm#fr_273) <span
id="v.xi-p66.7"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p67"></span><span id="v.xi-p67.1"></span> “Le verbe que
nous avons translate *condescendre*<span id="v.xi-p67.2"></span>,
signifie venir a gre. Ainsi Moyse exclud toutes graces de Dieu;” the
verb which we have translated *condescend*<span id="v.xi-p67.3"></span>,
(the Lord will not *condescend*<span id="v.xi-p67.4"></span> to spare
him,) signifies to consent. Thus Moses shuts out all the graces of God.
— *Fr* <span id="v.xi-p67.5"></span>יאבה<span id="v.xi-p67.6"></span>,
*acquiescet*<span id="v.xi-p67.7"></span>. — Taylor.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc05045.htm#fr_274) <span
id="v.xi-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p71"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “Comme Sainct Jude aussi
declare, que la foudre dont elles ont este abysmees, est figure du feu
eternal;” as St. Jude also declares, that the thunderbolt whereby they
were destroyed, is a type of the eternal fire.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[276](cc05045.htm#fr_275) <span
id="v.xi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p73"></span> See margin, *A*.*V*. — “*Who* had not given
to them *any* *portion*,” v, 26.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc05045.htm#fr_276) <span
id="v.xi-p73.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p74"></span> “Sa parole;” His word. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 30:1-10,15-20](cc05046)
