[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05052)  [Next](cc05054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
39](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#000)<span id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span><span id="vi.vi-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
39:1-43](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>**1.** And of the blue, and purple, and
scarlet, they made clothes of service, to do service in the holy
*place*, and made the holy garments for Aaron; as the Lord commanded
Moses.

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span>l. Ex hyacintho autem, et purpura, et
vermiculo cocci fecerunt vestes ministerii ad ministrandum in
sanctuario: fecerunt item vestes sanctitatis, quae erant Aharonis,
quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span>**2.** And he made the ephod *of* gold, blue,
and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span>**2.** Fecit et ephod ex auro, hyacintho, et
purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso retorta.

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span>**3.** And they did beat the gold into thin
plates, and cut *it* *into* wires, to work *it* in the blue, and in the
purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, *with* cunning work.

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span>**3.** Extenderuntque bracteas aureas, et
inciderunt fila, ut texerent in medio hyacinthi, et in medio purpurae,
et in medio vermiculi cocci, et in medio byssi, opere phrygionico.

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span>**4.** They made shoulder-pieces for it, to
couple *it* together: by the two edges was it coupled together.

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span>**4.** Oras fecerunt ei copulantes sese, et
in duabus extremitatibus ejus conjungebantur.

<span id="vi.vi-p11"></span>**5.** And the curious girdle of his ephod,
that *was* upon it, *was* of the same, according to the work thereof,
*of* gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen; as the
Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vi.vi-p12"></span>**5.** Et cingulum ephod quod erat super
illud, ex ipso erat juxta opus suum, ex auro, hyacintho, et purpura, et
vermiculo cocci, et bysso retorta, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Mosi.

<span id="vi.vi-p13"></span>**6.** And they wrought onyx-stones inclosed
in ouches of gold, graven, as signets are graven, with the names of the
children of Israel.

<span id="vi.vi-p14"></span>**6.** Et aptaverunt lapides onychinos
circundatos palis aureis, sculptos sculpturis annuli cum nominibus
filiorum Israel.

<span id="vi.vi-p15"></span>**7.** And he put them on the shoulders of
the ephod, *that* *they* *should* *be* stones for a memorial to the
children of Israel; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vi.vi-p16"></span>**7.** Posuitque illos in lateribus ephod,
ut essent lapides memoriae filiis Israel, quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova
Mosi.

<span id="vi.vi-p17"></span>**8.** And he made the breastplate *of*
cunning work, like the work of the ephod; *of* gold, blue, and purple,
and scarlet, and fine twined linen.

<span id="vi.vi-p18"></span>**8.** Fecit et pectorale opere phrygionis,
sicut opus ephod, ex auro, hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et
bysso retorta.

<span id="vi.vi-p19"></span>**9.** It was four-square; they made the
breastplate double: a span *was* the length thereof, and a span the
breadth thereof, *being* doubled.

<span id="vi.vi-p20"></span>**9.** Quadratum erat, duplicatum fecerunt
pectorale: palmus longitudo ejus, palmusque latitudo ejus: duplicatum.

<span id="vi.vi-p21"></span>**10.** And they set in it four rows of
stones; *the* *first* row *was* a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle:
this *was* the first row.

<span id="vi.vi-p22"></span>**10.** Impleverunt autem in eo quatuor
ordines lapidum, ordo autem talis erat, sardius, topazius, et
carbunculus, erat ordo primus.

<span id="vi.vi-p23"></span>**11.** And the second row, an emerald, a
sapphire, and a diamond.

<span id="vi.vi-p24"></span>**11.** Ordo vero secundus, smaragdus,
sapphirus, et jaspis.

<span id="vi.vi-p25"></span>**12.** And the third row, a ligure, an
agate, and an amethyst.

<span id="vi.vi-p26"></span>**12.** Ordo praeterea tertius, lyncurius,
achates, et amethystus.

<span id="vi.vi-p27"></span>**13.** And the fourth row, a beryl, an
onyx, and a jasper: *they* *were* inclosed in ouches of gold in their
inclosings.

<span id="vi.vi-p28"></span>**13.** Postremo quartus ordo, chrysolitus,
onychinus, et beryllus circundati palis aureis in plenitudinibus suis.

<span id="vi.vi-p29"></span>**14.** And the stones *were* according to
the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names,
*like* the engravings of a signet, every one with his name, according to
the twelve tribes.

<span id="vi.vi-p30"></span>**14.** Porro lapides illi juxta nomina
filiorum Israel erant, duodecim, juxta nomina eorum, sculpturae sigilli,
quilibet juxta nomen suum, secundum duodecim tribus.

<span id="vi.vi-p31"></span>**15.** And they made upon the breastplate
chains at the ends, *of* wreathen work *of* pure gold.

<span id="vi.vi-p32"></span>**15.** Fecerunt et super pectorale catenas
terminationis opere plectili ex auro puro.

<span id="vi.vi-p33"></span>**16.** And they made two ouches *of* gold,
and two gold rings, and put the two rings in the two ends of the
breastplate.

<span id="vi.vi-p34"></span>**16.** Fecerunt etiam duas palas aureas, et
duos annulos aureos: posueruntque duos illos annulos in duabus
extremitatibus pectoralis.

<span id="vi.vi-p35"></span>**17.** And they put the two wreathen chains
of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate.

<span id="vi.vi-p36"></span>**17.** Et inseruerunt duas catenas aureas
duobus illis annulis qui erant in extremitatibus pectoralis.

<span id="vi.vi-p37"></span>**18.** And the two ends of the two wreathen
chains they fastened in the two ouches, and put them on the
shoulder-pieces of the ephod, before it.

<span id="vi.vi-p38"></span>**18.** Duas autem extremitates duarum
catenarum inseruerunt duabus illis palis, posueruntque eas in oris ephod
a fronte ipsius.

<span id="vi.vi-p39"></span>**19.** And they made two rings of gold, and
put *them* on the two ends of the breastplate, upon the border of it,
which *was* on the side of the ephod inward.

<span id="vi.vi-p40"></span>**19.** Fecerunt item duos annulos aureos,
quos posuerunt in duabus extremitatibus pectoralis, in ora ejus quae
erat in latere ephod intrinsecus.

<span id="vi.vi-p41"></span>**20.** And they made two *other* golden
rings, and put them on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the
fore-part of it, over against the *other* coupling thereof, above the
curious girdle of the ephod.

<span id="vi.vi-p42"></span>**20.** Fecerunt praeterea duos alios
annulos aureos, quos posuerunt in duabus oris ephod inferne,a fronte
ipsius, e regione conjunctionis ejus, supra balteum ephod.

<span id="vi.vi-p43"></span>**21.** And they did bind the breastplate by
his rings unto the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might
be above the curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might
not be loosed from the ephod; as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vi.vi-p44"></span>**21.** Et ligaverunt pectorale ab annulis
suis ad annulos ipsius ephod, filo hyacinthino, ut esset supra balteum
ipsius ephod, neque separaretur pectorale ab ephod: quemadmodum
praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vi.vi-p45"></span>**22.** And he made the robe of the ephod
*of* woven work, all *of* blue.

<span id="vi.vi-p46"></span>**22.** Fecit insuper pallium ipsi ephod
opere textoris, totum hyacinthinum.

<span id="vi.vi-p47"></span>**23.** And *there* *was* an hole in the
midst of the robe, as the hole of habergeon, *with* a band round about
the hole, that it should not rend.

<span id="vi.vi-p48"></span>**23.** Et foramen pallii in medio ejus,
sicut foramen loricae labrum erat in orificio ipsius per circuitum, ne
frangeretur.

<span id="vi.vi-p49"></span>**24.** And they made upon the hems of the
robe pomegranates *of* blue, and purple, and scarlet, *and* twined
*linen*

<span id="vi.vi-p50"></span>**24.** Feceruntque in fimbriis pallii
malogranata ex hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso
retorta.

<span id="vi.vi-p51"></span>**25.** And they made bells *of* pure gold,
and put the bells between the pomegranates, upon the hem of the robe,
round about between the pomegranates:

<span id="vi.vi-p52"></span>**25.** Fecerunt et tintinnabula exauro
puro, posueruntque tintinnabula illa in medio malogranatorum, in
fimbriis pallii per circuitum, in medio, inquam, malogranatorum.

<span id="vi.vi-p53"></span>**26.** A bell and a pomegranate, a bell and
a pomegranate, round about the hem of the robe to minister *in*; as the
Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="vi.vi-p54"></span>**26.** Tintinnabulum et malogranatum,
tintinnabulum et malogranatum in fimbriis pallii in circuitu, ad
ministrandum, quemadmodum praeceperat et Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vi.vi-p55"></span>**27.** And they made coats *of* fine linen,
*of* woven work, for Aaron, and for his sons;

<span id="vi.vi-p56"></span>**27.** Post haec fecerunt tunicas ex bysso
opere textorio ipsi Aharon et filiis ejus:

<span id="vi.vi-p57"></span>**28.** And a mitre *of* fine linen, and
goodly bonnets *of* fine linen, and linen breeches of fine twined linen;

<span id="vi.vi-p58"></span>**28.** Mitram quoque ex bysso, et decora
galerorum ex bysso, et foeminalia linee ex bysso retorta:

<span id="vi.vi-p59"></span>**29.** And a girdle *of* fine twined linen,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, *of* needle-work; as the Lord
commanded Moses.

<span id="vi.vi-p60"></span>**29.** Balteum praeterea ex bysso retorta,
et hyacintho, ex purpura, et vermiculo cocci, opere phrygionis,
quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi.

<span id="vi.vi-p61"></span>**30.** And they made the plate of the holy
crown *of* pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, *like* *to* the
engravings of a signet, Holiness to the Lord.

<span id="vi.vi-p62"></span>**30.** Fecerunt postremo laminam coronae
sanctificationis ex auro, scripseruntque in ea scriptura caelaturarum
annuli, Sanctitas ipsi Jehovae.

<span id="vi.vi-p63"></span>**31.** And they tied unto it a lace of
blue, to fasten *it* on high upon the mitre; as the Lord commanded
Moses.

<span id="vi.vi-p64"></span>**31.** Et inseruerunt in eam filum
hyacinthinum, ut poneretur super tiaram superne, quemadmodum praeceperat
Jehova Mosi.

<span id="vi.vi-p65"></span>**32.** Thus was all the work of the
tabernacle of the tent of the congregation finished: and the children of
Israel did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they.

<span id="vi.vi-p66"></span>**32.** Perfectum est igitur totum opus
tabernaculi conventionis: et fecerunt filii Israel juxta omnia quae
praeceperat Jehova ipsi Mosi, sic fecerunt.

<span id="vi.vi-p67"></span>**33.** And they brought the tabernacle unto
Moses, the tent, and all his furniture, his taches, his boards, his
bars, and his pillars, and his sockets;

<span id="vi.vi-p68"></span>**33.** Attuleruntque tabernaculum illud ad
Mosen, tabernaculum et omnia vasa ejus, circulos ejus, tabulas ejus,
vectes ejus, et columnas ejus, et bases ejus.

<span id="vi.vi-p69"></span>**34.** And the covering of rams’ skins dyed
red, and the covering of badgers’ skins, and the vail of the covering;

<span id="vi.vi-p70"></span>**34.** Opertorium quoque ex pellibus
arietum rubricatis, et opertorium ex pellibus taxorum, et velum
operimenti.

<span id="vi.vi-p71"></span>**35.** The ark of the testimony, and the
staves thereof, and the mercy-seat;

<span id="vi.vi-p72"></span>**35.** Arcam testimonii, et vectes ejus, et
propitiatorium,

<span id="vi.vi-p73"></span>**36.** The table, *and* all the vessels
thereof, and the shew-bread;

<span id="vi.vi-p74"></span>**36.** Mensam, omnia vasa ejus, et panem
facierum,

<span id="vi.vi-p75"></span>**37.** The pure candlestick, *with* the
lamps thereof, *even* *with* the lamps to be set in order, and all the
vessels thereof, and the oil for light;

<span id="vi.vi-p76"></span>**37.** Candelabrum purum, lucernas *inquam*
ordinationis, et omnia vasa ejus, et oleum luminaris,

<span id="vi.vi-p77"></span>**38.** And the golden altar, and the
anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the hanging for the
tabernacle-door;

<span id="vi.vi-p78"></span>**38.** Et altare aureum, et oleum
unctionis, et suffimentum aromaticum, et aulaeum pro ostio tabernaculi.

<span id="vi.vi-p79"></span>**39.** The brasen altar, and his grate of
brass, his staves, and all his vessels; the laver and his foot;

<span id="vi.vi-p80"></span>**39.** Altare aereum, et cribrum ejus
aereum, vectes ejus, et omnia vasa ejus, et concham, et basim ejus.

<span id="vi.vi-p81"></span>**40.** The hangings of the court, his
pillars, and his sockets, and the hanging for the court-gate, his cords,
and his pins, and all the vessels of the service of the tabernacle, for
the tent of the congregation;

<span id="vi.vi-p82"></span>**40.** Cortinas atrii, et columnas ejus, et
aulaeum pro porta atrii, et funes ejus, et palos ejus, et omnia vasa
ministerii tabernaculi, tabernaculi conventionis.

<span id="vi.vi-p83"></span>**41.** The clothes of service to do service
in the holy *place*; and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his
sons’ garments, to minister in the priest’s office.

<span id="vi.vi-p84"></span>**41.** Vestes ministerii ad ministrandum in
sanctuario, vestes sanctas ipsi Aharon sacerdoti, et vestes filiorum
ejus, ad fungendum sacerdotio.

<span id="vi.vi-p85"></span>**42.** According to all that the Lord
commanded Moses, so the children of Israel made all the work.

<span id="vi.vi-p86"></span>**42.** Juxta omnia quae praeceperat Jehova
Mosi, sic fecerunt filii Israel universum opus.

<span id="vi.vi-p87"></span>**43.** And Moses did look upon all the
work, and, behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded, even so
had they done it: and Moses blessed them.

<span id="vi.vi-p88"></span>**43.** Videns vero Moses universum opus,
quod prorsus fecissent illud quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova, benedixit
illis.

<span id="vi.vi-p89"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi-p90"></span><span id="vi.vi-p90.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p91"></span>**1.** *And of the blue, and purple, and
scarlet*. The description of the sacerdotal garments, which is repeated
in this chapter, is more accurate than it would have been had he been
speaking of some unimportant matter. And assuredly, since Christ was
vividly represented in the person of the high priest, this was a most
important part of the legal service. We have elsewhere set forth how far
it was from being an empty pomp, as when the Popish sacrificers
now-a-days, in order to acquire dignity, dazzle the eyes of the simple
by the splendor of their vestments, and their magnificent paraphernalia;
but that rather it was for the purpose of placing before men’s eyes all
that faith ought to consider in Jesus Christ. We have especially seen
how great mysteries were contained in the mitre, which was Holiness to
the Lord: and in the ephod, in which shone forth the light of truth and
integrity of life, and in which were the symbols of the ten tribes, so
that the priest bore the people itself upon his shoulders and before his
breast, in such a manner that in the person of one all might be
presented familiarly before God. For this reason he repeats seven times
the clause, “as the Lord commanded Moses;” which certainly has the
effect of awakening attention.

<span id="vi.vi-p92"></span><span id="vi.vi-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p93"></span>**32.** *Thus was all the work of the
tabernacle*. A brief summary is now subjoined, whereby he indicates that
in no part was there the least defect, and also declares that the
children of Israel had so obeyed God’s commands, that the work itself
varied in no respect from its pattern. “The children of Israel,” he
says, “did according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did they;”
whence we gather that no part of the building was impaired by any
admixture. Afterwards it is added, that the tabernacle with its utensils
and furniture was brought before Moses, and that all things were
approved of by his judgment; for he is said to have “blessed them,”
because they had duly and faithfully obeyed God’s command. This,
however, was not a simple prayer, as of a private individual; but it was
a promise of reward, such as might awaken confidence in the minds of the
people, when they heard from the mouth (“D’un tel Prophete;” of such a
Prophet. — *Fr*.) of this excellent and unimpeachable witness that their
labor was pleasing to God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 24:1-18](cc05054)
