[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05045)  [Next](cc05047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
30](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#000)<span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span><span id="v.xii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
30:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)<span id="v.xii-p2.1"></span>,
15-20

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span>**1.** And it shall come to pass, when all
these things are come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I
have set before thee, and thou shalt call *them* to mind among all the
nations whither the Lord thy God hath driven thee,

<span id="v.xii-p4"></span>**1.** Erit autem, quum evenerint tibi omnia
verba haec, benedictio et maledictio quas proposui tibi, et reduxeris ad
cor tuum in cunctis gentibus ad quas expulerit te Jehova Deus tuus:

<span id="v.xii-p5"></span>**2.** And shalt return unto the Lord thy
God, and shalt obey his voice, according to all that I command thee this
day, thou and thy children, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;

<span id="v.xii-p6"></span>**2.** Et conversus fueris ad Jehovam Deum
tuum, obedierisque voci ejus per omnia ut ego praecipio tibi hodie, tu
et filii tui toto corde tuo, et tota anima tua:

<span id="v.xii-p7"></span>**3.** That then the Lord thy God will turn
thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return, and
gather thee from all the nations whither the Lord thy God hath scattered
thee.

<span id="v.xii-p8"></span>**3.** Tunc reducet Jehova Deus tuus
captivitatem tuam, et miserebitur tui: et conversus congregabit to de
cunctis populis ad quos disperserit te Jehova Deus tuus.

<span id="v.xii-p9"></span>**4.** If any of thine be driven out unto the
outmost *parts* of heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather
thee, and from thence will he fetch thee.

<span id="v.xii-p10"></span>**4.** Si fuerit expulsus tuus in extremo
coeli, illinc congregabit te Jehova Deus tuus, et illinc accipiet te:

<span id="v.xii-p11"></span>**5.** And the Lord thy God will bring thee
into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shalt possess it;
and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.

<span id="v.xii-p12"></span>**5.** Reducetque te Jehova Deus tuus ad
terram quam possederant patres tui, ac possidebis eam: benefacietque
tibi, et multiplicabit te magis quam patres tuos.

<span id="v.xii-p13"></span>**6.** And the Lord thy God will circumcise
thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with
all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.

<span id="v.xii-p14"></span>**6.** Et circuncidet Jehova Deus tuus cor
tuum, et cor seminis tui, ut diligas Jehovam Deum tuum toto corde tuo,
et tota anima tua, propter vitam tuam.

<span id="v.xii-p15"></span>**7.** And the Lord thy God will put all
these curses upon thine enemies, and on them that hate thee, which
persecuted thee.

<span id="v.xii-p16"></span>**7.** Dabit autem Jehova Deus tuus omnes
maledictiones istas super inimicos tuos, et super odio habentes te, et
qui persequuti sunt te.

<span id="v.xii-p17"></span>**8.** And thou shalt return, and obey the
voice of the Lord, and do all his commandments, which I command thee
this day.

<span id="v.xii-p18"></span>**8.** Tu ergo revertaris, et obedias voci
Jehovae, et fadas omnia praecepta ejus quae ego praecipio tibi hodie.

<span id="v.xii-p19"></span>**9.** And the Lord thy God will make time
plenteous in every work of thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in
the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land, for good: for the
Lord will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy
fathers;

<span id="v.xii-p20"></span>**9.** Et abundare te faciat Jehova Deus
tuus in omni opere manuum tuarum, in fructu ventris tui, et in fructu
jumenti tui, et in fructu terrae tuae, in bonum: quoniam convertetur
Jehova ut laetetur super te in bonum quemadmodum laetatus est super
patres tuos:

<span id="v.xii-p21"></span>**10.** If thou shalt hearken unto the voice
of the Lord thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes, *which*
*are* written in this book of the law, *and* if thou turn unto the Lord
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul.

<span id="v.xii-p22"></span>**10.** Si tamen obedieris voci Jehovae Dei
tui, custodiendo praecepta ejus, et statuta ejus scripta in hoc libro
Legis: quum conversus fueris ad Jehovam Deum tuum toto corde tuo, et
tota anima tua.

<span id="v.xii-p23"></span>**15.** See, I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil;

<span id="v.xii-p24"></span>**15.** Vide, proposui tibi hodie vitam, et
bonum, mortem et malum.

<span id="v.xii-p25"></span>**16.** In that I command thee this day to
love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his
commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, that thou mayest live
and multiply: and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land whither
thou goest to possess it.

<span id="v.xii-p26"></span>**16.** Quando ego praecipio tibi hodie ut
diligas Jehovam Deum tuum, ut ambules in viis ejus, et custodias
praecepta ejus et statuta ejus, et judicia ejus: ut vivas, et
multipliceris, benedicatque tibi Jehova Deus tuus in terra ad quam
ingrederis ut possideas eam.

<span id="v.xii-p27"></span>**17.** But if thine heart turn away, so
that thou wilt not hear, but shalt be drawn away, and worship other
gods, and serve them;

<span id="v.xii-p28"></span>**17.** Qued si averterit se cor tuum, et
non audieris, et impulsus adoraveris Deos alienos, coluerisque eos:

<span id="v.xii-p29"></span>**18.** I denounce unto you this day, that
ye shall surely perish, *and* *that* ye shall not prolong *your* days
upon the land whither thou passest over Jordan to go to possess it.

<span id="v.xii-p30"></span>**18.** Denuntio vobis hodie, pereundo
peribitis, non prorogabitis dies super terram ad quam transmisso Jordane
pergis, ut possideas eam.

<span id="v.xii-p31"></span>**19.** I call heaven and earth to record
this day against you, *that* I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed
may live;

<span id="v.xii-p32"></span>**19.** Testor contra vos hodie coelum et
terram, quod vitam et mortem proposui, benedictionem et maledictionem:
deligas ergo vitam, ut vivas tu, et semen tuum.

<span id="v.xii-p33"></span>**20.** That thou mayest love the Lord thy
God, *and* that thou mayest obey his voice, and that thou mayest cleave
unto him; (for he *is* thy life, and the length of thy days;) that thou
mayest dwell in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.

<span id="v.xii-p34"></span>**20.** Diligendo Jehovam Deum tuum,
obediendo voci ejus, adhaerendo ei: ipse enim est vita tua, et longitudo
dierum tuorum, ut habites super terram quam juravit Jehova patribus
tuis, Abrahm, Isaac et Jacob se daturum illis.

<span id="v.xii-p35"></span> 

<span id="v.xii-p36"></span><span id="v.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p37"></span>**1.** *And it shall come to pass, when all
these things are come*. He again confirms what we have elsewhere seen,
that God never so severely afflicts His Church as not to be ready to
return to mercy; nay, that by their punishments, however cruel in
appearance, the afflicted, who were destroying themselves as if their
hearts were bent upon it, are invited to repentance, so as to obtain
pardon. Although, therefore, cause for despair is everywhere besetting
them from the burning wrath of God, still he bids them take heart and be
of good hope. Still, we must bear in mind what I have already shewn from
the words of Moses, that reconciliation is not offered to all
indiscriminately, but that this blessing exists by peculiar privilege in
the Church alone; and this we gather also from the special promise,
 <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) I will visit their iniquities
with the rod; nevertheless I will not take away my loving-kindness from
them. Now, however, it must also be added, that this is not common to
all who profess to be members of the Church, but only belongs  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) to the residue of the seed, and those
whom Paul calls the remnant of grace, (<span id="v.xii-p39.1"></span>[Ro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span id="v.xii-p39.1"></span>;)
for it is no more profitable for the hypocrites, though they are mixed
with believers, to be smitten with the scourges of God unto salvation,
than it is for strangers. Wherefore this promise is only addressed to a
certain number, because it was always necessary that some people should
remain as a residue, in order that God’s covenant should stand firm and
sure.

<span id="v.xii-p40"></span>Still, Moses does not only enjoin the
Israelites to profit by the corrections of God, but also to reflect upon
His blessings whereby they might be led to serve Him with pleasure. For
this comparison was of no slight avail in illustration of the judgments
of God.  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) If the punishments
alone had occupied their minds, their knowledge would have been but
partial or more obscure; whereas, when on the one hand they considered
that they had not served God in vain, and on the ether, that in
forsaking Him they had fallen from the height of felicity into the
deepest misery, it was easy for them to infer that whatever misfortunes
they suffered were the fruit and reward of their ungodliness. Nor is it
to be doubted but that, under the Law, God so adapted Himself to a
tender and ignorant people, that the course of his blessings and curses
was perfectly manifest; so that it was plainly shewn that they neither
threw away their labor in keeping the Law, nor violated it with
impunity. Often does He declare by the Prophets, that, as long as His
children were obedient, He on His part would be their Father; that
thence it might be more clearly perceived that the deterioration of
their circumstances arose from His just indignation. Under this pretext,
indeed, the wicked formerly endeavored to defend their superstitions;
as, for instance, when in order to refute Jeremiah, they proudly boasted
that it was well with them when they “burnt incense unto the frame of
heaven;”  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) but such wanton
depravity is admirably reproved by the Prophet, who shews that God had
most manifestly avenged such pollutions by the destruction of their city
and the fall of the Temple. (<span id="v.xii-p42.2"></span>[Jer.
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022)<span id="v.xii-p42.2"></span>.)
The distinction, therefore, of which Moses now speaks, could not escape
them, unless they willfully shut out the light. Moreover, because it
rarely happens that men are wise in prosperity, he advises the
Israelites to return to their senses, at any rate when sorely afflicted;
for He addresses the exiles, who, disinherited by God, had no hope left;
and promises them, that if, when banished to distant lands, they at
length repented, God would be propitiated towards them. For “to  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) bring back to their heart” is
equivalent to considering what before had been despised through
contempt, or neglect, or stupidity, and buried as it were in voluntary
oblivion. Still, lest they should presume on God’s kindness, and only
seek for pardon in a perfunctory manner, serious conversion is required,
the results of which should appear in their life, since newness of life
accompanies (genuine  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) )
repentance. Nor does Moses speak only of the outward correction of the
life, but demands sincere desires to obey, for we have elsewhere seen
 <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) that “all the heart” means with
integrity of heart.

<span id="v.xii-p46"></span><span id="v.xii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p47"></span>**4.** *If any of thine be driven out*.
Since their dispersion into unknown countries might have altogether
annihilated their hope of restoration, Moses anticipates this doubt, and
teaches them that, although they might be driven out into the utmost
regions of the earth, the infinite power of God sufficed to gather them
from thence; as also it is said in <span id="v.xii-p47.1"></span>[Ps
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002)<span id="v.xii-p47.1"></span>,

<span id="v.xii-p48"></span>“The Lord doth build up Jerusalem; he
gathereth together the outcasts of Israel.”

<span id="v.xii-p49"></span>With this intent, the adverb “from thence”
is twice repeated, lest they should imagine that the distance of place
would be any impediment to the fulfillment of what God had promised.

<span id="v.xii-p50"></span>We have seen elsewhere that it was not
without reason that their dwelling in the land of Canaan was magnified
as a peculiar blessing, because it behooved that, until the time of
Christ’s coming, the hope of an eternal inheritance should be cherished
in their minds by an earthly and visible symbol.

<span id="v.xii-p51"></span><span id="v.xii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p52"></span>**6.** *And the Lord thy God will circumcise
thine heart*. This promise far surpasses all the others, and properly
refers to the new Covenant, for thus it is interpreted by Jeremiah, who
introduces God thus speaking, —

<span id="v.xii-p53"></span>“Behold, the days come that I will make a
new covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, not
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, which covenant
they brake, but I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts.” (<span id="v.xii-p53.1"></span>[Jer
31:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span
id="v.xii-p53.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xii-p54"></span>Moses now declares the same thing in
different words, that, lest the Israelites, according to their wonted
instability, should fall back from time to time into new rebellions, a
divine remedy was needed, *i*.*e*., that God should renew and mould
their hearts. In short, he reminds them that this would be the chief
advantage of their reconciliation, that God should endow them with the
Spirit of regeneration. There is a metaphor in this word *circumcise*;
for Moses alludes to the legal sign of consecration, whereby they were
initiated into the service of God. The expression, therefore, is
equivalent to his saying, God will create you spiritually to be new men,
so that, cleansed from the filth of the flesh and the world, and
separated from the unclean nations, you should serve Him in purity.
Meanwhile, he shews that, whatever God offers us in the Sacraments,
depends on the secret operation of His Spirit. Circumcision was then the
Sacrament of repentance and renewal, as Baptism is now to us; but “the
letter,” as Paul calls it, (<span id="v.xii-p54.1"></span>[Ro
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027)<span id="v.xii-p54.1"></span>,)
was useless in itself, as also now many are baptized to no profit. So
far, then, is God from resigning the grace of His Spirit to the
Sacraments, that all their efficacy and utility is lodged in the Spirit
alone.

<span id="v.xii-p55"></span>Although Moses seems to make a division of
the matter between men and God, so as to ascribe to them the beginning
of repentance, and to make Him the author of perseverance (only,  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) ) nevertheless this difficulty is
easily solved; for according to the ordinary manner of Scripture, when
he exhorts them to repentance, he is not teaching them that it is a gift
of the Spirit, but simply reminding them of their duty. Meanwhile, the
defenders of free-will foolishly conclude, that more is not required of
men than they are able to perform; for in other places they are taught
to ask of God whatever He enjoins. Thus, in this passage, Moses treats
of the means of propitiating God, viz., by returning into the right way
with an unfeigned heart; but, after he has testified that God will be
gracious to them, he adds, that there is need of a better remedy, so
that, being once restored by Him, they may be perpetual recipients of
His grace. Still, it is not his intention to restrict the circumcision
of the heart to the subsequent course of their lives, as if it depended
on their own will and choice to circumcise themselves before God should
work in them. And surely it is not at all more easy to rise when you
have fallen, than to stand upright after God has set you up. I confess
that perseverance is an excellent grace; but how shall the sinner, who
is enthralled to Satan, free himself from those chains, unless God shall
deliver him? Therefore, what Moses lays down as to the gift, of
perseverance, applies no less to the commencement of conversion; but he
only wishes to teach us that, although God should pardon our sins, that
blessing would be but transient, unless He should keep us in subjection
to His Law. And, in fact, He regenerates by His Spirit unto
righteousness all those whose sins He pardons.

<span id="v.xii-p57"></span><span id="v.xii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p58"></span>**8.** *And thou shalt return*  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) *and obey the voice of the Lord*. The
*copula* which Moses here employs is equivalent to the *illative*
*particle*; for he argues from their certainty of obtaining pardon, that
they should not hesitate to return to God, nay, rather that they should
set about it with a cheerful and ready mind; and then that they should
constantly proceed in the course of obedience. But, when he now requires
of the people the perseverance which he had just before declared to be
given by God alone, we may at once infer that they deal foolishly who
estimate the powers of man by the commands of God. Meanwhile, let us
bear in mind this main point, that true conversion is proved by the
constant tenor of the life; because we are redeemed, as Zecharias
testifies, to this end that we should serve God, our Deliverer, “in
holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.” (<span
id="v.xii-p59.1"></span>[Luke 1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074),
[75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)<span id="v.xii-p59.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.xii-p60"></span><span id="v.xii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p61"></span>**15.** *See, I have set before thee this
day*. A solemn injunction, similar to the foregoing ones, that the
Israelites should consider how inestimable a blessing it was that God
should have condescended to deposit His Law with them; and that if they
did not receive it with reverence, the punishments for such foul
ingratitude would be by no means light. For, in order to deprive them of
the pretext of error, He separates them from the heathen nations, which
through ignorance of the right way vacillated, as in uncertainty,
between life and death. He says, therefore, that He has set before their
eyes life, and that indeed connected with true and complete happiness;
and likewise death with its consequences. Now, there is no one who,
under the guidance of nature, would not seek for life and recoil from
death; and thence Moses reproaches them with being more than senseless
if they should plunge voluntarily into all miseries. Meanwhile, he
signifies that he is not addressing to them mere idle menaces, but that
his doctrine is armed with the power of God, so that whosoever should
embrace it would find salvation in it, whilst none would despise it with
impunity. The distribution of the two clauses then follows, viz., that
the love of God and the keeping of His Law is prescribed that they may
live; but if they turn away from it, their destruction is denounced. It
is not, then, without reason that I have called the promises and threats
the Sanctions of the Law, because, in order that its authority may be
assured to us, it is necessary that both the recompence of obedience,
and also the punishment of transgression, should be set before us. By
the worship of other gods, he means every revolt from God, as I have
observed already. He does not speak of their being “drawn away” to
superstition as an excuse for their instability, but rather as an
aggravation of their crime, inasmuch as they are carried away by their
depraved desires,  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) and thus
desert the truth of God when well acquainted with it.

<span id="v.xii-p63"></span><span id="v.xii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p64"></span>**19.** *I call heaven and earth to record
this day against you*. Though the verb is in the past tense, it
indicates a present act. It is in order to deal with them with greater
urgency that he calls heaven and earth to witness the vengeance of God.
In these words he does not address men and angels, as some tamely
expound it, but in amplification attributes sense to things inanimate. I
pass this over briefly, because I have  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) treated it more fully before; as also
what soon afterwards follows about life and death. For the Law, as
respects its doctrine, contains in it life and death; for the reward of
eternal life is not promised in it in vain; but since no one is found
worthy of the promised reward, Paul justly teaches that the Law
ministers death. Still this is accidental, and proceeds not from any
fault in the doctrine, but from the corruption of men. Nevertheless, it
is asked how, if the corruption of our nature causes that the Law should
engender nothing but death, Moses commands us to “choose life,” which
the sinner cannot attain to by it? Thence the Papists uplift their
crests, both to extol free-will and to boast of merits; as if Moses did
not also testify and proclaim the gratuitous mercy of God, and direct
his disciples to Christ in order to seek salvation from Him. When,
therefore, he speaks of keeping the Commandments, he does not exclude
the two-fold grace of Christ, that believers, being regenerated by the
Spirit,  <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) should aspire to the
obedience of righteousness, and at the same time should be reconciled
freely to God through the forgiveness of their sins. And assuredly,
since the same covenant is common to us and to the ancient people, it is
not to be doubted but that *they* “chose life” who of old embraced the
doctrine of Moses. At the same time, in so far as his legation was
different from the Gospel, he rather insists on the office peculiarly
entrusted to him, so that the distinction between Christ and himself
might more clearly appear. This is the reason why he more sparingly
touches upon justification by faith, whilst he enlarges fully on loving
and serving God and fulfilling His Commandments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc05046.htm#fr_277) <span
id="v.xii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p38"></span> <span id="v.xii-p38.1"></span>[2 Sam.
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015)<span id="v.xii-p38.1"></span>;
<span id="v.xii-p38.2"></span>[Ps.
89:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)<span id="v.xii-p38.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc05046.htm#fr_278) <span
id="v.xii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p39"></span> “Residuum semen.” — *Lat*. “La semence, que
Dieu se reserve;” the seed which God reserves to Himself. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc05046.htm#fr_279) <span
id="v.xii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p41"></span> “A donner lustre a la gloire de Dieu;” to
give lustre to the glory of God. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc05046.htm#fr_280) <span
id="v.xii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p42"></span> See margin, *A*.*V*., <span
id="v.xii-p42.1"></span>[Jer
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017)<span id="v.xii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc05046.htm#fr_281) <span
id="v.xii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p43"></span> “Call *them* to mind.” — *A*.*V*. “And thou
shalt cause *them* to return to thine heart, or reduce, bring again to
thine heart, *i*.*e*., call to mind, consider seriously; so in <span
id="v.xii-p43.1"></span>[De 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#039)<span
id="v.xii-p43.1"></span>.” — Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc05046.htm#fr_282) <span
id="v.xii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p44"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc05046.htm#fr_283) <span
id="v.xii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p45"></span> See *ante* on <span
id="v.xii-p45.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029)<span id="v.xii-p45.1"></span>, p.
271.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc05046.htm#fr_284) <span
id="v.xii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p56"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc05046.htm#fr_285) <span
id="v.xii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p59"></span> “Return thou therefore,” etc. — *Lat*.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc05046.htm#fr_286) <span
id="v.xii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p62"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “comme d’un tourbillon;”
as by a whirlpool.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc05046.htm#fr_287) <span
id="v.xii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p65"></span> See *ante* on <span
id="v.xii-p65.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026)<span id="v.xii-p65.1"></span>, p.
270.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc05046.htm#fr_288) <span
id="v.xii-p65.3"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p66"></span> “S’adonnent a observer la Loy, et pource
qu’ils n’en peuvent venir a bout, qu’ils ne soyent toujours redevables,
que leur fautes leurs soyent gratuitement pardonnees;” should devote
themselves to the keeping of the Law; and because they could never
attain its end, so as not to be always indebted to it, that their faults
should be gratuitously pardoned. — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Return to the History](cc05047)
