[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05022)  [Next](cc05024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii-p1"></span>Political Supplements to the eighth
Commandment

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
22:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** If a man shall steal an ox, or a
sheep, and kill it, or sell it; he shall restore five oxen for an ox,
and four sheep for a sheep.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p4"></span>**1.** Quum furatus fuerit quis bovem
aut pecudem, et jugulaverit, aut vendiderit, quinque boves reddet pro
illo bove, et quatuor pecudes pro pecude illa:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** If a thief be found breaking up,
and be smitten that he die, *there* *shall* no blood *be* *shed* for
him.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p6"></span>**2.** (Si in effossione inventus
fuerit fur, et percussus fuerit, et inde mortuus, non erit ei in
sanguinem.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** If the sun be risen upon him,
*there* *shall* *be* blood *shed* for him; *for* he should make full
restitution: if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p8"></span>**3.** Si ortus fuerit sol super eum,
erit ei in sanguinem:) reddendo reddet: si non sit ei, vendetar propter
furtum suum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** If the theft be certainly found
in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or *ass*, or sheep, he shall
restore double.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p10"></span>**4.** Si deprehendatur in manu ejus
furtum a bove usque ad asinum, usque ad pecudem: viva duo reddet.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p12"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p13"></span>Thus far God has proclaimed Himself
the avenger of iniquities, and, citing thieves before His tribunal, has
threatened them with eternal death. Now follow the civil laws, the
principle of which is not so exact and perfect; since in their enactment
God has relaxed His just severity in consideration of the people’s
hardness of heart.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p14"></span>What God formerly delivered to His
people the heathen legislators afterwards borrowed. Draco, indeed, was
more severe, but his extreme rigor became obsolete by the silent consent
of the people of Athens; and the Decemvirs borrowed from Solon part of
their law, which they published in the ten tables, although there were
some variations in the distinction of the double or quadruple
restitution, and in process of time other alterations were afterwards
made. But if all things be duly considered, it will be found that both
Solon and the Decemvirs have made a change for the worse, wherever they
have varied from the law of God. First of all, no distinction  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) is here made, such as the Roman laws
decree, between manifest thieves and those that are not manifest; for by
them the thief not manifest is condemned to a double amend, and the
manifest to quadruple; and he is called a manifest thief who is caught
before he has carried what he has stolen to the place of its
destination. I suppose that the awarders of the punishment had this
point in view, that the wickedness of that person was the more egregious
who was so greedily and anxiously set on his prey as not to be afraid of
disgrace; and undoubtedly he who has no fear of shame is more audacious
ill sin. But, on the contrary, God condemns to a double amend those upon
whom the stolen goods were found; and to quadruple, those who had killed
or sold it; and deservedly so, because greater obstinacy in crime
betrays itself where the theft is turned to profit, nor is there any
hope of repentance; and thus by this further process the crime of
dishonesty is doubled. It might be that, immediately after the offense,
the thief should be alarmed; but he who had dared to kill the stolen
animal or to sell it, is altogether hardened in his sin. Besides, the
more difficult its investigation is, the greater is the punishment which
a misdemeanor deserves. Meanwhile, it is to be remembered, that the
pecuniary fine imposed upon thieves did not free them from guilt; for,
as Marcellus says,  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) not even the
president of a province can bring it to pass, that infamy should not
pursue a man condemned of theft; and there was no need of establishing
by law that in which all by nature are agreed. Thus, when God punished
thieves by a fine, He left them still marked by infamy. I know not
whether they  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) assign the true
cause why he who had stolen an ox is fined to a larger amount than he
who had stolen a goat, or sheep, or other cattle, who say that the loss
of the owner is taken into account to whom the labor of the ox is
especially useful in agriculture; for what is said as to an ox I extend
to cows and the whole herd. Those seem to come nearer to the truth who
say the audacity of the thief is punished who, when he stole the larger
animal, did not fear being observed by witnesses; yet it seems to me
more likely that the different sentence depended on the price of the
article; for assuredly it is more reasonable that he who has done the
most harm should be exposed to the greater punishment.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p18"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p19"></span>**2.** *If a thief be found breaking
up*. This clause is to be taken separately, and is inserted by way of
parenthesis; for, after having decreed the punishment, God adds in
connection, “he should make full restitution; if he have nothing, then
he should be sold for his theft;” and this exception as to the thief in
the night is introduced parenthetically. But although the details are
not expressed with sufficient distinctness, still the intention of God
is by no means ambiguous, viz., that if a thief should be killed in the
dark, his slayer should be unpunished; for he can then hardly be
distinguished from a robber, especially when he proceeds with violence;
because he cannot enter another man’s house by night without either
digging through a wall or breaking down a door. The Twelve Tables  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) differ slightly from this; for they
permit the killing of a thief by night, and also by day if he should
defend himself with a weapon. But, since God had sufficiently repressed
by other laws murders and violent assaults, He is silent here respecting
robbers who use the sword in their attempts at plunder. He therefore
justly condemns to death those who have avenged by murder a theft in
open day.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p21"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p22"></span>**3.** *He should make full
restitution*. These words, as I have said, are connected with the first
verse, since here the execution of the punishment is only enjoined; as
if God forbade thieves to be spared, but that they should pay either
twofold or quadruple, or even quintuple, according to the measure of
their crime. But, if they were unable to pay, He commands them to be
sold as slaves, which also was the custom at Rome. Whence the saying of
Cato,  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) “that private thieves
lived in bonds and fetters, but public ones in gold and purple.” And
since this condition was a harsh one, a caution is expressly given, that
they were not to be absolved on the score of their poverty. If any one
should ask whether it was lawful for the owner of the thing stolen to
recover double or quadruple its value, I answer, that what God awards, a
man has the best of rights to; meanwhile, in equity men were bound to
take care that they did not grow rich at the expense of others, but
rather were they to apply whatever they gained to pious and holy uses.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
22:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>**5.** If a man shall cause a field or
vineyard to be eaten, and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in
another man’s field; of the best of his own field, and of the best of
his own vineyard, shall he make restitution.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>**5.** Si depasci fecerit quispiam
agrum aut vitem, et immiserit jumentum suum ut depasceretur agrum
alterius: bonum agri ejus et bonum vineae ejus restituet.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** If fire break out, and catch in
thorns, so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field,
be consumed *therewith*; he that kindled the fire shall surely make
restitution.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p6"></span>**6.** Quum egressus fuerit ignis, et
invenerit spinas: absumptusque fuerit acervus, vel seges, vel ager,
reddendo redder qui ignem accendit, rem combustam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>**7.** If a man shall deliver unto his
neighbor money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man’s
house; if the thief be found, let him pay double.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>**7.** Quum dederit quispiam proximo
suo argentum, vel vasa ad custodiendum, et furto ablatum fuerit e domo
viri illius: si inventus fuerit fur, reddet duplum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>**8.** If the thief be not found, then
the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges, *to* *see*
whether he have put his hand unto his neighbor’s goods.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p10"></span>**8.** Si non inventus fuerit fur,
tunc applicabitur dominus domus ad judices, annon miserit manum suam in
substantiam proximi sui.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p11"></span>**9.** For all manner of trespass,
*whether* *it* *be* for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, *or* for
any manner of lost thing, which *another* challengeth to be his, the
cause of both parties shall come before the judges; *and* whom the
judges shall condemn, he shall pay double unto his neighbor.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>**9.** Super omni causa
praevaricationis, super bove, super asino, super pecude, super
vestimento, super omni re amissa: quum dixerit quispiam hoc esse, usque
ad judices veniet causa utriusque: et quem damnaverint judices, is
reddat duplum proximo suo.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p13"></span>**10.** If a man deliver unto his
neighbor an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep, and it
die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing *it*:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p14"></span>**10.** Si dederit quispiam proximo
suo asinum, vel bovem, vel pecudem, aut quodcunque animal ad
custodiendum, et mortuum fuerit, aut contractum, aut ab hostibus captum
nemine vidente.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p15"></span>**11.** *Then* shall an oath of the
Lord be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his
neighbor’s goods; and the owner of it shall accept *thereof*, and he
shall not make *it* good.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p16"></span>**11.** Juramentum Jehovae erit inter
utrumque, annon miserit manum suam in substantiam proximi sui, et
juramentum suscipiet dominus ejus, et non reddet.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p17"></span>**12.** And if it be stolen from him,
he shall make restitution unto the owner thereof.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p18"></span>**12.** Quod si furto ablatum fuerit
ei, reddet domino ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p19"></span>**13.** If it be torn in pieces,
*then* let him bring *it* *for* witness, *and* he shall not make good
that which was torn.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p20"></span>**13.** Si vero rapiendo raptum
fuerit, adducet ei testem: raptum non reddet.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p21"></span>**14.** And if a man borrow *ought*
of his neighbor, and it be hurt, or die, the owner thereof *being* not
with it; he shall surely make *it* good.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p22"></span>**14.** Si commodato acceperit
quispiam a proximo suo, et confractum fuerit aut mortuum domino ejus
absente, reddendo reddet.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p23"></span>**15.** But if the owner thereof *be*
with it, he shall not make *it* good: if it *be* an hired *thing*, it
came for his hire.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p24"></span>**15.** Si dominus ejus fuerit cum
eo, non reddet: si conductum fuerit, veniens pro mercede sua.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p25"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p26"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p27"></span>**9.** *For all manner of
trespass*<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>. An action for theft is
here permitted, but with a fine attached if any should rashly accuse his
neighbor; for else it might be doubted when or for what reasons the
restitution of double or quadruple was to be required. He therefore
permits that if any one suspects another of theft, he should summon that
person to plead his cause; and if he should prove his case, that he
should recover double the thing lost; but if the judges should pronounce
that he had brought his action groundlessly, that he, on the contrary,
should pay the penalty of his false accusation. For such an action as
this is not altogether a civil one, but carries with it the stain of
infamy, and thus it would be unjust that a man should be injured by
false suspicions whom the judges acquit of crime. The word used here for
judges is <span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p27.2"></span>אלהים<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p27.3"></span>, *elohim*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p27.4"></span>, which properly means gods, as being of
the plural number; it is, however often used for God.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) <span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>
It is transferred to judges for the purpose of dignifying their office;
because in it they represent the person of God, in whose hand alone is
all dominion and power. Therefore Christ says they were called gods,
because to them “the word of God came,” (<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p28.2"></span>[Joh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p28.2"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p28.3"></span>,)
i.e., that they should preside in His name, and be set over others, on
which subject we treated under the Fifth Commandment.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p29"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p30"></span>**5.** *If a man shall cause a field
or vineyard to be eaten*. This kind of fraud is justly ranked among
thefts; viz., if any man shall have put in his beast to feed in
another’s field or vineyard. For if a person have made improper use of
his servant to steal by him, he himself is deemed guilty of the offense,
even although he may have touched nothing with his own hand; nor does he
less do wrong who has given occasion of injury by means of a brute.
Still, God restricts the punishment to a compensation of double the
amount, because it cannot be certainly established that the master of
the animal desired to effect the damage fraudulently and designedly; yet
He requires the loss to be made up at the highest estimate of its value;
 <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) for thus I interpret “the
goodness of his field and his vineyard,” that the place having been
examined, a liberal restitution shall be awarded to its owner, according
to the utmost it would have probably produced in its greatest state of
fertility.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p32"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p33"></span>**6.** *If fire break out and catch
in thorns*. This injury is somewhat different from the foregoing, for he
who kindles the fire is commanded to make good the damage done by him,
although there may have been no willful intention to do harm. For the
incendiary who had maliciously destroyed either a cornfield or a
vineyard was to be far more severely punished; here, however, mere
carelessness is punished. Although no mention is made either of house or
barn, still the law includes all similar cases requiring compensation
from him who had kindled a fire even in an open field. But it seems that
such a person would be blameless, because he could not. foresee that the
fire would ignite the thorns; yet, in order that every one should take
as much care of the property of another as of his own, God commands him
to suffer the penalty of his heedless or stupid negligence.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p34"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p35"></span>**7.** *If a man shall deliver unto
his neighbor money*. It is here determined under what circumstances an
action for theft would lie in case of a deposit, viz., if an inanimate
thing, as a garment or furniture, be given ill charge, and the person
with whom it is deposited should allege that it is stolen, God commands
that, if the thief be discovered, he should pay double; but, if not,
that an oath should be required of the man who declares that the thing
has been stolen from him. But, if it be an animal that was given in
charge, a somewhat different provision is made, viz., that if it have
been violently carried away, or torn by beasts, the person with whom it
was deposited should be free; but if it had *been* stolen, that he
should make restitution. In order to understand the principle of this
law, we must observe that depositaries are not to be compelled to do
more than faith. fully preserve the thing entrusted to them; just as a
prudent and careful father of a family is attentive to the preservation
of his property. When they have acquitted themselves diligently in this
respect, it would be unjust to require more, of them; otherwise, when
they undertake the burden of this gratuitous office, their generosity
would be an injury to themselves. But, since it is not so easy to steal
an animal from the stall, or from the hands of the shepherd, the
negligence of the shepherd betrays itself in the loss of the beast,
 <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) supposing no violence to have
been used. Justice, then, is done in both cases, *i* *e*., that the
depository shall not make good a vessel, or money, or a garment, because
this would be in a manner to put him in the place of the thief; but that
if the animal be stolen he shall pay its price, unless he can cleat’
himself of carelessness. If any should think that too great indulgence
is shown to the depositary, when God would have the dispute terminated
by his oath; the reply is easy, that we do not entrust anything to be
kept by another, unless we are persuaded of his honesty. Whoever, then,
has chosen a guardian for his property, has borne witness to his own
prejudice that he is a good and trustworthy man; and consequently, it
would be absurd that he should soon afterwards be involved in all
accusation of theft without proof. Wherefore it was reasonable that God
would have the owner of the lost goods acquiesce in the oath of him.
whom he has considered to be his faithful friend. Besides, a man is
altogether acquitted who clears himself by calling God to witness his
innocence, unless any sinister suspicion is alleged against him, and
provided he excuses himself on probable evidence.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p37"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p38"></span>**10.** *If a man deliver unto his
neighbor an ass*. Since in the passage from whence I have taken these
four verses, mention is made of a deposit, and Moses is professedly
providing against frauds, and robberies, and thefts, I have thought it
well to place them under this head. It has indeed some relation to the
Third Commandment, because it shows the lawful use of an oath, viz.,
that in matters of concealment men should have recourse to the witness
of God, and that, by the interposition of His sacred name, an end should
be put to their strife. But, while the authority attributed to oaths
depends on the reverence due to God, at the same time faith and piety
are enforced in them,  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) so that
all things should correspond. I have, however, considered the main
point, *i* *e*., how controversies as to things concealed should be
brought to an end for the advancement of peace and equity. He would
therefore have the depositary acquitted, if he swears that the animal
entrusted to him is lost (either by death or violence,  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) ) although lie should produce no
witness of the matter, since it would be unjust that he should bear the
blame, unless fraud, or some more palpable offense, have been committed
by him. At the conclusion, then, it is said, “the owner of it shall
accept” the oath, which is equivalent to saying, that lie shall be
compelled to acquiesce, and shall give no more trouble about it. The
expression, “an oath of the Lord shall be between them both,” is a
remarkable one, whereby the obligation and sanctity of an oath are
enforced, whilst Moses reminds us that God is the author of this sacred
mode of attestation, and presides over it as its judge and avenger.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p41"></span>Moses now lays down the law as to a
borrowed animal, if it die, or be mutilated, or injured. There is,
however, a wide distinction between a thing borrowed and a thing
deposited, for he who lends confers a favor; and therefore, when a man
borrows a thing, he binds himself to restore it in safety, as far as in
him lies. A distinction, however, is made, if the owner himself of the
animal be an eye-witness of the death or fracture, he shall bear the
loss; but if the animal should die or be injured in his absence, its
value is awarded to him. His presence is tantamount to this, as if it
were said, if he shall have seen with his own eyes that the injury did
not occur by the fault of him to whom he lent it, then he shall give him
no trouble about it. For instance, if you have lent me a horse, and take
the journey with me, although anything untoward should happen —
supposing you are assured that it did not occur by my temerity, or
negligence, or bad management, I am free, and exempt from loss.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p42"></span>What is here laid down as to a
borrowed animal must be applied also to all other things borrowed.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
24](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#018),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#021)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>**18.** And he that killeth a beast
shall make it good; beast for beast.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>**18.** Qui percusserit animam
animalis, restituet illud: animam pro anima.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>**21.** And he that killeth a beast,
he shall restore it; and he that killeth a man, he shall be put to
death.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>**21.** Qui percusserit animal,
reddet illud.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iii-p9"></span>God here prescribes, that whosoever
has inflicted a loss upon another shall make satisfaction for it,
although he may not have turned it to his own profit; for in respect to
a theft, its profit is not to be considered, but the intention to
injure, or other cause of guilt; for it might happen that he who has
killed another’s ox should not deliberately desire to do him an injury,
but in a fit of passion, or from unpremeditated impulse, should
nevertheless have inflicted loss upon him. In whatever way, therefore, a
man should have committed an offense, whereby another is made poorer, he
is commanded to make good the loss. Whence it is clear, that whosoever
do not so restrain themselves as to care for a neighbor’s advantage as
much as for their own, are accounted guilty of theft before God. The
object, however, of the law is, that no one should suffer loss by us,
which will be the case if we have regard to the good of our brethren.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
21:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#033)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>**33.** And if a man shall open a pit,
or if a man shall dig a pit, and not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall
therein;

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p4"></span>**33.** Quum aperuerit quis cisternam,
vel foderit quis cisternam, et non cooperuerit eam: cecideritque illuc
bos vel asinus:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p5"></span>**34.** The owner of the pit shall
make *it* good, *and* give money unto the owner of them; and the dead
*beast* shall be his.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>**34.** Dominns cisternae reddet
pecuniam, et restituet domino ejus: et quod mortuum est, erit illius.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>**35.** And if one man’s ox hurt
another’s, that he die; then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the
money of it; and the dead ox also they shall divide.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p8"></span>**35.** Si percusserit bos alicujus
bovem proximi sui, mortuusque fuerit, tunc vendet bovem vivum, et
partientur pretium ejus: mortuum quoque partientur.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p9"></span>**36.** Or if it be known that the ox
hath used to push in time past, and his owner hath not kept him in; he
shall surely pay ox for ox; and the dead shall be his own.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p10"></span>**36.** Quod si notum fuerit bovem
esse cornupetam ab heri et nudiustertius, et non custodierit eum dominus
ejus, reddendo reddet bovem pro bove, et mortuus erit illius.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p12"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.iv-p13"></span>**33.** *And if a man shall open a
pit* He enumerates still more cases of damage inflicted, in which
restitution is to be demanded of the person who gave occasion for the
occurrence. First, it is said, If a man shall open a pit, or cistern,
and not cover it, and an animal shall fall into it, he is bound to pay
its value; and justly, since his carelessness approaches to actual
guilt. Here, again, we see how God would have all men to be anxious for
their neighbor’s advantage; yet, inasmuch as there was no fraud or
malice in the case, he is permitted, after paying its price, to
appropriate the carcass to himself. But, if one man’s ox should be
killed by another’s, a most just appointment is made, viz., that, if it
happened unexpectedly, and by sudden accident, they should divide the
dead ox between them, and, having sold the other, each should take half
the price; but if the ox was a savage one, that its owner should undergo
a greater penalty by paying its full price; because he ought to have
anticipated the mischief, and thus was scarcely so kind as he should
have been, giving occasion to the injury.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.v-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#025)<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p3"></span>**24.** When thou comest into thy
neighbor’s vineyard, then thou mayest eat grapes thy fill at thine own
pleasure; but thou shalt not put *any* in thy vessel.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p4"></span>**24.** Quum ingressus fueris vineam
proximi tui, comedes uvas pro desiderio tuo ad satietatem tuam: at in
vase tuo non pones.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p5"></span>**25.** When thou comest into the
standing corn of thy neighbor, then thou mayest pluck the ears with
thine hand; but thou shalt not move a sickle unto thy neighbor’s
standing corn.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p6"></span>**25.** Quum ingressus fueris segetem
proximi tui, decerpes spicas manu tua: at falcem non attolles in segetem
proximi tui.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p9"></span>Since God here concedes a great
indulgence to the poor, some restrict it to the laborers in the harvest
and vintage,  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) as if He permitted
them to pluck the ears of corn and grapes with their hands for food
alone, and not to carry away. I have no doubt, however, that it refers
to all persons, and that no greater license is given than humanity
demands. For we must not strain the words too precisely, but look to the
intention of the Lawgiver. God forbids men to introduce a sickle into
the harvest of another; now, if a man should pluck with his hands as
many ears of corn as he could carry on his shoulders, or lay upon a
horse, could he excuse himself by the puerile explanation that he had
not used a sickle? But, if common sense itself repudiates such gross
impudence, it is plain that the Law has another object, viz., that no
one should touch even an ear of another man’s harvest, except for
present use, which occurred to Christ’s disciples, when they were
compelled by hunger to rub the ears of corn in their hands, lest they
should faint by the way. (<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p10.1"></span>[Mt
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.v-p10.1"></span>.) The same view must be taken as to
grapes. If any man deliberately breaks into another’s vineyard and
gorges himself there, whatever excuse he may make, he will be accounted
a thief. Wherefore, there is no doubt but that this Law permits hungry
travelers to refresh themselves by eating grapes, when they have not
enough of other food. But although the liberty of eating to their fill
is granted, still it was not. allowable oil this pretext to gorge
themselves. Besides, vineyards were enclosed with hedges and guarded;
whence it appears that the grapes were not exposed to every glutton.
This, then, is the sum, that it is not accounted a theft, if a traveler,
in order to relieve his hunger, should stretch forth his hand to the
hanging fruit,  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) until he should
arrive at his resting-place where he may buy bread and wine.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>[Lev.
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p3"></span>**9.** And when ye reap the harvest of
your land, thou shalt not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither
shalt thou gather the gleanings of thy harvest.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p4"></span>**9.** Quum messueritis messem
regionis vestrae, non finies metere angulum agri tui, et collectionem
messis tuae non colliges.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p5"></span>**10.** And thou shalt not glean thy
vineyard, neither shalt thou gather every grape of thy vineyard; thou
shalt leave them for the poor and stranger: I am the Lord your God.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p6"></span>**10.** Et vineam tuam non racemabis,
neque grana vineae tuae colliges: pauperi et peregrino relinques ea: ego
Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p8"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>[Leviticus
23](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p9"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>[Leviticus
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#022)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p10"></span>**22.** And when ye reap the harvest
of your land, thou shalt not make clean riddance of the corners of thy
field when thou reapest, neither shalt thou gather any gleaning of thy
harvest; thou shalt leave them unto the poor, and to the stranger: I am
the Lord your God.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p11"></span>**22.** Quum metetis messem regionis
vestrae, non absolves usque ad angulum agri tui: nec collectionem messis
tuae colliges: pauperi et peregrino relinques eam: Ego Jehova Deus
vester.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p12"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p13"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p13.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
24:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p14"></span>**19.** When thou cuttest down thine
harvest in thy field, and hast forgot a sheaf in the field, then shalt
not go again to fetch it: it shall be for the stranger, for the
fatherless, and for the widow; that the Lord thy God may bless thee in
all the work of thine hands.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p15"></span>**19.** Quum messueris messem in agro
tuo, et oblitus fueris manipulum in agro, non reverteris ad eum
tollendum: peregrino, pupillo, et viduae erit: ut benedicat tibi Jehova
Deus tuus in omni opere manuum tuarum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p16"></span>**20.** When then beatest thine
olive-tree, thou shalt not go over the boughs again: it shall be for the
stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p17"></span>**20.** Quum excusseris olivam tuam,
non scrutaberis ramos post te: peregrino, pupillo, et viduae erit.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p18"></span>**21.** When thou gatherest the
grapes of thy vineyard, thou shalt not glean *it* afterward: it shall be
for the stranger, for the fatherless, and for the widow.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p19"></span>**21.** Quum vindemiabis vineam tuam,
non colliges racemos post te: peregrino, pupillo, et viduae erunt.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p20"></span>**22.** And thou shalt remember that
thou wast a bond-man in the land of Egypt: therefore I command thee to
do this thing.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p21"></span>**22.** Memento quod servus fueris in
terra AEgypti: idcirco praecipio tibi ut hoc facias.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p22"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p23"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p24"></span>God here inculcates liberality upon
the possessors of land, when their fruits are gathered: for, when His
bounty is exercised before our eyes, it invites us to imitate Him; and
it is a sign of ingratitude, unkindly and maliciously, to withhold what
we derive from His blessing. God does not indeed require that those who
have abundance should so profusely give away their produce, as to
despoil themselves by enriching others; and, in fact, Paul prescribes
this as the measure of our alms, that their relief of the poor should
not bring into distress the rich themselves, who kindly distribute.
(<span id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p24.1"></span>[2Co
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#013)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vi-p24.1"></span>.) God, therefore, permits every one to
reap his corn, to gather his vintage, and to enjoy his abundance;
provided the rich, content with their own vintage and harvest, do not
grudge the poor the gleaning of the grapes and corn. Not that He
absolutely assigns to the poor whatever remains, so that they may seize
it as their own; but that some small portion may flow gratuitously to
them from the munificence of the rich. He mentions indeed by name the
orphans, and widows, and strangers, yet undoubtedly He designates all
the poor and needy, who have no fields of their own to sow or reap; for
it will sometimes occur that orphans are by no means in want, but rather
that they have the means of being liberal themselves; nor are widows and
strangers always hungry; but I have explained elsewhere why these three
classes are mentioned.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
15:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p3"></span>**1.** At the end of *every* seven
years thou shalt make a release.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p4"></span>**1.** Septimo quoque anno facies
remissionem.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p5"></span>**2.** And this *is* the manner of
the release: Every creditor that lendeth *ought* unto his neighbor shall
release *it*; he shall not exact *it* *of* his neighbor, or of his
brother; because it is called the Lord’s release.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p6"></span>**2.** Haec autem est ratio
remissionis, ut remittat omnis qui mutuum dederit manu sua, id quod
mutuum dederit amico suo: non reposcet ab amico suo, aut a fratre suo,
quia proclamata est remissio Jehovae.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p7"></span>**3.** Of a foreigner thou mayest
exact *it* *again*: but *that* which is thine with thy brother thine
hand shall release;

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p8"></span>**3.** Ab alienigena reposces, aut
quod fuerit tibi apud fratrem tuum, remittet manus tua:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p9"></span>**4.** Save when there shall be no
poor among you; for the Lord shall greatly bless thee in the land which
the Lord thy God giveth *thee* *for* an inheritance to possess it:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p10"></span>**4.** Nisi quia non sit (*vel*,
prorsus certe non erit) in te mendicus: quia benedicendo benedicet tibi
Jehova in terra quam ipse Deus tuus dat tibi in haereditatem ut
possideas eam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p11"></span>**5.** Only if thou carefully
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all these
commandments which I command thee this day.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p12"></span>**5.** Sed ita duntaxat, si
obediendo obedieris voci Jehovae Dei tui, ita ut custodias faciendo omne
praeceptum istud quod ego praecipio tibi hodie.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p13"></span>**6.** For the Lord thy God blesseth
thee, as he promised thee: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, but
thou shalt not borrow; and thou shalt reign over many nations, but they
shall not reign over thee.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p14"></span>**6.** Nam Jehova Deus tuus
benedixit tibi, quemadmodum dixit tibi: tum mutuo accepto pignore dabis
gentibus multis, tu autem non accipies mutuo: et dominaberis gentibus
multis, at tibi non dominabuntur.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p15"></span>**7.** If there be among you a poor
man of one of thy brethren within any of thy gates, in thy land which
the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shalt not harden thine heart, nor
shut thine hand from thy poor brother;

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p16"></span>**7.** Si fuerit apud te mendicus
quispiam e fratribus tuis, in una e portis tuis, in terra tua quam
Jehova Deus tuus dat tibi: non indurabis cor tuum, neque claudes manum
tuam a fratre tuo mendico.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p17"></span>**8.** But thou shalt open thine
hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him sufficient for his need,
*in* *that* which he wanteth.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p18"></span>**8.** Sed aperiendo aperies illi
manum tuam, et mutuando mutuabis ei ad sufficientiam usque, id quo
indiguerit.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p19"></span>**9.** Beware that there be not a
thought in thy wicked heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of
release, is at hand; and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and
thou givest him naught, and he cry unto the Lord against thee, and it be
sin unto thee.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p20"></span>**9.** Cave tibi ne sit quidpiam in
corde tuo impium, dicendo, Propinquus est annus septimus, annus
remissionis: et malignus sit oculus tuus in fratrem tuum mendicum, ita
ut non des ei: clamet autem contra te ad Jehovam, et erit in te
peccatum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p21"></span>**10.** Thou shalt surely give him,
and thine heart shall not be grieved when thou givest unto him: because
for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and
in all that thou puttest thine hand unto.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p22"></span>**10.** Dando dabis ei, neque
malignum erit cor tuum quum dederis ei: quia hujus rei gratia benedicet
tibi Jehova Deus tuus in omnibus operibus tuis, et in omni expensione
manuum tuarum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p23"></span>**11.** For the poor shall never
cease out of the land: therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shalt open
thine hand wide unto thy brother, to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy
land.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p24"></span>**11.** Non enim deerit mendicus de
medio terrae: idcirco praecipio tibi dicendo, Aperiendo aperies manum
tuam fratri tuo, id est pauperi tuo et mendico tuo in terra tua.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p25"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p26"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p27"></span>**1.** *At the end of every seven
years*. A special act of humanity towards each other is here prescribed
to the Jews, that every seven years, brother should remit to brother
whatever was owed him. But, although we are not bound by this law at
present, and it would not be even expedient that it should be in use,
still the object to which it tended ought still to be maintained, *i*
*e*., that we should not be too rigid in exacting our debts, especially
if we have to do with the needy, who are bowed down by the burden of
poverty. The condition of the ancient people, as I have said, was
different. They derived their origin from a single race; the land of
Canaan was their common inheritance; fraternal association was to be
mutually sustained among them, just as if they were one family: and,
inasmuch as God had once enfranchised them, the best plan for
preserving’ their liberty for ever was to maintain a condition of
mediocrity, lest a few persons of immense wealth should oppress the
general body. Since, therefore, the rich, if they had been permitted
constantly to increase in wealth, would have tyrannized over the rest,
God put by this law a restraint on immoderate power. Moreover, when rest
was given to the land, and men reposed from its cultivation, it was just
that the whole people, for whose sake the Sabbath was instituted, should
enjoy some relaxation. Still the remission here spoken of was, in my
opinion, merely temporary. Some, indeed, suppose that all debts were
then entirely cancelled;  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) as if
the Sabbatical year destroyed all debtor and creditor accounts; but this
is refuted by the context, for when the Sabbatical year is at hand, God
commands them to lend freely, whereas the contract would have been
ridiculous, unless it had been lawful to seek repayment in due time.
Surely, if no payment had ever followed, it would have been required
simply to give: for what would the empty form of lending have availed if
the money advanced was never to be returned to its owner? But God
required all suits to cease for that year, so that no one should trouble
his debtor: and, *because* in that year of freedom and immunity there
was no hope of receiving back the money, God provides against the
objection, and forbids them to be niggardly, although the delay might
produce some *inconvenience*. First of all, therefore, He commands them
to make a remission in the seventh year, *i* *e*., to abstain from
exacting their debts, and to concede to the poor, as well as to the
land, a truce, or vacation. On which ground Isaiah reproves the Jews for
observing the Sabbath amiss, when they exact  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) their debts, and “fast for strife and
debate.” (<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>[Isa.
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>.) The form of remission is added, That
no one should vex his neighbor in the year in which the release of God
is proclaimed.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p30"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p31"></span>**3.** *Of a foreigner thou mayest
exact it*<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p31.1"></span>. An exception follows,
that it should be lawful to sue foreigners, and to compel them to pay;
and this for a very good reason, because it was by no means just that
despisers of the Law should enjoy the Sabbatical benefit, especially
when God had conferred the privilege on His elect people alone. What
follows in the next verse, “Unless because there shall be no beggar,”
interpreters twist into various senses. Some translate it, Nevertheless
(*veruntamen,*<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p31.2"></span>) let there be no
beggar among thee; as if it were a prohibition, that they should not
suffer their poor brethren to be overwhelmed with poverty, without
assisting them; and, lest they should object that, if they should be so
liberal in giving, they would soon exhaust themselves, God anticipates
them, and bids them rely upon his blessing. Others, however, understand
it as a promise, and connect it thus, That there should be no beggar
among them, if only they keep the Law, since then God would bless them.
Nor would this meaning be very unsuitable. What they mean who expound
it, Insomuch that there should be no beggar with thee, I know not. Let
my readers, however, consider whether  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.1"></span>אפס כי<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.2"></span>, *ephes* *ci*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.3"></span>, is not better rendered “unless
because,” (*nisi* *quod*<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.4"></span>:) and
then this clause would be read parenthetically, as if it were said,
Whenever there shall be any poor among your brethren, an opportunity of
doing them good is presented to you. Therefore the poverty of your
brethren is to be relieved by you, in order that God may bless you. But,
that the sentence may be clearer, I take the two words, <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.5"></span>אפס כי<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.6"></span>, *ephes* *ci*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.7"></span>, exclusively, as if it were, On no
account let there be a beggar: or, howsoever it. may be, suffer not that
by your fault there should be any beggar amongst you; for He would put
an end to all vain excuses, and, as necessity arose, would have them
disposed to give assistance, lest the poor should sink under the
pressure of want and distress, tie does not, therefore, mean generally
all poor persons, but only those in extreme indigence; such as the
Prophet Amos complains are “sold for a pair of shoes.” (<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.8"></span>[Am
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.8"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32.9"></span>.)
In order, then, that they may more cheerfully assist their distresses,
He promises that His blessing shall be productive of greater abundance.
And from hence Paul seems to have derived his exhortation to the
Corinthians:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p33"></span>“He which soweth bountifully, shall
reap also bountifully. God is able to make all grace abound toward you;
that ye, always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to
every good work.: Now he that ministereth seed to the sower, *shall*
both minister bread for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and
increase the fruits of your righteousness, *that*, being enriched in
every thing, *you* *may* *abound* unto all bountifulness.” (<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p33.1"></span>[2Co
9:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p33.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p34"></span>In short, God would have them
without carefulness, since He will abundantly recompense them with His
blessing, if they have diminished their own stores by liberality to the
poor.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p35"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p36"></span>**6.** *For the Lord thy God
blesseth thee*. He confirms the foregoing declaration, but ascends from
the particular to the general; for, after having taught that they might
expect from God’s blessing much more than they have bestowed on the
poor, he now recalls their attention to the Covenant itself, as much as
to say, that whatever they have is derived from that original fountain
of God’s grace, when He made them inheritors of the land of Canaan. God
reminds them also that He then promised them abundant produce; and thus
indicates that, if they were mean and niggardly, they would cause the
land to be barren. When He says that they should lend to all nations, he
speaks by way of amplification; and also in the next clause, that they
should reign over the Gentiles; whence it follows, that if there were
any in want among them, it would arise from the wickedness and
depravity, of the people themselves.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p37"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p38"></span>**7.** *If there be among you a poor
man* <span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p38.1"></span> The same word <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p38.2"></span>אביון<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p38.3"></span>, *ebyon*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p38.4"></span>, is used, which we have seen just
above, verse 4; nor is there any contradiction when He commands them to
relieve beggars, whom He had before forbidden to exist among His people;
for the object of the prohibition was, that if any were reduced to
beggary, they should not be cast out and forsaken. Now, however, He
explains the mode of preventing this, viz., that the hands of the rich
should be open to assist them. In order to incline them to compassion,
he again reminds them of their common brotherhood, and sets before them,
as its token and pledge, the land in which by God’s goodness they dwell
together. Again, that they may be willing and prompt in their humanity,
He forbids them to harden their heart, thereby signifying that avarice
is always cruel. Finally, He applies this instruction to the year of
release, viz., that they should straightway relieve their poor brethren
towards the beginning of that year, just as if they would receive back
in a few days the money which the poor man would retain to its end.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p39"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p40"></span>**11.** *For the poor shall never
cease out of the land*. The notion  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) of those is far fetched who suppose
that there would be always poor men among them, because they would not
keep the law, and consequently the land would be barren on account of
their unrighteousness. I admit that this is true; but God does not here
ascribe it to their sins that there would always be some beggars among
them, but only reminds them that there would never be wanting matter for
their generosity, because He would prove what was in their hearts by
setting the poor before them. For, (as I have observed above,) this is
why the rich and poor meet together, and the Lord is maker of them all;
because otherwise the duties of charity would not be observed unless
they put them into exercise by assisting each other. Wherefore God, to
stir up the inactivity of the rich, declares that lie prescribes nothing
but what continual necessity will require.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
21:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#001)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p3"></span>**1.** Now these *are* the judgments
which thou shalt set before them.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p4"></span>**1.** Haec sunt judicia quae
propones eis.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p5"></span>**2.** If thou buy an Hebrew
servant, six years he shall serve; and in the seventh he shall go out
free for nothing.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p6"></span>**2.** Si emeris servum Hebraeum,
sex annis serviet: septimo egredietur gratis.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p7"></span>**3.** If he came in by himself, he
shall go out by himself; if he were married, then his wife shall go out
with him.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p8"></span>**3.** Si cum corpore suo ingressus
fuerit, cum corpore suo egredietur: si maritus mulieris erat, egredietur
et uxor ejus cum ipso.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p9"></span>**4.** If his master have given him
a wife, and she have born him sons or daughters; the wife and her
children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by himself.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p10"></span>**4.** Si herus ejus dederit ei
uxorem, et pepererit ei filios, vel filias, uxor et filii ejus erunt
heri sui: ipse vero egredietur cum corpore suo.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p11"></span>**5.** And if the servant shall
plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go
out free:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p12"></span>**5.** Quod si dicendo dixerit
servus, Diligo herum meum, et uxorem meam, et filios meos, non
egredietur liber:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p13"></span>**6.** Then his master shall bring
him unto the judges; he shall also bring him to the door, or unto the
doorpost: and his master shall bore his ear through with an awl; and he
shall serve him for ever.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p14"></span>**6.** Tunc adducet eum herus ejus
ad judices, et applicabit eum ad ostium, vel ad postem, perforabitque
herus ejus aurem ejus subula, et serviet ei in saeculum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p15"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p16"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p17"></span>**1.** *Now these are the
judgments*. Both passages contain the same appointment, viz., that as to
the Hebrews slavery must end at the seventh year; for God would have the
children of Abraham, although obliged to sell themselves, to differ from
heathen and ordinary slaves. Their enfranchisement is, therefore,
enjoined, but with an exception, which Moses expresses in the first
passage but omits in the latter, *i* *e*., that if the slave had married
a bond-woman, and had begotten children, they should remain with the
master, and that he should alone be free. Whence it appears how hard was
the condition of slaves, since it could not be mitigated without an
unnatural exception (*sine* *prodigio*;) for nothing could be more
opposed to nature than that a husband, forsaking his wife and children,
should remove himself elsewhere. But the tie of slavery could only be
loosed by divorce, that is to say, by this impious violation of
marriage. There was then gross barbarity in this severance, whereby a
man was disunited from half of himself and his own bowels. Yet there was
no remedy for it; for if the wife and children had been set free, it
would have been a spoliation of their lawful master to take them with
him, not only because the woman was his slave, but because he had
incurred expense in the bringing up of the young children. The sanctity
of marriage therefore gave way in this case to private right; and this
defect is to be reckoned amongst the others which God tolerated on
account of the people’s hardness of heart, because it could hardly be
remedied; yet, if any one were withheld by chaste affection, and
unwilling to abandon his wife and offspring, an alternative is
presented, viz., that he should give himself up also to perpetual
slavery. The form of this is more clearly pointed out in Exodus than in
Deuteronomy; for, in the latter, it is only said that the master, in
order to assert his perpetual right to the slave, should bore his ear;
whereas in Exodus the circumstance is added, that a public process
should first take place; for, if each private individual had been his
own judge in this matter, the rich men’s houses would have been like
slaughterhouses to put their wretched slaves to the torment in.  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) We read in Jeremiah, (<span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p18.1"></span>[Jer
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p18.1"></span>,) that this law fell into contempt,
and that the Jews, contrary to all law and justice, retained perpetual
dominion over their slaves; nay, that when they were severely
reprimanded under King Zedekiah, and liberty was anew proclaimed, the
wretched men were immediately dragged back to their yoke of tyranny, as
if they had been set free in mockery. Care was therefore to be taken
lest, by secret tortures, they should compel the unwilling to continue
as their slaves; and the provision against this evil was an open
confession of their desire before the judges; whilst the boring of the
ear was a kind of stigma upon them. For the Orientals were accustomed to
brand slaves, or fugitives, or criminals, or those who were in any wise
suspected; and although God did not choose to have this mark of ignominy
imprinted on the foreheads of his people, yet, if any one voluntarily
consented to endure perpetual slavery, He willed that he should bear
this token of his servitude upon his ear. Still we must remember that
even this slavery, although it is said to endure for ever, was brought
to a close at the jubilee, because then the condition of the land and
people was altogether renewed.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
15:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p3"></span>**12.** *And* if thy brother, an
Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six
years, then in the seventh year thou shalt let him go free from thee.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p4"></span>**12.** Si venditus fuerit tibi frater
tuus Hebraeus, vel Hebraea, et servierit tibi sex annis: anno septimo
dimittes eum liberum a te.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p5"></span>**13.** And when thou sendest him out
free from thee, thou shalt not let him go away empty:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p6"></span>**13.** Et quum dimittes eum liberum a
te, non dimittes eum vacuum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p7"></span>**14.** Thou shalt furnish him
liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor, and out of thy
wine-press: *of* *that* wherewith the Lord thy God hath blessed thee
thou shalt give unto him.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p8"></span>**14.** Onerando onerabis eum, de
pecudibus tuis, et de area tua, et de torculari tuo: in quibus benedixit
tibi Jehova Deus tuus, dabis ei.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p9"></span>**15.** And thou shalt remember that
thou wast a bond-man in the land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed
thee: therefore I command thee this thing today.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p10"></span>**15.** Et recordaberis quod servus
fuisti in terra AEgypti, et redemerit te Jehova Deus tuus: idcirco ego
praecipio tibi hoc hodie.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p11"></span>**16.** And it shall be, if he say
unto thee, I will not go away from thee; (because he loveth thee and
thine house, because he is well with thee;)

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p12"></span>**16.** Quod si dixerit tibi, Non
egrediar a te: propterea quod diligat te et domum tuam, et quod bene sit
ei tecum:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p13"></span>**17.** Then thou shalt take an awl,
and thrust *it* through his ear unto the door, and he shall be thy
servant for ever: and also unto thy maidservant thou shalt do likewise.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p14"></span>**17.** Tunc accipies subulam, et
adiges in aurem ejus in porta: eritque tibi servus in saeculum: sic
etiam ancillae tuae facies.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p15"></span>**18.** It shall not seem hard unto
thee when thou sendest him away free from thee; for he hath been worth a
double hired servant *to* *thee*, in serving thee six years: and the
Lord thy God shall bless thee in all that thou doest.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p16"></span>**18.** Non sit durum in oculis tuis
quum dimittes eum liberum a te, quia duplo secundum mercedem mercenarii
servivit tibi sex annis: et benedicet tibi Jehova in omnibus quae
facies.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p17"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p18"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p19"></span>**13.** *And when thou sendest him
out free from thee*. Here not only is the *enfranchisement* of slaves
enjoined, but an exhortation to liberality is also added, viz., that
they should not send away their slaves without their hire; for this is
not a civil enactment for the purpose of extorting from the avaricious
more than they were willing to give. The rule of Paul here applies:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p20"></span>“Every man according as he purposeth
in his heart, *so* *let* *him* *give*; not grudgingly or of necessity:
for God loveth a cheerful giver.” (<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p20.1"></span>[2Co
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p21"></span>But, since the Hebrew slaves were
brethren, God would not allow them to be placed in a worse condition
than hirelings. That He commands them to be furnished out of the
wine-press, and floor, and flock, does not mean that they were to be
enriched, or that a large provision should be assigned to them, but He
justly lays a constraint on the rich, whose varied abundance supplied
them with the means of liberality; as if He would show them from whence
they received their gratuitous gifts, which were at the same time a just
compensation for the labors of their slaves.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p22"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p23"></span>**18.** *It shall not seem hard unto
thee*. I have lately observed how difficult and inconvenient to the Jews
was the observance of this law; wherefore it is not without reason that
God reproves their mean and niggardly pride, if they enfranchised their
slaves grudgingly. And, indeed, He first urges them to obey on the score
of justice, and then from the hope of remuneration. For He reminds them
that for six years the slave had earned double the wages of a hireling,
either because his life was more laborious, inasmuch as heavier tasks
are required from slaves than from free-men, who are paid for their
work; or because he had completed twice as long a period as hirelings
were wont to be engaged for. For the Jewish (commentators)  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) infer from this passage, that three
years was the term prescribed for hired servants; and thus they suppose
the six years were counted. But since this is a mere conjecture, I know
not whether my opinion is not more suitable, that for six years their
labors had been twice as profitable as would have been those of a
free-man who is not under the compulsion of a slave.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
25:39-55](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p3"></span>**39.** And if thy brother *that*
*dwelleth* by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee; thou shalt not
compel him to serve as a bond-servant:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p4"></span>**39.** Si attenuatus fuerit frater
tuus apud te, ita ut vendat se tibi, non uteris opera ejus tanquam servi
opera.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p5"></span>**40.** *But* as an hired servant,
*and* as a sojourner, he shall be with thee, *and* shall serve thee unto
the year of jubilee:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p6"></span>**40.** Tanquam mercenarius, tanquam
colonus erit tecum: usque ad annum Jubilaei serviet tibi.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p7"></span>**41.** And *then* shall he depart from
thee, *both* he and his children with him, and shall return unto his own
family, and unto the possession of his fathers shall he return.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p8"></span>**41.** Egredietur autem a te ipse, et
liberi ejus cum eo, ac revertetur ad familiam suam, et ad possessionem
patrum suorum revertetur.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p9"></span>**42.** For they *are* my servants,
which I brought forth out of the land of Egypt: they shall not be sold
as bond-men.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p10"></span>**42.** Sunt enim servi mei quos eduxi
e terra AEgypti: non vendentur venditione servili.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p11"></span>**43.** Thou shalt not rule over him
with rigor, but shalt fear thy God.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p12"></span>**43.** Non dominaberis illis dure sed
timebis a Deo tuo.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p13"></span>**44.** Both thy bond-men and thy
bond-maids, which thou shalt have, *shall* *be* of the heathen that are
round about you; of them shall ye buy bond-men and bond-maids.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p14"></span>**44.** Servus autem tuus et ancilla
tua qui erunt tibi, de gentibus erunt quae sunt in circuitu vestro, ex
iis emetis servum et ancillam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p15"></span>**45.** Moreover, of the children of
the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and of
their families that *are* with you, which they begat in your land; and
they shall be your possession:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p16"></span>**45.** Et etiam de filiis incolarum
qui versantur apud vos, emetis: et de familia eorum qui apud vos sunt,
quos procreaverunt in terra vestra: eruntque vobis in possessionem.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p17"></span>**46.** And ye shalt take them as an
inheritance for your children after you, to inherit *them* *for* a
possession; they shall be your bond-men for ever: but over your brethren
the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over another with rigor.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p18"></span>**46.** Et jure haereditario
possidebitis eos pro filiis vestris post vos, ad possidendum
possessionem: in perpetuum utemini opera, eorum: fratribus autem vestris
filiis Israel quisque fratri suo non dominabitur dure.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p19"></span>**47.** And if a sojourner or stranger
wax rich by thee, and thy brother *that* *dwelleth* *by* him wax poor,
and sell himself unto the stranger *or* sojourner by thee, or to the
stock of the stranger’s family:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p20"></span>**47.** Si autem apprehenderint manus
peregrini et advenae qui est apud te, et attenuatus fuerit frater tuus
qui apud illum versatur, seque vendiderit peregrino et advenae qui est
apud te, vel stirpi familiae peregrini:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p21"></span>**48.** After that he is sold he may
be redeemed again; one of his brethren may redeem him:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p22"></span>**48.** Postquam vendiderit se,
redemptio erit ei: unus e fratribus ejus redimet eum:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p23"></span>**49.** Either his uncle, or his
uncle’s son, may redeem him, or *any* that is nigh of kin unto him of
his family may redeem him; or, if he be able, he may redeem himself.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p24"></span>**49.** Aut patruus ejus, aut filius
patrui ejus redimet eum, aut propinquus carnis ejus e familia ejus
redimet eum: aut si apprehenderit manus ejus, tunc redimet seipsum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p25"></span>**50.** And he shall reckon with him
that bought him, from the year that he was sold to him, unto the year of
jubilee: and the price of his sale shall be according unto the number of
years, according to the time of an hired servant shall it be with him.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p26"></span>**50.** Et supputabit cum eo qui emit
ipsum, ab anno quo se vendidit illi, usque ad annum Jubilaei,
aestimabiturque pecunia venditionis ejus secundum numerum annorum: et
secundum dies mercenarii fiet cum eo.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p27"></span>**51.** If *there* *be* yet many years
*behind*, according unto them he shall give again the price of his
redemption out of the money that he was bought for.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p28"></span>**51.** Si adhuc multi fuerint anni,
secundum eos restituet redemptionem suam de argento venditionis suae.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p29"></span>**52.** And if there remain but few
years unto the year of jubilee, then he shall count with him, and
according unto his years shall he give him again the price of his
redemption.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p30"></span>**52.** Quod si parum reliquum sit ex
annis usque ad annum Jubilaei, tunc supputabit cum eo: et secundum annos
suos restituet redemptionem suam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p31"></span>**53.** *And* as a yearly hired
servant shall he be with him: *and* *the* *other* shall not rule with
rigor over him in thy sight.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p32"></span>**53.** Tanquam mercenarius annuus
erit cum illo: non dominabitur ei dure in oculis tuis.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p33"></span>**54.** And if he be not redeemed in
these *years*, then he shall go out in the year of jubilee, *both* he,
and his children with him.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p34"></span>**54.** Si non se redemerit in illis,
egredietur in anno Jubilaei ipse et filii ejus:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p35"></span>**55.** For unto me the children of
Israel *are* servants; they *are* my servants, whom I brought forth out
of the land of Egypt: I *am* the Lord your God.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p36"></span>**55.** Quia mihi sunt filii Israel
servi, servi mei sunt quos eduxi e terra AEgypti: ego Jehova Deus
vester.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p37"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p38"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p39"></span>**39.** *And if thy brother*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p39.1"></span>. He now proceeds further, *i* *e*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p39.2"></span>., that one who has bought his brother
should treat him with humanity, and not otherwise than a hired servant.
We have seen, indeed, just above, that the labor of a slave is estimated
at twice as much, because the humanity of his master will never go so
far as to indulge or spare his slave as if he were a hireling. It is
not, therefore, without reason that God puts a restraint upon that rule,
which experience shows to have been often tyrannical. Still He
prescribes no more than heathen philosophers did,  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) <span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p40.1"></span>
viz., that masters should treat their slaves like hired servants. And
this principle of justice ought to prevail towards all without
exception; but since it was difficult to prescribe the same rule
respecting strangers as respecting their brethren, a special law is
enacted, that at least *they*<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p40.2"></span> should
observe moderation towards their brethren, with whom they had a common
inheritance and condition. First:. therefore, it is provided as to
Hebrew slaves that they should not be treated harshly and contemptuously
like captives (*mancipia*<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p40.3"></span>;) and then
that their slavery should come to an end in the year of jubilee. But
here the question arises, since their liberty was before accorded to
them in the, seventh year, why it is now postponed to the fiftieth? Some
get over the difficulty by supposing that  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) <span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p41.1"></span>
if the jubilee occurred during the six years, they must then be set
free, although they had not completed the whole term; but this is too
forced a conjecture. The view that most approves itself to me is, that
the word <span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p41.2"></span>יבל<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p41.3"></span>, *yobel*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p41.4"></span>, is extended to mean every seventh year,
or, at any rate, that moderation towards those slaves is specially
prescribed who were most exposed to violence and other injurious
treatment. For they would not have dared to oppress at pleasure their
slaves, who were soon afterwards to be free; but those who, by having
their ears bored, had subjected themselves to the longer period of
slavery, would have been more outrageously harassed, unless God had
interposed. And this opinion I freely adopt, that although their slavery
lasted to the jubilee, yet flint their masters were to treat them with
moderation and humanity. This too is confirmed by what immediately
follows, where it is enjoined that the children should be set free with
their fathers, which did not take place in the seventh year.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p42"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p43"></span>**42.** *For they are my servants.*
God here declares that His own right is invaded when those, whom He
claims as His property, are taken into subjection by another; for He
says that He acquired the people as His own when He redeemed them from
Egypt. Whence He infers that His right is violated if any should usurp
perpetual dominion over a Hebrew. If any object that this is of equal
force, when they only serve for a time, I reply, that though God might
have justly asserted His sole ownership, yet He was satisfied with this
symbol of it; and therefore that He suffered by indulgence that they
should be enslaved for a fixed period, provided some trace of His
deliverance of them should remain. In a word, He simply chose to apply
this preventative lest slavery should altogether extinguish the
recollection of His grace, although He allowed it to be thus smothered
as it were. Lest, therefore, cruel masters should trust that their
tyranny would be exercised with impunity, Moses reminds them that they
had to do with God, who will at length appear as its avenger. Although
the political laws of Moses are not now in operation, still the analogy
is to be preserved, lest the condition of those who have been redeemed
by Christ’s blood should be worse amongst us, than that of old of tits
ancient people. To whom Paul’s exhortation refers:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p44"></span>“Ye masters, forbear threatening
*your* *slaves*, knowing that both your and their Master is in heaven.”
 <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) (<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p45.1"></span>[Eph
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p45.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p46"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p47"></span>**44.** *Both thy bond-men, and thy
bond-maids*. What God here permits as regards strangers was everywhere
customary among the Gentiles, viz., that their power over their slaves
should exist not only until their death, but should continue in
perpetual succession to their children; for this is the force of the
expression, “ye shall possess them for your children,” that the right of
ownership should pass to their heir’s also; nor is there a distinction
made only as to perpetuity,  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) but
also as to the mode of their treatment. For we must observe the
antithesis, “ye shall make use of their service, but over his brother no
man shall rule with rigor;”  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)
whence it appears that a restraint was imposed upon them lest they
should imperiously rule the children of Abraham, and not leave them half
their liberty in comparison with the Gentiles. Not that a tyrannical or
cruel exercise of power oyer strangers was allowed, but that God would
have the race of Abraham, whose liberator lie was, exempted by certain
privileges from the common lot.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p50"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p51"></span>**47.** *And if a sojourner or a
stranger*. A caution is here introduced as to the Israelites who had
enslaved themselves to strangers. But by strangers understand only those
who inhabited the land of Canaan; for, if any one \]lad been carried
away into other countries, God would have enacted this law as to their
redemption in vain. A power, therefore, of redeeming the slave is
granted to his relatives, or, if he had himself obtained sufficient to
pay his price, the same permission is accorded to himself. The mode and
the form of this are then expressed: that a calculation of the time
which remained before the jubilee should be made, and the period which
had already elapsed should be subtracted from the sum, viz., if he had
been sold for fifty shekels he should only pay ten shekels in the
fortieth year, because only a fifth part of the time remained. But if
none of his family aided him, and the unhappy man’s hope of redemption
was frustrated, He commands that he should be set free in the jubilee
year, in which a general enfranchisement took place as regarded the
children of Abraham. The object of the law was, that none of those whom
God had adopted, should be alienated from their race, and thus should
depart from the true worship of God Himself. The whole of this is
comprehended in the last verse, where God declares that the children of
Abraham were His property, inasmuch as He had led them forth from the
land of Egypt, and, on the other hand, that He is their peculiar God.
For, whilst it was just that they should enjoy His blessing, so also it
behooved that they should be kept sound in His pure and undivided
worship; whereas, if they had been the slaves of Gentiles, not only
would the elect people have been diminished in numbers, but circumcision
would have been corrupted and a door opened to impious perversions. Yet
God so mitigates His law as to lay no unjust burden upon sojourners,
since He concedes more to them, with respect to Hebrew slaves, than to
the natives of the land; for if they had sold themselves to their
brethren, they went forth free in the seventh year, whilst their slavery
under sojourners was extended to the fiftieth year. This exception only
was introduced that the stranger who had bought slaves should
enfranchise them on the payment of their value. Since God had previously
promised to His people a large and manifold abundance of all good
things, the poverty here adverted to could only occur from the curse of
God;  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) we see, therefore, that of
His incomparable loving-kindness He stretches forth His hand to the
transgressors of His law; and, whilst He chastises them with poverty,
still looks upon them, unworthy as they are, and provides a remedy for
the ills which their own guilt had brought upon them.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Leviticus
25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>[Leviticus
25:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p3"></span>**23.** The land shall not be sold for
ever: for the land *is* mine; for ye *are* strangers and sojourners with
me.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p4"></span>**23.** Terra autem non vendetur
absolute, quia mea est terra: vos enim peregrini, et advenae estis apud
me.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p5"></span>**24.** And in all the land of your
possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p6"></span>**24.** In universa autem terra
possessionis vestrae redemptionem dabitis terrae.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p7"></span>**25.** If thy brother be waxen poor,
and hath sold away *some* of his possession, and if any of his kin come
to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which his brother sold.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p8"></span>**25.** Quum attenuatus fuerit frater
tuus, et vendiderit de possessione sua: tunc veniet redemptor ejus
propinquus ipsi: et redimet venditionem fratris sui.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p9"></span>**26.** And if the man have none to
redeem it, and himself be able to redeem it;

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p10"></span>**26.** Et, si non fuerit viro
redemptor, sed apprehenderit manus ejus, et invenerit quod sufficit ad
ejus redemptionem;

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p11"></span>**27.** Then let him count the years
of the sale thereof, and restore the overplus unto the man to whom he
sold it, that he may return unto his possession.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p12"></span>**27.** Tunc supputabit annos
venditionis suae, et restituet quod superest viro cui vendidit, et
revertetur ad possessionem suam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p13"></span>**28.** But if he be not able to
restore *it* to him, then that which is sold shall remain in the hand of
him that hath bought it until the year of jubilee: and in the jubilee it
shall go out, and he shall return unto his possession.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p14"></span>**28.** Si vero non invenerit manus
ejus quod sufficiat ad reddendum illi, tum erit venditio ejus in manu
ejus, qui emit illum, usque ad annum Jubilaei: at egredietur in
Jubilaeo, reverteturque ad possessionem suam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p15"></span>**29.** And if a man sell a
dwelling-house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole
year after it is sold: *within* a full year may he redeem it.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p16"></span>**29.** Vir autem quum vendiderit
domum habitationis in urbe murata, erit redemptio ejus donec compleatur
annus venditionis ejus: anno uno erit redemptio ejus.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p17"></span>**30.** And if it be not redeemed
within the space of a full year, then the house that *is* in the walled
city shall be established for ever to him that bought it, throughout his
generations: it shall not go out in the jubilee.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p18"></span>**30.** Quod si non redimatur donec
impleatur illi annus integer, remanebit domus quae fuerit in civitate
cui est murus, absolute ementi illam in generationibus ejus: non
egredietur in Jubilaeo.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p19"></span>**31.** But the houses of the
villages, which have no walls round about them, shall be counted as the
fields of the country; they may be redeemed, and they shall go out in
the jubilee.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p20"></span>**31.** Domus autem villarum quibus
non est murus in circuitu, secundum agrum terrae aestimabitur, redemptio
erit ei, et in Jubilaeo egredietur.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p21"></span>**32.** Notwithstanding the cities of
the Levites, *and* the houses of the cities of their possession, may the
Levites redeem at any time.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p22"></span>**32.** Urbium autem Levitarum, et
domorum urbium possessionis eorum, redemptio perpetua erit Levitis.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p23"></span>**33.** And if a man purchase of the
Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his *possession*,
shall go out in *the* *year* of jubilee: for the houses of the cities of
the Levites *are* their possession among the children of Israel.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p24"></span>**33.** Qui autem emerit a Levitis,
egredietur venditio domus, et urbis possessionis ejus in Jubilaeo, quia
domus urbium Levitatum est possessio eorum in medio filiorum Israel.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p25"></span>**34.** But the field of the suburbs
of their cities may not be sold; for it *is* their perpetual possession.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p26"></span>**34.** Ager autem suburbii urbium
eorum non vendetur, quia possessio perpetua est illis.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p27"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p28"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p29"></span>**23.** *The land shall not be sold
for ever*. Since the reason for this law was peculiar to the children of
Abraham, its provisions can hardly be applied to other nations; for so
equal a partition of the land was made under Joshua, that the
inheritance was distributed amongst the several tribes and families;
nay, in order that each man’s possession should be more sacred, the land
had been divided by lot, as if God by His own hand located them in their
separate stations. In fact, that allotment was, as it were, an
inviolable *decree* of God Himself, whereby the memory of the covenant
should be maintained, by which the inheritance of the land had been
promised to Abraham and his posterity; and thus the land of Canaan was
an earnest, or symbol, or mirror, of the adoption on which their
salvation was founded. Wherefore it is not to be wondered at that God
was unwilling that this inestimable benefit should ever be lost; and,
lest this should be the case, like a provident father of a family, He
laid a restraint on His children, to prevent them from being too
prodigal; for, when a man has any suspicions of his heir, he forbids him
to alienate the patrimony he leaves him. Such, therefore, was the
condition of the ancient people; yet it cannot be indiscriminately
transferred to other nations who have had no common inheritance given
them. Some vestige of it appears in the right of redemption;  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) but, because that depends on the
consent of the parties, and is also a special mode of contract, it has
nothing to do with the law of Moses, which entirely restored both men
and lands, (in the year of jubilee,  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) ) That God should call the land of
Canaan *His*, is, as it were, to assert His direct Lordship  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) (*dominium*,) as they call it, over
it; as He immediately afterwards more clearly expresses His meaning,
where He says that the children of Israel sojourn in it as His guests.
 <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) For although their condition
was the best in which just and perpetual owners can be placed, still, as
respected God, they were but His tenants (*coloni*,) only living there
at His will. In fine, God claims the freehold (*fundum*) for Himself,
lest the recollection of tits having granted it to them should ever
escape them.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p34"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p35"></span>**24.** *And in all the land of your
possession*. Before the jubilee came, He permits not only the relations
to redeem land sold by a poor man, but the seller also, if no other
redeemer interposed. The same power was also given to relations amongst
other nations, though with a different object, viz., the preservation of
the family name; still, the seller was never allowed to redeem, unless a
special clause to that effect was contained in the contract. But God
desired that the lands should be retained by their legal possessor, in
order that the people might deviate as little as possible from the
division made by Joshua. Meanwhile, He had in view the private advantage
of individuals; but in the perpetual succession to the land He
considered Himself rather than men, in order that the recollection of
His kindness should never be lost. Finally, He orders all lands to
return in the year of jubilee to their original owners; and all sales to
be cancelled, as if, in the fiftieth year, he renewed the lot for the
division of the land.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p36"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p37"></span>**29.** *And if a man sell a
dwelling-house*. He here distinguishes houses from lands, providing that
the power of redemption should not extend beyond a year; and also, that
the purchase should hold good even in the jubilee. A second distinction,
however, is also added between different kinds of houses, viz., that
houses in towns might be altogether alienated, whilst the condition of
those in the country should be the same as that of the lands themselves,
as being annexed so as to form part of them. As regarded houses fix
towns, because they were sometimes burdensome to their owners, it was an
advantage that they might pass into the hands of the rich who were
competent to bear the expenses of building. Besides, a house does not
supply daily food like a field, and it is more tolerable to be without a
house than a field, in which you may work, and from the cultivation of
which you may support yourself and family. But it was necessary to
except houses in the country, because they were appendages to the land;
for what use would there be in harvesting the fruits, if you had no
place to store them in? Nay, what would it profit to possess a farm
which you could not cultivate? for how could oxen plough without any
stalls in its vicinity? Since, then, lands without farm-buildings or
cottages are almost useless, and they cannot be conveniently separated,
justly did God appoint that, in the year of Jubilee, every rural
possession should revert to its former owner.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p38"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p39"></span>**32.** *Notwithstanding the cities
of the Levites*. Another exception, that the Levites should recover the
houses they had sold, either by the right of redemption, or gratuitously
in the year of jubilee. And this is not only appointed out of favor to
them, but because it concerned the whole people, that they should be
posted like sentries in the place which God had assigned to them. As to
the suburbs, or the lands destined for the support of their cattle, God
forbids their alienation, because thus they would have forsaken their
proper station and removed elsewhere; whereas it was of importance to
the whole people that such a dispersion should not occur.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>[Deut.
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p3"></span>**19.** When thou shalt besiege a
city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shalt not
destroy the trees thereof by forcing an axe against them: for thou
mayest eat of them, and thou shalt not cut them down, (for the tree of
the field is man’s life,) to employ them in the siege:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p4"></span>**19.** Si obsederis urbem, diebus
multis pugnando adversus eam, ut capias eam, non disperdes arbores ejus,
impellendo in eas securim: quia ex illarum fructibus vesceris, propterea
ipsas non succides: (quia an homo arbor agri ut ingrediatur a facie tua
in munitionem?)

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p5"></span>**20.** Only the trees which thou
knowest that they *be* not trees for meat, thou shalt destroy and cut
them down; and thou shalt build bulwarks against the city that maketh
war with thee, until it be subdued.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p6"></span>**20.** Veruntamen arbores quas
noveris non esse fructiferas, disperdes, et succides: et aedificabis
munitionem adversus urbem illam quae tecum dimicat, donec descendat
ipsa.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p8"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p9"></span>**19.** *When thou shalt besiege a
city a long time*<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p9.1"></span>. I have not
hesitated to annex this precept to the Eighth Commandment, for when God
lays a restraint on the liberty of inflicting injuries in the very heat
of war, with respect to felling trees, much more did He desire His
people to abstain from all mischievous acts in time of peace. The sum
is, that although the laws of war opened the gate to plunder and rapine,
still they were to beware, as much as possible, lest the land being
desolated, it should be barren for the future; in short, that the booty
was so to be taken from the enemy, as that the advantage of the human
race should still be considered, and that posterity might still be
nourished by the trees which do not quickly arrive at the age of
fruit-bearing. He commands them to spare fruit-trees, first of all, for
this reason, because they supply food to all men; and thus the blessing
of God is manifested in them. He then adds, as a second reason, that
trees are exposed to everybody, whereby He signifies that war should not
be waged with them as with men. This passage is indeed variously
explained, but the sense which I have chosen accords very well and
appears to be the right one. For,  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) <span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.2"></span>
although the letter <span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.3"></span>ה<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.4"></span> is demonstrative, according to the
rules of grammar, and thus points out the enemy; yet, in my opinion, the
sentence is to be taken interrogatively. But <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.5"></span>מצור<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.6"></span>, *matzor*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.7"></span>, signifies rather a bulwark than a
siege. God, therefore, indirectly reproves the stupidity and madness of
men, who, when in arms, exert their strength against a tree which does
not move from its place, but waits to meet them. Thus the open field is
contrasted with the bulwark. Meanwhile, God permits ramparts and
palisadoes, and other machines used in sieges, to be made of trees which
do not bear fruit, and only provides that the tempest of war, which
ought to be momentary, should not strip the land of its ornaments for
many years. Still, there is no such strict rule laid down as that a
fruit-tree may not be cut down if necessity demands it; but God
restrains the Israelites from giving way to destruction and devastation
under the impulse of anger and hatred, and in forgetfulness of the calls
of humanity.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
21:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#014)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p3"></span>**14.** And it shall be, if thou
have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will; but
thou shalt not sell her at all for money, thou shalt not make
merchandise of her, because thou hast humbled her.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p4"></span>**14.** Si non placuerit tibi uxor
captiva, dimittes eam pro desiderio suo: nec vendendo vendes eam
pecunia, neque negotiaberis de ea, quod afflixeris eam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p5"></span>**15.** If a man have two wives, one
beloved, and another hated, and they have borne him children, *both* the
beloved and the hated; and if the first-born son be her’s that was
hated:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p6"></span>**15.** Quum fuerint viroduae
uxores, una dilecta et altera exosa, et pepererit ei filios dilecta et
exosa, fuerit autem filius primogenitus exosae:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p7"></span>**16.** Then it shall be, when he
maketh his sons to inherit *that* which he hath, *that* he may not make
the son of the beloved first-born before the son of the hated, *which*
*is* *indeed* the first-born:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p8"></span>**16.** Die quo haeredes instituet
filios suos eorum quae habuerit, non poterit dare jus primogeniturae
filio dilectae ante filium exosae primogenitum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p9"></span>**17.** But he shall acknowledge the
son of the hated *for* the first-born, by giving him a double portion of
all that he hath: for he *is* the beginning of his strength; the right
of the first-born *is* his.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p10"></span>**17.** Sed primogenitum filium
exosae agnoscet, ut det ei mensuram duorum ex omnibus quae habuerit:
ipse enim principium fortitudinis ejus, ipsius est jus primogeniturae.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p12"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p13"></span>**14.** *And it shall be, if thou
have no delight in her*. I have been compelled to separate this sentence
from the foregoing context which I have explained elsewhere;  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) for Moses there gave instructions how
a captive woman was to be taken to wife if her beauty attracted a Jewish
husband. That law then had reference to chastity and conjugal fidelity,
and especially to the purity of God’s worship; but now Moses prescribes
that, if a man have dishonored a captive woman, he should not sell her,
but let her go free, and by this satisfaction wipe out, or at any rate
diminish, the injury. Hence we infer that this rule of justice depends
on the Eighth Commandment, Let none defraud another. This condition was
at least tolerable for the captive; for, although chastity is a special
treasure, yet liberty, which is justly called an inestimable blessing,
was no trifling consolation to her. The penalty, then, of lust, was that
the conqueror should lose his booty.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p15"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p16"></span>**15.** *If a man have two wives*.
Inasmuch as it is here provided that a father should not unjustly
transfer what belongs to one son to another, it is a part and supplement
of the Eighth Commandment, the substance of which is, that every one’s
rights should be preserved to him. For, if the father substituted
another son in the place of his first-born, it was unquestionably a kind
of theft. But, since it rarely happens that a father unnaturally
degrades his first-born from his precedence, if all are born of the same
mother, God reminds us that He did not enact this law without cause;
for, where polygamy was allowed, the mind of the husband was generally
most inclined to the second wife; because, if he had loved the first
with true affection, he would have been contented with her as the
companion of his life and bed, and would not have thought of a second.
When, therefore, the husband grew tired of his first wife, and desired a
second, he might be coaxed by her blandishments to leave away from the
children of his first marriage what naturally belonged to them. Hence,
therefore, the necessity of the remedy whereby the father’s power of
altering the right of primogeniture is barred; for, although they might
allege that they only gave what was their own, yet it was an act of
ungodly arrogance to reject him whom God had deigned to honor. For he
who arrogates such power to himself, or who assigns the birth-right to
whom he will, almost arrogates to himself the ability to create. This
right, as is stated in verse 17, was a double portion of the paternal
inheritance. The reason which is added, is equivalent to saying, that
the first-born is the principal honor and ornament of the father. Still,
if there was a just cause for disinheriting the first-born, another
successor might be substituted in his stead, as Jacob shewed in his case
when he disinherited Reuben. (<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p16.1"></span>[Ge
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p16.1"></span>.) When it is said, “*before* the son
of the hated,” some expound it to mean “during his lifetime;” others
retain the Hebrew phrase, “before his face.” Their opinion, however, is
probable, who take this particle comparatively, for “instead of her
son.” The wife is called hated, not that her husband is positively her
enemy, but because he loves her least; for contempt is considered as
hatred, and he is called an enemy who does not render conjugal
benevolence.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
20:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p3"></span>**5.** And the officers shall speak
unto the people, saying, What man *is* *there* that hath built a new
house, and hath not dedicated it? let him go and return to his house,
lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p4"></span>**5.** Quum bellandum erit,
alloquentur praefecti populum, dicendo, Quis est vir qui aedificavit
domum novam, et non dedicavit eam? abeat, et revertatur ad domum suam,
ne forte moriatur in praelio, et alius dedicet eam.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p5"></span>**6.** And what man *is* *he* that
hath planted a vineyard, and hath not *yet* eaten of it? let him *also*
go and return unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man
eat of it.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p6"></span>**6.** Et quis est vir qui plantavit
vineam, et non fecit eam communem? abeat et revertatur ad domum suam: ne
forte moriatur in praelio, et alius communem eam faciat.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p7"></span>**7.** And what man *is* *there* that
hath betrothed a wife, and hath not taken her? let him go and return
unto his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p8"></span>**7.** Et quis est vir qui despondit
mulierem, et non accepit eam? abeat et revertatur domum suam ne forte
moriatur in praelio, et alius eam accipiat.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p9"></span>**8.** And the officers shall speak
further unto the people, and they shall say, What man *is* *there*
*that* *is* fearful and faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his
house, lest his brethren’s heart faint as well as his heart.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p10"></span>**8.** Addent praefecti alloqui
populum, dicendo, Quis est vir timidus et mollis corde? abeat, et
revertatur domum suam, ne dissolvatur cor fratrum ejus, sicut cor
illius.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p12"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p13"></span>**5.** *And the officers shall speak
unto the people*. I have added the commencement, “*quum* *bellandum*
*erit*,” (when there shall be war,) that my readers may know what is the
subject here discussed; for although the instruction given may seem
somewhat remote from the prohibition of theft, still it accords well,
and is closely connected with it. For by this indulgence God shews how
just it is, that every one should enjoy peaceably what he possesses;
because, if it be hard that men on account of war should be deprived of
the use of their new house, or of the produce of their vineyard, how
much more harsh and intolerable it will be to deprive men of their
fortunes, or to drive them from the lands which they justly call their
own! Since, therefore, it is expedient for the state that vineyards
should be sown or planted, and that houses should be built, whilst men
would not address themselves to these duties with sufficient alacrity,
unless encouraged by the hope of enjoying them, God gives them the
privilege of exemption from fighting, if they be owners of new houses
which they have not yet inhabited. He makes also the same appointment as
to possessors of vineyards, if they have not yet tasted of the fruit of
their labor, and will not have men torn from their affianced wives until
they have enjoyed their embraces. A different principle applies to a
fourth class, because the faint-hearted and lazy are not deserving that
God should have consideration for their cowardice, when they shun
dangers to be incurred for the public welfare; but because it concerns
the whole people that soldiers should go forth readily to war, God will
not have more required from any one than he is disposed to bear. We now
understand the substance of this passage, viz., that, when every man’s
right is asserted to enjoy what he possesses, it extends so far as that
a man who has built a house should not be dragged unwillingly to war,
until by dwelling in it he shall have received some advantage from the
expenses incurred. To make a vineyard common,  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) or to profane it, is equivalent to
applying the vintage to the common uses of life; for it was not lawful,
as we saw under the First Commandment,  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) to gather its first-fruits, as if it
were as yet uncircumcised; therefore the recompence for their industry
and diligence is made when those who have planted vines are thus set
free, until they have enjoyed some of their produce. As regards the
betrothed, although it seems to have been an indulgence granted in honor
of marriage, that they should return to the wives whom they had not yet
enjoyed, yet it is probable that they were not torn away from the
dearest of all possessions, in order that every man’s property should be
maintained. Besides, if the hope of progeny were taken away, the
inheritance would be thus transferred to others, which would have been
tantamount to diverting it from its rightful owner. We have said that
the lazy and timid were sent home, that the Israelites might learn that
none were to be pressed beyond their ability; and this also depends upon
that rule of equity  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) which
dictates that we should abstain from all unjust oppression.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p1"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
25](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#000)<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p2"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
25:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p3"></span>**5.** If brethren dwell together, and
one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall not marry
without unto a stranger: her husband’s brother shall go in unto her, and
take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of an husband’s brother
unto her.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p4"></span>**5.** Quum habitaverint fratres
pariter, et mortuus fuerit unus ex ipsis, nec fuerit ei filius, non
abnubet uxor mortui viro extraneo: cognatus ejus ingredietur ad eam, et
capiet eam sibi in uxorem, et affinitatem contrahet cum ea.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p5"></span>**6.** And it shall be, *that* the
first-born which she beareth shall succeed in the name of his brother
*which* *is* dead, that his name be not put out of Israel.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p6"></span>**6.** Atque ita primogenitus quem
peperit, surget nomine fratris ejus defuncti: ne deleat nomen ejus ex
Israele.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p7"></span>**7.** And if the man like not to take
his brother’s wife, then let his brother’s wife go up to the gate unto
the elders, and say, My husband’s brother refuseth to raise up unto his
brother a name in Israel, he will not perform the duty of my husband’s
brother.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p8"></span>**7.** Quod si noluerit vir ille
accipere affinem suam, tunc ascendet ipsa ad portam ad seniores, et
dicet, Renuit affinis meus suscitare fratri suo nomen in Israele, nec
vult affinitatem contrahere mecum.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p9"></span>**8.** Then the elders of his city
shall call him, and speak unto him: and *if* he stand *to* *it*, and
say, I like not to take her;

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p10"></span>**8.** Tunc accersent illum seniores
urbis illius, et loquentur cum eo: et ubi steterit, ac dixerit, Non
placet accipere eam:

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p11"></span>**9.** Then shall his brother’s wife
come unto him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off
his foot, and spit in his face, and shall answer and say, So shall it be
done unto that man that will not build up his brother’s house.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p12"></span>**9.** Accedet postea cognata ejus ad
ipsum in oculis seniorum, et solvet calceamentum ejus a pede ipsius, et
spuet in faciem ejus: loqueturque, ac dicet, Sic fiet viro qui non
aedificaverit domum fratris sui.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p13"></span>**10.** And his name shall be called
in Israel, The house of him that hath his shoe loosed.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p14"></span>**10.** Et vocabitur nomen ejus in
Israel, Domus discalceati.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p15"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p16"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p17"></span>**5.** *If brethren dwell together,
and one of them die*. This law has some similarity with that which
permits a betrothed person to return to the wife, whom he has not yet
taken; since the object of both is to preserve to every man what he
possesses, so that he may not be obliged to leave it to strangers, but
that he may have heirs begotten of his own body: for, when a son
succeeds to the father, whom he represents, there seems to be hardly any
change made. Hence, too, it is manifest how greatly pleasing to God it
is that no one should be deprived of his property, since He makes a
provision even for the dying, that what they could not resign to others
without regret and annoyance, should be preserved to their offspring.
Unless, therefore, his kinsman should obviate the dead man’s
childlessness, this inhumanity is accounted a kind of theft. For, since
to be childless was a curse of God, it was a consolation in this
condition to hope for a borrowed offspring, that the name might not be
altogether extinct.

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xv-p18"></span>Since we now understand the intention
of the law, we must also observe that the word *brethren* does not mean
actual brothers, but cousins, and other kinsmen, whose marriage with the
widows of their relative would not have been incestuous; otherwise God
would contradict Himself. But these two things are quite compatible,
that no one should uncover the nakedness of his brother, and yet that a
widow should not marry out of her husband’s family, until she had raised
up seed to him from some relation. In fact, Boaz did not marry Ruth
because he was the brother of her deceased husband, but only his near
kinsman. If any should object that it is not probable that other kinsmen
should dwell together, I reply that this passage is improperly supposed
to refer to actual living together, as if they dwelt in the same house,
but that the precept is merely addressed to relations, whose near
residence rendered it convenient to take the widows to their own homes;
for, if any lived far away, liberty was accorded to both to seek the
fulfillment of the provision elsewhere. Surely it is not probable that
God would have authorized an incestuous marriage, which He had before
expressed His abomination of. Nor can it be doubted, as I have above
stated, but that the like necessity was imposed upon the woman of
offering herself to the kinsman of her former husband; and although
there was harshness in this, still she seemed to owe this much to his
memory, that she should willingly raise up seed to the deceased; yet, if
any one think differently, I will not contend the point with him. If,
however, she were not obliged to do so, it was absurd that she should
voluntarily obtrude herself: nor was there any other reason why she
should bring to trial the kinsman, from whom she had suffered a repulse,
except that she might acquire the liberty of marrying into another
family. Yet it is not probable that he was to be condemned to an
ignominious punishment, without being admitted to make his defense,
because sometimes just reasons for refusal might be alleged. This
disgrace, therefore, was only a penalty for inhumanity or avarice. By
giving up his shoe, he renounced his right of relationship, and gave it
up to another: for, by behaving so unkindly towards the dead, he became
unworthy of reaping any of the advantages of his relationship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc05023.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p15"></span> The negative added from *Fr*. See A.
Gell. 11:18.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc05023.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p16"></span> “Il est dit en la loy;” it is said in
the law. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc05023.htm#fr_133) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p17"></span> This first opinion is “that (says
Corn. a Lapide) of S. Thomas, 1:2. q. 105, art. 2. ad 9., after Strabo;
God commands that a thief should restore five oxen for one, because the
ox has five *utilities*; first, it is killed in sacrifice; secondly, its
flesh is eaten; thirdly, it ploughs; fourthly, it gives milk; fifthly,
it supplies leather; — whilst a sheep only has four advantages; for,
first, it is slain in sacrifice; secondly, its flesh is eaten; thirdly,
it gives milk; fourthly, it gives wool.” The second opinion is
attributed to Junius by Willet, “oportet hunc furem audacem, et versutum
esse.”

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc05023.htm#fr_134) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p20"></span> This provision of the Twelve Tables
is thus given by A. Gell. 11. *ult*., “Si nox furtum faxit, sim (*si*
*eum*) quis occisit, jure caesus esto: si luci furtum faxit, sim aliquis
endo (*in*) ipso furto capsit, verberator, illique, cui furtum factum
escit (*erit*) addicitor, sed non nisi is, qui interemturus erat,
quiritaret,” *i.e*., shall have called out for assistance.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc05023.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.i-p23"></span> “Sed enim M. Cato in oratione quam de
praeda militibus dividenda scripsit, vehementibus et illustribus verbis
de impunitate peculatus atque licentia conqueritus. Ea verba, quoniam
nobis impense placuerunt, adscripsimus: Fures (inquit) privatorum
furtorum in nervo atque in compedibus aetatem agunt: fures autem publici
in auto atque in purpura.” — A. Gell. 11 *ult*.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc05023.htm#fr_136) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p27.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p28"></span> “Le Dieu vivant.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc05023.htm#fr_137) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p31"></span> *C.’s* view of these words seems to
be adopted by none of the commentators. They understand them more
simply, that the restitution was to be made in kind, and of the best of
the aggressor’s produce. Whether we read with *C.* “bonum agri,” or with
others “de bono,” or “de optimo,” as Dathe and *A.* *V*., does not
appear to affect this sense.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc05023.htm#fr_138) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p36"></span> “Que la beste se soit esvanouye sans
qu’il en ait rien sceu;” in that the beast has vanished without his
knowing anything about it. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc05023.htm#fr_139) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p39"></span> For these latter words, which I
hardly understand, the following are substituted in *Fr*., “Cela touche
quant et quant a son service et religion.”

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc05023.htm#fr_140) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ii-p40"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc05023.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p10"></span> “The Chaldee translateth, *when*
*thou* *art* *hired*; and of such do the Hebrews understand this Law,
that laborers hired to work in a vineyard are to eat of the fruit
thereof.” — Ainsworth. So also Vatablus from the Chaldee and Arabic, in
Poole’s Synopsis.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc05023.htm#fr_142) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.v-p11"></span> “Cueille des espis, ou des raisins
pour sa necessite,” should gather ears of corn or grapes for his
necessary wants. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc05023.htm#fr_143) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28"></span><span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.1"></span> “The Hebrews (says Ainsworth) for the
most part hold the remission to be perpetual.” He, however, argues from
the word <span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.2"></span>שמטה<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.3"></span>, *an* *intermission*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.4"></span>, and its use in that sense in <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.5"></span>[Ex
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.5"></span><span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.6"></span>,
that *C*<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.7"></span>.’*s*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.8"></span> interpretation is the correct one. So
also Dathe, who quotes Jos. Meyer in his Treatise on the Festivals of
the Jews, ch. 17 sec. 20; and Michaelis, in his Laws of Moses, P. 3.
sec. 157.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc05023.htm#fr_144) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p28.9"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p29"></span> *A.* *V*., “all your labors;”
margin, “things wherewith ye grieve others; *Heb*., griefs;” *C*.’*s*
own version, “omnes facultates vestras exigitis.”

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc05023.htm#fr_145) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p32"></span> *S*. *M*., *However*. *A*. *V*.,
*Save* *when*; or, in its margin, *To* *the* *end* *that*. *S*.*M*.
refers to Jewish expositors as saying, “The meaning is, Thou shalt not
fear that this law may do you an injury; for, if you be such zealous
observers of my precepts, I will so bless you, and make all things
needful for you to increase, that there shall be no poor man amongst
you, to whom you need give what is lent. And if there be any person
needing your assistance, and ye, for my sake, forgive his debt, as I
have commanded, the man who doth thus shall not lose what was owed him,
but shall receive from me a more abundant blessing.” The learned reader
may find this expression further discussed in Noldii Concord. partic.
Art., 509 of Annot and Vindic. — *W*.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc05023.htm#fr_146) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.vii-p41"></span> “I know that ye will not obey me
with a perfect heart, and therefore my blessing shall be lessened
towards you, and there shall *be* poor among you.” Hebrew commentators
quoted in Munster and Fagius. — Poole’s Syn.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc05023.htm#fr_147) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.viii-p18"></span> “Pour tormenter, et *gehener* les
poures serfs.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc05023.htm#fr_148) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.ix-p24"></span> “The Chaldee, Vatablus, and other
more recent commentators translate it, *Since* *he* *has* *served*
*thee* *for* *six* *years* *for* *double* *the* *wages* *of* *a*
*hireling*; which the Hebrews thus explain, that the wages of a slave of
six years’ standing are called double, because hirelings amongst the
Hebrew’s only engaged themselves for three years, whereas the slave
served for sir years; therefore he served twice as long, and earned
twice as much.” — Corn. a Lapide *in* *loco*.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc05023.htm#fr_149) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p39.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p40"></span> Seneca de Benef. 3:22. “Servus (ut
placet Chrysippo) perpetuus mercenarius est.” See also Sen. Epp. 6:47,
in which the following beautiful sentiment occurs: “Haec tamen mei
praecepti summa est, Sic cum inferiore vivas, quemadmodum tecum
superiorem velis vivere.”

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc05023.htm#fr_150) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p40.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p41"></span> So the Hebrew doctors, and
*Ainsworth*, Caietan, and *Willet*. Michaelis supposes that servants
were regularly restored to freedom after six years’ service, (not on the
Sabbatical year, but on the seventh from the sale;) but supposing them
bought less than six years before the jubilee, they received their
freedom on that year. Laws of Moses, vol. 2 p. 176. — *Brightwell*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc05023.htm#fr_151) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p45"></span> See Margin of *A.* *V.*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc05023.htm#fr_152) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p48"></span> “Or la diversite d’entre les
estrangers, et les enfans d’Israel n’est pas seulement mis, etc.;” now
the diversity between strangers and the children of Israel is not only
placed, etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc05023.htm#fr_153) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p49"></span> See Margin of *A.V*. on <span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p49.1"></span>[Le
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#046)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p49.1"></span>. “His in perpetuum tanquam servis
utamini, popularibus vero vestris Israelitis ne severius imperetis.” —
Dathe.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc05023.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.x-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.x-p52"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “Et d’un juste
chastiment de leurs pechez;” and as a just chastisement of their sins.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc05023.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p30"></span> “*Redemptio* in Law, a faculty or
right of re-entering upon lands, etc., that have been sold and assigned,
upon reimbursing the purchase-money with legal costs. Bargains wherein
the *faculty*, or, as some call it, the *equity* of redemption is
reserved, are only a kind of pignorative contracts. A certain time is
limited, within which the *faculty*, of redemption shall be exercised;
and beyond which it shall not extend. — Chambers’s Encyclopaedia.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc05023.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p31"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc05023.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p32"></span> “La seigneurie directe (qu’on
appelle,) ou fonsiere.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc05023.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xi-p33"></span> Addition in *Fr*., “Ou fermiers, ou
grangiers.”

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc05023.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10"></span> *S* *M*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.1"></span>. and the *LXX*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.2"></span>. agree in regarding <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.3"></span>ה<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.4"></span>
as interrogative here, hence *S* *M*<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.5"></span>. renders the clause, “Thinkest thou
that the tree of the field is man that he must depart from thy face in
the siege?” and he quotes Rabbi Solomon as giving a similar exposition.
But he also quotes Aben-Ezra as rendering the clause in the same manner
as our *A* *V*<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.6"></span>. The word <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.7"></span>מצור<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.8"></span> admits of either of the two
interpretations quoted by *C*<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p10.9"></span>. —
*W*

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11"></span>Dathe’s version is, “for they
(*i*.*e*. the trees) are appointed by God for the use of men,” and he
thinks that Moses undoubtedly had in view the precept in <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.1"></span>[Ge
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc05023.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiii-p14"></span> *Vide* vol. 2, p. 70.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc05023.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p14"></span> See margin of *A*.*V*., ver. 6.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc05023.htm#fr_162) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p15"></span> See on <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p15.1"></span>[Leviticus
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023)<span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p15.1"></span>, vol. 2, p. 49.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc05023.htm#fr_163) <span
id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.iii.xiv-p16"></span> “Et cela est de l’equite commune, a
laquelle se rapporte le Huitieme Commandement;” and this is a part of
that common equity to which the Eighth Commandment has reference. —
*Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Law: The Ninth Commandment](cc05024)
