[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05035)  [Next](cc05037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#000)<span id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span><span id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
27:11-26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011)<span id="v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span>**11.** And Moses charged the people the same
day, saying,

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span>**11.** Praecepitque Moses populo eo die,
dicendo:

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>**12.** These shall stand upon mount Gerizim
to bless the people, when ye are come over Jordan; Simeon, and Levi, and
Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span>**12.** Hi stabunt ad benedicendum populo
super montem Garizim, quando transieris Jordanem, Simon, et Levi, et
Juda, et Issachar, et Joseph, et Benjamin:

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>**13.** And these shall stand upon mount Ebal
to curse; Reuben, Gad, and Ashur, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>**13.** Isti vero stabunt ad maledictionem in
monte Ebal, Ruben, Gad, et Aser, et Zebulon, Dan et Nephthali.

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>**14.** And the Levites shall speak, and say
unto all the men of Israel with a loud voice,

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>**14.** Loquentur autem Levitae, ac dicent ad
omnem virum Israel voce excelsa:

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span>**15.** Cursed *be* the man that maketh *any*
graven or molten image, an abomination unto the Lord, the work of the
hands of the craftsman, and putteth *it* in a secret *place*: and all
the people shall answer and say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>**15.** Maledictus vir ille qui fecerit
sculptile, et conflatile, abominationem Jehovae, opus manuum artificis,
et posuerit in abscondito: et respondebunt universus populus, ac dicent,
Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span>**16.** Cursed *be* he that setteth light by
his father or his mother: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>**16.** Maledictus qui vilipenderit patrem
suum, aut matrem suam: et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span>**17.** Cursed *be* he that removeth his
neighbor’s land-mark: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span>**17.** Maledictus qui transfert terminum
proximi sui, et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span>**18.** Cursed *be* he that maketh the blind
to wander out of the way: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span>**18.** Maledictus qui aberrare facit caecum
in via: et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p19"></span>**19.** Cursed *be* he that perverteth the
judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and widow: and all the people
shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p20"></span>**19.** Maledictus qui pervertit judicium
peregrini, pupilli, et viduae: et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p21"></span>**20.** Cursed *be* he that lieth with his
father’s wife; because he uncovereth his father’s skirt: and all the
people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p22"></span>**20.** Maledictus qui coierit cum uxore
patris sui, quia discooperuit oram patris sui, et dicet universus
populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p23"></span>**21.** Cursed *be* he that lieth with any
manner of beast: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p24"></span>**21.** Maledictus qui coierit cum quovis
animali, et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p25"></span>**22.** Cursed *be* he that lieth with his
sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother: and
all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p26"></span>**22.** Maledictus qui coierit cum sorore
sua, filia patris sui, vel filia matris suae, et dicet universus
populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p27"></span>**23.** Cursed *be* he that lieth with his
mother-in-law: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p28"></span>**23.** Maledictus qui coierit cum socru sua:
et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p29"></span>**24.** Cursed *be* he that smiteth his
neighbor secretly: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p30"></span>**24.** Maledictus qui percusscrit proximum
suum abscondite: et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p31"></span>**25.** Cursed *be* he that taketh reward to
slay an innocent person: and all the people shall say, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p32"></span>**25.** Maledictus qui acceperit munus, ut
percutiat plaga animae sanguinem innocentem: et dicet universus populus,
Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p33"></span>**26.** Cursed *be* he that confirmeth not
*all* the words of this law to do them: and all the people shall say,
Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p34"></span>**26.** Maledictus qui non stabilierit verba
Legis istius faciendo illa: et dicet universus populus, Amen.

<span id="v.ii-p35"></span> 

<span id="v.ii-p36"></span><span id="v.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p37"></span>**11.** *And Moses charged the people the
same day*<span id="v.ii-p37.1"></span>. In order that both the promises
and threats might have more efficacy in affecting the minds of all, God
enjoined not only that they should be proclaimed in a solemn rite, but
also that they should be approved by the people in a loud voice, and
sealed, as it were, by their consent. It is elsewhere recorded that this
was faithfully performed by Joshua. (<span id="v.ii-p37.2"></span>[Jos
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033)<span id="v.ii-p37.2"></span><span
id="v.ii-p37.3"></span>.) Let it suffice to say at present that they
were all summoned, and conducted before God to subscribe to them, so
that henceforth all subterfuge might be put an end to. The tribes of
Israel were divided into two parties, that they might stand opposite to
each other, and that the blessings might sound forth from one side, and
the curses from the other,  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)
<span id="v.ii-p38.1"></span> like <span
id="v.ii-p38.2"></span>ἀντίστροφοι<span id="v.ii-p38.3"></span>. I
confess I do not know why the descendants of Simeon, Levi, Judah,
Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin, were chosen by God to proclaim the
blessings, rather than the others;  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) <span id="v.ii-p39.1"></span> for
there is no force in the opinion of the Hebrew writers that those who
descended from free mothers were placed in the post of highest dignity:
since the tribe of the first-born, Reuben, was united with some who
sprang from the bond-maids; unless, perhaps, we may say that the
descendants of Reuben were degraded into the second class as a mark of
ignominy; but, since both the blessings and curses were offered in the
name of the whole people, it is not a point of much importance. For, if
this division  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) <span
id="v.ii-p40.1"></span> was made to bear witness to their common
consent, it was equivalent to their all alike confessing that the
transgressors of the Law were accursed, and those who kept it blessed;
and consequently I am not very curious to know why, in their common
office, God preferred some to the others. Moses will elsewhere relate
that the tribes, which are here separated, were then united together. It
would perhaps be a probable conjecture that God, who well knew what
would hereafter be the inheritance of every tribe, placed them severally
in that station which would correspond to their future allotment.

<span id="v.ii-p41"></span>In order that the sanction might have more
solemnity, God chose that the Levites should dictate the words as if He
Himself spoke from heaven; for, since they were appointed to be the
expounders of the Law, as it behooved them faithfully to repeat what God
had dictated out of His own mouth, so they were heard with greater
attention and reverence.

<span id="v.ii-p42"></span><span id="v.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p43"></span>**15.** *Cursed be the man that maketh any
graven*. Hence it appears that Moses is silent as to the half (of what
he had spoken of before;  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) ) for
no mention is made of the blessings  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) which occupied before the first place.
Perhaps the Spirit would indirectly rebuke the wickedness of the people,
from whence it arose that He was not at liberty to proclaim the praises
conveyed in the blessings; for, when they ought to have embraced
cheerfully the reward promised to them, their ungodliness deprived them
of this honor; and nothing remained but that they should submit
themselves to the just punishment of their iniquities. Meanwhile, it
cannot be doubted but that they were taught by the forms of cursing
which we here read what course was to be observed in blessing. For, when
God pronounces His condemnation of transgressors, we may hence infer
that the hope of blessedness is laid up for His true servants, if any
fulfill His law. Besides, in the list of curses here recorded, a
*synecdoche* is to be observed, since no special curse is separately
denounced against blasphemers, perjurers, Sabbath-breakers, slanderers,
and adulterers. It is plain, therefore, that some kinds of crime which
were worthy of the greatest abomination, were selected, in order that
the people might learn from hence that transgression against any
particular of the Law would not be unpunished; for, by speaking of
graven images, God undoubtedly defends His worship from all pollutions;
and thus this curse extends to every breach of the First Table.
Moreover, when He threatens to punish secret sins, we may readily infer
that, although offenders might be hidden from earthly judges, and escape
from their hands a hundred times, still God would be the avenger of His
polluted worship. If any had put an idol in a secret place, or had
smitten his neighbor secretly, he will not suffer the punishment which
cannot be inflicted unless his crime be detected, and he is convicted of
the offense; but, lest impunity should encourage any one to become
obdurate in sin, the people are summoned before the heavenly tribunal of
God, that they may be retained in the path of duty, not only by the fear
of punishment, but for conscience-sake. Whence, again, it is clear that
God did not only deliver a political Law, which should merely direct
their outward morals, but one which would require true sincerity of
heart.

<span id="v.ii-p46"></span><span id="v.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p47"></span>**16.** *Cursed be he that setteth light by
his father*<span id="v.ii-p47.1"></span>. What follows refers to the
Second Table of the Law; and, first, He pronounces those cursed who
should be undutiful (*impii*<span id="v.ii-p47.2"></span>) to their
parents; for the word <span id="v.ii-p47.3"></span>קלל<span
id="v.ii-p47.4"></span>, *kalal*<span id="v.ii-p47.5"></span>,  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) <span id="v.ii-p48.7"></span> which
means to despise, as well as to curse, is put in opposition to the honor
which, by the Fifth Commandment, is due to our father and mother. Then
He mentions such thefts as generally escape the knowledge of men; as
also, He only adverts to those acts of fornication which are anxiously
concealed on account of their filthiness. To have connection with a
beast, with one’s mother-in-law, or step-mother, or sister, is so
unnatural and detestable a crime, that it is generally concealed more
carefully. But God admonishes us that, whatever modes of concealment the
sinner shall adopt, they will profit him nothing, but that, when He
shall at length *ascend*<span id="v.ii-p48.8"></span> His judgment-seat,
their shame shall be discovered. For the same reason he does not curse
all murderers, but only such as have shed innocent blood for hire, which
nefarious compact cannot easily be discovered so as to be punished by
laws.  <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201)

<span id="v.ii-p50"></span><span id="v.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p51"></span>**26.** *Cursed is he that confirmeth not*.
Although it was God’s purpose to summon the consciences of all men
before Him, and, in order that they might not only fear human judgments,
He designedly threatened them with the punishment of secret sins, yet
the conclusion, which is now added, extends the same judgment to all
iniquities of whatever kind. Nay, He briefly declares, that whosoever
shall not perform what the Law requires, are accursed. From whence Paul
rightly infers, that “as many as are of the works of the Law are under
the curse.” (<span id="v.ii-p51.1"></span>[Ga
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span id="v.ii-p51.1"></span>.)
For let the most perfect man come forward, and, although he may have
striven ever so diligently to keep the Law, he will have at least
offended in some point or other; since the declaration of James must be
borne in mind, “Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in
one point, he is guilty of all;” for he that forbade murder and
adultery, forbade theft also. (<span id="v.ii-p51.2"></span>[Jas.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)<span id="v.ii-p51.2"></span>.)
Paul indeed does not quote the very words of Moses, for he thus cites
his testimony;

<span id="v.ii-p52"></span>“Cursed is every one that continueth not in
all things which are written in the book of the law to do them,” (<span
id="v.ii-p52.1"></span>[Ga 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="v.ii-p52.1"></span>;)

<span id="v.ii-p53"></span>but there is no difference in the sense,
since all are here condemned without exception, who have not confirmed
the Law of God, so as to fulfill to the uttermost whatever it contains.
Whence if is clear that, in whatever respect the deficiency betrays
itself, it brings men under the curse; and to this the Israelites are
commanded to assent, so as to acknowledge that they were all without
exception lost, since they were involved in the curse. And now-a-days,
also, it is necessary that we should all to a man be struck with the
same despair, in order that, embracing the grace of Christ, we should be
delivered from this melancholy state of guilt; since he was made
accursed for us, that He might redeem us from the curse of the Law.
(<span id="v.ii-p53.1"></span>[Ga
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="v.ii-p53.1"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc05036.htm#fr_195) <span
id="v.ii-p37.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p38"></span> “Comme correspondantes.” — *Fr*. “It was
also customary on some occasions to dance round the altars whilst they
sung the sacred hymns, which consisted of three stanzas or parts; the
first of which, called *strophe*, was sung in turning from east to west;
the other, named *antistrophe*, in returning from west to east: then
they stood before the altar and sung the *epode*, which was the last
part of the song.” — Potter’s Antiq. of Greece, Book II. chap. 4.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc05036.htm#fr_196) <span
id="v.ii-p38.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p39"></span> “The six nobler tribes answered amen to the
blessings; the six more ignoble to the curses, viz., four who descended
from the children of the hand-maids, *i*.*e*., Gad, Asher, Dan, and
Naphtali, to whom Reuben is added, because he had defiled his father’s
bed incestuously; and Zebulun, because he was the youngest son of Leah.
So Raban and Theod., q. 34.” — Corn. a Lapide, *in* *loco*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc05036.htm#fr_197) <span
id="v.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p40"></span> “De six a six.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc05036.htm#fr_198) <span
id="v.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p44"></span> Added from *Fr*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc05036.htm#fr_199) <span
id="v.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p45"></span> “Howbeit, though Moses appointed these to
bless, yet he expresseth not the blessings; by such silence leading his
prudent reader to look for them by another, which is Christ. <span
id="v.ii-p45.1"></span>[Joh 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span
id="v.ii-p45.1"></span>, <span id="v.ii-p45.2"></span>[Ac
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026)<span id="v.ii-p45.2"></span>. For
silence in the holy story often implieth great mysteries, as the Apostle
(in <span id="v.ii-p45.3"></span>[Heb
7:1-28](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)<span id="v.ii-p45.3"></span>.)
teacheth from the narration of Melchisedek, in <span
id="v.ii-p45.4"></span>[Ge
14:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)<span
id="v.ii-p45.4"></span>.” — Ainsworth.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc05036.htm#fr_200) <span
id="v.ii-p47.6"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p48"></span><span id="v.ii-p48.1"></span> He assumes,
what is scarcely tenable, that <span id="v.ii-p48.2"></span>מקלה<span
id="v.ii-p48.3"></span> is derived from <span
id="v.ii-p48.4"></span>קלל<span id="v.ii-p48.5"></span> rather than from
<span id="v.ii-p48.6"></span>קלה **—** *W*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc05036.htm#fr_201) <span
id="v.ii-p48.9"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p49"></span> “Des hommes.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy 11:26-32](cc05037)
