[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05054)  [Next](cc05056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.viii"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span><span id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
31](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#000)<span id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span><span id="vi.viii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018)<span id="vi.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p3"></span>**18.** And he gave unto Moses, when he had
made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, two tables of
testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.

<span id="vi.viii-p4"></span>**18.** Et dedit Deus Most, quum finem
fecisset loquendi cum eo in monte Sinai, duas tabulas Testimonii,
tabulas lapideas scriptas digito Dei.

<span id="vi.viii-p5"></span> 

<span id="vi.viii-p6"></span><span id="vi.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p7"></span>**18** *And he gave unto Moses*. It must be
observed, that, after the voice of God had been heard from the midst of
the fire, and He had delivered the Ten Commandments, and the form of the
tabernacle had been described, and the work had been already finished by
the artificers, though its dedication had not yet taken place, Moses was
again withdrawn from the sight and intercourse of men, that he might be
taught apart by himself to be a faithful interpreter of the Law. For
although God had briefly comprised in the Ten Commandments the sum of
His doctrine, which might suffice for the rule of a pious and righteous
life, still a clearer exposition was needed, such as Moses afterwards
added. With this object he was taken up into the sanctuary (*adytum*) of
heaven, as it were, in order that he might familiarly learn all things
that concerned the full and complete understanding of the Ten
Commandments, since he could never have attained their genuine meaning
if God had not been his Master and Teacher. Hence we gather that he
wrote his five books not only under the guidance of the Spirit of God,
but as God Himself had suggested them, speaking to him out of His own
mouth. Wherefore he observed silence for forty days, that he might
afterwards freely speak by the authority of God. Thus ought all true
pastors of the Church to be disciples, so as to teach nothing but what
they have received. But although God might in a moment have fully
perfected His servant, yet, in order more surely to evince that he
advanced nothing which did not proceed from the school of heaven, he was
separated for forty days from the human race, so that the Israelites
might henceforth look up to him as to an angel sent from heaven; for
there could be no savour of earth about him who had thus lived with God,
without meat and drink, or any other means of nourishment, and divested
of all infirmity of the flesh.

<span id="vi.viii-p8"></span>Finally, the Ten Commandments were written
on two tables, so that they might never be lost. I have elsewhere stated
why they were divided into two tables, viz., because they consist of two
parts, the first of which is the rule of piety, whilst the second
prescribes how we must live righteously, innocently, and chastely with
men. Thus the worship of God comes first in order, and then the duties
of charity follow. The tables were of stone, inasmuch as it is usual for
enduring monuments to be engraven on brass, or stones. That they were
“written with the finger of God,” we must understand to mean that the
characters were formed without the hand or skill of men, by the secret
virtue of God; nor is it a matter of wonder that a writing should have
suddenly been brought into existence at the same will (*nutu*) of God,
whereby the waste and shapeless materials of the world, which they call
chaos, were changed so as to be resplendent with astonishing elegance
and beauty. This expression, however, is metaphorical, whereby what is
only applicable to men is figuratively spoken of God; for God is not
corporeal so as to write with His finger; and for Him to act is only to
command; as it is said in the Psalms,

<span id="vi.viii-p9"></span>“He spake, and all things were made; he
commanded, and they were created.” (<span id="vi.viii-p9.1"></span>[Ps.
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009), [Ps.
148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005)<span id="vi.viii-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.viii-p10"></span>Many approve of the allegory, that the Law
was written by the Spirit of God on stones, because the hardness of our
heart does not receive it without the grace of regeneration; but we must
rather hold to the antithesis of Paul, wherein he shews that the Gospel
differs from the Law in this respect, because it is written on fleshy
hearts, subdued unto obedience, (<span id="vi.viii-p10.1"></span>[2Co
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span id="vi.viii-p10.1"></span>;)
and indeed it is by no means fitting that we should trifle in such
conceits as this, when the simple intention of God is abundantly
manifest, viz., that the Law was registered upon stones, in order that
the perpetuity of its doctrine should be maintained in all ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 32:1-35](cc05056)
