[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc05048)  [Next](cc05050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 5: Harmony of the Law, Part III*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Exodus
35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#000)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii-p2.1"></span>[Exodus
35:20-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#020)<span id="vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>**20.** And all the congregation of the
children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span>**20.** Egressi sunt universus coetus
filiorum Israel a facie Mosis,

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>**21.** And they came, every one whose heart
stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, *and* they
brought the Lord’s offering to the work of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for all his service, and for the holy garments.

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>**21.** Veneruntque vir quem extulit cor
suum, qui liberalis fuit spiritu suo: attuleruntque oblationem ad opus
tabernaculi conventionis, et ad omne opus ejus, et ad vestes
sanctitatis.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>**22.** And they came, both men and women, as
many as were willing-hearted, *and* brought bracelets, and ear-rings,
and rings, and tablets, all jewels of gold: and every man that offered,
*offered* an offering of gold unto the Lord.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>**22.** Venerunt viri et mulieres, quicunque
liberalis fuit corde, attulerunt fibulas, et inaures, et annulos, et
armillas, quodlibet vas aureum, et omnis vir qui attulit levationem auri
Jehovae.

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>**23.** And every man with whom was found
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goat’s *hair*, and
red skins of rams, and badgers’ skins, brought *them*

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span>**23.** Praeterea onmis vir apud quem
inveniebatur hyacinthus, purpura, coccus, byssus, et pili caprarum, et
pelles arietum rubricatae, et pelles taxorum, haec attulerunt.

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>**24.** Every one that did offer an offering
of silver and brass, brought the Lord’s offering: and every man with
whom was found shittim-wood, for any work of the service, brought *it*

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>**24.** Omnis tollens levationem argenti et
aeris, obtulerunt levationem Jehovae: et omnis apud quem inveniebantur
ligna sittim, pro universo opere ministerii attulerunt.

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>**25.** And all the women that were
wise-hearted did spin with their hands, and brought that which they had
spun, *both* of blue, and of purple, *and* of scarlet, and of fine
linen.

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>**25.** Praeterea omnis mulier intelligenti
corde, manibus suis neverunt, et attulerunt quod nendo operatae fuerant,
hyaciuthum, purpuram, coccum et byssum.

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>**26.** And all the women, whose hearts
stirred them up in wisdom, spun goats’ *hair*

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span>**26.** Omnes quoque mulieres quas excitavit
cor ipsarum, intelligenter neverunt pilos caprinos.

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span>**27.** And the rulers brought onyx-stones,
and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate;

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span>**27.** Principes quoque attulerunt lapides
onychinos, et gemmas inserendas in ephod et pectorali:

<span id="vi.ii-p19"></span>**28.** And spice, and oil for the light,
and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.

<span id="vi.ii-p20"></span>**28.** Aromata etiam et oleum pro luminari,
et pro oleo unctionis, et pro incenso aromatico.

<span id="vi.ii-p21"></span>**29.** The children of Israel brought a
willing offering unto the Lord, every man and woman, whose heart made
them willing to bring, for all manner of work which the Lord had
commanded to be made by the hand of Moses.

<span id="vi.ii-p22"></span>**29.** Omnis vir et mulier qui liberales
fuerunt corde suo ad offerendum pro cuncto opere quod mandaverat Jehova
fieri per manum Mosis, obtulerunt filii Israel donum voluntarium
Jehovae.

<span id="vi.ii-p23"></span>**30.** And Moses said unto the children of
Israel, See, the Lord hath called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the
son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah:

<span id="vi.ii-p24"></span>**30.** Tunc ait Moses ad filios Israel,
Videte, vocavit Jehova nomine Besaleel filium Uri, filii Hur, de tribu
Juda:

<span id="vi.ii-p25"></span>**31.** And he hath filled him with the
spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all
manner of workmanship;

<span id="vi.ii-p26"></span>**31.** Et implevit cum Spiritu Dei, in
sapientia et intelligentia, in scientia et omni artificio,

<span id="vi.ii-p27"></span>**32.** And to devise curious works, to work
in gold, and in silver, and in brass,

<span id="vi.ii-p28"></span>**32.** Ad excogitandum ingeniosa opera, ut
faciat in auro, argento et aere:

<span id="vi.ii-p29"></span>**33.** And in the cutting of stones, to set
*them*, and in carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.

<span id="vi.ii-p30"></span>**33.** Et in artificio gemmarum; ut illas
includat in artificio ligni, ut faciat quodcunque opus ingeniosum.

<span id="vi.ii-p31"></span>**34.** And he hath put in his heart that he
may teach, *both* he and Aholiab the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of
Dan.

<span id="vi.ii-p32"></span>**34.** Et posuit in corde ejus ut doceat,
ipse et Aholiab filius Ahisamach, e tribu Dan.

<span id="vi.ii-p33"></span>**35.** Them hath he filled with wisdom of
heart, to work all manner of work of the engraver, and of the cunning
workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and
in fine linen, and of the weaver, *even* of them that do any work, and
of those that devise cunning work.

<span id="vi.ii-p34"></span>**35.** Replevit eos sapientia cordis, ut
faciant omne opus artificis, et phrygionis, et acupictoris, ex
hyacintho, et purpura, et vermiculo cocci, et bysso, et textura,
facientes omne opus, et excogitantes inventiones.

<span id="vi.ii-p35"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p36"></span><span id="vi.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p37"></span>**20.** *And all the congregation of the
children of Israel*. There is no reason why any one should be surprised
that the order of the narrative is changed, since it plainly appears
from many passages that the order of time is not always observed by
Moses. Thus he appears here to connect the fall of the people with the
foregoing injunctions, both with respect to the building of the
tabernacle, and the rest of the religious service of God. But I have
shewn  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) upon good grounds that
the tabernacle was built before the people fell into idolatry. Therefore
Moses now supplies what had been before omitted, though I have followed
the thread of the narrative in order to render it less difficult.

<span id="vi.ii-p39"></span>The sum of this relation is, that whatever
was necessary for the building of the tabernacle was liberally
contributed. It must be observed that they had departed from the
presence of Moses: for we gather from this circumstance that, having
severally retired to their tents, they had considered apart by
themselves what they should give. Hence their liberality is deserving of
greater praise, because it was premeditated; for it often happens that
when a person has been bountiful from sudden impulse, he afterwards
repents of it. When it is added that “they came, every one,” it is a
question whether he means that the minds of the whole people were prompt
and cheerful in giving, or whether he indirectly rebukes the stinginess
and sordidness of those who meanly neglected their duty. In whichever
way we choose to take it, Moses repeats what we have seen before, that
the offerings were not extorted by force or necessity, but that they
proceeded from voluntary and cordial feelings. I thus construe the
words, “They came, every one, as his heart stirred each of them up,” as
if he had said that they were not compelled by any law imposed upon
them, but that every one was his own lawgiver, of his own good-will.
This passage is absurdly twisted by the Papists in proof of free-will;
as if men were incited by themselves to act rightly and well; for Moses,
even while praising their spontaneous feelings, does not mean to exclude
the grace of the Spirit, whereby alone our hearts are inclined to holy
affections; but this stirring up is contrasted with the unwillingness by
which ungodly men are withheld and restrained. Those, therefore, whom
the Spirit rules, He does not drag unwillingly by a violent and
extrinsic impulse, as it is called, but He so works within them upon
their will, that believers stir up themselves, and they voluntarily
follow His leadings. So that when it is added, “whose spirit was liberal
in himself,”  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) the commencement
of well-doing is not ascribed to men, nor is even their concurrence
praised, as if they co-operated apart from God, but only the internal
impulse of their minds, and the sincerity of their desires·

<span id="vi.ii-p41"></span><span id="vi.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p42"></span>**22.** *And they came, both men and women*.
Express mention is made of the women, not only whose bounty, but whose
labors, as it soon afterwards appears, God designed to make use of in
the work of the sanctuary. Moses magnifies the fervor of their pious
desires, because they did not spare their ornaments; of which people,
and especially women, are generally so fond, that they would rather
suffer cold, hunger, or thirst, than touch them.  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) It was, therefore, a sign of no
ordinary zeal to deprive themselves of their rings and bracelets, which
many are so slow to part with, even when they are dying of hunger.
Again, the contribution of those is praised who gave brass, iron,
shittim-wood, and rams’ skins; so that the poor might not doubt but
that, although their ability might not be equal to their wishes, the
offering, which they presented willingly in their poverty, was no less
acceptable to God than when the rich man of his abundance gave what was
a hundred times more valuable.

<span id="vi.ii-p44"></span><span id="vi.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p45"></span>**30.** *See, the Lord hath called by name
Bezaleel*. This was a great stimulus to encourage them, when they
plainly saw that God presided over the work; a conspicuous proof of
which was that new and extraordinary power wherewith Bezaleel and
Aboliab were endued; for although they had before been noble and
excellent artificers, still there is no doubt but that they were still
further endowed with higher gifts, even to a miracle. Hence it is not
without cause that he bids the people attend to this unexpected exertion
of God’s power; since it was exactly as if he had stretched forth His
hand from heaven for the advancement of the work. For which reason also
the tribe of each of them is referred to, because of the conspicuous
excellency of the grace, the memory of which it was fitting to celebrate
in all generations. Now, as God conferred this honor on the architects
of the visible sanctuary, so He declares that their names shall be
glorious in heaven, who, being furnished with the illustrious gifts of
the Spirit, faithfully employ their labors in the building of His
spiritual temple. (<span id="vi.ii-p45.1"></span>[Da
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)<span id="vi.ii-p45.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.ii-p46"></span>By “the wisdom of heart,” both in the men
and women, which is so often mentioned here, understand activity of
mind: for not only is the seat of the affections called the heart, but
also the power and faculty of the intellect as it is called: thus in
<span id="vi.ii-p46.1"></span>[De
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004)<span id="vi.ii-p46.1"></span>, it
is said, “Yet the Lord hath not given you a heart to understand.”  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294)

<span id="vi.ii-p48"></span><span id="vi.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p49"></span>**31.** *And he hath filled him with the
spirit of God*. He again magnifies at greater length the excellence of
genius and ability, (which had been given to Bezaleel.)  <span
id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) For it was a remarkable instance of
God’s power, that, after the Israelites had been so contemptuously and
oppressively enslaved, there should exist in their nation men still
endowed with such talent. God is said to have “filled him with the
Spirit of God,” *i* *e*., with the Divine Spirit; in order that we may
understand that these endowments were not natural to the man, nor even
acquired by his own industry. For although even the gifts of nature
proceed from the Spirit of God, who gives their intellect to all men no
less than their life; still the distribution of peculiar gifts is
conspicuous in a higher and different degree. Besides, God had regard to
the exquisite nature of this work, so as to endow these artificers with
wonderful and extraordinary ability. The faculty of teaching is also
added, because two persons by themselves would never have completed so
arduous a work in their whole life-time: and this capacity, too, was the
gift of Divine grace; for else they would never have overcome the
fatigue of instructing the ignorant, nor would have so speedily prepared
such a great multitude of men for fashioning the various parts of the
work with incredible symmetry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc05049.htm#fr_291) <span
id="vi.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p38"></span> See vol. 2, p. 143, and note.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc05049.htm#fr_292) <span
id="vi.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p40"></span> “Every one, whom his spirit made willing.”
— *A*.*V*.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc05049.htm#fr_293) <span
id="vi.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p43"></span> Addition in *­Fr*., “Pour s’en defaire;” to
deprive themselves of them.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc05049.htm#fr_294) <span
id="vi.ii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p47"></span> “To perceive.” — *A*.*V*. See *ante*, vol.
1, p. 390, and vol. 2, p. 441.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc05049.htm#fr_295) <span
id="vi.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p50"></span> Added from *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus 36:1-38](cc05050)
