[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08016)  [Next](cc08018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>PSALM 12.

<span id="xviii-p2"></span>David, deploring the wretched and forlorn
condition of his people, and the utter overthrow of good order,
beseeches God to afford them speedy relief. Then, in order to comfort
both himself and all the godly, after having mentioned God’s promise of
assisting his people, he magnifies his faithfulness and constancy in
performing his promises. From this he concludes, that at length God will
deliver the godly, even when the world may be in a state of the greatest
corruption.  <span id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252)

<span id="xviii-p4"></span>To the chief musician upon the eighth. A song
of David.

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Save me, O Jehovah; for the merciful
man hath failed, and the faithful are wasted away from among the
children of men, **2.** Every one speaketh deceit \[or falsehood\] with
his neighbor; they speak with lips of flattery, with a double heart.
 <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253)

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span><span id="xviii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>*To the chief musician upon the eighth.*
With respect to the word *eighth,* there are two opinions among
interpreters. According to some, it means a musical instrument; while
others are rather inclined to think that it is a tune. But as it is of
no great importance which of these opinions is adopted, I do not trouble
myself much about this matter. The conjecture of some, that it was the
beginning of a song, does not seem to me to be so probable as that it
refers to the tune, and was intended to point out how the psalm was to
be sung.  <span id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254) In the commencement
David complains that the land was so overspread with wicked men, and
persons who had broken forth into the commission of every kind of
wickedness, that the practice of righteousness and justice had ceased,
and none was found to defend the cause of the good; in short, that there
remained no longer either humanity or faithfulness. It is probable that
the Psalmist here speaks of the time when Saul persecuted him, because
then all, from the highest to the lowest, had conspired to destroy an
innocent and an afflicted man. It is a thing very distressing to relate,
and yet it was perfectly true, that righteousness was so utterly
overthrown among the chosen people of God, that all of them, with one
consent, from their hostility to a good and just cause, had broken forth
into acts of outrage and cruelty. David does not here accuse strangers
or foreigners, but informs us that this deluge of iniquity prevailed in
the Church of God. Let the faithful, therefore in our day, not be unduly
discouraged at the melancholy sight of a very corrupt and confused state
of the world; but let them consider that they ought to bear it
patiently, seeing their condition is just like that of David in time
past. And it is to be observed, that, when David calls upon God for
succor, he encourages himself in the hope of obtaining it from this,
that there was no uprightness among men; so that from his example we may
learn to betake ourselves to God when we see nothing around us but black
despair. We ought to be fully persuaded of this, that the greater the
confusion of things in the world is, God is so much the readier to aid
and succor his people,  <span id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255) and that
it is then the most proper season for him to interpose his assistance.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**1.** *The merciful man hath failed.* Some
think that this is a complaint that the righteous had been unjustly put
to death; as if the Psalmist had said, Saul has cruelly cut off all who
observed justice and faithfulness. But I would understand the words in a
simpler sense, as meaning that there is no longer any beneficence or
truth remaining among men. He has expressed in these two words in what
true righteousness consists. As there are two kinds of unrighteousness,
violence and deceit; so men live righteously when, in their intercourse
with each other, they conscientiously abstain from doing any wrong or
injury to one another, and cultivate peace and mutual friendship; when
they are neither lions nor foxes. When, however, we see the world in
such a state of disorder as is here described, and are afflicted
thereby, we ought to be careful not to howl with the wolves, nor to
suffer ourselves to be carried away with the dissipation and overflowing
flood of iniquity which we see prevailing around us, but should rather
imitate the example of David.

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span><span id="xviii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>**2.** *Every man speaketh deceit.* David
in this verse sets forth that part of unrighteousness which is contrary
to truth. He says that there is no sincerity or uprightness in their
speech, because the great object upon which they are bent is to deceive.
He next describes the manner in which they deceive, namely, that every
man endeavors to ensnare his neighbor by *flattery*  <span
id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256) He also points out the fountain and
first cause of this, *They speak with a double heart.* This doubleness
of heart, as I may term it, makes men double and variable in their
speech, in order thereby to disguise themselves in different ways,
 <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) or to make themselves appear to
others different from what they really are. Hence the Hebrew word <span
id="xviii.i-p13.2"></span>חלקות, *chalakoth,* which denotes flattery, is
derived from a word which signifies *division.* As those who are
resolved to act truthfully in their intercourse with their neighbors,
freely and ingenuously lay open their whole heart; so treacherous and
deceitful persons keep a part of their feeling hidden within their own
breasts, and cover it with the varnish of hypocrisy and a fair outside;
so that from their speech we cannot gather any thing certain with
respect to their intentions. Our speech, therefore, must be sincere in
order that it may be as it were a mirror, in which the uprightness of
our heart may be beheld.

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
12:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)<span id="xviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Let Jehovah cut off all flattering
tips, and the tongue that speaketh great \[or proud\] things: **4.**
Those who have said we will be strengthened by our tongues; our lips are
in our own power: who is lord over us?

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p5"></span>To his complaint in the preceding verse he
now subjoins an imprecation, that God would cut off deceitful tongues.
It is uncertain whether he wishes that deceitful men may be utterly
destroyed, or only that the means of doing mischief may be taken from
them; but the scope of the passage leads us rather to adopt the first
sense, and to view David as desiring that God, by some means or other,
would remove that plague out of the way. As he makes no mention of
malice, while he inveighs so vehemently against their envenomed tongues,
we hence conclude, that he had suffered much more injury from the latter
than from the former; and certainly falsehood and calumnies are more
deadly than swords and all other kind of weapons. From the second clause
of the third verse it appears more clearly what kind of flatterers they
were of whom mention was made in the preceding verse: *The tongue that
speaketh great or proud things.* Some flatter in a slavish and fulsome
manner, declaring that they are ready to do and suffer any thing which
they possibly can for our benefit. But David here speaks of another kind
of flatterers, namely, those who in flattering proudly boast of what
they will accomplish, and mingle base effrontery and threatening with
their deceitful arts. He does not, therefore, speak of the herd of mean
conceited persons among the common people who make a trade of
flattering, that they may live at other people’s expense;  <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) but he points his imprecation against
the great calumniators of the court to which he was attached,  <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) who not only insinuated themselves by
gentle arts, but also lied designedly in boasting of themselves, and in
the big and haughty discourse with which they overwhelmed the poor and
simple.  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)

<span id="xviii.ii-p9"></span><span id="xviii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p10"></span>This the Psalmist confirms more fully in
the following verse: *Who have said, we will be strengthened by our
tongues* Those must be possessed of great authority who think that, in
the very falsehood to which they are addicted, they have enough of
strength to accomplish their purposes, and to protect themselves. It is
the utmost height of wickedness for persons to break out into such
presumption, that they scruple not to overthrow all law and equity by
their arrogant and boasting language; for, in doing this, it is just as
if they openly declared war against God himself. Some read, *we will
strengthen our tongues.* This reading is passable, in so far as the
sense is concerned, but it scarcely agrees with the rules of grammar,
because the letter <span id="xviii.ii-p10.1"></span>ל, *lamed,* is
added. Moreover, the sense which is more suitable is this: that the
wicked persons spoken of being armed with their tongues, go beyond all
bounds, and think they can accomplish by this means whatever they
please; just as this set of men so deform every thing with their
calumnies, that they would almost cover the sun himself with darkness.

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)<span
id="xviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p2"></span>**5.** Because of the spoiling  <span
id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) of the needy, because of the groaning
of the poor, I will now arise, Jehovah will say; I will set in safety
him whom he snareth.  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) **6.** The
words of Jehovah are pure words: silver melted in an excellent crucible
of earth, purified seven times.

<span id="xviii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p7"></span>**5.** *Because of the spoiling of the
needy.* David now sets before himself as matter of consolation, the
truth that God will not suffer the wicked thus to make havoc without end
and measure. The more effectually to establish himself and others in the
belief of this truth, he introduces God himself as speaking. The
expression is more emphatic when God is represented as coming forward
and declaring with his own mouth that he is come to deliver the poor and
distressed. There is also great emphasis in the adverb *now,* by which
God intimates that, although our safety is in his hand, and, therefore,
in secure keeping, yet he does not immediately grant deliverance from
affliction; for his words imply that he had hitherto been, as it were,
lying still and asleep, until he was awakened by the calamities and the
cries of his people. When, therefore, the injuries, the extortions, and
the devastations of our enemies leave us nothing but tears and groans,
let us remember that now the time is at hand when God intends to rise up
to execute judgment. This doctrine should also serve to produce in us
patience, and prevent us from taking it ill, that we are reckoned among
the number of the poor and afflicted, whose cause God promises to take
into his own hand.

<span id="xviii.iii-p8"></span>With respect to the meaning of the second
clause of the verse, expositors differ. According to some, *to set in
safety,* means the same thing as *to give or bring safety,* as if the
letter <span id="xviii.iii-p8.1"></span>ב, *beth,* which signifies *in,*
were superfluous. But the language rather contains a promise to grant to
those who are unjustly oppressed, full restitution. What follows is
attended with more difficulty. The word <span
id="xviii.iii-p8.2"></span>פוה, *phuach,* which we have rendered *to lay
snares for,* sometimes signifies *to blow out,* or *to puff,* — at other
times *to ensnare,* or *to lay snares for;* and sometimes, also, to
*speak.* Those who think it is here put for *to speak* also differ among
themselves with respect to the meaning. Some render it *God will speak
to himself;* that is to say, God will determine with himself; but as the
Psalmist had already declared the determination of God, this would be an
unnecessary and vain repetition. Others refer it to the language of the
godly, as if David introduced them speaking one to another concerning
the faithfulness and stability of the promises of God; for with this
word they connect the following sentence, *The words of the Lord are
pure words, etc* But this view is even more strained than the preceding.
The opinion of others, who suppose, that to the determination of God *to
arise,* there is subjoined the language which is addressed to the godly,
is more admissible. It would not be sufficient for God to determine with
himself what he would do for our safety, if he did not speak to us
expressly, and by name. It is only when God makes us to understand, by
his own voice, that he will be gracious to us, that we can entertain the
hope of salvation. God, it is true, speaks also to unbelievers, but
without producing any good effect, seeing they are deaf; just as when he
treats them with gentleness and liberality, it is without effect,
because they are stupid, and devour his benefits without any sense of
their coming from him. But as I perceive that under the word <span
id="xviii.iii-p8.3"></span>יאמר, *yomar, will say,* the promises of God
may be suitably and properly comprehended, to avoid a repetition of the
same thing, I adopt without hesitation the sense of the last clause,
which I have given in the translation, namely, that God declares he will
arise to restore to safety those who seem on all sides to be environed
by the snares of their enemies, and even caught in them. The import of
the language is this: The ungodly may hold the poor and afflicted
entangled in their snares as a prey which they have caught; but I will
set them in safety. If it should be replied, that the reading in the
Hebrew is not *for whom,* but *for him,* I would observe, that it is no
new thing for these words, *him, for him,* to be used instead of *whom*
and *for whom.*  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) If any one
prefer the sense of *puffing at,* I am not disposed greatly to oppose
him. According to this reading, David would elegantly taunt the pride of
the ungodly, who confidently imagine they can do any thing,  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) even with their breath, as we have
seen in the tenth psalm, at the fifth verse.

<span id="xviii.iii-p11"></span><span id="xviii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p12"></span>**6.** *The words of Jehovah.* The
Psalmist now declares, that God is sure, faithful, and steadfast in his
promises. But the insertion by the way of this commendation of the word
of God would be to no purpose, if he had not first called himself, and
other believers, to meditate on God’s promises in their afflictions.
Accordingly, the order of the Psalmist is to be attended to, namely,
that, after telling us how God gives to his servants the hope of speedy
deliverance, even in their deepest distresses, he now adds, to support
their faith and hope, that God promises nothing in vain, or for the
purpose of disappointing man. This, at first sight, seems a matter of
small importance; but if any person consider more closely and
attentively how prone the minds of men are to distrust and ungodly
doubtings, he will easily perceive how requisite it is for our faith to
be supported by this assurance, that God is not deceitful, that he does
not delude or beguile us with empty words, and that he does not magnify
beyond all measure either his power or his goodness, but that whatever
he promises in word he will perform in deed. There is no man, it is
true, who will not frankly confess that he entertains the same
conviction which David here records, *that the words of Jehovah are
pure;* but those who while lying in the shade and living at their ease
liberally extol by their praises the truth of God’s word, when they come
to struggle with adversity in good earnest, although they may not
venture openly to pour forth blasphemies against God, often charge him
with not keeping his word. Whenever he delays his assistance, we call in
question his fidelity to his promises and murmur just as if he had
deceived us. There is no truth which is more generally received among
men than that God is true; but there are few who frankly give him credit
for this when they are in adversity. It is, therefore, highly necessary
for us to cut off the occasion of our distrust; and whenever any doubt
respecting the faithfulness of God’s promises steals in upon us, we
ought immediately to lift up against it this shield, that the words of
the Lord are pure. The similitude of *silver,* which the Psalmist
subjoins, is indeed far below the dignity and excellence of so great a
subject; but it is very well adapted to the measure of our limited and
imperfect understanding. Silver, if thoroughly refined, is valued at a
high price amongst us. But we are far from manifesting for the word of
God, the price of which is inestimable, an equal regard; and its purity
is of less account with us than that of a corruptible metal. Yea, a
great many coin mere dross in their own brain, by which to efface or
obscure the brightness which shines in the word of God. The word <span
id="xviii.iii-p12.2"></span>בעליל, *baälil,* which we have translated
*crucible,* is interpreted by many *prince,* or *lord, as if* it were a
simple word. According to them, the meaning would be, that the word of
God is like the purest silver, from which the dross has been completely
removed with the greatest art and care, not for common use, but for the
service of a great lord or prince of some country. I, however, rather
agree with others who consider that <span
id="xviii.iii-p12.3"></span>בעליל, *baälil,* is a word compounded of the
letter <span id="xviii.iii-p12.4"></span>ב, *beth,* which signifies
*in,* and the noun <span id="xviii.iii-p12.5"></span>עליל, *alil,* which
signifies a clean or well polished vessel or crucible.

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
12:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)<span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>**7.** Thou, O Jehovah, wilt keep them;
thou wilt preserve him from this generation for ever. **8.** The ungodly
walk about on every side; when they are exalted, there is reproach to
the children of men.

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span>**7.** *Thou, O Jehovah.* Some think that
the language of the Psalmist here is that of renewed prayer; and they,
therefore, understand the words as expressive of his desire, and
translate them in the optative mood, thus, *Do thou, O Jehovah, keep
them*  <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) But I am rather of
opinion that David, animated with holy confidence, boasts of the certain
safety of all the godly, of whom God, who neither can deceive nor lie,
avows himself to be the guardian. At the same time, I do not altogether
disapprove of the interpretation which views David as renewing his
supplications at the throne of grace. Some give this exposition of the
passage, *Thou wilt keep them,* namely, *thy words;*  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) but this does not seem to me to be
suitable.  <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) David, I have no
doubt, returns to speak of the poor, of whom he had spoken in the
preceding part of the psalm. With respect to his changing the number,
(for, he says first, *Thou wilt keep them,* and, next, *Thou wilt
preserve him*  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) it is a thing
quite common in Hebrew, and the sense is not thereby rendered ambiguous.
These two sentences, therefore, *Thou wilt keep them,* and *Thou wilt
preserve him,* signify the same thing, unless, perhaps, we may say that,
in the second, under the person of one man, the Psalmist intends to
point out the small number of good men. To suppose this is not
unreasonable or improbable; and, according to this view, the import of
his language is, Although only one good man should be left alive in the
world, yet he would be kept in perfect safety by the grace and
protection of God. But as the Jews, when they speak generally, often
change the number, I leave my readers freely to form their own judgment.
This, indeed, cannot be controverted, that by the word *generation,* or
*race,* is denoted a great multitude of ungodly persons, and almost the
whole body of the people. As the Hebrew word <span
id="xviii.iv-p9.2"></span>דור, *dor,* signifies as well the men who live
in the same age, as the space of time itself, David, without doubt, here
means that the servants of God cannot escape, and continue safe, unless
God defend them against the malice of the whole people, and deliver them
from the wicked and perverse men of the age in which they live. Whence
we learn that the world, at that time, was so corrupt, that David, by
way of reproach, puts them all, as it were, into one bundle. Moreover,
it is of importance again to remember what we have already stated, that
he does not here speak of foreign nations, but of the Israelites, and
God’s chosen people. It is well to mark this carefully, that we may not
be discouraged by the vast multitude of the ungodly, if we should
sometimes see an immense heap of chaff upon the barn-floor of the Lord,
while only a few grains of corn lie hidden underneath. And then, however
small may be the number of the good, let this persuasion be deeply fixed
in our minds, that God will be their protector, and that for ever. The
word <span id="xviii.iv-p9.3"></span>לעולם, *leolam,* which signifies
*for ever,* is added, that we may learn to extend our confidence in God
far into the future, seeing he commands us to hope for succor from him,
not only once, or for one day, but as long as the wickedness of our
enemies continues its work of mischief. We are, however, from this
passage, at the same time, admonished that war is not prepared against
us for a short time only, but that we must daily engage in the conflict.
And if the guardianship which God exercises over the faithful is
sometimes hidden, and is not manifest in its effects, let them wait in
patience until he arise; and the greater the flood of calamities which
overflows them, let them keep themselves so much the more in the
exercise of godly fear and solicitude.

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p11"></span>**8.** *The ungodly walk about on every
side.* The Hebrew word <span id="xviii.iv-p11.1"></span>סביב, *sabib,*
which we have translated *on every side,* signifies *a circuit,* or *a
going round;* and, therefore, some explain it allegorically thus: the
ungodly seize upon all the defiles or narrow parts of roads, in order to
shut up or besiege the good on all sides; and others expound it even
more ingeniously, thus: that they lay snares by indirect means, and by
inventions full of art and deception. But I think the simple meaning is,
that they possess the whole land, and range about through every part of
it; as if the Psalmist had said, Wherever I turn my eyes, I see troops
of them on every side. In the next clause he complains that mankind are
shamefully and basely oppressed by their tyranny. This is the meaning,
provided the clause is read as a distinct one by itself, separate from
the preceding, a point about which interpreters differ, although this
view seems to come nearer to the mind of the inspired writer. Some
render the verse in one continuous sentence, thus: *The ungodly fly
about every where, when the reproaches among the children of men* (that
is to say, when the worthless and the refuse of men) *are exalted,* an
exposition which is not unsuitable. It commonly happens, that as
diseases flow from the head into the members, so corruptions proceed
from princes, and infect the whole people. As, however, the former
exposition is more generally received, and the most learned grammarians
tell us that the Hebrew word <span id="xviii.iv-p11.2"></span>זלות,
*zuluth,* which we have translated *reproach,* is a noun of the singular
number, I have adopted the former exposition, not that I am dissatisfied
with the latter, but because we must needs choose the one or the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_252"></span>[253](cc08017.htm#fr_252) <span
id="xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii-p3"></span> “<span id="xviii-p3.1"></span>Voire au temps
mesmes qu’il n’y aura roy ni equite au monde.” — *Fr*. “Even when there
is neither faith nor equity in the world.”

<span id="fn_253"></span>[254](cc08017.htm#fr_253) <span
id="xviii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span> Calvin’s words literally rendered are,
*with a heart and a heart,* and this is a very literal translation of
the Hebrew words <span id="xviii.i-p3.1"></span>בלב ולב, *be-leb
va-leb.* On the margin of the French version, he reads, “<span
id="xviii.i-p3.2"></span>De coeur double,” *“with a double heart,”*
which explains the meaning of the other phrase. “With a heart and a
heart,” is a form of expression which forcibly describes the character
of deceitful men. “They seem to have *two hearts,”* says *Dr Adam
Clarke*, “one to speak fair words, and the *other* to invent mischief.”

<span id="fn_254"></span>[255](cc08017.htm#fr_254) <span
id="xviii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p7.1"></span>Et que
c’est pour exprimer comment se devoir chanter le pseaume.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[256](cc08017.htm#fr_255) <span
id="xviii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p8.1"></span>Tant plus
Dieu est prest d’aider et secourir les siens.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[257](cc08017.htm#fr_256) <span
id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span> *Horsley* reads “smooth lips.” “Not
smooth,” says he, “with flattery, but with *glossing lies,* with
ensnaring eloquence and specious arguments in support of the wretched
cause which they espouse.”

<span id="fn_257"></span>[258](cc08017.htm#fr_257) <span
id="xviii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p13.1"></span>Pour se
disguiser en diverses sortes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[259](cc08017.htm#fr_258) <span
id="xviii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p6.1"></span>Il ne
parle donc pas d’un tas de faquins du commun peuple, qui sont estat de
flatter pour avoir la lippee franche.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[260](cc08017.htm#fr_259) <span
id="xviii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p7"></span> “The occasion on which this psalm was
composed is not expressed, but it is a sad complaint of the corrupt
manners of that age, (especially of the court of Saul, 5:3,) in which it
was hard to find an honest plain dealing man, in whom one might confide.
Some think it aims partly at Doeg, and such like courtiers; partly at
the Ziphires, and such perfidious people in the country, who, promising
him their friendship, (as *Theodoret* understands it,) would have most
basely betrayed him unto Saul, his declared *enemy.”* — *Bishop
Patrick’s Paraphrase on the Book of Psalms.*

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc08017.htm#fr_260) <span
id="xviii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xviii.ii-p8.1"></span>Mais qui
mentent plaisir en se vantans et tenans propos braves et hautains,
desquels ils accablent les poures et simples.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc08017.htm#fr_261) <span
id="xviii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p3"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p3.1"></span>Oppression.” — Fr.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc08017.htm#fr_262) <span
id="xviii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p4.1"></span>Celuy
a qui le roeschant tend des laqs.” — *Fr*. “Him for whom the wicked lays
snares.” *Hebrews* “<span id="xviii.iii-p4.2"></span>Il luy tend des
laqs.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “I will set in safety; he lays snares for him.”

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc08017.htm#fr_263) <span
id="xviii.iii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xviii.iii-p9.1"></span>Et
quant a ce qu’on pourroit repliequer qu’il n’y a pas en l’Hebrieu A qui,
mais Luy, ce n’est pas chose nouvelle que ces mots Le, Luy se prenent
pour Qui et A qui.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc08017.htm#fr_264) <span
id="xviii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p10"></span> “<span
id="xviii.iii-p10.1"></span>Qu’ils renverseront tout k soufiler
seulement.” — *Fr*. “That they shall overthrow all simply by their
breath.”

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc08017.htm#fr_265) <span
id="xviii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p6.1"></span>Que tu
les gardes, Seigneur.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc08017.htm#fr_266) <span
id="xviii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span> This is the view adopted by *Hammond*. He
refers the *them* to *the words of the Lord* mentioned in the preceding
verse, and the *him* following to the godly, or just man, and explains
the verse thus: ”Thou, O Lord, shalt keep, or perform, those words, thou
shalt preserve the just man from this generation for ever.” The Chaldee
version reads, “Thou wilt keep the just;” the Septuagint, Vulgate,
Arabic, and Ethiopic versions read, “Thou wilt keep us;”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc08017.htm#fr_267) <span
id="xviii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p8.1"></span>Mais
quant a ceux qui elisent, *Tu les garderas*, as avoir *Tes paroles*;
l’exposition ne me semble pas propre.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc08017.htm#fr_268) <span
id="xviii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="xviii.iv-p9.1"></span>Car il
dit premierement, *Tu les garderas;* et puis*, Tu le preserveras.”* —
*Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 13](cc08018)
