[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08006)  [Next](cc08008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>PSALM 2

<span id="viii-p2"></span>David boasts that his kingdom, though assailed
by a vast multitude of powerful enemies, would, notwithstanding, be
perpetual, because it was upheld by the hand and power of God. He adds,
that in spite of his enemies, it would be extended even to the uttermost
ends of the earth. And, therefore, he exhorts kings and other rulers to
lay aside their pride, and receive, with submissive minds, the yoke laid
upon them by God; as it would be vain for them to attempt to shake it
off. All this was typical and contains a prophecy concerning the future
kingdom of Christ.

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Why do the nations rise tumultuously,
and the peoples murmur in vain? **2.** The kings of the earth have
confederated, and the princes have assembled together, against Jehovah
and against his Christ. **3.** Let us break of their bonds, and cast
away their yoke from us.

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span><span id="viii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>WE know how many conspired against David,
and endeavored to prevent his coming to the throne, and from their
hostile attempts, had he judged according to the eye of sense and
reason, he might have been so full of apprehension, as forthwith to have
given up all hope of ever becoming king. And, doubtless, he had often to
struggle sorrowfully with very grievous temptations. But, as he had the
testimony of an approving conscience, that he had attempted nothing
rashly nor acted as ambition and depraved desire impel many to seek
changes in the government of kingdoms; as he was, on the contrary,
thoroughly persuaded that he had been made king by divine appointment,
when he coveted no such thing, nor even thought of it;  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) he encouraged himself by strong
confidence in God against the whole world, just as in these words, he
nobly pours contempt both on kings and their armies. He confesses,
indeed, that he had a sore battle to fight, inasmuch as it was no small
party, but whole nations with their kings, who had conspired against
him; but he courageously boasts that their attempts were vain, because
they waged war, not against mortal man, but against God himself. It is
not certain from the words, whether he speaks only of enemies in his own
kingdom, or extends his complaints to foreign invaders. But, since the
fact was, that enemies rose up against him in all quarters, and that as
soon as he had settled the disturbances among his own people, the
neighboring states, in their turn, became hostile to him, I am disposed
to think that both classes of enemies are meant, Gentiles as well as
Jews. It would be a strange mode of expression to speak of many nations
and people when only one nation was meant, and to speak of many kings
when he had in eye Saul only. Besides, it agrees better with the
completeness of the type to suppose that different kinds of enemies were
joined together; for we know that Christ had not only to do with enemies
in his own country, but likewise with enemies in other nations; the
whole world having entered into a common conspiracy to accomplish his
destruction. The Jews, indeed, first began to rage against Christ as
they had formerly done against David; but afterwards the same species of
madness seized upon other nations. The sum is, that although those who
endeavored to overthrow him might be strengthened by powerful armies,
yet their tumults and counsels would prove vain and ineffectual.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>By attributing to the people commotion and
uproar, and to kings and rulers the holding of assemblies, to take
counsel, he has used very appropriate language. Yet he intimates that,
when kings have long and much consulted together, and the people have
poured forth their utmost fury, all of them united would make nothing of
it. But we ought carefully to mark the ground of such confidence, which
was, that he had not thrust himself forward to be king rashly, or of his
own accord, but only followed the call of God. From this he concludes,
that in his person God was assailed; and God could not but show himself
the defender of the kingdom of which he was the founder. By honoring
himself with the title of Messias, or the Anointed, he declares that he
reigned only by the authority and command of God, inasmuch as the oil
brought by the hand of Samuel made him king who before was only a
private person. David’s enemies did not, indeed, think they were making
a violent attack against God, yea, they would resolutely deny their
having any such intention; yet it is not without reason that David
places God in opposition to them, and speaks as if they directly
levelled their attacks against him, for by seeking to undermine the
kingdom which he had erected, they blindly and ferociously waged war
against Him. If all those are rebels against God who resist the powers
ordained by him, much more does this apply to that sacred kingdom which
was established by special privilege.

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>But it is now high time to come to the
substance of the type. That David prophesied concerning Christ, is
clearly manifest from this, that he knew his own kingdom to be merely a
shadow. And in order to learn to apply to Christ whatever David, in
times past, sang concerning himself, we must hold this principle, which
we meet with everywhere in all the prophets, that he, with his
posterity, was made king, not so much for his own sake as to be a type
of the Redeemer. We shall often have occasion to return to this
afterwards, but at present I would briefly inform my readers that as
David’s temporal kingdom was a kind of earnest to God’s ancient people
of the eternal kingdom, which at length was truly established in the
person of Christ, those things which David declares concerning himself
are not violently, or even allegorically, applied to Christ, but were
truly predicted concerning him. If we attentively consider the nature of
the kingdom, we will perceive that it would be absurd to overlook the
end or scope, and to rest in the mere shadow. That the kingdom of Christ
is here described by the spirit of prophecy, is sufficiently attested to
us by the apostles, who, seeing the ungodly conspiring against Christ,
arm themselves in prayer with this doctrine, (<span
id="viii.i-p8.1"></span>[Ac 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i-p8.1"></span>.) But to place our faith beyond the reach of
all cavils, it is plainly made manifest from all the prophets, that
those things which David testified concerning his own kingdom are
properly applicable to Christ. Let this, therefore, be held as a settled
point, that all who do not submit themselves to the authority of Christ
make war against God. Since it seems good to God to rule us by the hand
of his own Son, those who refuse to obey Christ himself deny the
authority of God, and it is in vain for them to profess otherwise. For
it is a true saying,

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span>“He that honoureth not the Son, honoureth
not the  
Father which hath sent him,” (<span id="viii.i-p9.2"></span>[Joh
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="viii.i-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>And it is of great importance to hold fast
this inseparable connection, that as the majesty of God hath shone forth
in his only begotten Son, so the Father will not be feared and
worshipped but in his person.

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span>A twofold consolation may be drawn from
this passage:— First, as often as the world rages, in order to disturb
and put an end to the prosperity of Christ’s kingdom, we have only to
remember that, in all this there is just a fulfillment of what was long
ago predicted, and no changes that can happen will greatly disquiet us.
Yea, rather it will be highly profitable to us to compare those things
which the apostles experienced with what we witness at the present time.
Of itself the kingdom of Christ would be peaceable, and from it true
peace issues forth to the world; but through the wickedness and malice
of men, never does it rise from obscurity into open view without
disturbances being excited. Nor is it at all wonderful, or unusual, if
the world begin to rage as soon as a throne is erected for Christ. The
other consolation which follows is, that when the ungodly have mustered
their forces, and when, depending on their vast numbers, their riches,
and their means of defense, they not only pour forth their proud
blasphemies, but furiously assault heaven itself, we may safely laugh
them to scorn, relying on this one consideration, that he whom they are
assailing is the God who is in heaven. When we see Christ well nigh
overwhelmed with the number and strength of his enemies, let us remember
that they are making war against God over whom they shall not prevail,
and therefore their attempts, whatever they may be, and however
increasing, will come to naught, and be utterly ineffectual. Let us
learn, farther, that this doctrine runs through the whole gospel; for
the prayer of the apostles which I have just quoted, manifestly
testifies that it ought not to be restricted to the person of Christ.

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span><span id="viii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>**3.** *Let us break,* *etc*. This is a
prosopopoeia,  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) in which the prophet
introduces his-enemies as speaking; and he employs this figure the
better to express their ungodly and traitorous design. Not that they
openly avowed themselves rebels against God, (for they rather covered
their rebellion under every possible pretext, and presumptuously boasted
of having God on their side;) but since they were fully determined, by
all means, fair or foul, to drive David from the throne, whatever they
professed with the mouth, the whole of their consultation amounted to
this, how they might overthrow the kingdom which God himself had set up.
When he describes his government under the metaphorical expressions of
bonds, and a yoke, on the persons of his adversaries, he indirectly
condemns their pride. For he represents them speaking scornfully of his
government, as if to submit to it were a slavish and shameful
subjection, just as we see it is with all the enemies of Christ who,
when compelled to be subject to his authority reckon it not less
degrading than if the utmost disgrace were put upon them.

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** He who dwelleth in heaven will laugh
at them; the Lord  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) will have them
in derision. **5.** Then will he speak to them in his wrath, and vex
them in his sore displeasure. **6.** I have anointed my King upon my
holy hill of Sion.

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span><span id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span>After David has told us of the tumult and
commotions, the counsels and pride, the preparation and resources the
strength and efforts of his enemies, in opposition to all these he
places the power of God alone, which he concludes would be brought to
bear against them, from their attempting to frustrate his decree. And,
as a little before, by terming them *kings of the earth,* he expressed
their feeble and perishable condition; so now, by the lofty title of *He
that dwelleth in heaven,* he extols the power of God, as if he had said,
that power remains intact and unimpaired, whatever men may attempt
against it. Let them exalt themselves as they may, they shall never be
able to reach to heaven; yea, while they think to confound heaven and
earth together, they resemble so many grasshoppers, and the Lord,
meanwhile, undisturbed beholds from on high their infatuated evolutions.
And David ascribes laughter to God on two accounts; first, to teach us
that he does not stand in need of great armies to repress the rebellion
of wicked men, as if this were an arduous and difficult matter, but, on
the contrary, could do this as often as he pleases with the most perfect
ease. In the second place, he would have us to understand that when God
permits the reign of his Son to be troubled, he does not cease from
interfering because he is employed elsewhere, or unable to afford
assistance, or because he is neglectful of the honor of his Son; but he
purposely delays the inflictions of his wrath to the proper time,
namely, until he has exposed their infatuated rage to general derision.
Let us, therefore, assure ourselves that if God does not immediately
stretch forth his hand against the ungodly, it is now his time of
laughter; and although, in the meantime, we ought to weep, yet let us
assuage the bitterness of our grief, yea, and wipe away our tears, with
this reflection, that God does not connive at the wickedness of his
enemies, as if from indolence or feebleness, but because for the time he
would confront their insolence with quiet contempt. By the adverb then,
he points to the fit time for exercising judgment, as if he had said,
after the Lord shall have for a time apparently taken no notice of the
malpractices of those who oppose the rule of his Son, he will suddenly
change his course, and show that he retards nothing with greater
abhorrence than such presumption.

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span><span id="viii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span>Moreover, he ascribes speech to God, not
for the purpose of instructing his enemies, but only to convict them of
their madness; indeed, by the term *speak,* he means nothing else than a
manifestation of God’s wrath, which the ungodly do not perceive until
they feel it. The enemies of David thought it would be the easiest thing
in the world for them to destroy one who, coming from a mean shepherd’s
cot, had, in their view,  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)
presumptuously assumed the sovereign power. The prophecy and anointing
of Samuel were, in their estimation, mere ridiculous pretences. But when
God had at length overthrown them, and settled David on the throne, he,
by this act, spoke not so much with his tongue as with his hand, to
manifest himself the founder of David’s kingdom. The Psalmist hereon
then, refers to speaking by actions, by which the Lord, without uttering
a single word, makes manifest his purpose. In like manner, whenever he
defends the kingdom of his Son against the ungodly, by the tokens and
inflictions of his wrath, although he does not speak a single word, yet
in effect he speaks enough to make himself understood.  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) David afterwards, speaking in the name of
God, shows more clearly how his enemies were guilty of wickedly fighting
against God himself in the hatred which they bore towards him whom God
had made king. The sum is this: Wicked men may now conduct themselves as
wickedly as they please, but they shall at length feel what it is to
make war against heaven. The pronoun *I* is also emphatical, by which
God signifies that he is so far exalted above the men of this world,
that the whole mass of them could not possibly obscure his glory in the
least degree. As often, then, as the power of man appears formidable to
us, let us remember how much it is transcended by the power of God. In
these words there is set before us the unchangeable and eternal purpose
of God effectually to defend, even to the end, the kingdom of his Son,
of which he is the founder; and this may well support our faith amidst
the troublous storms of the world. Whatever plots, therefore, men may
form against it, let this one consideration be sufficient to satisfy us,
that they cannot render ineffectual the anointing of God. Mention is
here made of mount Sion in express terms, not because David was first
anointed thereon but because at length, in God’s own time, the truth of
the prophecy was manifested and actually established by the solemn rite
of his consecration. And although David in these words had a regard to
the promise of God, and recalled the attention of himself and others to
it, yet, at the same time, he meant to signify that his own reign is
holy and inseparably connected with the temple of God. But this applies
more appropriately to the kingdom of Christ, which we know to be both
spiritual and joined to the priesthood, and this is the principal part
of the worship of God.

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
2:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**7.** I will declare the decree: The Lord
hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee.
**8.** Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span><span id="viii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span>**7.** *I will declare,* etc. David, to
take away all pretense of ignorance from his enemies, assumes the office
of a preacher in order to publish the decree of God; or at least he
protests that he did not come to the throne without a sure and clear
proof of his calling; as if he had said, I did not, without
consideration, publicly go forward to usurp the kingdom, but I brought
with me the command of God, without which, I would have acted
presumptuously, in advancing myself to such fin honorable station. But
this was more truly fulfilled in Christ, and doubtless, David, under the
influence of the spirit of prophecy, had a special reference to him. For
in this way all the ungodly are rendered inexcusable, because Christ
proved himself to have been endued with lawful power from God, not only
by his miracles, but by the preaching of the gospel. In fact, the very
same testimony resounds through the whole world. The apostles first, and
after them pastors and teachers, bore testimony that Christ was made
King by God the Father; but since they acted as ambassadors in Christ’s
stead, He rightly and properly claims to himself alone whatever was done
by them. Accordingly, Paul (<span id="viii.iii-p5.1"></span>[Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span id="viii.iii-p5.1"></span>)
ascribes to Christ what the ministers of the gospel did in his name. “He
came,” says he, “and preached peace to them that were afar off, and to
them that were nigh.” Hereby, also, the authority of the gospel is
better established because, although it is published by others, it does
not cease to be the gospel of Christ. As often therefore, as we hear the
gospel preached by men, we ought to consider that it is not so much they
who speak, as Christ who speaks by them. And this is a singular
advantage, that Christ lovingly allures us to himself by his own voice,
that we may not by any means doubt of the majesty of his kingdom.

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span>On this account, we ought the more
carefully to beware of wickedly refusing the edict which he publishes,
*Thou art my Son*. David, indeed could with propriety be called the son
of God on account of his royal dignity, just as we know that princes,
because they are elevated above others, are called both gods and the
sons of God. But here God, by the singularly high title with which he
honors David, exalts him not only above all mortal men, but even above
the angels. This the apostle (<span id="viii.iii-p6.1"></span>[Heb
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#005)<span id="viii.iii-p6.1"></span>)
wisely and diligently considers when he tells us this language was never
used with respect to any of the angels. David, individually considered,
was inferior to the angels, but in so far as he represented the person
of Christ, he is with very good reason preferred far above them. By the
Son of God in this place we are therefore not to understand one son
among many, but his only begotten Son, that he alone should have the
pre-eminence both in heaven and on earth. When God says, I have begotten
thee, it ought to be understood as referring to men’s understanding or
knowledge of it; for David was begotten by God when the choice of him to
be king was clearly manifested. The words this day, therefore, denote
the time of this manifestation; for as soon as it became known that he
was made king by divine appointment, he came forth as one who had been
lately begotten of God, since so great an honor could not belong to a
private person. The same explanation is to be given of the words as
applied to Christ. He is not said to be begotten in any other sense than
as the Father bore testimony to him as being his own Son. This passage,
I am aware, has been explained by many as referring to the eternal
generation of Christ; and from the words this day, they have reasoned
ingeniously as if they denoted an eternal act without any relation to
time. But Paul, who is a more faithful and a better qualified
interpreter of this prophecy, in <span id="viii.iii-p6.2"></span>[Ac
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)<span id="viii.iii-p6.2"></span>,
calls our attention to the manifestation of the heavenly glory of Christ
of which I have spoken. This expression, to be begotten, does not
therefore imply that he then began to be the Son of God, but that his
being so was then made manifest to the world. Finally, this begetting
ought not to be understood of the mutual love which exists between the
Father and the Son; it only signifies that He who had been hidden from
the beginning in the sacred bosom of the Father, and who afterwards had
been obscurely shadowed forth under the law, was known to be the Son of
God from the time when he came forth with authentic and evident marks of
Sonship, according to what is said in <span
id="viii.iii-p6.3"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="viii.iii-p6.3"></span>,
“we have seen his glory, as of the only begotten of the Father.” We
must, at the same time, however, bear in mind what Paul teaches, (<span
id="viii.iii-p6.4"></span>[Ro 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span
id="viii.iii-p6.4"></span>) that he was declared to be the Son of God
with power when he rose again from the dead, and therefore what is here
said has a principal allusion to the day of his resurrection. But to
whatever particular time the allusion may be, the Holy Spirit here
points out the solemn and proper time of his manifestation, just as he
does afterwards in these words

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>“This is the day which the Lord hath
made;  
we will rejoice and be glad in it.” (<span id="viii.iii-p7.2"></span>[Ps
118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)<span
id="viii.iii-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span><span id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>**8.** *Ask of me.* Christ, it is true,
besought his Father (<span id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>[Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="viii.iii-p9.1"></span>)
to “glorify him with the glory which he had with him before the world
was;” yet the more obvious meaning is, that the Father will deny nothing
to his Son which relates to the extension of his kingdom to the
uttermost ends of the earth. But, in this wonderful matter, Christ is
introduced as presenting himself before the Father with prayers, in
order to illustrate the free liberality of God in conferring upon men
the honor of constituting his own Son governor over the whole world. As
the eternal Word of God, Christ, it is true, has always had in his hands
by right sovereign authority and majesty, and as such can receive no
accessions thereto; but still he is exalted in human nature, in which he
took upon him the form of a servant. This title, therefore, is not
applied to him only as God, but is extended to the whole person of the
Mediator; for after Christ had emptied himself there was given to him a
name which is above every name, that before him every knee should bow,
(<span id="viii.iii-p9.2"></span>[Php
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="viii.iii-p9.2"></span>)
David, as we know, after having obtained signal victories reigned over a
large extent of territory, so that many nations became tributaries to
him; but what is here said was not fulfilled in him. If we compare his
kingdom with other monarchies it was confined within very narrow
boundaries. Unless, therefore, we suppose this prophecy concerning the
vast extent of kingdom to have been uttered in vain and falsely, we must
apply it to Christ, who alone has subdued the whole world to himself and
embraced all lands and nations under his dominion. Accordingly, here, as
in many other places, the calling of the Gentiles is foretold, to
prevent all from imagining that the Redeemer who was to be sent of God
was king of one nation only. And if we now see his kingdom divided,
diminished, and broken down, this proceeds from the wickedness of men,
which renders them unworthy of being under a reign so happy and so
desirable. But although the ingratitude of men hinders the kingdom of
Christ from prospering it does not render this prediction of none
effect, inasmuch as Christ collects the dispersed remnants of his people
from all quarters, and in the midst of this wretched desolation, keeps
them joined together by the sacred bond of faiths so that not one corner
only, but the whole world is subjected to his authority. Besides,
however insolently the ungodly may act, and however they may reject his
sovereignty, they cannot, by their rebellion, destroy his authority and
power. To this subject also belongs what immediately follows:

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>**9.** Thou shalt break them with a rod of
iron, and dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.

<span id="viii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.iv-p4"></span><span id="viii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p5"></span>This is expressly stated to teach us that
Christ is furnished with power by which to reign even over those who are
averse to his authority, and refuse to obey him. The language of David
implies that all will not voluntarily receive his yoke, but that many
will be stiff-necked and rebellious, whom notwithstanding he shall
subdue by force, and compel to submit to him. It is true, the beauty and
glory of the kingdom of which David speaks are more illustriously
displayed when a willing people run to Christ in the day of his power,
to show themselves his obedient subjects; but as the greater part of men
rise up against him with a violence which spurns all restraint, it was
necessary to add the truth, that this king would prove himself superior
to all such opposition. Of this unconquerable power in war God exhibited
a specimen, primarily in the person of David, who, as we know,
vanquished and overthrew many enemies by force of arms. But the
prediction is more fully verified in Christ, who, neither by sword nor
spear, but by the breath of his mouth, smites the ungodly even to their
utter destruction.

<span id="viii.iv-p6"></span>It may, however, seem wonderful that, while
the prophets in other parts of Scripture celebrate the meekness, the
mercy, and the gentleness of our Lord, he is here described as so
rigorous, austere, and full of terror. But this severe and dreadful
sovereignty is set before us for no other purpose than to strike alarm
into his enemies; and it is not at all inconsistent with the kindness
with which Christ tenderly and sweetly cherishes his own people. He who
shows himself a loving shepherd to his gentle sheep, must treat the wild
beasts with a degree of severity either to convert them from their
cruelty, or effectually to restrain it. Accordingly in <span
id="viii.iv-p6.1"></span>[Ps
110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)<span id="viii.iv-p6.1"></span>,
after a commendation is pronounced upon the obedience of the godly
Christ is immediately armed with power to destroy, in the day of his
wrath, kings and their armies who are hostile to him. And certainly both
these characters are with propriety ascribed to him: for he was sent by
the Father to cheer the poor and the wretched with the tidings of
salvation, to set the prisoners free, to heal the sick, to bring the
sorrowful and afflicted out of the darkness of death into the light of
life, (<span id="viii.iv-p6.2"></span>[Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="viii.iv-p6.2"></span>)
and as, on the other hand, many by their ingratitude, provoke his wrath
against them, he assumes, as it were, a new character, to beat down
their obduracy. It may be asked, what is that iron scepter which the
Father hath put into the hand of Christ, wherewith to break in pieces
his enemies? I answer, The breath of his mouth supplies to him the place
of all other weapons, as I have just now shown from Isaiah. Although,
therefore, Christ move not a finger, yet by his speaking he thunders
awfully enough against his enemies, and destroys them by the rod of his
mouth alone. They may fret and kick, and with the rage of a madman
resist him never so much, but they shall at length be compelled to feel
that he whom they refuse to honor as their king is their judge. In
short, they are broken in pieces by various methods, till they become
his footstool. In what respect the doctrine of the gospel is an iron
rod, may be gathered from Paul’s Epistle to the Corinthians, (<span
id="viii.iv-p6.3"></span>[2Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004)<span id="viii.iv-p6.3"></span>)
where he teaches that the ministers of Christ are furnished with
spiritual weapons to cast down every high thing which exalteth itself
against Christ, etc. I allow that even the faithful themselves may be
offered in sacrifice to God, that he may quicken them by his grace, for
it is meet we should be humbled in the dust, before Christ stretch forth
his hand to save us. But Christ trains his disciples to repentance in
such a way as not to appear terrible to them; on the contrary, by
showing them his shepherd’s rod, he quickly turns their sorrow into joy;
and so far is he from using his iron rod to break them in pieces, that
he rather protects them under the healing shadow of his hand, and
upholds them by his power. When David speaks, therefore, of breaking and
bruising, this applies only to the rebellious and unbelieving who submit
to Christ, not because they have been subdued by repentance, but because
they are overwhelmed with despair. Christ does not, indeed, literally
speak to all men; but as he denounces in his word whatever judgments he
executes upon them, he may be truly said to slay the ungodly man with
the breath of his mouth, (<span id="viii.iv-p6.4"></span>[2Th
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)<span id="viii.iv-p6.4"></span>.)
The Psalmist exposes to shame their foolish pride by a beautiful
similitude; teaching us, that although their obstinacy is harder than
the stones, they are yet more fragile than *earthen vessels.* Since,
however, we do not see the enemies of the Redeemer immediately broken in
pieces, but, on the contrary, the Church herself appears rather to be
like the frail earthen vessel under their iron hammered the godly need
to be admonished to regard the judgments which Christ daily executes as
presages of the terrible ruin which remains for all the ungodly, and to
wait patiently for the last day, when he will utterly consume them by
the flaming fire in which he will come. In the meantime, let us rest
satisfied that he “rules in the midst of his enemies.

<span id="viii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p1"></span><span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)<span id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p2"></span>**10.** And now, O ye kings, be wise; and ye
judges of the earth be instructed. **11.** Serve Jehovah with fear, and
rejoice with trembling.

<span id="viii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="viii.v-p4"></span><span id="viii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p5"></span>David having, as a preacher of the judgments
of God, set forth the vengeance which God would take upon his enemies
proceeds now, in the character of a prophet and teacher, to exhort the
unbelieving to repentance, that they may not, when it is too late, be
compelled to acknowledge, from dire experience, that the divine
threatenings are neither idle nor ineffectual. And he addresses by name
kings and rulers, who are not very easily brought to a submissive state
of mind, and who are, besides, prevented from learning what is right by
the foolish conceit of their own wisdom with which they are puffed up.
And if David spare not even kings themselves, who seem unrestrained by
laws, and exempted from ordinary rules, much more does his exhortation
apply to the common class of men, in order that all, from the highest to
the lowest, may humble themselves before God. By the adverb now, he
signifies the necessity of their speedy repentance, since they will not
always be favored with the like opportunity. Meanwhile, he tacitly gives
them to understand, that it was for their advantage that he warned them,
as there was yet room for repentance provided they made haste. When he
enjoins them to be wise, he indirectly condemns their false confidence
in their own wisdom as if he had said, The beginning of true wisdom is
when a man lays aside his pride, and submits himself to the authority of
Christ. Accordingly, however good an opinion the princes of the world
may have of their own shrewdness, we may be sure they are arrant fools
till they become humble scholars at the feet of Christ. Moreover, he
declares the manner in which they were to be wise, by commanding them to
serve the Lord with fear. By trusting to their elevated station, they
flatter themselves that they are loosed from the laws which bind the
rest of mankind; and the pride of this so greatly blinds them as to make
them think it beneath them to submit even to God. The Psalmist
therefore, tells them, that until they have learned to fear him, they
are destitute of all right understanding. And certainly, since they are
so much hardened by security as to withdraw their obedience from God,
strong measures must at the first be employed to bring them to fear him,
and thus to recover them from their rebelliousness. To prevent them from
supposing that the service to which he calls them is grievous, he
teaches them by the word rejoice how pleasant and desirable it is, since
it furnishes matter of true gladness. But lest they should, according to
their usual way, wax wanton, and, intoxicated with vain pleasures,
imagine themselves happy while they are enemies to God, he exhorts them
farther by the words with fear to an humble and dutiful submission.
There is a great difference between the pleasant and cheerful state of a
peaceful conscience, which the faithful enjoy in having the favor of
God, whom they fear, and the unbridled insolence to which the wicked are
carried, by contempt and forgetfulness of God. The language of the
prophet, therefore, implies, that so long as the proud profligately
rejoice in the gratification of the lusts of the flesh, they sport with
their own destruction, while, on the contrary, the only true and
salutary joy is that which arises from resting in the fear and reverence
of God.

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span>**12.** Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and
ye perish from the way, when  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) his
wrath is kindled in a moment. O blessed are all who put their trust in
him.

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span><span id="viii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span>David expresses yet more distinctly what
kind of fear and service God requires. Since it is the will of God to
reign by the hand of his Son, and since he has engraved on his person
the marks and insignia of his own glory, the proper proof of our
obedience and piety towards him is reverently to embrace his Son, whom
he has appointed king over us, according to the declaration,

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span>“He that honoureth not the Son,  
honoureth not the Father who hath sent him,” (<span
id="viii.vi-p7.2"></span>[Joh
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span id="viii.vi-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span>The term kiss refers to the solemn token or
sign of honor which subjects were wont to yield to their sovereigns. The
sum is, that God is defrauded of his honor if he is slot served in
Christ. The Hebrew word <span id="viii.vi-p8.1"></span>בר Bar, signifies
both a son and an elect person; but in whatever way you take it, the
meaning will remain the same. Christ was truly chosen of the Father, who
has given him all power, that he alone should stand pre-eminent above
both men and angels. On which account also he is said to be “sealed” by
God, (<span id="viii.vi-p8.2"></span>[Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="viii.vi-p8.2"></span>)
because a peculiar dignity was, conferred upon him, which removes him to
a distance from all creatures. Some interpreters expound it, *kiss or
embrace what is pure*,  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) which is a
strange and rather forced interpretation. For my part, I willingly
retain the name of son, which answers well to a former sentence, where
it was said, “Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.”

<span id="viii.vi-p10"></span>What follows immediately after is a
warning to those who despise Christ, that their pride shall not go
unpunished, as if he had said, As Christ is not despised without
indignity being done to the Father, who hath adorned him with his own
glory, so the Father himself will not allow such an invasion of his
sacred rights to pass unpunished. And to teach them to beware of vainly
deceiving themselves with the hope of a lengthened delay, and from their
present ease indulging themselves in vain pleasures, they are plainly
told that his wrath will be kindled *in a moment*. For we see, when God
for a time connives at the wicked, and bears with them, how they abuse
this forbearance, by growing more presumptuous, because they do not
think of his judgments otherwise, than according to sight and feeling.
Some interpreters, I know, explain the Hebrew word <span
id="viii.vi-p10.1"></span>כמעט, *Camoat*, which we have rendered, *in a
moment*, in a different way, namely, that as soon as God’s wrath is
kindled in even a small degree, it will be all over with the reprobate.
But it is more suitable to apply it to time, and to view it as a warning
to the proud not to harden themselves in their stupidity and
indifference, nor flatter themselves from the patience of God, with the
hope of escaping unpunished. Moreover, although this word appears to be
put for the purpose of giving a reason of what goes before,  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) namely, why those who refuse to kiss the
Son shall perish, and although the Hebrew word <span
id="viii.vi-p11.2"></span>כי, *ki*, signifies more frequently *for* than
*when*, yet I am unwilling to depart from the commonly received
translation, and have thought it proper to render the original word by
the adverb *when*, which denotes both the reason and time of what is
predicated. Some explain the phrases, *to perish from the way*, as
meaning, a perverse way, or wicked manner of listing. Others resolve it
thus, lest your way perish, according to that saying of the first psalm,
the way of the ungodly shall perish. But I am rather inclined to attach
to the words a different meaning, and to view them as a denunciation
against the ungodly, by which they are warned that the wrath of God will
cut them off when they think themselves to be only in the middle of
their race. We know how the despisers of God are accustomed to flatter
themselves in prosperity, and run to great excess in riot. The prophet,
therefore, with great propriety, threatens that when they shall say,
Peace and safety, reckoning themselves at a great distance from their
end, they shall be cut off by a sudden destruction, (<span
id="viii.vi-p11.3"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="viii.vi-p11.3"></span>)

<span id="viii.vi-p12"></span>The concluding sentence of the psalm
qualifies what was formerly said concerning the severity of Christ; for
his iron rod and the fiery wrath of God would strike terror into all men
without distinction, unless this comfort had been added. Having,
therefore discoursed concerning the terrible judgment which hangs over
the unbelieving, he now encourages God’s faithful and devout servants to
entertain good hope, by setting forth the sweetness of his grace. Paul
likewise observes the same order, (<span id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>[2Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>)
for having declared that vengeance was in readiness against the
disobedient, he immediately adds addressing himself to believers “When
your obedience is fulfilled.” Now, we understand the meaning of the
Psalmist. As believers might have applied to themselves the severity of
which he makes mention, he opens to them a sanctuary of hope, whither
they may flee, in order not to be overwhelmed by the terror of God’s
wrath;  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) just as Joel (<span
id="viii.vi-p13.2"></span>[Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span id="viii.vi-p13.2"></span>)
also after having summoned the ungodly to the awful judgment-seat of
God, which of itself is terrible to men,  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) immediately subjoins the comfort,
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. For it
appears to me that this exclamation, *Blessed are all they that put
their trust in him,*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) should be
read as a distinct sentence by itself. The pronoun him may be referred
as well to God as to Christ, but, in my judgment, it agrees better with
the whole scope of the psalm to understand it of Christ, whom the
Psalmist before enjoined kings and judges of the earth to kiss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc08007.htm#fr_23) <span
id="viii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span> <span id="viii.i-p6.1"></span>Ne mesme y
pensait. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc08007.htm#fr_24) <span
id="viii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span> A rhetoric figure, in which persons or
things are feigned or supposed to speak; a personification.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc08007.htm#fr_25) <span
id="viii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span> The word in our Hebrew Bibles is *Elohai*;
but is considerable number of MSS, it is *Jehovah*. “The Jews in latter
ages had a superstitious dread of pronouncing the word Jehovah, and
frequently inserted Adonai and Elohim instead of it in their manuscripts
of the Scriptures. But the more ancient MSS. Have Jehovah frequently
where the more modern have Adonai and Elohim. Sixty MSS, of Dr.
Kennicott’s collation and twenty-five of De Rossi’s have Jehovah here.”
— *Street, 2:4*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc08007.htm#fr_26) <span
id="viii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span> <span id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>Il avoit a
Leur avis. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc08007.htm#fr_27) <span
id="viii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span> <span id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>Encore
qu’il ne dise un seul, si est ce qu’en effect il parle assez pour se
faire entendre. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc08007.htm#fr_28) <span
id="viii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span> <span id="viii.vi-p3.1"></span>Ou, car
son; or, for his. — *Fr*. Marg.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc08007.htm#fr_29) <span
id="viii.vi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span> The word <span
id="viii.vi-p9.1"></span>בר, *Bar*, which here signifies son, is also
sometimes used to denote pure, as it is in <span
id="viii.vi-p9.2"></span>[Job
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#004)<span id="viii.vi-p9.2"></span>,
<span id="viii.vi-p9.3"></span>[Ps
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004)<span id="viii.vi-p9.3"></span>
and <span id="viii.vi-p9.4"></span>[Ps
73.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span id="viii.vi-p9.4"></span>.
In this former sense it is a Chaldee word, in the latter it is a Hebrew
one. This rendering, of which Calvin disapproves, is substantially that
of the Septuagint, which reads, <span id="viii.vi-p9.5"></span>δραξασθε
παιδειας, literally, lay hold upon instruction. But as the Arabic
version of the Psalms, which generally follows the Septuagint, has used
here (and in many other places, where the Septuangint has <span
id="viii.vi-p9.6"></span>παιδειας) a word which signifies not only
instruction, but good morals, virtue, Street thinks that the authors of
the Septuangint, by <span id="viii.vi-p9.7"></span>παιδειας, meant good
morals, or virtue in general, and that they understand <span
id="viii.vi-p9.8"></span>בר, *Bar*, as a general expression for the same
thing. The Chaldee, Vulgate, and Ethiopic version, also render <span
id="viii.vi-p9.9"></span>בר, *Bar*, by a word meaning doctrine or
discipline. “This is a remarkable case,” says Dr. Adam Clark, “and
especially that in so pure a piece of Hebrew as this poem is, a Chaldee
word should have been found, <span id="viii.vi-p9.10"></span>בר, *Bar*,
instead of <span id="viii.vi-p9.11"></span>בן, *Ben*, which adds nothing
to the strength of the expression, or the elegance of the poetry. I know
that <span id="viii.vi-p9.12"></span>בר, *Bar*, is also pure Hebrew as
well as Chaldee; but it is taken in the former language in the sense of
purifying, the versions probably understood it so here. Embrace that
which is pure, namely, the doctrine of God.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc08007.htm#fr_30) <span
id="viii.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p11"></span> <span id="viii.vi-p11.1"></span>Pour
rendre raison du precedent ascavoir pour quoy c’est qu’ila periront. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc08007.htm#fr_31) <span
id="viii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p13"></span> <span id="viii.vi-p13.1"></span>Pour
n’estre point accablez de la frayeur d’ire de Dieu. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc08007.htm#fr_32) <span
id="viii.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p14"></span> <span id="viii.vi-p14.1"></span>Qui de
soy est espouvantable aux hommes — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc08007.htm#fr_33) <span
id="viii.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p15"></span> The word <span
id="viii.vi-p15.1"></span>אשרי, *ashre*, which occurs in the beginning
of the psalm, is also used here; and therefore, the word may be
rendered, O the blessednesses of all those who put their trust in him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 3](cc08008)
