[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08026)  [Next](cc08028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxviii"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p1"></span>PSALM 22.

<span id="xxviii-p2"></span>David complains in this psalm, that he is
reduced to such circumstances of distress that he is like a man in
despair. But after having recounted the calamities with which he was so
severely afflicted, he emerges from the abyss of temptations, and
gathering courage, comforts himself with the assurance of deliverance.
At the same time, he sets before us, in his own person, a type of
Christ, who he knew by the Spirit of prophecy behoved to be abased in
marvellous and unusual ways  <span id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493)
previous to his exaltation by the Father. Thus the psalm, in the two
parts of which it consists, explains that prophecy of Isaiah, (<span
id="xxviii-p3.2"></span>[Isa 53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span
id="xxviii-p3.2"></span>,) “He was taken from prison and from judgment:
and who shall declare his generation?”

<span id="xxviii-p4"></span>To the chief musician. Upon the hind of the
morning. A psalm of David.

<span id="xxviii-p5"></span>This inscription is obscure; but
interpreters have needlessly perplexed themselves in seeking after I
know not what sublime mystery in a matter of small importance. Some are
of opinion that the word <span id="xxviii-p5.1"></span>אילת, *ayeleth,*
means *the morning star;*  <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494)
others that it denotes *strength*  <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) but it is more correctly rendered
*hind.* As it is evident, from the testimony of the apostles, that this
psalm is a prophecy concerning Christ, the ancient interpreters thought
that Christ would not be sufficiently dignified and honored unless,
putting a mystical or allegorical sense upon the word *hind,* they
viewed it as pointing out the various things which are included in a
sacrifice. Those, also, who prefer translating the original words, <span
id="xxviii-p7.4"></span>אילת השחר, *ayeleth hashachar, the dawn of the
day* or *morning,*  <span id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) have
endeavored to do the same thing. But as I find no solidity in these
subtleties, it will be better to take that view of the title which is
more simple and natural. I think it highly probable that it was the
beginning of some common song; nor do I see how the inscription bears
any relation to the subject-matter of the psalm. From the tenor of the
whole composition, it appears that David does not here refer merely to
one persecution, but comprehends all the persecutions which he suffered
under Saul. It is, however, uncertain whether he composed this psalm
when he peaceably enjoyed his kingdom, or in the time of his affliction;
but there is no doubt that he here describes the thoughts which passed
through his mind in the midst of his troubles, perplexities, and
sorrows.

<span id="xxviii.i"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="xxviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** My God! my God! why hast thou
forsaken me? Why art thou far from my help, and from the words of my
roaring? **2.** O my God! I cry in the day-time,  <span
id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) but thou hearest not: and in the
night-season, and there is no silence to me.

<span id="xxviii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.i-p5"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *My God!* The first verse contains
two remarkable sentences, which, although apparently contrary to each
other, are yet ever entering into the minds of the godly together. When
the Psalmist speaks of being forsaken and cast off by God, it seems to
be the complaint of a man in despair; for can a man have a single spark
of faith remaining in him, when he believes that there is no longer any
succor for him in God? And yet, in calling God twice his own God, and
depositing his groanings into his bosom, he makes a very distinct
confession of his faith. With this inward conflict the godly must
necessarily be exercised whenever God withdraws from them the tokens of
his favor, so that, in whatever direction they turn their eyes, they see
nothing but the darkness of night. I say, that the people of God, in
wrestling with themselves, on the one hand discover the weakness of the
flesh, and on the other give evidence of their faith. With respect to
the reprobate, as they cherish in their hearts their distrust of God,
their perplexity of mind overwhelms them, and thus totally incapacitates
them for aspiring after the grace of God by faith. That David sustained
the assaults of temptation, without being overwhelmed, or swallowed up
by it, may be easily gathered from his words. He was greatly oppressed
with sorrow, but notwithstanding this, he breaks forth into the language
of assurance, *My God! my God!* which he could not have done without
vigorously resisting the contrary apprehension  <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) that God had forsaken him. There is
not one of the godly who does not daily experience in himself the same
thing. According to the judgment of the flesh, he thinks he is cast off
and forsaken by God, while yet he apprehends by faith the grace of God,
which is hidden from the eye of sense and reason; and thus it comes to
pass, that contrary affections are mingled and interwoven in the prayers
of the faithful. Carnal sense and reason cannot but conceive of God as
being either favorable or hostile, according to the present condition of
things which is presented to their view. When, therefore, he suffers us
to lie long in sorrow, and as it were to pine away under it, we must
necessarily feel, according to the apprehension of the flesh, as if he
had quite forgotten us. When such a perplexing thought takes entire
possession of the mind of man, it overwhelms him in profound unbelief,
and he neither seeks, nor any longer expects, to find a remedy. But if
faith come to his aid against such a temptation, the same person who,
judging from the outward appearance of things, regarded God as incensed
against him, or as having abandoned him, beholds in the mirror of the
promises the grace of God which is hidden and distant. Between these two
contrary affections the faithful are agitated, and, as it were,
fluctuate, when Satan, on the one hand, by exhibiting to their view the
signs of the wrath of God, urges them on to despair, and endeavors
entirely to overthrow their faith; while faith, on the other hand, by
calling them back to the promises, teaches them to wait patiently and to
trust in God, until he again show them his fatherly countenance.

<span id="xxviii.i-p8"></span>We see then the source from which
proceeded this exclamation, *My God! my God!* and from which also
proceeded the complaint which follows immediately after, *Why hast thou
forsaken me?* Whilst the vehemence of grief, and the infirmity of the
flesh, forced from the Psalmist these words, *I am forsaken of God;*
faith, lest he should when so severely tried sink into despair, put into
his mouth a correction of this language, so that he boldly called God,
of whom he thought he was forsaken, his God. Yea, we see that he has
given the first place to faith. Before he allows himself to utter his
complaint, in order to give faith the chief place, he first declares
that he still claimed God as his own *God,* and betook himself to him
for refuge. And as the affections of the flesh, when once they break
forth, are not easily restrained, but rather carry us beyond the bounds
of reason, it is surely well to repress them at the very commencement.
David, therefore, observed the best possible order in giving his faith
the precedency - in expressing it before giving vent to his sorrow, and
in qualifying, by devout prayer, the complaint which he afterwards makes
with respect to the greatness of his calamities. Had he spoken simply
and precisely in these terms, Lord, why forsakest thou me? he would have
seemed, by a complaint so bitter, to murmur against God; and besides,
his mind would have been in great danger of being embittered with
discontent through the greatness of his grief. But, by here raising up
against murmuring and discontent the rampart of faith, he keeps all his
thoughts and feelings under restraint, that they may not break beyond
due bounds. Nor is the repetition superfluous when he twice calls God
*his God;* and, a little after, he even repeats the same words the third
time. When God, as if he had cast off all care about us, passes over our
miseries and groanings as if he saw them not, the conflict with this
species of temptation is arduous and painful, and therefore David the
more strenuously exerts himself in seeking the confirmation of his
faith. Faith does not gain the victory at the first encounter, but after
receiving many blows, and after being exercised with many tossings, she
at length comes forth victorious. I do not say that David was so
courageous and valiant a champion as that his faith did not waver. The
faithful may put forth all their efforts to subdue their carnal
affections, that they may subject and devote themselves wholly to God;
but still there is always some infirmity remaining in them. From this
proceeded that halting of holy Jacob, of which Moses makes mention in
<span id="xxviii.i-p8.1"></span>[Ge
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#024)<span id="xxviii.i-p8.1"></span>;
for although in wrestling with God he prevailed, yet he ever after bore
the mark of his sinful defect. By such examples God encourages his
servants to perseverance, lest, from a consciousness of their own
infirmity, they should sink into despair. The means therefore which we
ought to adopt, whenever our flesh becomes tumultuous, and, like an
impetuous tempest, hurries us into impatience, is to strive against it,
and to endeavor to restrain its impetuosity. In doing this we will, it
is true, be agitated and sorely tried, but our faith will, nevertheless,
continue safe, and be preserved from shipwreck. Farther, we may gather
from the very form of the complaint which David here makes, that he did
not without cause redouble the words by which his faith might be
sustained. He does not simply say that he *was forsaken* by God, but he
adds, that God *was far from his help,* in as-much as when he saw him in
the greatest danger, he gave him no token to encourage him in the hope
of obtaining deliverance. Since God has the ability to succor us, if,
when he sees us exposed as a prey to our enemies, he nevertheless sits
still as if he cared not about us, who would not say that he has drawn
back his hand that he may not deliver us? Again, by the expression, *the
words of my roaring,* the Psalmist intimates that he was distressed and
tormented in the highest degree. He certainly was not a man of so little
courage as, on account of some slight or ordinary affliction, to howl in
this manner like a brute beast.  <span id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499)
We must therefore come to the conclusion, that the distress was very
great which could extort such roaring from a man who was distinguished
for meekness, and for the undaunted courage with which he endured
calamities.

<span id="xxviii.i-p10"></span>As our Savior Jesus Christ, when hanging
on the cross, and when ready to yield up his soul into the hands of God
his Father, made use of these very words, (<span
id="xxviii.i-p10.1"></span>[Mt
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span
id="xxviii.i-p10.1"></span>,) we must consider how these two things can
agree, that Christ was the only begotten Son of God, and that yet he was
so penetrated with grief, seized with so great mental trouble, as to cry
out that God his Father had forsaken him. The apparent contradiction
between these two statements has constrained many interpreters to have
recourse to evasions for fear of charging Christ with blame in this
matter.  <span id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) Accordingly, they have
said that Christ made this complaint rather according to the opinion of
the common people, who witnessed his sufferings, than from any feeling
which he had of being deserted by his father. But they have not
considered that they greatly lessen the benefit of our redemption, in
imagining that Christ was altogether exempted from the terrors which the
judgment of God strikes into sinners. It was a groundless fear to be
afraid of making Christ subject to so great sorrow, lest they should
diminish his glory. As Peter, in <span id="xxviii.i-p11.2"></span>[Ac
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span id="xxviii.i-p11.2"></span>,
clearly testifies that “it was not possible that he should be holden of
the pains of death,” it follows that he was not altogether exempted from
them. And as he became our representative, and took upon him our sins,
it was certainly necessary that he should appear before the
judgment-seat of God as a sinner. From this proceeded the terror and
dread which constrained him to pray for deliverance from death; not that
it was so grievous to him merely to depart from this life; but because
there was before his eyes the curse of God, to which all who are sinners
are exposed. Now, if during his first conflict “his sweat was as it were
great drops of blood,” and he needed an angel to comfort him, (<span
id="xxviii.i-p11.3"></span>[Lu
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#043)<span
id="xxviii.i-p11.3"></span>,) it is not wonderful if, in his last
sufferings on the cross, he uttered a complaint which indicated the
deepest sorrow. By the way, it should be marked, that Christ, although
subject to human passions and affections, never fell into sin through
the weakness of the flesh; for the perfection of his nature preserved
him from all excess. He could therefore overcome all the temptations
with which Satan assailed him, without receiving any wound in the
conflict which might afterwards constrain him to halt. In short, there
is no doubt that Christ, in uttering this exclamation upon the cross,
manifestly showed, that although David here bewails his own distresses,
this psalm was composed under the influence of the Spirit of prophecy
concerning David’s King and Lord.

<span id="xxviii.i-p12"></span><span id="xxviii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p13"></span>**2.** *O my God! I cry in the day-time.*
In this verse the Psalmist expresses the long continuance of his
affliction, which increased his disquietude and weariness. It was a
temptation even still more grievous, that his crying seemed only to be
lost labor; for, as our only means of relief under our calamities is in
calling upon God, if we derive no advantage from our prayers, what other
remedy remains for us? David, therefore, complains that God is in a
manner deaf to his prayers. When he says in the second clause, *And
there is no silence to me,* the meaning is, that he experienced no
comfort or solace, nothing which could impart tranquillity to his
troubled mind. As long as affliction pressed upon him, his mind was so
disquieted, that he was constrained to cry out. Here there is shown the
constancy of faith, in that the long duration of calamities could
neither overthrow it, nor interrupt its exercise. The true rule of
praying is, therefore, this, that he who seems to have beaten the air to
no purpose, or to have lost his labor in praying for a long time, should
not, on that account, leave off, or desist from that duty. Meanwhile,
there is this advantage which God in his fatherly kindness grants to his
people, that if they have been disappointed at any time of their desires
and expectations, they may make known to God their perplexities and
distresses, and unburden them, as it were, into his bosom.

<span id="xxviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Yet thou art holy, who inhabitest
the praises of Israel. **4.** Our fathers trusted in thee: they trusted,
and thou didst deliver them. **5.** They cried unto thee, and were
delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. **6.** But I
am a worm, and not a man; the scorn of men, and the contempt of the
people. **7.** All those who see me mock at me: they thrust out the lip,
and shake the head. **8.** “He has committed,” say they, “his cause unto
\[or, devolved his cause upon\] Jehovah:  <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) let him deliver him, let him deliver
him,  <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) seeing he delights in
him.”

<span id="xxviii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p7"></span>**3.** *Yet thou art holy.* In the
Hebrew, it is properly, *And thou art holy:* but the copula <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.1"></span>ו*, vau*, ought, without doubt, to be
rendered by the adversative particle *yet.* Some think that the eternal
and immutable state of God is here set in opposition to the afflictions
which David experienced;  <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) but I
cannot subscribe to this opinion. It is more simple and natural to view
the language as meaning, that God has always shown himself gracious to
his chosen people. The subject here treated is not what God is in
heaven, but what he has shown himself to be towards men. It may be
asked, whether David, in these words, aggravates his complaint, by
insinuating that he is the only person who obtains nothing from God? or
whether, by holding up these words as a shield before him, he repels the
temptation with which he was assailed, by exhibiting to his view this
truth, that God is the continual deliverer of his people? I admit that
this verse is an additional expression of the greatness of David’s
grief; but I have no doubt, that in using this language he seeks from it
a remedy against his distrust. It was a dangerous temptation to see
himself forsaken by God; and, accordingly, lest by continually thinking
upon it, he should nourish it, he turned his mind to the contemplation
of the constant evidences afforded of the grace of God, from which he
might encourage himself, in the hope of obtaining succor. He, therefore,
not only meant to ask how it was that God, who had always dealt
mercifully with his people, should now, forgetting as it were his own
nature, thus leave a miserable man without any succor or solace; but he
also takes a shield with which to defend himself against the fiery darts
of Satan. He calls God *holy,* because he continues always like himself.
He says that he *inhabiteth the praises of Israel;* because, in showing
such liberality towards the chosen people, as to be continually
bestowing blessings upon them, he furnished them with matter for
continued praise and thanksgiving. Unless God cause us to taste of his
goodness by doing us good, we must needs become mute in regard to the
celebration of his praise. As David belonged to the number of this
chosen people, he strives, in opposition to all the obstacles which
distrust might suggest as standing in the way, to cherish the hope that
he shall at length be united to this body to sing along with them the
praises of God.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p9"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p10"></span>**4.** *Our fathers trusted in thee.*
Here the Psalmist assigns the reason why God sitteth amidst the praises
of the tribes of Israel. The reason is, because his hand had been always
stretched forth to preserve his faithful people. David, as I have just
now observed, gathers together the examples of all past ages, in order
thereby to encourage, strengthen, and effectually persuade himself, that
as God had never cast off any of his chosen people, he also would be one
of the number of those for whom deliverance is securely laid up in the
hand of God. He therefore expressly declares that he belongs to the
offspring of those who had been heard, intimating by this, that he is an
heir of the same grace which they had experienced. He has an eye to the
covenant by which God had adopted the posterity of Abraham to be his
peculiar people. It would be of little consequence to know the varied
instances in which God has exercised his mercy towards his own people,
unless each of us could reckon himself among their number, as David
includes himself in the Church of God. In repeating three times that the
fathers had obtained deliverance by *trusting,* there is no doubt that
with all modesty he intends tacitly to intimate that he had the same
hope with which they were inspired, a hope which draws after it, as its
effect, the fulfillment of the promises in our behalf. In order that a
man may derive encouragement from the blessings which God has bestowed
upon his servants in former times, he should turn his attention to the
free promises of God’s word, and to the faith which leans upon them. In
short, to show that this confidence was neither cold nor dead, David
tells us, at the same time, that *they cried unto God.* He who pretends
that he trusts in God, and yet is so listless and indifferent under his
calamities that he does not implore his aid, lies shamefully. By prayer,
then, true faith is known, as the goodness of a tree is known by its
fruit. It ought also to be observed, that God regards no other prayers
as right but those which proceed from faith, and are accompanied with
it. It is therefore not without good reason that David has put the word
*cried* in the middle between these words, *They trusted in thee, they
trusted,* in the fourth verse, and these words, *They trusted in thee,*
in the fifth verse.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p12"></span>**6.** *But I am a worm, and not a man.*
David does not murmur against God as if God had dealt hardly with him;
but in bewailing his condition, he says, in order the more effectually
to induce God to show him mercy, that he is not accounted so much as a
man. This, it is true, seems at first sight to have a tendency to
discourage the mind, or rather to destroy faith; but it will appear more
clearly from the sequel, that so far from this being the case, David
declares how miserable his condition is, that by this means he may
encourage himself in the hope of obtaining relief. He therefore argues
that it could not be but that God would at length stretch forth his hand
to save him; to save him, I say, who was so severely afflicted, and on
the brink of despair. If God has had compassion on all who have ever
been afflicted, although afflicted only in a moderate degree, how could
he forsake his servant when plunged in the lowest abyss of all
calamities? Whenever, therefore, we are overwhelmed under a great weight
of afflictions, we ought rather to take from this an argument to
encourage us to hope for deliverance, than suffer ourselves to fall into
despair. If God so severely exercised his most eminent servant David,
and abased him so far that he had not a place even among the most
despised of men, let us not take it ill, if, after his example, we are
brought low. We ought, however, principally to call to our remembrance
the Son of God, in whose person we know this also was fulfilled, as
Isaiah had predicted,

<span id="xxviii.ii-p13"></span>“He is despised and rejected of men; a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief and we hid as it were our
faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not.” (<span
id="xxviii.ii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="xxviii.ii-p14"></span>By these words of the prophet we are
furnished with a sufficient refutation of the frivolous subtlety of
those who have philosophised upon the word *worm,* as if David here
pointed out some singular mystery in the generation of Christ; whereas
his meaning simply is, that he had been abased beneath all men, and, as
it were, cut off from the number of living beings. The fact that the Son
of God suffered himself to be reduced to such ignominy, yea, descended
even to hell, is so far from obscuring, in any respect, his celestial
glory, that it is rather a bright mirror from which is reflected his
unparalleled grace towards us.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p15"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p16"></span>**7.** *All those who see me mock at me,
etc.,*  <span id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) This is an explanation
of the preceding sentence. He had said that he was an object of scorn to
the lowest of men, and, as it were, to the refuse of the people. He now
informs us of the ignominy with which he had been treated, — that not
content with opprobrious language, they also showed their insolence by
their very gesture, both by shooting out their lips,  <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) and by shaking their heads. As the
words which we render *they thrust out the lip,* is, in the Hebrew,
*they open with the lip,*  <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) some
explain them as meaning *to rail.* But this view does not appear to me
to be appropriate; for the letter <span id="xxviii.ii-p21.2"></span>ב*,
beth,* which signifies *with,* is here superfluous, as it often is in
the Hebrew. I have therefore preferred rendering the original words,
*they thrust out the lip;* which is the gesture of those who mock openly
and injuriously. The reproachful language which follows was much more
grievous when they alleged against him that God, who he openly avowed
was his father, was turned away from him. We know that David, when he
saw himself unjustly condemned of the world, was accustomed to support
and console himself with the assurance, that since he had the approving
testimony of a good conscience, he had God in heaven for his guardian,
who was able to execute vengeance upon his revilers.  <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) But now, all who saw him reproached
him, that with vain arrogance he had groundlessly boasted of the succor
he would receive from God. Where is that God, say they, on whom he
leaned? Where is that love to which he trusted? Satan has not a more
deadly dart for wounding the souls of men than when he endeavors to
dislodge hope from our minds, by turning the promises of God into
ridicule. David’s enemies, however, do not simply say that his prayers
were in vain, and that the love of God of which he boasted was
fallacious; but they indirectly charge him with being a hypocrite, in
that he falsely pretended to be one of the children of God, from whom he
was altogether estranged.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p23"></span><span id="xxviii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p24"></span>How severe a temptation this must have
been to David every man may judge from his own experience. But by the
remedy he used he afforded a proof of the sincerity of his confidence:
for unless he had had God as the undoubted witness and approver of the
sincerity of his heart, he would never have dared to come before him
with this complaint. Whenever, therefore, men charge us with hypocrisy,
let it be our endeavor that the inward sincerity of our hearts may
answer for us before God. And whenever Satan attempts to dislodge faith
from our minds, by biting detraction and cruel derision, let this be our
sacred anchors — to call upon God to witness it, and that, beholding it,
he may be pleased to show his righteousness in maintaining our right,
since his holy name cannot be branded with viler blasphemy than to say
that those who put their trust in him are puffed up with vain
confidence, and that those who persuade themselves that God loves them
deceive themselves with a groundless fancy. As the Son of God was
assailed with the same weapon, it is certain that Satan will not be more
sparing of true believers who are his members than of him. They ought,
therefore, to defend themselves from this consideration - that although
men may regard them as in a desperate condition, yet, if they commit to
God both themselves and all their affairs, their prayers will not be in
vain. By the verb, <span id="xxviii.ii-p24.1"></span>גל, *gol,* which is
rendered *to commit,* the nature and efficacy of faith are very well
expressed, which, reposing itself upon the providence of God, relieves
our minds from the burdens of the cares and troubles with which they are
agitated.

<span id="xxviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p2"></span>**9.** Surely thou didst draw me forth
from the womb, and thou didst cause me to confide upon the breasts of my
mother.  <span id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) **10.** I was cast upon
thee  <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) from the womb: thou art my
God from my mother’s belly. **11.** Depart not far from me, for distress
is near, and there is none to help me.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p7"></span>**9.** *Surely thou.* David again here
raises a new fortress, in order to withstand and repel the machinations
of Satan. He briefly enumerates the benefits which God had bestowed upon
him, by which he had long since learned that he was his father. Yea, he
declares that even before he was born God had shown towards him such
evidence of his fatherly love, that although now overwhelmed with the
darkness of death, he might upon good ground venture to hope for life
from him. And it is the Holy Spirit who teaches the faithful the wisdom
to collect together, when they are brought into circumstances of fear
and trouble, the evidences of the goodness of God, in order thereby to
sustain and strengthen their faith. We ought to regard it as an
established principle, that as God never wearies in the exercise of his
liberality, and as the most exuberant bestowment cannot exhaust his
riches, it follows that, as we have experienced him to be a father from
our earliest infancy, he will show himself the same towards us even to
extreme old age. In acknowledging that he was *taken from the womb* by
the hand of God, and that *God had caused him to confide upon the
breasts of his mother,* the meaning is, that although it is by the
operation of natural causes that infants come into the world, and are
nourished with their mother’s milk, yet therein the wonderful providence
of God brightly shines forth. This miracle, it is true, because of its
ordinary occurrence, is made less account of by us. But if ingratitude
did not put upon our eyes the veil of stupidity, we would be ravished
with admiration at every childbirth in the world. What prevents the
child from perishing, as it might, a hundred times in its own
corruption, before the time for bringing it forth arrives, but that God,
by his secret and incomprehensible power, keeps it alive in its grave?
And after it is brought into the world, seeing it is subject to so many
miseries, and cannot stir a finger to help itself, how could it live
even for a single day, did not God take it up into his fatherly bosom to
nourish and protect it? It is, therefore, with good reason said, that
the infant *is cast upon him;* for, unless he fed the tender little
babes, and watched over all the offices of the nurse, even at the very
time of their being brought forth, they are exposed to a hundred deaths,
by which they would be suffocated in an instant. Finally, David
concludes that God was *his God.* God, it is true, to all appearance,
shows the like goodness which is here celebrated even to the brute
creation; but it is only to mankind that he shows himself to be a father
in a special manner. And although he does not immediately endue babes
with the knowledge of himself, yet he is said *to give them confidence,*
because, by showing in fact that he takes care of their life, he in a
manner allures them to himself; as it is said in another place,

<span id="xxviii.iii-p8"></span>“He giveth to the beast his food, and to
the young ravens which cry,” (<span id="xxviii.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009)<span
id="xxviii.iii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxviii.iii-p9"></span>Since God anticipates in this manner, by
his grace, little infants before they have as yet the use of reason, it
is certain that he will never disappoint the hope of his servants when
they petition and call upon him. This is the argument by which David
struggled with, and endeavored to overcome temptation.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxviii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p11"></span>**11.** *Depart not far from me.* Here
he employs another argument to induce God to show him mercy, alleging
that he is sorely pressed and hemmed in by the greatest distress. He
doubtless set before his eyes the office which the Scriptures every
where attribute to God of succouring the miserable, and of being the
more ready to help us the more we are afflicted. Even despair itself,
therefore, served as a ladder to elevate his mind to the exercise of
devout and fervent prayer. In like manner, the feeling we have of our
afflictions should excite us to take shelter under the wings of God,
that by granting us his aid, he may show that he takes a deep interest
in our welfare.

<span id="xxviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012)<span
id="xxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p2"></span>**12.** Strong bulls have encompassed me;
the bulls of Bashan have beset me round. **13.** They have opened their
mouth against me, as a ravening and a roaring lion. **14.** I am poured
out like water, and all my bones are disjointed: my heart is like wax;
it is melted in the midst of my bowels. **15.** My strength is dried up
like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; and thou hast
brought me to the dust of death. **16.** For dogs have encompassed me;
the assembly of the wicked have surrounded me: they have pierced my
hands and my feet.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p5"></span>**12.** *Strong bulls have encompassed
me.* The Psalmist now complains of the cruelty and barbarous rage of his
enemies; and he compares them first to bulls, secondly to lions, and
thirdly to dogs. When the anger of bulls is kindled, we know how fierce
and terrible they are. The lion, also, is a cruel beast, and dreadful to
mankind. And the eager and fierce boldness with which dogs, when once
they are irritated, rush upon a man to do him injury, is well known. In
short, David’s enemies were so blood-thirsty and cruel, that they more
resembled wild beasts than men. He calls them not simply *bulls,* but
*strong bulls.* Instead of rendering the original word <span
id="xxviii.iv-p5.1"></span>רבים, *rabbim, strong,* as we have done, some
would render it *many:* with which I cannot agree. David, it is true,
was assailed by great hosts of enemies; but it appears, from the second
clause of the verse, that what is here described is their strength, and
not their number. He there terms them *the bulls of Bashan;* meaning by
that expression, well-fed bulls, and, consequently, large and strong:
for we know that the hill of Bashan was distinguished for rich and fat
pastures.  <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510)

<span id="xxviii.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p8"></span>**14.** *I am poured out like water.*
Hitherto he has informed us that being surrounded by wild beasts, he was
not far from death, as if he had been at the point of being devoured
every moment. He now bewails, in addition to this, his inward distress;
from which we learn that he was not stupid or insensible in dangers. It
could have been no ordinary fear which made him almost pine away, by
which his bones were disjointed, and his heart poured out like water. We
see, then, that David was not buffeted with the waves of affliction like
a rock which cannot be moved, but was agitated within by sore troubles
and temptations, which, through the infirmity of the flesh, he would
never have been able to sustain had he not been aided by the power of
the Spirit of God. How these sufferings are applicable to Christ I have
informed you a little before. Being a real man, he was truly subject to
the infirmities of our flesh, only without the taint of sin. The perfect
purity of his nature did not extinguish the human affections; it only
regulated them, that they might not become sinful through excess. The
greatness of his griefs, therefore, could not so weaken him as to
prevent him, even in the midst of his most excruciating sufferings, from
submitting himself to the will of God, with a composed and peaceful
mind. Now, although this is not the case with respect to us, who have
within us turbulent and disorderly affections, and who never can keep
them under such restraint as not to be driven hither and thither by
their impetuosity, yet, after the example of David, we ought to take
courage; and when, through our infirmity, we are, as it were, almost
lifeless, we should direct our groanings to God, beseeching him that he
would be graciously pleased to restore us to strength and vigor.  <span
id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511)

<span id="xxviii.iv-p10"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p11"></span>**15.** *My strength is dried up.* He
means the vigor which is imparted to us by the radical moisture, as
physicians call it. What he adds in the next clause, *My tongue cleaveth
to my jaws,* is of the same import. We know that excessive grief not
only consumes the vital spirits, but also dries up almost all the
moisture which is in our bodies. He next declares, that in consequence
of this, he was adjudged or devoted to the grave: *Thou hast brought me
to the dust of death.* By this he intimates, that all hope of life was
taken from him; and in this sense Paul also says, (<span
id="xxviii.iv-p11.1"></span>[2Co
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#009)<span
id="xxviii.iv-p11.1"></span>,) that “he had received the sentence of
death in himself.” But David here speaks of himself in hyperbolical
language, and he does this in order to lead us beyond himself to Christ.
The dreadful encounter of our Redeemer with death, by which there was
forced from his body blood instead of sweat; his descent into hell, by
which he tasted of the wrath of God which was due to sinners; and, in
short, his emptying himself, could not be adequately expressed by any of
the ordinary forms of speech. Moreover, David speaks of death as those
who are in trouble are accustomed to speak of it, who, struck with fear,
can think of nothing but of their being reduced to dust and to
destruction. Whenever the minds of the saints are surrounded and
oppressed with this darkness, there is always some unbelief mixed with
their exercise, which prevents them from all at once emerging from it to
the light of a new life. But in Christ these two things were wonderfully
conjoined, namely, terror, proceeding from a sense of the curse of God;
and patience, arising from faith, which tranquillised all the mental
emotions, so that they continued in complete and willing subjection to
the authority of God. With respect to ourselves, who are not endued with
the like power, if at any time, upon beholding nothing but destruction
near us, we are for a season greatly dismayed, we should endeavor by
degrees to recover courage, and to elevate ourselves to the hope which
quickens the dead.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p12"></span><span id="xxviii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p13"></span>**16.** *They have pierced my hands and
my feet.* The original word, which we have translated *they have
pierced,* is <span id="xxviii.iv-p13.1"></span>כארי, *caari,* which
literally rendered is, *like a lion.* As all the Hebrew Bibles at this
day, without exception, have this reading, I would have had great
hesitation in departing from a reading which they all support, were it
not that the scope of the discourse compels me to do so, and were there
not strong grounds for conjecturing that this passage has been
fraudulently corrupted by the Jews. With respect to the Septuagint
version, there is no doubt that the translators had read in the Hebrew
text, <span id="xxviii.iv-p13.2"></span>כארו, *caaru,* that is the
letter <span id="xxviii.iv-p13.3"></span>ו, *vau,* where there is now
the letter <span id="xxviii.iv-p13.4"></span>י, *yod.*  <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) The Jews prate much about the literal
sense being purposely and deliberately overthrown, by our rendering the
original word by *they have pierced:* but for this allegation there is
no color of truth whatever. What need was there to trifle so
presumptuously in a matter where it was altogether unnecessary? Very
great suspicion of falsehood, however, attaches to them, seeing it is
the uppermost desire of their hearts to despoil the crucified Jesus of
his escutcheons, and to divest him of his character as the Messiah and
Redeemer. If we receive this reading as they would have us to do, the
sense will be enveloped in marvellous obscurity. In the first place, it
will be a defective form of expression, and to complete it, they say it
is necessary to supply the verb *to surround* or *to beset.* But what do
they mean by *besetting the hands and the feet?* Besetting belongs no
more to these parts of the human body than to the whole man. The
absurdity of this argument being discovered, they have recourse to the
most ridiculous old wives’ fables, according to their usual way, saying,
that the lion, when he meets any man in his road, makes a circle with
his tail before rushing upon his prey: from which it is abundantly
evident that they are at a loss for arguments to support their view.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p15"></span>Again, since David, in the preceding
verse, has used the similitude of a lion, the repetition of it in this
verse would be superfluous. I forbear insisting upon what some of our
expositors have observed, namely, that this noun, when it has prefixed
to it the letter <span id="xxviii.iv-p15.1"></span>כ, *caph,* which
signifies *as,* the word denoting similitude, has commonly other points
than those which are employed in this passage. My object, however, is
not here to labor to convince the Jews who in controversy are in the
highest degree obstinate and opinionative. I only intend briefly to show
how wickedly they endeavor to perplex Christians on account of the
different reading which occurs in this place. When they object, that by
the appointment of the law no man was fastened with nails to a cross,
they betray in this their gross ignorance of history, since it is
certain that the Romans introduced many of their own customs and manners
into the provin ces which they had conquered. If they object that David
was never nailed to a cross, the answer is easy, namely, that in
bewailing his condition, he has made use of a similitude, declaring that
he was not less afflicted by his enemies than the man who is suspended
on a cross, having his hands and feet pierced through with nails. We
will meet a little after with more of the same kind of metaphors.

<span id="xxviii.v"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)<span
id="xxviii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p2"></span>**17.** I will number all my bones; they
look and stare upon me. **18.** They part my garments among them, and
cast the lot upon my vesture. **19.** Be not thou then, O Jehovah! far
from me. O thou: who art my strength, make haste to help me. **20.**
Deliver my soul from the sword; my only one  <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) from the hand \[or power\] of the dog.
**21.** Save me from the mouth of the lion, and hear me from the horns
of the unicorns.  <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514)

<span id="xxviii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.v-p6"></span><span id="xxviii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p7"></span>**17.** *I will number.* The Hebrew word
<span id="xxviii.v-p7.1"></span>עצמות, *atsmoth* which signifies
*bones,* is derived from another word, which signifies *strength;* and,
therefore, this term is sometimes applied to friends, by whose defense
we are strengthened, or to arguments and reasons which are, as it were,
the sinews and the strength of the defense of a cause. Some, therefore,
put this meaning upon the passage, — I will profit nothing by reckoning
up all my arguments in self-vindication; for my enemies are fully
determined to destroy me by some means or other, whether fair or foul,
without having any regard to the dictates of justice. Others explain it
thus: Although I should gather together all the aids which might seem to
be capable of affording me succor, they would avail me nothing. But the
exposition which is more generally received seems to me to be also the
more simple and natural, and, therefore, I embrace it the more readily.
It is this - that David complains that his body was so lean and wasted,
that the bones appeared protruding from all parts of it; for he adds
immediately after, that his enemies took pleasure in seeing him in so
pitiable a condition. Thus the two clauses of the verse are beautifully
connected together. The cruelty of his enemies was so insatiable, that
beholding a wretched man wasted with grief, and as it were pining away,
they took pleasure in feeding their eyes with so sad a spectacle.

<span id="xxviii.v-p8"></span><span id="xxviii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p9"></span>What follows in the next verse concerning
his garments is metaphorical. It is as if he had said, that all his
goods were become a prey to his enemies, even as conquerors are
accustomed to plunder the vanquished, or to divide the spoil among
themselves, by casting lots to determine the share which belongs to
each. Comparing his ornaments, riches, and all that he possessed, to his
garments, he complains that, after he had been despoiled of them, his
enemies divided them among themselves, as so much booty, accompanied
with mockery of him; and by this mockery the villany of their conduct
was aggravated, inasmuch as they triumphed over him, as if he had been a
dead man. The Evangelists quote this place to the letter, as we say, and
without figure; and there is no absurdity in their doing so. To teach us
the more certainly that in this psalm Christ is described to us by the
Spirit of prophecy, the heavenly Father intended that in the person of
his Son those things should be visibly accomplished which were shadowed
forth in David. Matthew, (<span id="xxviii.v-p9.2"></span>[Matt.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)<span id="xxviii.v-p9.2"></span>,)
in narrating that the paralytic, the blind, and the lame, were healed of
their diseases, says, that this was done “that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, Himself took our
infirmities, and bear our sicknesses;” although the prophet, in that
place, sets before us the Son of God in the character of a spiritual
physician. We are extremely slow and backward to believe; and it is not
wonderful, that, on account of our dullness of apprehension, a
demonstration of the character of Christ, palpable to our senses, has
been given us,  <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) which might have
the effect of arousing the sluggishness of our understandings.

<span id="xxviii.v-p11"></span><span id="xxviii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p12"></span>**19.** *Be not thou, then, far from me,
O Jehovah!* We must keep in mind all that David has hitherto related
concerning himself. As his miseries had reached the utmost height, and
as he saw not even a single ray of hope to encourage him to expect
deliverance, it is a wonderful instance of the power of faith, that he
not only endured his afflictions patiently, but that from the abyss of
despair he arose to call upon God. Let us, therefore, particularly mark,
that David did not pour out his lamentations thinking them to be in
vain, and of no effect, as persons who are in perplexity often pour
forth their groanings at random. The prayers which he adds sufficiently
show that he hoped for such an issue as he desired. When he calls God
*his strength,* by this epithet he gives a more evident proof of his
faith. He does not pray in a doubting manner; but he promises himself
the assistance which the eye of sense did not as yet perceive. By *the
sword,* by *the hand of the dog,* by *the mouth of the lion,* and by
*the horns of the unicorns,* he intimates that he was presently exposed
to the danger of death, and that in many ways. Whence we gather, that
although he utterly fainted in himself when thus surrounded by death, he
yet continued strong in the Lord, and that the spirit of life had always
been vigorous in his heart. Some take the words *only soul,* or *only
life,* for *dear* and *precious;*  <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) but this view does not appear to me to
be appropriate. He rather means, that, amidst so many deaths he found no
help or succor in the whole world; as in <span
id="xxviii.v-p13.1"></span>[Ps
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017)<span id="xxviii.v-p13.1"></span>
the words, *only soul,*  <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517) are
used in the same sense for a person who is alone and destitute of all
aid and succor. This will appear more clearly from <span
id="xxviii.v-p14.2"></span>[Ps
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016)<span
id="xxviii.v-p14.2"></span>, where David, by calling himself poor and
alone, doubtless complains that he was completely deprived of friends,
and forsaken of the whole world. When it is said in the end of the 21st
verse, *Answer me,* or, *Hear me from the horns of the unicorns,* this
Hebrew manner of speaking may seem strange and obscure to our ears, but
the sense is not at all ambiguous. The cause is only put instead of the
effect; for our deliverance is the consequence or effect of God’s
hearing us. If it is asked how this can be applied to Christ, whom the
Father did not deliver from death? I answer, in one word, that he was
more mightily delivered than if God had prevented him from falling a
victim to death, even as it is a much greater deliverance to rise again
from the dead than to be healed of a grievous malady. Death, therefore,
did not prevent Christ’s resurrection from at length bearing witness
that he had been heard.

<span id="xxviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)<span
id="xxviii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p2"></span>**22.** I will declare thy name to my
brethren: in the midst of the assembly will I praise thee. **23.**
\[Saying,  <span id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) \] Ye who fear
Jehovah, praise him: all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him; and fear
him, all ye the seed of Israel. **24.** For he hath not despised nor
disdained the poor; nor hath he hidden his face from him; and when he
cried unto him he heard him.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.vi-p5"></span><span id="xxviii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p6"></span>**22.** *I will declare thy name.*  <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) David, in promising that when he is
delivered he will not be ungrateful, confirms what I have previously
stated, that he had never been so cast down by temptation as not to take
courage to resist it. How could he be putting himself in readiness, as
he is doing here, to offer to God the sacrifice of thanksgiving, if he
had not beforehand entertained the assured hope of deliverance? Should
we even grant that this psalm was composed after David had actually
obtained what he desired, there is no doubt that what he afterwards put
into writing formed the meditations and reflections which had passed
through his mind during the time of his heavy afflictions. It ought to
be particularly noticed, that it is no ordinary token of gratitude which
he promises, but such as God required for rare blessings; namely, that
the faithful should come into his sanctuary, and there bear solemn
testimony to the grace which they had received. The design of public and
solemn thanksgiving is, that the faithful may employ themselves in all
variety of ways, in serving and honoring God, and that they may
encourage one another to act in the same manner. We know that God’s
wonderful power shone forth in the protection of David; and that not
only by one miracle, but by many. It is, therefore, not wonderful that
he brings himself under obligation, by a solemn vow, to make open and
public profession of his piety and faithfulness towards God. By *his
brethren* he means the Israelites; and he gives them this appellation,
not only because he and they were both descended from the same
parentage, but rather because the religion which they had in common, as
a sacred bond, kept them united to one another by a spiritual
relationship. The apostle, (<span id="xxviii.vi-p7.1"></span>[Heb
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#012)<span id="xxviii.vi-p7.1"></span>)
in applying this verse to Christ, argues from it, that he was a partaker
of the same nature with us, and joined to us by a true fellowship of the
flesh, seeing he acknowledges us as his brethren, and vouchsafes to give
us a title so honorable. I have already repeatedly stated, (and it is
also easy to prove it from the end of this psalms) that under the figure
of David, Christ has been here shadowed forth to us. The apostle,
therefore, justly deduces from this, that under and by the name of
*brethren,* the right of fraternal alliance with Christ has been
confirmed to us. This, no doubt, to a certain extent belongs to all
mankind, but the true enjoyment thereof belongs properly to genuine
believers alone. For this reason Christ himself, with his own mouth,
limits this title to his disciples, saying,

<span id="xxviii.vi-p8"></span>“Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I
ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God,”  
(<span id="xxviii.vi-p8.2"></span>[Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="xxviii.vi-p8.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxviii.vi-p9"></span>The ungodly, by means of their unbelief,
break off and dissolve that relationship of the flesh, by which he has
allied himself to us, and thus render themselves utter strangers to him
by their own fault. As David, while he comprehended under the word
*brethren* all the offspring of Abraham, immediately after (verse 23)
particularly addresses his discourse to the true worshippers of God; so
Christ, while he has broken down “the middle wall of partition” between
Jews and Gentiles, and published the blessings of adoption to all
nations, and thereby exhibited himself to them as a brother, retains in
the degree of brethren none but true believers.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p10"></span><span id="xxviii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p11"></span>**23.** *Ye who fear Jehovah.* Here,
again, the Psalmist expresses more distinctly the fruit of public and
solemn thanksgiving, of which I have spoken before, declaring, that by
engaging in this exercise, every man in his own place invites and stirs
up the church by his example to praise God. He tells us, that the end
for which he will praise the name of God in the public assembly is to
encourage his brethren to do the same. But as hypocrites commonly thrust
themselves into the church, and as on the barn-floor of the Lord the
chaff is mingled with the wheat, he addresses himself expressly to the
godly, and those who *fear* God. Impure and wicked men may sing the
praises of God with open mouth, but assuredly, they do nothing else than
pollute and profane his holy name. It were, indeed, an object much to be
desired, that men of all conditions in the world would, with one accord,
join in holy melody to the Lord. But as the chief and most essential
part of this harmony proceeds from a sincere and pure affection of
heart, none will ever, in a right manner, celebrate the glory of God,
except the man who worships him under the influence of holy fear. David
names, a little after, *the seed of Jacob and Israel,* having a
reference to the common calling of the people; and certainly, he put no
obstacle in the way to hinder even all the children of Abraham from
praising God with one accord. But as he saw that many of the Israelites
were bastard and degenerate, he distinguishes true and sincere
Israelites from them; and at the same time shows that God’s name is not
duly celebrated, unless where there is true piety and the inward fear of
God. Accordingly, in his exhortation he again joins together the praises
of God and reverence towards him. — *Fear him, ye seed of Israel,* says
he; for all the fair faces which hypocrites put on in this matter are
nothing but pure mockery. The fear which he recommends is not, however,
such as would frighten the faithful from approaching God, but that which
will bring them truly humbled into his sanctuary, as has been stated in
the fifth psalm. Some may be surprised to find David addressing an
exhortation to praise God,  <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) to
those whom he had previously commended for doing so. But this is easily
explained, for even the holiest men in the world are never so thoroughly
imbued with the fear of God as not to have need of being continually
incited to its exercise. Accordingly, the exhortation is not at all
superfluous when, speaking of those who fear God, he exhorts them to
stand in awe of him, and to prostrate themselves humbly before him.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p13"></span><span id="xxviii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p14"></span>**24.** *For he hath not despised.* To
rejoice in one another’s good, and to give thanks in common for each
other’s welfare, is a branch of that communion which ought to exist
among the people of God, as Paul also teaches,

<span id="xxviii.vi-p15"></span>“That for the gift bestowed upon us by
the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many on our behalf.”  
(<span id="xxviii.vi-p15.2"></span>[2Co
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#011)<span
id="xxviii.vi-p15.2"></span>,)

<span id="xxviii.vi-p16"></span>But this statement of David serves
another important purpose — it serves to encourage every man to hope
that God will exercise the same mercy towards himself. By the way, we
are taught from these words that the people of God ought to endure their
afflictions patiently, however long it shall please the Lord to keep
them in a state of distress, that he may at length succor them, and lend
them his aid when they are so severely tried.

<span id="xxviii.vii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xxviii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025)<span
id="xxviii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p2"></span>**25.** My praise shall proceed from
thee  <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) in the great assembly; I
will pay my vows in the presence of them that fear him. **26.** The poor
shall eat and be satisfied; they shall praise Jehovah that seek him:
your heart shall live for ever. **27.** All the ends of the earth shall
remember, and turn to Jehovah; and all the tribes of the Gentiles shall
prostrate themselves before his face. **28.** For the kingdom is
Jehovah’s, that he may be the governor among the nations. **29.** All
the fat ones of the earth shall eat and worship; all those who are going
down to the dust shall bow before him; and he who quickeneth not his own
soul, \[or he who is unable to keep himself alive.\]

<span id="xxviii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.vii-p5"></span><span id="xxviii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p6"></span>**25.** *My praise shall proceed from
thee.* I do not reject the other translation; but in my opinion, the
Hebrew manner of expression here requires this sense - that David will
take the matter of his song of praise from God. Accordingly, I supply
the verb *shall proceed,* or *shall flow,* — *My praise shall proceed or
flow from thee;* and he made this statement in order to testify that he
owed his deliverance entirely to God. We know that there are many who,
under pretense of praising God, trumpet forth their own praises, and
those of their friends, and leaving God in the back-ground, take
occasion from one thing or another to celebrate their own triumphs. The
Psalmist repeats what he had touched upon a little before, that he will
show the tokens of his gratitude in a public manner, in order thereby to
edify others. He adds, that among these tokens will be the solemn
exercise of godliness enjoined by the law: *I will pay my vows in the
presence of them that fear him.* In important affairs, and when
threatened with imminent danger, it was a common practice among God’s
ancient people to vow a peace-offering, and after having obtained the
object of their desire, they performed their vow. As David, therefore,
belonged to the number of the saints, he conformed himself, as it became
him, to that common and understood regulation of the Church. The vows
which he promises to pay are those which he intimates he had made in his
extreme distress, and he prepares himself to perform them with a noble
and cheerful heart, yea, with a heart full of confidence. Now, although
it behoved him to perform this solemn act of religion in the presence of
the whole assembly without distinction, he again confesses it to be his
desire, that all who should be present there to witness it should be the
true worshippers of God. Thus, although it may not be in our power to
cleanse the Church of God, it is our duty to desire her purity. The
Papists, by wresting this passage to support their false and deceitful
vows, show themselves so stupid and so ridiculous, that it is
unnecessary to spend much time in refuting them. What resemblance is
there between these childish fooleries, with which according to their
own imagination they attempt to appease God, and this holy testimony of
gratitude, which not only a true sense of religion and the fear of God
suggested to the fathers, but which God himself has commanded and
ratified in his law? Yea, how can they have the face to equal their
foolish and infamous superstitions to the most precious of all
sacrifices - the sacrifice of thanksgiving? even as the Scriptures
testify, that the principal part of the service of God consists in this,
that true believers publicly and solemnly acknowledge that he is the
author of all good things.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p7"></span><span id="xxviii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p8"></span>**26.** *The poor shall eat.* The
Psalmist has a reference to the custom which was at that time prevalent
among the Jews, of feasting on their sacrifices, as is very well known.
He here promises this feast, in order to exercise and prove his charity.
And surely that is a pleasant and an acceptable oblation to God to which
compassion and mercy are joined. Without these, the ceremonies by which
men profess to worship God, with all their pomp and magnificence, vanish
into smoke. David does not, however, simply promise to bestow upon the
poor and the hungry something for the mere nourishment of the body. He
declares that they shall be partakers of this feast for another purpose,
namely, that matter of comfort being ministered to them, joy might be
restored to their hearts and flourish afresh. For they saw in that
feast, as in a mirror, the goodness of God set forth to all who are in
affliction, which might assuage with wonderful consolation the grief
arising from all their calamities. The Psalmist therefore adds, *They
shall praise Jehovah that seek him.* The abundant repast of which they
had partaken ought, no doubt, to have incited them to give thanks to
God; but what is particularly meant is, praising God for that
deliverance in grateful commemoration of which the sacrifice was
offered. This appears still more clearly from the last clause of the
verse: *Your heart shall live for ever* One meal could not have sufficed
to make their hearts live for ever. It was rather the hope which they
entertained of having ready succor from God which did this; for all the
faithful justly reckoned the deliverance of this one man as a
deliverance wrought for themselves in particular. Whence it follows,
that, in the peace-offerings, the praises of God were so celebrated, as
that genuine worshippers also exercised their hope in them. Farther, as
hypocrites content themselves with merely going through the bare and
lifeless ceremony, the Psalmist restricts the right performance of this
exercise to true and holy Israelites; *They shall praise Jehovah that
seek him;* and to seek God is the certain mark of genuine godliness.
Now, if the fathers under the law had their spiritual life renewed and
invigorated by their holy feasts, this virtue will show itself much more
abundantly at this day in the holy supper of Christ, provided those who
come to partake of it seek the Lord truly, and with their whole heart.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p9"></span><span id="xxviii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p10"></span>**27.** *All the ends of the earth
shall remember.* This passage, beyond all doubt, shows that David stops
not at his own person, but that under himself, as a type, he describes
the promised Messiah. For even then, it ought to have been a well-known
point, that he had been created king by God, that the people might be
united together and enjoy a happy life under one head; and this was at
length completely fulfilled in Christ. David’s name, I admit, was great
and renowned among the neighboring nations; but what was the territory
which they occupied in comparison of the whole world? Besides, the
foreign nations whom he had subdued had never been converted by him to
the true worship of God. That forced and slavish submission, therefore,
which the heathen nations had been brought by conquest to yield to an
earthly king, was very different from the willing obedience of true
godliness by which they would be recovered from their miserable
wanderings, and gathered to God. Nor does the Psalmist mean an ordinary
change, when he says, that the nations shall return to God, after having
become well acquainted with his grace. Moreover, by uniting them to the
fellowship of the holy feast, he manifestly grafts them into the body of
the Church. Some explain these words, *They shall remember,* as meaning,
that upon the restoration of the light of faith to the Gentiles, they
should then come to remember God, whom they had for a time forgotten;
 <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) but this seems to me too
refined, and far from the meaning. I allow that the conversion or return
of which mention is here made, implies that they had previously been
alienated from God by wicked defection; but this remembrance simply
means that the Gentiles, awakened by the signal miracles wrought by God,
would again come to embrace the true religion, from which they had
fallen away. Farther, it is to be observed, that the true worship of God
proceeds from the knowledge of him; for the language of the Psalmist
implies, that those shall come to prostrate themselves before God, in
humble adoration, who shall have profited so far in meditation upon his
works, as that they shall have no more desire proudly and contemptuously
to break forth against him.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p12"></span><span id="xxviii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p13"></span>This sense is more fully confirmed by
the reason  <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) which is added in
the following verse, (28) *The kingdom is Jehovah’s, that he may rule
over the nations* Some explain these words thus:- It is not to be
wondered at if the Gentiles should be constrained to yield honor to God,
by whom they were created, and by whose hand they are governed, although
he has not entered into a covenant of life with them. But I reject this
as a meagre and unsatisfactory interpretation. This passage, I have no
doubt, agrees with many other prophecies which represent the throne of
God as erected, on which Christ may sit to superintend and govern the
world. Although, therefore, the providence of God is extended to the
whole world, without any part of it being excepted; yet let us remember
that he then, in very deed, exercises his authority, when having
dispelled the darkness of ignorance, and diffused the light of his word,
he appears conspicuous on his throne. We have such a description of his
kingdom by the prophet Isaiah,

<span id="xxviii.vii-p15"></span>“He shall judge among the nations, and
shall rebuke many people.” (<span id="xxviii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)<span
id="xxviii.vii-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="xxviii.vii-p16"></span>Moreover, as God had not subdued the
world to himself, prior to the time when those who before were
unconquerable were subdued to a willing obedience by the preaching of
the gospel, we may conclude that this conversion was effected only under
the management and government of Christ. If it is objected, that the
whole world has never yet been converted, the solution is easy. A
comparison is here made between that remarkable period in which God
suddenly became known every where, by the preaching of the gospel, and
the ancient dispensation, when he kept the knowledge of himself shut up
within the limits of Judea. Christ, we know, penetrated with amazing
speed, from the east to the west, like the lightning’s flash, in order
to bring into the Church the Gentiles from all parts of the world.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p17"></span><span id="xxviii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p18"></span>**29.** *All the fat ones of the earth
shall eat and worship.* Lest it should be thought inconsistent that now
the fat ones of the earth are admitted as guests to this banquet, which
David seemed immediately before to have appointed only for the poor, let
us remember that the first place was given to the poor, because to them
principally comfort was set forth in the example of David. Yet it was
necessary, in the second place, that the rich and the prosperous should
be called to the feast, that they might not think themselves excluded
from the participation of the same grace. They are not, it is true,
urged, by the pressure of present calamities, to seek comfort for grief,
but they have need of a remedy to prevent them from intoxicating
themselves with their delights, and to excite them rather to lay up
their joy in heaven. Again, since they also are subject to a variety of
troubles, their abundance will be a curse to them, provided it keep
their minds down to the earth. The amount of the Psalmist’s statement
is, that this sacrifice will be common as well to those who are sound,
lusty, and in opulent circumstances, as to those who are lean, poor, and
half dead from the want of food; that the former, laying aside their
pride, may humble themselves before God, and that the latter, though
they may be brought low, may lift up their minds by spiritual joy to
God, the author of all good things, as James (<span
id="xxviii.vii-p18.1"></span>[Jas.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010)<span
id="xxviii.vii-p18.1"></span>) admonishes both classes, in these words,
“Let the brother of low degree rejoice in that he is exalted; but the
rich in that he is made low.” Now, if God, under the law, joined the
full with the hungry, the noble with the mean, the happy with the
wretched, much more ought this to take place at the present day under
the gospel. When, therefore, the rich hear that food is offered to them
elsewhere than in earthly abundance, let them learn to use the outward
good things which God has bestowed upon them for the purposes of the
present life, with such sobriety as that they may not be disgusted with
spiritual food, or turn away from it, through loathing. So long as they
wallow in their own filth, they will never long for this food with a
holy desire; and although they may have it at hand, they will never take
pleasure in tasting it.  <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524)
Farther, as those who are fat must become lean, in order that they may
present themselves to God to be fed and nourished, so David endeavors to
inspire the famished with assured and undaunted confidence, lest their
poverty should hinder them from coming to the banquet. Yea, he invites
even the dead to come to the feast, in order that the most despised, and
those who, in the estimation of the world, are almost like putrefying
carcases, may be encouraged and emboldened to present themselves at the
holy table of the Lord. The change which the Psalmist makes in the
number, from the plural to the singular, in the end of the verse,
somewhat obscures the sense; but the meaning undoubtedly is, that those
who seem already to be reduced to dust, and whose restoration from death
to life is, as it were, despaired of, shall be partakers of the same
grace with him.

<span id="xxviii.viii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="xxviii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
22:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030)<span
id="xxviii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p2"></span>**30.** Their seed shall serve him, and
shall be registered to the Lord  <span id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525)
for a generation. **31.** They shall come, and shall declare his
righteousness to a people that shall be born, because he hath done it.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxviii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xxviii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p6"></span>**30.** *Their seed shall serve him.*
The more to exalt the greatness of the benefit, he declares that it will
be of such a character that posterity will never forget it. And he shows
how it will come to be perpetuated, namely, because the conversion of
the world, of which he has spoken, will not be for a short time only but
will continue from age to age. Whence we again conclude, that what is
here celebrated is not such a manifestation of the glory of God to the
Gentile nations as proceeds from a transitory and fading rumor, but such
as will enlighten the world with its beams, even to the end of time.
Accordingly, the perpetuity of the Church is here abundantly proved, and
in very clear terms: not that it always flourishes or continues in the
same uniform course through successive ages, but because God, unwilling
that his name should be extinguished in the world, will always raise up
some sincerely to devote themselves to his service. We ought to remember
that this seed, in which the service of God was to be preserved, is the
fruit of the incorruptible seed; for God begets and multiplies his
Church only by means of his word.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p7"></span>The expression, *To be registered to
the Lord for a generation,* is explained in two ways. Some take the
Hebrew word <span id="xxviii.viii-p7.1"></span>דור, *dor,* for *a
succession of ages,* and explain the clause thus: They shall be
registered to the Lord age after age. Others take it for *generation,*
in the sense in which the word *natio* \[nation\] is used in the Latin
tongue. As both these senses suit very well, and come almost to the same
thing, I leave my readers at liberty to choose between them. I am,
however, I admit, rather inclined to the opinion, that by this word is
designated God’s chosen people and peculiar nation, which may be
accounted the heritage of God. Farther, as the name *Jehovah,* which is
expressive of God’s essence, is not here used as it is a little before,
but the word *Adonai,* I do not disapprove of the opinion of those who
think that Christ is here expressly invested with authority over  <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) the Church, that he may register all
who shall give in their names as on the side of God his Father. And,
indeed, as our heavenly Father has committed all his chosen ones to the
protection and guardianship of his own Son, he acknowledges as his
people none but those who belong to the flock of Christ.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p9"></span><span id="xxviii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p10"></span>**31.** *They shall come, and shall
declare.* The Psalmist here confirms what I have previously stated, that
since the fathers will transmit the knowledge of this benefit to their
children, as it were from hand to hand, the name of God will be always
renowned. From this we may also deduce the additional truth, that it is
by the preaching of the grace of God alone that the Church is kept from
perishing. At the same time, let it be observed, that care and diligence
in propagating divine truth are here enjoined upon us, that it may
continue after we are removed from this world. As the Holy Spirit
prescribes it as a duty incumbent on all the faithful to be diligent in
instructing their children, that there may be always one generation
after another to serve God, the sluggishness of those who have no
scruple of conscience in burying the remembrance of God in eternal
silence, a sin with which those are virtually chargeable who neglect to
speak of him to their children, and who thus do nothing to prevent his
name from utterly perishing, is condemned as involving the greatest
turpitude. The term *righteousness,* in this place, refers to the
faithfulness which God observes in preserving his people, of which we
have a memorable example in the deliverance of David. In defending his
servant from the violence and outrage of the wicked, he proved himself
to be righteous. Hence we may learn how dear our welfare is to God,
seeing he combines it with the celebration of the praise of his own
righteousness. If then the righteousness of God is illustriously
manifested in this, that he does not disappoint us of our hope, nor
abandon us in dangers, but defends and keeps us in perfect safety, there
is no more reason to fear that he will forsake us in the time of our
need, than there is reason to fear that he can forget himself. We must,
however, remember that it is not for any particular succor afforded to
one individual, but it is for the redemption of the human race, that the
celebration of the praise of God is required from us in this passage. In
short, the Holy Spirit, by the mouth of David, recommends to us the
publication of Christ’s resurrection. In the end of this psalm some
commentators resolve the particle <span
id="xxviii.viii-p10.1"></span>כי, *ki, because,* into the pronoun <span
id="xxviii.viii-p10.2"></span>אשר, *asher, which,* as if it had been
said, *The righteousness which he hath done.* But the sentence will be
fuller if we read, *because,* and explain the passage thus: They shall
come, and shall declare his righteousness, because God shall have given
proof, or demonstration, of his righteousness - shall have afforded
evidence by the effect, or the deed itself, that he is the faithful
guardian of his own people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_493"></span>[494](cc08027.htm#fr_493) <span
id="xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxviii-p3.1"></span>En toutes
les sortes qu’il est possible de penser.” — *Fr*. “In every way which it
is possible to conceive.”

<span id="fn_494"></span>[495](cc08027.htm#fr_494) <span
id="xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p6"></span> And this title they say is prefixed to the
psalm, because the whole of it is concerning Christ the morning star.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[496](cc08027.htm#fr_495) <span
id="xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p7"></span> Those who render it *strength* derive the
word from <span id="xxviii-p7.1"></span>איל, *eyl, strength,* and
observe, that the cognate word in verse 20, <span
id="xxviii-p7.2"></span>אילותי, *eyaluthi,* is rendered by the
Septuagint <span id="xxviii-p7.3"></span>την βοηθειαν μου*, my aid* or
*strength.* By *the strength of the morning* they understand the dawning
of the day.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[497](cc08027.htm#fr_496) <span
id="xxviii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p8"></span> This is the sense in which *Lightfoot*
understands the words.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[498](cc08027.htm#fr_497) <span
id="xxviii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p3.1"></span>Mon
Dieu, je crie *tout* le jour.” — *Fr*. “O my God, I cry *all* the day.”

<span id="fn_498"></span>[499](cc08027.htm#fr_498) <span
id="xxviii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p7.1"></span>Ce qu il
ne pouvoit faire si non en resistant vivement a la apprehension
contraire.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[500](cc08027.htm#fr_499) <span
id="xxviii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p9.1"></span>Et de
faict, il n’estoit point de si petit courage, que pour quelque real
leger il hurlast ainsi comme une beste brute.” — *Fr*. “The original
word \[for *roaring*\] properly denotes the roaring of a lion, and is
often applied to the deep groaning of men in sickness. See among other
places, <span id="xxviii.i-p9.2"></span>[Ps.
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003), [Ps.
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)<span id="xxviii.i-p9.2"></span>.”
— *Bishop Mant.*

<span id="fn_500"></span>[501](cc08027.htm#fr_500) <span
id="xxviii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xxviii.i-p11.1"></span>Pour
crainte de charger Christ de ce blasme.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[502](cc08027.htm#fr_501) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p3"></span> In the Hebrew it is, “He rolled
\[himself\] upon God.” In the Latin version our author reads, “<span
id="xxviii.ii-p3.1"></span>Devolvit ad Jehovam;” and in the French,
“<span id="xxviii.ii-p3.2"></span>Il a remis disent-ils*,* au Seigneur
son a l’aime.”

<span id="fn_502"></span>[503](cc08027.htm#fr_502) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p4"></span> “*Let him deliver him, let him deliver
him.* This repetition is also the rendering adopted by *Street*, and it
is approved by *Poole*. “The same thing,” says *Poole*, “is twice
repeated, to show both the vehemence of their hatred and their
confidence of success against him.”

<span id="fn_503"></span>[504](cc08027.htm#fr_503) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p8"></span> As <span id="xxviii.ii-p8.1"></span>ישב,
*yashab,* not only signifies *to inhabit,* but also *to remain* or
*continue,* (see <span id="xxviii.ii-p8.2"></span>[Ps
102:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013)<span
id="xxviii.ii-p8.2"></span>,) *Hammond* thinks this last is the meaning
here, and renders the word, “But thou remainest or continuest to be
holy, O thou, the praises of, or who art the praises of Israel, that is,
the object of all their praises; or more simply, But thou remainest
holy, the praises of Israel.”

<span id="fn_504"></span>[505](cc08027.htm#fr_504) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p17"></span> *Bishop Horsley* reads these words,
“All who see me insult \[me\] with gestures of derision:” and says, “I
can no otherwise render the verb <span id="xxviii.ii-p17.1"></span>לעג,
than by this periphrasis. *Bishop Mant* translates the whole verse thus,

<span id="xxviii.ii-p18"></span>“All who to slaughter see me led,  
Deride my state distrest;  
They curl the lip, they shake the head,  
They point the taunting jest:”

<span id="xxviii.ii-p19"></span>And observes, “The distinctness and
colouring of the prophetic picture here are as striking to the
imagination, as the subject is painful to the heart.”

<span id="fn_505"></span>[506](cc08027.htm#fr_505) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p20"></span> “To protrude the lower lip is, in the
East, considered a very strong indication of contempt. Its employment is
chiefly confined to the lower orders.” — *Illustrated Commentary upon
the Bible.*

<span id="fn_506"></span>[507](cc08027.htm#fr_506) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p21"></span> <span id="xxviii.ii-p21.1"></span>בשפה,
*besaphah, with the lip.*

<span id="fn_507"></span>[508](cc08027.htm#fr_507) <span
id="xxviii.ii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p22"></span> “<span
id="xxviii.ii-p22.1"></span>Qu’il avoit Dieu au ciel pour garent qui
s’avoir bien faire la vengence de ses mesdisans.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_508"></span>[509](cc08027.htm#fr_508) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxviii.iii-p3.1"></span>Qui
m’as donne asseurance, lorsque je suchoye les mammelles de ma mere.” —
*Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, thou gavest me confidence whilst I sucked
the breasts of my mother.”

<span id="fn_509"></span>[510](cc08027.htm#fr_509) <span
id="xxviii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p4"></span> “<span
id="xxviii.iii-p4.1"></span>Abandonne entre tes mains.” — *Note, Fr.
marg.* “That is, left among thy hands.” *Poole*, applying this to Christ
says, “I was like one, forsaken by his parent, and cast wholly upon thy
providence. I had no father upon earth; and my mother was poor and
helpless.”

<span id="fn_510"></span>[511](cc08027.htm#fr_510) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p6"></span> “The bull is known to be a fierce
animal, and those of Bashan, from its luxuriant pastures, were
uncommonly so.” — *Dr Geddes.*

<span id="fn_511"></span>[512](cc08027.htm#fr_511) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="xxviii.iv-p9.1"></span>Ace
qu’il luy plaise nous remettre sus, et nous rendre force et vigueur.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[513](cc08027.htm#fr_512) <span
id="xxviii.iv-p13.5"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p14"></span> This word has created much discussion.
In the Hebrew Bible, the *kethib* or *textual* reading is, <span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.1"></span>כארי, *caari, like a lion;* the *keri,* or
*marginal* reading, is <span id="xxviii.iv-p14.2"></span>כארו, *caaru,
“they* *pierced,”* from <span id="xxviii.iv-p14.3"></span>כרה, *carah,
to cut, dig,* or *pierce.* Both readings are supported by MSS. There is,
however, no ground to doubt that the genuine reading is, <span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.4"></span>כארו, *caaru.* As the Septuagint here reads
<span id="xxviii.iv-p14.5"></span>ωρυξαν*, they pierced,* the
translators, doubtless, considered that the correct reading of the
Hebrew text was <span id="xxviii.iv-p14.6"></span>כארו, *caaru.* The
Vulgate, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic, give a similar rendering. All the
Evangelists also quote and apply the passage to the crucifixion of
Christ. Besides, the other reading, <span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.7"></span>כארי, *caari, as a lion,* renders the
passage unintelligible. The Chaldee version has combined both the ideas
of pierced and *as a lion,* reading, “Biting, as a lion, my hands and my
feet.” Our author supposes that the text has been fraudulently corrupted
by the Jews, who have intentionally changed <span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.8"></span>כארו, *caaru,* into <span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.9"></span>כארי, *caari.* But there is no necessity for
supposing that there has been any fraud in the case. In the process of
transcription, the change might have been made unintentionally, by the
substitution of the letter <span id="xxviii.iv-p14.10"></span>י, *yod,*
for the letter <span id="xxviii.iv-p14.11"></span>ו, *vau,* which it so
nearly resembles. *Walford* observes, “that the present reading \[<span
id="xxviii.iv-p14.12"></span>כארי, *caari*\] is quite satisfactory, if
it be taken as a participle plural in reflexive, and be translated,
‘Wounders of my hands and my feet.’”

<span id="fn_513"></span>[514](cc08027.htm#fr_513) <span
id="xxviii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p3"></span> “<span
id="xxviii.v-p3.1"></span>Asgavoir, vie, qui est seule.” — *Note, Fr.
marg.* “Namely, my life, which is alone.”

<span id="fn_514"></span>[515](cc08027.htm#fr_514) <span
id="xxviii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p4"></span> “<span id="xxviii.v-p4.1"></span>Et me
respon, *en me sauvant* des cornes des licornes.” — *Fr*. “And answer
me, *by saving* me from the horns of the Unicorns.”

<span id="fn_515"></span>[516](cc08027.htm#fr_515) <span
id="xxviii.v-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="xxviii.v-p10.1"></span>Il
nous a este faite une demonstration si grossiere, qu’on la pouvoit
taster, au doigt.” — *Fr.* “There has been given us a demonstration so
palpable, that it might be touched with the finger.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[517](cc08027.htm#fr_516) <span
id="xxviii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p13"></span> That is, my life, which is dear and
precious to me.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[518](cc08027.htm#fr_517) <span
id="xxviii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xxviii.v-p14.1"></span>La vie
esseulee.” — *Fr*. “Life deserted or left alone.”

<span id="fn_518"></span>[519](cc08027.htm#fr_518) <span
id="xxviii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p3"></span> “<span
id="xxviii.vi-p3.1"></span>*Disant.”* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](cc08027.htm#fr_519) <span
id="xxviii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p7"></span> The second part of the psalm here
commences. There is a transition from language of the deepest anguish to
that of exalted joy and gratitude. The suffering Messiah here
contemplates the blessed results of his sufferings.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](cc08027.htm#fr_520) <span
id="xxviii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p12"></span> It is “praise God,” both in the Latin
and French versions; but the train of thought seems to require that it
should be “fear God.”

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](cc08027.htm#fr_521) <span
id="xxviii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxviii.vii-p3.1"></span>Ate
laus mea.” — *Lat.* “<span id="xxviii.vii-p3.2"></span>Ma louange
proviendra de toy.” — *Fr*. “<span id="xxviii.vii-p3.3"></span>Ou, ma
louange sera de toy.” — *Ft*. *marg.* “Or, my praise shall be of thee.”

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](cc08027.htm#fr_522) <span
id="xxviii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p11"></span> As it is not said what they should
remember, some commentators explain it thus: That they shall remember,
with penitence, their sins; and, particularly, their idolatry. Others,
that they shall remember the goodness and mercy of God, through Christ,
to a lost world. And others, that they shall remember God whom they had
forgotten, worshipping, instead of him, wood and stones. This last seems
to be the view to which Calvin refers.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](cc08027.htm#fr_523) <span
id="xxviii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p14"></span> The reason why the Gentiles shall
remember, and turn to the Lord.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](cc08027.htm#fr_524) <span
id="xxviii.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p19"></span> “<span id="xxviii.vii-p19.1"></span>Et
encores qu’ils les ayent en main, ils ne pourront prendre plaisir in les
savourer.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](cc08027.htm#fr_525) <span
id="xxviii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p3"></span> The Hebrew word here is <span
id="xxviii.viii-p3.1"></span>אדני, *Adonai.*

<span id="fn_526"></span>[527](cc08027.htm#fr_526) <span
id="xxviii.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p8"></span> The Hebrew word *Adonai* is derived
from a verb which signifies *to direct, rule, judge;* and it therefore
signifies *director, ruler, judge.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 23](cc08028)
