[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08013)  [Next](cc08015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span><span id="xv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#000)<span id="xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv-p2"></span>David, after having recounted the former
victories which he had gained, and exalted in lofty strains the grace
and power of God in their happy issue, now again, when he sees new
enemies and dangers rising up, implores the protection of the same God
by whom he had before been delivered, and beseeches him to overthrow the
pride of his enemies.

<span id="xv-p3"></span>To the chief musician Almuth Laben. A Psalm of
David.

<span id="xv-p4"></span>This inscription is variously explained. Some
translate it, *Upon the death of Laben,* and are of opinion that he was
one of the chief captains of David’s enemies. Others are inclined to
think it was rather a fictitious name, and that Goliath is the person
spoken of in this psalm. According to others, it was a musical
instrument. But to me it seems a more correct, or, at least, (as I am
accustomed to speak when the matter is obscure,  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) a more probable opinion, that it was
the beginning of some well-known song, to the tune of which the psalm
was composed. The disputes of interpreters as to what victory David here
celebrates, in my judgment, are unnecessary, and serve no good purpose.
In the first place, their opinion that it is a song of victory, in which
David simply gives thanks to God, is confuted, and shown to be erroneous
from the scope of the psalm. The greater part is indeed occupied in
singing the praises of God, but the whole ought to be considered as a
prayer; in which, for the purpose of elevating his mind to confidence in
God, he calls to his remembrance, according to his usual manner, by what
wonderful displays of the power of God he had formerly been delivered
from the violence and power of his enemies. It is therefore a mistake to
limit to one victory this thanksgiving, in which he intended to
comprehend many deliverances.

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** I will praise Jehovah with my whole
heart; I will tell of thy marvellous works. **2.** I will rejoice and
exult  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) in thee; yea, I will
celebrate in songs thy name, O thou Most High. **3.** When my enemies
are turned back, they fall down, and are put to flight  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) at thy presence.

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span><span id="xv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**1.** *I will praise the Lord.* David begins
the psalm in this way, to induce God to succor him in the calamities
with which he was now afflicted. As God continues his favor towards his
own people without intermission, all the good he has hitherto done to us
should serve to inspire us with confidence and hope, that he will be
gracious and merciful to us in the time to come.  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) There is, indeed, in these words a
profession of gratitude for the favors which he has received from God;
 <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) but, in remembering his past
mercies, he encourages himself to expect succor and aid in future
emergencies; and by this means he opens the gate of prayer. *The whole
heart* is taken for an upright or sincere heart, which is opposed to a
double heart. Thus he distinguishes himself not only from gross
hypocrites, who praise God only with their lips outwardly, without
having their hearts in any way affected, but also acknowledges that
whatever he had hitherto done which was commendable, proceeded entirely
from the pure grace of God. Even irreligious men, I admit, when they
have obtained some memorable victory, are ashamed to defraud God of the
praise which is due to him; but we see that as soon as they have uttered
a single expression in acknowledgement of the assistance God has
afforded them, they immediately begin to boast loudly, and to sing
triumphs in honor of their own valor, as if they were under no
obligations whatever to God. In short, it is a piece of pure mockery
when they profess that their exploits have been done by the help of God;
for, after having made oblation to Him, they sacrifice to their own
counsels, skill, courage, and resources. Observe how the prophet
Habakkuk, under the person of one presumptuous king, wisely reproves the
ambition which is common to all, (<span id="xv.i-p9.2"></span>[Hab
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)<span id="xv.i-p9.2"></span>.)
Yea, we see that the famous generals of antiquity, who, upon returning
victorious from some battle, desired public and solemn thanksgivings
 <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) to be decreed in their name to
the gods, thought of nothing less than of doing honor to their false
deities; but only abused their names under a false pretense, in order
thereby to obtain an opportunity of indulging in vain boasting, that
their own superior prowess might be acknowledged.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) David, therefore, with good reason,
affirms that he is unlike the children of this world, whose hypocrisy or
fraud is discovered by the wicked and dishonest distribution which they
make between God and themselves,  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) arrogating to themselves the greater
part of the praise which they pretended to ascribe to God. He praised
God with his whole heart, which they did not; for certainly it is not
praising God with the whole heart when a mortal man dares to appropriate
the smallest portion of the glory which God claims for himself. God
cannot bear with seeing his glory appropriated by the creature in even
the smallest degree, so intolerable to him is the sacrilegious arrogance
of those who by praising themselves, obscure his glory as far as they
can.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>*I will tell of all thy marvellous works.*
Here David confirms what I have already said, that he does not treat in
this psalm of one victory or one deliverance only; for he proposes to
himself in general all the miracles which God had wrought in his behalf,
as subjects of meditation. He applies the term *marvellous* not to all
the benefits which he had received from God, but to those more signal
and memorable deliverances in which was exhibited a bright and striking
manifestation of the divine power. God would have us to acknowledge him
as the author of all our blessings; but on some of his gifts he has
engraven more evident marks in order the more effectually to awaken our
senses, which are otherwise as if asleep or dead. David’s language,
therefore, is an acknowledgement that he was preserved of God, not by
ordinary means, but by the special power of God, which was conspicuously
displayed in this matter; inasmuch as he had stretched forth his hand in
a miraculous manner, and above the common and usual way.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span><span id="xv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span>**2.** *I will rejoice and exult in thee.*
Observe how the faithful praise God sincerely and without hypocrisy,
when they do not rest on themselves for happiness, and are not
intoxicated with foolish and carnal presumption, but rejoice in God
alone; which is nothing else than to seek the matter of their joy from
the favor of God, and from no other source, since in it perfect
happiness consists. *I will rejoice in thee* We ought to consider how
great is the difference and opposition between the character of the joy
which men endeavor to find in themselves, and the character of the joy
which they seek in God. David, the more forcibly to express how he
renounces every thing which may keep hold of or occupy him with vain
delight, adds the word *exult,* by which he means that he finds in God a
full and an overflowing abundance of joy, so that he is not under the
necessity of seeking even the smallest drop in any other quarter.
Moreover, it is of importance to remember what I have previously
observed, that David sets before himself the testimonies of the divine
goodness which he had formerly experienced, in order to encourage
himself with the more alacrity to lay open his heart  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) to God, and to present his prayers
before him. He who begins his prayer by affirming that God is the great
source and object of his joy, fortifies himself before-hand with the
strongest confidence, in presenting his supplications to the hearer of
prayer.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span><span id="xv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>**3.** *While my enemies are turned back.* In
these words he assigns the reason why he undertakes to sing the praises
of God, namely, because he acknowledges that his frequent victories had
been achieved, not by his own power, nor by the power of his soldiers,
but by the free favor of God. In the first part of the verse he narrates
historically how his enemies were discomfited or put to flight; and then
he adds, what faith alone could enable him to say, that this did not
take place by the power of man or by chance, but because God fought for
him,  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) and stood against them in
the battle. He says, *they fall,*  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) *and are put to flight* At Thy
Presence. David therefore acted wisely, when, upon seeing his enemies
turn their backs, he lifted up the eyes of his mind to God, in order to
perceive that victory flowed to him from no other source than from the
secret and incomprehensible aid of God. And, doubtless, it is He only
who guides the simple by the spirit of wisdom, while he inflicts madness
on the crafty, and strikes them with amazement, — who inspires with
courage the faint and timid, while he causes the boldest to tremble with
fear, — who restores to the feeble their strength, while he reduces the
strong to weakness, — who upholds the fainthearted by his power, while
he makes the sword to fall from the hands of the valiant; - and,
finally, who brings the battle to a prosperous or disastrous issue, just
as he pleases. When, therefore, we see our enemies overthrown, we must
beware of limiting our view to what is visible to the eye of sense, like
ungodly men, who, while they see with their bodily eyes, are yet blind;
but let us instantly call to our remembrance this truth, that when our
enemies turn back, they are put to flight by the presence of the Lord.
 <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) The verbs, *fall* and *put to
flight,* in the Hebrew, are in the future tense, but I have translated
them in the present, because David anew presents to his own view the
goodness of God which had formerly been manifested towards him.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**4.** For thou hast maintained my right and
my cause; thou sittest upon the throne a righteous judge.  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) **5.** Thou hast rebuked the nations;
thou hast destroyed the wicked; thou hast blotted out their name for
ever and ever.

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span><span id="xv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span>The Psalmist proceeds a step farther in the
4th verse, declaring that God stretched forth his hand to give him
succor, because he was unrighteously afflicted by his enemies. And
surely if we desire to be favored with the assistance of God, we ought
to see to it that we fight under his standard. David, therefore, calls
him *a judge of righteousness,* or, which is the same thing, *a
righteous judge;* as if he had said, God has acted towards me according
to his ordinary manner and constant principle of acting, for it is his
usual way to undertake the defense of good causes. I am more inclined to
render the words, *Thou sittest a just judge,* than to render them, *O*
*just judge, thou sittest*,  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)
because the form of expression, according to the first reading, is more
emphatic. The import of it is this: God at length has assumed the
character of judge, and is gone up into his judgment-seat to execute the
office of judge. On this account he glories in having law and right on
his side, and declares that God was the maintainer of his right and
cause. What follows in the next verse, *Thou hast destroyed* \[or
*discomfited,*\] *the wicked,* belongs also to the same subject. When he
beholds his enemies overthrown, he does not rejoice in their
destruction, considered simply in itself; but in condemning them on
account of their unrighteousness, he says that they have received the
punishment which they deserved. Under the name of *nations* he means,
that it was not a small number of ungodly persons who were destroyed,
but great armies, yea, even all who had risen up against him from
different quarters. And the goodness of God shines forth the brighter in
this, that, on account of the favor which he bare to one of his
servants, he spared not even whole nations. When he says, *Thou hast
blotted out their name for ever,* it may be understood as meaning, that
they were destroyed without any hope of ever being able to rise again,
and devoted to everlasting shame. We could not otherwise discern how God
buries the name of the ungodly with themselves, did we not hear him
declare that the memory of the righteous shall be for ever blessed,
(<span id="xv.ii-p7.2"></span>[Pr
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007)<span id="xv.ii-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)<span id="xv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>**6.** O thou enemy, desolations are come to
an end for ever; and thou hast destroyed \[or demolished  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) \] cities; their memory has perished
with them. **7.** And Jehovah sitteth for ever, he hath prepared his
throne for judgment. **8.** And he shall judge the world in
righteousness, he shall judge the nations in uprightness.

<span id="xv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p6"></span>**6.** *O thou enemy, desolations are come
to an end for ever.* This sixth verse is explained in different ways.
Some read it interrogatively, viewing the letter <span
id="xv.iii-p6.1"></span>ה, as a mark of interrogation, as if David,
addressing his discourse to his enemies, asked whether they had
completed their work of devastation, even as they had resolved to
destroy every thing; for the verb <span id="xv.iii-p6.2"></span>תמם,
*tamam,* signifies sometimes *to complete,* and sometimes *to put an end
to any thing.* And if we here take it in this sense, David, in the
language of sarcasm or irony, rebukes the foolish confidence of his
enemies. Others, reading the verse without any interrogation, make the
irony still more evident, and think that David describes, in these three
verses, a twofold state of matters; that, in the first place, (verse 6,)
he introduces his enemies persecuting him with savage violence, and
persevering with determined obstinacy in their cruelty, so that it
seemed to be their fixed purpose never to desist until the kingdom of
David should be utterly destroyed; and that, in the second place,
(verses 7, 8) he represents God as seated on his judgment-seat, directly
over against them, to repress their outrageous attempts. If this sense
is admitted, the copulative, in the beginning of the seventh verse,
which we have translated *and,* must be rendered by the adversative
particle *but,* in this way: Thou, O enemy, didst seek after nothing
except slaughter and the destruction of cities; but, at length, God has
shown that he sits in heaven on his throne as judge, to put into proper
order the things which are in confusion on the earth. According to
others, David gives thanks to God, because, when the ungodly were fully
determined to spread universal ruin around them, he put an end to their
devastations. Others understand the words in a more restricted sense, as
meaning that the desolations of the ungodly were completed, because God,
in his just judgment, had made to fall upon their own heads the
calamities and ruin which they had devised against David. According to
others, David, in the 6th verse, complains that God had, for a long
time, silently suffered the miserable devastation of his people, so that
the ungodly, being left unchecked, wasted and destroyed all things
according to their pleasure; and in the seventh verse, they think he
subjoins for his consolation that God, notwithstanding, presides over
human affairs. I have no objection to the view, that there is first
described ironically how dreadful the power of the enemy was, when they
put forth their highest efforts; and next, that there is set in
opposition to it the judgment of God, which suddenly brought their
proceedings to an abrupt termination, contrary to their expectation.
They anticipated no such issue; for we know that the ungodly, although
they may not presume openly to deprive God of his authority and
dominion, yet run headlong to every excess of wickedness, not less
boldly than if he were bound with fetters.  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) We have taken notice of an almost
similar manner of speaking in a preceding psalm, (<span
id="xv.iii-p7.2"></span>[Ps 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#013)<span
id="xv.iii-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="xv.iii-p8"></span>This contrast between the power of the
enemies of God and his people, and the work of God in breaking up their
proceedings, very well illustrates the wonderful character of the succor
which he granted to his people. The ungodly had set to themselves no
limit in the work of doing mischief, save in the utter destruction of
all things, and at the commencement complete destruction seemed to be at
hand; but when things were in this state of confusion, God seasonably
made his appearance for the help of his people.  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) As often, therefore, as nothing but
destruction presents itself to our view, to whatever side we may turn,
 <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) let us remember to lift up our
eyes to the heavenly throne, whence God beholds all that is done here
below. In the world our affairs may have been brought to such an
extremity, that there is no longer hope in regard to them; but the
shield with which we ought to repel all the temptations by which we are
assailed is this, that God, nevertheless, sits Judge in heaven. Yea,
when he seems to take no notice of us, and does not immediately remedy
the evils which we suffer, it becomes us to realize by faith his secret
providence. The Psalmist says, in the first place, *God sitteth for
ever,* by which he means, that however high the violence of men may be
carried, and although their fury may burst forth without measure, they
can never drag God from his seat. He farther means by this expression,
that it is impossible for God to abdicate the office and authority of
judge; a truth which he expresses more clearly in the second clause of
the verse, *He hath prepared his throne for judgment,* in which he
declares that God reigns not only for the purpose of making his majesty
and glory surpassingly great, but also for the purpose of governing the
world in righteousness.

<span id="xv.iii-p11"></span><span id="xv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p12"></span>**8.** *And he shall judge the world in
righteousness.* As David has just now testified, that the power of God
is not inactive, so that he dwells in heaven only indulging himself in
pleasures; but that it is a constantly operating power which he
exercises in preserving his authority, and governing the world in
righteousness and equity; so in this verse he adds the use of this
doctrine, which is this, that the power of God is not shut up in heaven,
but manifests itself in succouring men. The true doctrine on this
subject, is not, like Epicurus, to imagine that God is a being wholly
devoted to ease and pleasures, and who, satisfied with himself alone,
has no care whatever about mankind, but to place him on the throne of
power and equity, so that we may be fully persuaded, that although he
does not immediately succor those who are unrighteously oppressed, yet
there is not a moment in which he ceases to take a deep interest in
them. And when he seems for a time to take no notice of things, the
conclusion to which we should come most assuredly is, not that he
deserts his office, but that he wishes hereby to exercise the patience
of his people, and that, therefore, we should wait the issue in
patience, and with tranquillity of mind. The demonstrative pronoun *He,*
in my opinion, is of great weight. The import of it is, as if David had
said, No one can deprive God of his office as Judge of the world, nor
prevent him from extending his judgments to all nations. Whence it
follows, that he will much more be the judge of his own people. David
declares these judgments to be *righteous,* in order to induce us, when
we are unrighteously and cruelly molested, to ask assistance from God,
in the confident expectation of obtaining it; for since he judges the
nations in righteousness, he will not suffer injustice and oppression
always to reign with impunity in the world, nor deny his aid to the
innocent.

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**9.** And Jehovah will be a refuge to the
poor, and a protection in seasonable times in trouble. **10.** And they
that know thy name will put their trust in thee: for thou forsakest not
them that seek thee, O Jehovah. **11.** Sing unto Jehovah, who dwelleth
in Sion, and proclaim his doings among the nations. **12.** For in
requiring blood, he hath remembered it: he hath not forgotten the cry of
the afflicted.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span>**9.** *And Jehovah will be a refuge for the
poor.* David here furnishes a remedy for the temptation which greatly
afflicts the weak, when they see themselves, and those who are like
them, abandoned to the will of the ungodly, while God keeps silence.
 <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) He puts us in mind that God
delays his aid, and to outward appearance forsakes his faithful ones, in
order at length to succor them at a more convenient season, according to
the greatness of their necessity and affliction. From this it follows,
that he by no means ceases from the exercise of his office, although he
suffer the good and the innocent to be reduced to extreme poverty, and
although he exercise them with weeping and lamentations; for by doing
this he lights up a lamp to enable them to see his judgments the more
clearly. Accordingly, David expressly declares, that God interposes his
protection *seasonably* in the afflictions of his people. *The Lord will
be a protection to the poor in seasonable times in trouble* From this we
are taught the duty of giving his providence time to make itself at
length manifest in the season of need. And if protection by the power of
God, and the experience of his fatherly favor, is the greatest blessing
which we can receive, let us not feel so uneasy at being accounted poor
and miserable before the world, but let this consolatory consideration
assuage our grief, that God is not far from us, seeing our afflictions
call upon him to come to our aid. Let us also observe, that God is said
to be at hand in *seasonable times* when he succours the faithful during
their affliction.  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) The Hebrew
word <span id="xv.iv-p7.2"></span>בצרה, *batsarah,* which occurs in the
end of the 9th verse, is understood by some as if it were the simple
word which signifies *defense;* but here they render it metaphorically
*distress,* denoting those trying circumstances in which a person is so
closely shut up, and reduced to such extremity, that he can find no
escape. I, however, think there is more probability in the opinion of
those who take <span id="xv.iv-p7.3"></span>ב, the first letter of <span
id="xv.iv-p7.4"></span>בצרה, *batsarah,* as a servile letter meaning
*in,* which is its ordinary signification.  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) What is here said, then, is, that God
assists his own people in the time of need, namely, in affliction, or
when they are weighed down with it, for then assistance is most
necessary and most useful.

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span><span id="xv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span>In the tenth verse, the Psalmist teaches us,
that when the Lord delivers the righteous, the fruit which results from
it is, that they themselves, and all the rest of the righteous, acquire
increasing confidence in his grace; for, unless we are fully persuaded
that God exercises a care about men and human affairs, we must
necessarily be troubled with constant disquietude. But as most men shut
their eyes that they may not see the judgments of God, David restricts
this advantage to the faithful alone, and, certainly, where there is no
godliness, there is no sense of the works of God. It is also to be
observed, that he attributes to the faithful *the knowledge of God;*
because from this religion proceeds, whereas it is extinguished through
the ignorance and stupidity of men. Many take the *name of God* simply
for God himself; but, as I have observed in my remarks on a preceding
psalm, I think something more is expressed by this term. As God’s
essence is hidden and incomprehensible, his name just means his
character, so far as he has been pleased to make it known to us. David
next explains the ground of this trust in God to be, that he *does not
forsake those who seek him* God is sought in two ways, either by
invocation and prayers, or by studying to live a holy and an upright
life; and, indeed, the one is always inseparably joined with the other.
But as the Psalmist is here treating of the protection of God, on which
the safety of the godly depends, *to seek God,* as I understand it, is
to betake ourselves to him for help and relief in danger and distress.

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span><span id="xv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span>**11.** *Sing unto Jehovah.* David, not
contented with giving thanks individually, and on his own account,
exhorts the faithful to unite with him, praising God, and to do this not
only because it is their duty to stir up one another to this religious
exercise, but because the deliverances of which he treats were worthy of
being publicly and solemnly celebrated; and this is expressed more
clearly in the second clause, where he commands them to be published
among the nations. The meaning is, that they are not published or
celebrated as they deserve, unless the whole world is filled with the
renown of them. To proclaim God’s doings among the nations was indeed,
as it were, to sing to the deaf; but by this manner of speaking, David
intended to show that the territory of Judea was too narrow to contain
the infinite greatness of Jehovah’s praises. He gives God this title,
*He who dwelleth in Sion,* to distinguish him from all the false gods of
the Gentiles. There is in the phrase a tacit comparison between the God
who made his covenant with Abraham and Israel, and all the gods who, in
every other part of the world except Judea, were worshipped according to
the blinded and depraved fancies of men. It is not enough for persons to
honor and reverence some deity indiscriminately or at random; they must
distinctly yield to the only living and true God the worship which
belongs to him, and which he commands. Moreover, as God had particularly
chosen Sion as the place where his name might be called upon, David very
properly assigns it to him as his peculiar dwelling-place, not that it
is lawful to attempt to shut up, in any particular place, Him whom “the
heaven of heavens cannot contain,” (<span id="xv.iv-p12.1"></span>[1Ki
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001)<span id="xv.iv-p12.1"></span>.)
but because, as we shall afterwards see, (<span
id="xv.iv-p12.2"></span>[Ps
132:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012)<span id="xv.iv-p12.2"></span>)
he had promised to make it his rest for ever. David did not, according
to his own fancy, assign God a dwelling-place there; but he understood,
by a revelation from heaven, that such was the pleasure of God himself,
as Moses had often predicted, (<span id="xv.iv-p12.3"></span>[De
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#001)<span id="xv.iv-p12.3"></span>.)
This goes far to prove what I have said before, that this psalm was not
composed upon the occasion of David’s victory over Goliath; for it was
only towards the close of David’s reign that the ark of the covenant was
removed to Sion according to the commandment of God. The conjecture of
some that David spake by the Spirit of prophecy of the residence of the
ark on Sion, as a future event, appears to me to be unnatural and
forced. Farther, we see that the holy fathers, when they resorted to
Sion to offer sacrifices to God, did not act merely according to the
suggestion of their own minds; but what they did proceeded from faith in
the word of God, and was done in obedience to his command; and they
were, therefore, approved of by him for their religious service. Whence
it follows, that there is no ground whatever to make use of their
example as an argument or excuse for the religious observances which
superstitious men have, by their own fancy, invented for themselves.
Besides, it was not enough for the faithful, in those days, to depend
upon the word of God, and to engage in those ceremonial services which
he required, unless, aided by external symbols, they elevated their
minds above these, and yielded to God spiritual worship. God, indeed,
gave real tokens of his presence in that visible sanctuary, but not for
the purpose of binding the senses and thoughts of his people to earthly
elements; he wished rather that these external symbols should serve as
ladders, by which the faithful might ascend even to heaven. The design
of God from the commencement in the appointment of the sacraments, and
all the outward exercises of religion, was to consult the infirmity and
weak capacity of his people. Accordingly, even at the present day, the
true and proper use of them is, to assist us in seeking God spiritually
in his heavenly glory, and not to occupy our minds with the things of
this world, or keep them fixed in the vanities of the flesh, a subject
which we shall afterwards have a more suitable opportunity of discussing
more fully. And as the Lord, in ancient times, when he called himself,
*He who dwelleth in Sion,* intended to give his people full and solid
ground of trust, tranquillity, and joy; so even now, after the law has
come out of Sion, and the covenant of grace has flowed to us from that
fountain, let us know and be fully persuaded, that wherever the
faithful, who worship him purely and in due form, according to the
appointment of his word, are assembled together to engage in the solemn
acts of religious worship, he is graciously present, and presides in the
midst of them.

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span><span id="xv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span>**12.** *For in requiring blood.* In the
original, it is *bloods,* in the plural number, and, therefore, the
relative which follows immediately after, *And remembereth* THEM, may
very properly be referred to that word in this way, He requireth bloods,
and remembereth them. But as it is sufficiently common in Hebrew to
invert the order of the antecedent and the relative, and to put *them*
before the word to which it refers,  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) some explain it of *the poor,* thus:
In requiring blood, he hath remembered them, namely, the poor, of whom
he speaks a little after. As to the sum and substance of the matter, it
is of small importance in which of these ways we explain the relative;
but the former is, in my view, the more natural explanation. There is
here a repetition of what the Psalmist had said a little before, that we
ought especially to consider God’s power, as it is manifested in the
mercy which he exercises towards his servants, who are unrighteously
persecuted by wicked men. From the numerous works of God, he selects one
which he commends as especially worthy of being remembered, namely, his
work in delivering the poor from death. God sometimes leaves them in his
holy providence to be persecuted by men; but at length he takes
vengeance for the wrongs inflicted upon them. The words which David uses
denote a continued act; but I have no doubt that he intends from those
examples, which he has related in the preceding part of the psalm, to
lead men to acknowledge that God requireth innocent blood, and remembers
the cry of his people.

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span>He again insists on what I adverted to
before, that God does not always put a stop to injuries so speedily as
we would wish, nor break the attempts of the wicked at the first, but
rather withholds and delays his assistance, so that it may seem that we
cry to him in vain, a truth which it is of importance for us to
understand; for if we measure the help of God according to our senses,
our courage will ever and anon fail us, and in the end our hope will be
entirely extinguished, and will give place to despondency and despair.
We would fondly wish him, as I have said, to stretch forth his hand to a
distance, and drive back the troubles which he sees to be prepared for
us; yet he seems to take no notice, and does not prevent the blood of
the innocent from being shed. Let this consolatory consideration,
however, sustain us, that he will at length actually show how precious
our blood was in his sight. If it is objected, that God’s assistance
comes too late, after we have endured all calamities, I answer, God
delays to interfere no longer than he knows it to be of advantage for us
to be humbled under the cross, and if he chooses rather to take
vengeance after we have suffered outrage, than to aid us previous to the
infliction of evil, it is not because he is not always willing and ready
to succor us; but because he knows it is not always a proper time for
manifesting his grace. By the way, it is a striking evidence, not only
of his fatherly love towards us, but of the blessed immortality which is
the portion of all the children of God, that he has a care about them
even after they are dead. Were he always by his grace to prevent
affliction from befalling us, who is there amongst us who would not be
wholly attached to the present life? When, however, he avenges our
death, from this it appears that, though dead, we still remain alive in
his presence. For he does not, after the manner of men, hold in
estimation the memory of those whom he could not preserve alive,  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) but he actually shows that he
cherishes in his bosom, and gives protection to those who seem to be no
more, viewing them according to the flesh. And this is the reason why
David says that he remembereth blood when he requireth it; for although
he may not presently deliver his servants from the swords of the wicked,
yet he suffers not their murder to pass unpunished. To the same purpose
is the last clause *He forgetteth not the cry of the afflicted* God may
not show, by granting instant deliverance or relief, that he lends an
immediate ear to the complaints of his servants; but at length he proves
unanswerably that he has regarded them. Express mention is made of
*crying,* to encourage all who desire to experience God as their
deliverer and protector, to direct their wishes, groanings, and prayers
to him.

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span><span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013)<span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**13.** Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah, see my
affliction which I suffer from those who persecute me, thou that liftest
me up from the gates of death. **14.** That I may recount all thy
praises in the gates of the daughter of Sion; and that I may rejoice in
thy salvation.

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span><span id="xv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span>**13.** *Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah.* I
think that this is the second part of the psalm. Others, however, are of
a different opinion, and consider that David, according to his frequent
practice, while giving thanks to God for the deliverance wrought for
him, mingles with his thanksgiving an account of what had been the
matter of his prayer in the extremity of his distress; and examples of
the same kind, I confess, are every where to be met with in the Psalms.
But when I consider all the circumstances more attentively, I am
constrained to incline to the other opinion, namely, that in the
commencement he celebrated the favors conferred upon him in order to
make way for prayer; and the psalm is at last concluded with a prayer.
He does not, therefore, in passing here insert the prayers which he had
formerly made in the midst of his dangers and anxieties; but he
purposely implores help from God at the present time,  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) and asks that *He,* whom he had often
experienced as his deliverer, would continue the exercise of the same
grace towards him. His enemies, perhaps, whom he had already vanquished
on various occasions, having gathered new courage, and raised new
forces, made a desperate effort, as we often see those who are driven to
despair rush upon their enemies just with the greater impetuosity and
rage. It is indeed certain, that David, when he offered this prayer, was
seized with the greatest fear; for he would not, on account of a small
matter, have called upon God to witness his affliction in the way he
here does. It ought to be observed, that while he humbly betakes himself
to the mercy of God, he bears, with a patient and submissive mind, the
cross which was laid upon him.  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178)
But we ought chiefly to mark the title which he gives to God, calling
him *his lifter up from the gates of death;* for we could not find a
more appropriate expression than *to lift up* for the Hebrew word <span
id="xv.v-p7.2"></span>מרומם, *meromem.* By this the Psalmist, in the
first place, strengthens his faith from his past experience, inasmuch as
he had often been delivered from the greatest dangers. And, in the
second place, he assures himself of deliverance, even in the very jaws
of death; because God is accustomed not only to succor his servants, and
to deliver them from their calamities by ordinary means, but also to
bring them from the grave, even after all hope of life is cut off; for
*the gates of death* is a metaphorical expression, denoting the utmost
perils which threaten destruction, or rather, which lay the grave open
before us. In order, therefore, that neither the weight of the
calamities which we presently endure, nor the fear of those which we see
impending over *us,* may overwhelm our faith, or interrupt our prayers,
let us call to our remembrance that the office of lifting up his people
from the gates of death is not ascribed to God in vain.

<span id="xv.v-p8"></span><span id="xv.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p9"></span>**14.** *That I may recount.* David’s meaning
simply is, that he will celebrate the praises of God in all assemblies,
and, wherever there is the greatest concourse of people, (for at that
time it was the custom to hold assemblies at the gates of cities;) but,
at the same time, there seems to be an allusion to the gates of death,
of which he has just spoken, as if he had said, After I am delivered
from the grave, I will do my endeavor to bear testimony, in the most
public manner, to the goodness of God, manifested in my deliverance. As,
however, it is not sufficient to utter the praises of God with our
tongues, if they do not proceed from the heart, the Psalmist, in the
last clause of the verse, expresses the inward joy with which he would
engage in this exercise, *And that I may rejoice in thy salvation;* as
if he had said, I desire to live in this world for no other purpose than
to rejoice in having been preserved by the grace of God. Under the name
of daughter, as is well known, the Jews meant a people or city, but he
here names the city from its principal part, namely, Sion.

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**15.** The heathen are sunk into the pit
which they made; in the net which they have hid are their own feet
taken. **16.** Jehovah is known by executing judgment. The wicked is
snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span><span id="xv.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span>**15.** *The heathen are sunk.* David being
now raised up to holy confidence, triumphs over his enemies. In the
first place, he says metaphorically, that they were taken in their own
craftiness and snares. He next expresses the same thing without figure,
that they were snared in their own wickedness. And he affirms that this
happened not by chance, but was the work of God, and a striking proof of
his judgment. When he compares his enemies to hunters or fowlers, it is
not without having just ground for doing so. The wicked, it is true,
often commit violence and outrage, yet in deceits and cunning artifices
they always imitate their father Satan, who is the father of lies, and,
therefore, whatever ingenuity they have, they employ it in practising
wickedness and in devising mischief. As often, therefore, as wicked men
cunningly plot our destruction, let us remember that it is no new thing
for them to lay nets and snares for the children of God. At the same
time, let us comfort ourselves from the reflection, that whatever they
may attempt against us, the issue is not in their power, and that God
will be against them, not only to frustrate their designs, but also to
surprise them in the wicked devices which they frame, and to make all
their resources of mischief to fall upon their own heads.

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span><span id="xv.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span>**16.** *The Lord is known in executing
judgment.* The reading of the words literally is this, The *known Lord
has done judgment.* This manner of speech is abrupt, and its very
brevity renders it obscure. It is therefore explained in two ways. Some
explain it thus:- God begins then to be known when he punishes the
wicked. But the other sense suits the passage better, namely, that it is
a thing obvious and manifest to all that God executes the office of
judge, as often as he ensnares the wicked in their own maliciousness. In
short, whenever God turns back upon themselves whatever schemes of
mischief they devise, David declares that in this case the divine
judgment is so evident, that what happens can be ascribed neither to
nature nor to fortune. If God, therefore, in this way manifestly
display, at any time, the power of his hand, let us learn to open our
eyes, that from the judgments which he executes upon the enemies of his
Church our faith may be confirmed more and more. As to the word
*Higgaion,* which properly signifies *meditation,* I cannot at present
assign a better reason why it has been inserted than this, that David
intended to fix the minds of the godly in meditation upon the judgments
of God. The word *Selah* was intended to answer the same purpose, and as
I have said before, regulated the singing in such a manner as to make
the music correspond to the words and the sentiment.

<span id="xv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017)<span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p2"></span>**17.** The wicked shall be turned into
hell, and all the nations that forget God. **18.** For the poor shall
not always be forgotten; the hope of the humble shall not perish for
ever.

<span id="xv.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.vii-p4"></span><span id="xv.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p5"></span>**17.** *The wicked shall be turned into
hell.* Many translate the verb in the optative mood, *Let the wicked be
turned into hell,* as if it were an imprecation. But, in my judgment,
David here rather confirms himself and all the godly with respect to the
future, declaring that whatever the wicked may attempt, it will have a
termination disastrous to themselves. By the word *turn* he means that
the issue will be far otherwise than what they imagine; for there is
implied in it a tacit contrast between the height of their presumption
and the depth of their fall. As they have no fear of God, they exalt
themselves above the clouds; and then, as if they had “made a covenant
with death,” according to the language of Isaiah, (<span
id="xv.vii-p5.1"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span id="xv.vii-p5.1"></span>)
they become so much the more arrogant and presumptuous. But when we see
them raging without apprehension of danger, the prophet warns us that
their madness carries them headlong, so that, at length, they fall into
the grave, from which they thought themselves to be a great way off.
Here, then, is described to us the sudden and unexpected change, by
which God, when he pleases, restores to order things which were in
confusion. When, therefore, we see the wicked flying aloft devoid of all
fear, let us, by the eyes of faith, behold the grave which is prepared
for them; and rest assured that the hand of God, although it is unseen,
is very near, which can turn them back in the midst of their course in
which they aim at reaching heaven, and make them tumble into hell in a
moment. The meaning of the Hebrew word <span
id="xv.vii-p5.2"></span>שאולה, *sheolah,* is doubtful, but I have not
hesitated to translate it *hell*  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) I do not find fault with those who
translate it *the grave,* but it is certain that the prophet means
something more than common death, otherwise he would here say nothing
else with respect to the wicked than what would also happen to all the
faithful in common with them. Though then, he does not speak in express
terms of eternal destruction, but only says, *They shall be turned into
the grave,* yet, under the metaphor of *the grave,* he intimates that
all the ungodly shall perish, and that the presumption with which, by
every unlawful means, they raise themselves on high to trample
righteousness under foot, and to oppress the innocent, shall bring upon
them ruin and perdition. The faithful, also, it is true, descend into
the grave, but not with such fearful violence as plunges them into it
without hope of coming out again. So far is this from being the case,
that even when shut up in the grave, they dwell already in heaven by
hope.

<span id="xv.vii-p7"></span><span id="xv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p8"></span>**18.** *For the poor shall not always be
forgotten.* The assertion that God will not forsake the poor and
afflicted for ever, is a confirmation of the preceding sentence. By it
he intimates, that they may indeed seem to be forsaken for a time. Let
us, therefore, remember that God has promised his assistance to us, not
in the way of preventing our afflictions, but of at length succouring us
after we have been long subdued under the cross. David speaks expressly
of *hope* or *expectation,* thereby to encourage us to prayer. The
reason why God seems to take no notice of our afflictions is, because he
would have us to awaken him by means of our prayers; for when he hears
our requests, (as if he began but then to be mindful of us,) he
stretches forth his powerful hand to help us. David again repeats that
this is not done immediately, in order that we may persevere in hoping
well, even although our expectations may not be instantly gratified.

<span id="xv.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
9:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)<span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p2"></span>**19.** Arise, O Jehovah; let not man
 <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) prevail: let the nations be
judged in thy sight. **20.** Put them in fear, O Jehovah; that the
nations may know that they are men.

<span id="xv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.viii-p5"></span><span id="xv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p6"></span>**19.** *Arise, O Jehovah.* When David
beseeches God to arise, the expression does not strictly apply to God,
but it refers to external appearance and to our senses; for we do not
perceive God to be the deliverer of his people except when he appears
before our eyes, as it were sitting upon the judgment-seat. There is
added a consideration or reason to induce God to avenge the injuries
done to his people, namely, *that man may not prevail;* for when God
arises, all the fierceness  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) of
the ungodly must immediately fall down and give way. Whence is it that
the wicked become so audaciously insolent, or have so great power to
work mischief, if it is not because God is still, and gives them loose
reins? But, as soon as he shows some token of his judgment, he
immediately puts a stop to their proud tumults,  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) and breaks their strength and power
with his nod alone.  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) We are
taught, by this manner of praying, that however insolently and proudly
our enemies may boast of what they will do, yet they are in the hand of
God, and can do no more than what he permits them; and farther, that God
can doubtless, whenever he pleases, render all their endeavors vain and
ineffectual. The Psalmist, therefore, in speaking of them, calls them
*man.* The word in the original is <span id="xv.viii-p9.3"></span>אנוש,
*enosh,* which is derived from a root signifying misery or wretchedness,
and, accordingly, it is the same thing as if he had called them mortal
or frail man. Farther, the Psalmist beseeches God *to judge the heathen
before his face* God is said to do this when he compels them, by one
means or another, to appear before his judgment-seat. We know that
unbelievers, until they are dragged by force into the presence of God,
turn their backs upon him as much as they can, in order to exclude from
their minds all thought of him as their Judge.

<span id="xv.viii-p10"></span><span id="xv.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p11"></span>**20.** *Put them in fear, O Jehovah.* The
Septuagint translates <span id="xv.viii-p11.1"></span>מורה, *morah,*
\[<span id="xv.viii-p11.2"></span>νομοθέτης,\] *a lawgiver,* deriving it
from <span id="xv.viii-p11.3"></span>ירה, *yarah,* which sometimes
signifies *to teach.*  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) But the
scope of the passage requires that we should understand it of fear or
dread; and this is the opinion of all sound expositors. Now, it is to be
considered of what kind of fear David speaks. God commonly subdues even
his chosen ones to obedience by means of fear. But as he moderates his
rigour towards them, and, at the same time, softens their stony hearts,
so that they willingly and quietly submit themselves to him, he cannot
be properly said to compel them by fear. With respect to the reprobate,
he takes a different way of dealing. As their obduracy is inflexible, so
that it is easier to break than to bend them, he subdues their desperate
obstinacy by force; not, indeed, that they are reformed, but, whether
they will or no, an acknowledgement of their own weakness is extorted
from them. They may gnash their teeth and boil with rage, and even
exceed in cruelty wild beasts, but when the dread of God seizes upon
them, they are thrown down with their own violence, and fall with their
own weight. Some explain these words as a prayer that God would bring
the nations under the yoke of David, and make them tributaries to his
government; but this is a cold and forced explanation. The word *fear*
comprehends in general all the plagues of God, by which is repulsed, as
by the heavy blows of a hammer,  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185)
the rebellion of those who would never obey him except by compulsion.

<span id="xv.viii-p14"></span>There follows next the point to which the
nations must be brought, namely, to acknowledge themselves to be mortal
men. This, at first sight, seems to be a matter of small importance; but
the doctrine which it contains is far from being trifling. What is man,
that he dares of himself to move a finger? And yet all the ungodly run
to excess as boldly and presumptuously as if there were nothing to
hinder them from doing whatever they please. It is certainly through a
distempered imagination that they claim to themselves what is peculiar
to God; and, in short, they would never run to so great excess if they
were not ignorant of their own condition. David, when he beseeches God
to strike the nations with terror, that they *may know that they are
men,*  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) does not mean that the
ungodly will profit so much under the rods and chastisements of God as
to humble themselves truly and from the heart; but the knowledge of
which he speaks just means an experience of their own weakness. His
language is as if he had said, Lord, since it is their ignorance of
themselves which hurries them into their rage against me, make them
actually to experience that their strength is not equal to their
infatuated presumption, and after they are disappointed of their vain
hopes, let them lie confounded and abased with shame. It may often
happen that those who are convinced of their own weakness do not yet
reform; but much is gained when their ungodly presumption is exposed to
mockery and scorn before the world, that it may appear how ridiculous
was the confidence which they presumed to place in their own strength.
With respect to the chosen of God, they ought to profit under his
chastisements after another manner. It becomes them to be humbled under
a sense of their own weakness, and willingly to divest themselves of all
vain confidence and presumption. And this will be the case if they
remember that they are but men. Augustine has well and wisely said, that
the whole humility of man consists in the knowledge of himself.
Moreover, since pride is natural to all, God requires to strike terror
into all men indiscriminately, that, on the one hand, his own people may
learn to be humble, and that, on the other hand, the wicked, although
they cease not to elevate themselves above the condition of man, may be
put back with shame and confusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc08014.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv-p5"></span> “<span id="xv-p5.1"></span>Comme on a accoustum
de parler quand la chose est obscure.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc08014.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span> Or, leap for joy. This is the precise meaning
of the Hebrew word <span id="xv.i-p3.1"></span>אעלצה The Septuagint
render it <span id="xv.i-p3.2"></span>ἀγαλλιάσομαι, which means the same
thing.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc08014.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xv.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p4.1"></span>Et sont ruinez
devant ta face.” — *Fr*. “And are overthrown before thy face.”

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc08014.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p8.1"></span>Doit servir pour
nous asseurer et faire esperer qu’il nous sera propice et debonnaire,
l’advenir.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc08014.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xv.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p9.1"></span>De la faveur
qu’il a receu, de Dieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc08014.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xv.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>Processions.”
— *Fr.*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc08014.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xv.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p11.1"></span>Afin que leurs
belles prouesses veissent en cognaissance.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc08014.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xv.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p12.1"></span>Qu’ils sont
entre Dieu et eux.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc08014.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p16.1"></span>Afin de
deseouvrir son coeur a Dieu plus alaigrement.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc08014.htm#fr_163) <span
id="xv.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p19.1"></span>Mais pource
que Dieu a battacile pour luy. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc08014.htm#fr_164) <span
id="xv.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p20"></span> The idea implied in the verb <span
id="xv.i-p20.1"></span>כשל, *cashal,* is that of stumbling, and it is
here employed in a military sense. In <span id="xv.i-p20.2"></span>[Ps
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002)<span id="xv.i-p20.2"></span>,
where it is said of David’s enemies, “they stumbled and fell;” this is
the verb used for *stumbled.* The idea there is not properly that of
falling, but of being wounded and weakened by the stumbling-blocks in
the way, previous to falling. The word <span id="xv.i-p20.3"></span>כשל,
*cashal,* has been viewed as having the same meaning in the passage
before us. “It refers,” says *Hammond*, “to those that either faint in a
march or are wounded in a battle, or especially that in flight meet with
galling traps in their way, and so are galled and lamed, rendered unable
to go forward, and so fall, and become liable to all the ill chances of
pursuits, and as here are overtaken and perish in the fall.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc08014.htm#fr_165) <span
id="xv.i-p20.4"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p21"></span> “<span id="xv.i-p21.1"></span>C’est la face
de Dieu qui les poursuit.” — *Fr*. “It is the face of God which pursues
them.”

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc08014.htm#fr_166) <span
id="xv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p3.1"></span>Ou pour juger
justement.” — *Fr. marg.* “Or to judge righteously.”

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc08014.htm#fr_167) <span
id="xv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p7.1"></span>J’ay mieux
aime traduire, Tu t’es assis juste juge; que, O juste juge tu t’es
assis.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc08014.htm#fr_168) <span
id="xv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p3"></span> “*Demolished.* The Hebrew word expresses
the tearing up of the foundations of the buildings.” —*Horsley.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc08014.htm#fr_169) <span
id="xv.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p7.1"></span>Que s’il
avait les pieds et mains liees.” — *Fr*. “Than if he were bound hand and
foot.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc08014.htm#fr_170) <span
id="xv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p9.1"></span>Dieu s’est
montre bien a propos pour secourir les gens. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc08014.htm#fr_171) <span
id="xv.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xv.iii-p10.1"></span>De quelque
coste que nous-nous seachions tourner.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc08014.htm#fr_172) <span
id="xv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p6.1"></span>Exposez a
l’appetit et cruaute des meschans, sans que Dieu fkee semblant d’en rien
veoir ne scavoir.” — *Fr*. “Exposed to the desire and cruelty of the
wicked, while God seems neither to see nor to know any thing about it”

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc08014.htm#fr_173) <span
id="xv.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p7.1"></span>Notons aussi
que Dieu est dit estre prest en temps opportun quand il subvient aux
fideles lors qu’ils sour, affligez.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc08014.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xv.iv-p7.5"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span> “*In critical times,* <span
id="xv.iv-p8.1"></span>לעתות, *leitoth; in \[the season of\] distress,*
<span id="xv.iv-p8.2"></span>בצרה*, batsarah*, <span
id="xv.iv-p8.3"></span>בצרה is the substantive <span
id="xv.iv-p8.4"></span>צרה under its own preposition <span
id="xv.iv-p8.5"></span>ב, and is not so well rendered as a genitive
following <span id="xv.iv-p8.6"></span>עתות.” — *Horsley*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc08014.htm#fr_175) <span
id="xv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p15.1"></span>Et de mettre
Eux, devant le mot auquel il se rapporte.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc08014.htm#fr_176) <span
id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="xv.iv-p17.1"></span>Car ce n’est
pas qu’il face comme les hommes qui auront en estime et reverence apres
la mort la memoire de leurs amis quand ils ne leur ont peu sauver la
vie. — *Fr.* “For he does not act like men, who hold in estimation and
reverence after death the memory of their friends, when they can no
longer preserve their life.”

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc08014.htm#fr_177) <span
id="xv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span> “In the 12th verse,” says Horsley, “the
Psalmist having mentioned it as a part of the divine character, that God
forgetteth not the cry of the helpless, naturally thinks upon his own
helpless state, and in the 13th and 14th verses cries for deliverance.
The promise of the overthrow of the faction, which were the principal
instruments of his affliction, recurring to his thoughts, he breaks out
again in the 15th verse in strains of exultation.” The transition from
the language of triumph, in the preceding part of the psalm, to the
language of prayer and complaint in the 13th verse, and the mixture of
triumph and complaint in the sequel of the psalm, are very remarkable.
This was the natural effect of the Psalmist’s present distressed
condition. The pressure of his affliction excited him, on the one hand,
to utter the language of dejection; while his confident expectation of
deliverance prompted him, on the other hand, to utter the language of
triumph.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc08014.htm#fr_178) <span
id="xv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.v-p7.1"></span>Or il faut noter
que quand il ya humblement au recours a la misericorde de Dieu, c’est
signe qu’il portoit doucement et patienment, la croix que Dieu luy avoir
comme raise sur les espaules.” — *Fr*. “But it ought to be observed,
that, while he humbly betakes himself to the mercy of God, it is a sign
that he bore, submissively and patiently, the cross which God had, as it
were, laid upon his shoulders.”

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc08014.htm#fr_179) <span
id="xv.vii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p6"></span> “<span id="xv.vii-p6.1"></span>Le mot
Hebreu, pour lequel nous avons traduit *Enfer* signifie aussi Sepulchre;
mais j’ay mieux aime retenir ceste signification. — *Fr.* “The Hebrew
word which we have translated *hell* also signifies *the grave;* but I
have preferred to retain the former meaning of the word.”

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc08014.htm#fr_180) <span
id="xv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p3"></span> “<span id="xv.viii-p3.1"></span>L’homme
mortel.” — *Fr*. “Mortal man.”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc08014.htm#fr_181) <span
id="xv.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p7"></span> “<span id="xv.viii-p7.1"></span>Toute la
fierte et arrogance.” — *Fr*. “All the pride and arrogance.”

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc08014.htm#fr_182) <span
id="xv.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p8"></span> “<span id="xv.viii-p8.1"></span>Leur rage
et insolence.” — *Fr*. “Their rage and insolence.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc08014.htm#fr_183) <span
id="xv.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p9"></span> “<span id="xv.viii-p9.1"></span>Solo
nutu.” - *Lat.* “<span id="xv.viii-p9.2"></span>Enfaisant signe
seulement du bout du doigt.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc08014.htm#fr_184) <span
id="xv.viii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p12"></span> The Chaldee version reads *fear,* but the
Syriac, Ethiopic, and Vulgate versions follow the Septuagint. The Arabic
employs a word of nearly the same import, signifying *a doctor or
teacher of the law.* In it is, “O Lord set a schoolmaster over them.”
*Augustine* and *Jerome*, who adopted the reading of the Septuagint,
render the words, “Set, O Lord, a lawgiver over them;” and it was their
opinion that *lawgiver* means antichrist, to whom God in his wrath gave
dominion over the nations. According to others, lawgiver means Christ.
*Dr Horsley* reads, “O Jehovah, appoint thou a teacher over them.”
*Ainsworth* and *Dr Adam Clarke* adopt the same rendering, and view the
words as a prayer that the nations may learn humility and piety, that
they may know their accountability to God, and become wise unto
salvation.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc08014.htm#fr_185) <span
id="xv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p13"></span> “<span id="xv.viii-p13.1"></span>Tous
fleax de Dieu par lesquels est rembarre comme a grans coups de marteau.”
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc08014.htm#fr_186) <span
id="xv.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p15"></span> The original word is <span
id="xv.viii-p15.1"></span>אנוש, *enosh;* and therefore it is a prayer
that they may know themselves to be but miserable, frail, and dying men.
The word is in the singular number, but it is used collectively.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 10](cc08015)
