[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08010)  [Next](cc08012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>PSALM 6.

<span id="xii-p2"></span>David, being afflicted by the hand of God,
acknowledges that he had provoked the Divine wrath by his sins, and,
therefore, in order to obtain relief, he prays for forgiveness. At the
same time, he regrets, that by being taken out of the world, he would be
deprived of an opportunity of praising God. Then, having obtained
confidence, he celebrates the grace of God, and directs his discourse to
his enemies, who triumphed over his calamities.

<span id="xii-p3"></span>To the chief musician on Neginoth, upon the
eighth. A song of David.

<span id="xii-p4"></span>The name of *Song* shows that David composed
this psalm, in which he describes the passionate workings of his grief
in the time of his troubles after he had obtained deliverance from the
evils which he deplores. What the kind of chastisement was of which he
speaks is uncertain. Those who restrict it to bodily disease do not
adduce in support of their opinion any argument of sufficient weight.
They insist on the word <span id="xii-p4.1"></span>אמל*, amal,* which
occurs in verse third, where he says, “I am weak,” which indeed
signifies to be sick; but it is more probable that it is here used
metaphorically. They allege that Hezekiah, after his recovery from
sickness, sung in the same strains as are here recorded, concerning
death. But in &lt;19B601&gt;<span id="xii-p4.2"></span>[Psalm
116](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#000)<span id="xii-p4.2"></span>, where
no mention is made of bodily disease, the same complaint is uttered by
the Psalmist in the name of the whole Church. We can, indeed, gather
from these words that the life of David was in the utmost danger, but it
may have been some other kind of affliction than bodily sickness under
which he labored. We may, therefore, adopt this as the more certain
interpretation, that he had been stricken by some severe calamity, or
that some punishment had been inflicted upon him, which presented to his
view on every side only the shadow of death. It ought also to be
considered, that this psalm was not composed at the very time when he
presented to God the prayers recorded in it; but that the prayers which
he had meditated and uttered in the midst of his dangers and sadness
were, after he had obtained respite, committed to writing. This explains
why he joins the sorrow with which he certainly had struggled for a time
with the joy which he afterwards experienced. With respect to the word
*eighth,* as we have before said that <span
id="xii-p4.3"></span>נגינות*, Neginoth,* signifies a musical instrument,
I do not know whether it would be correct to say, that it was a harp of
eight strings. I am rather inclined to the opinion that it refers to the
tune, and points out the particular kind of music to which the psalm was
to be sung.  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) However, in a matter
so obscure and of so little importance I leave every one at liberty to
form his own conjecture.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Jehovah, rebuke me not in thine anger,
and chastise me not in thine indignation.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span><span id="xii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>The calamity which David now experienced had,
perhaps, been inflicted by men, but he wisely considers that he has to
deal with God. Those persons are very unsuitably exercised under their
afflictions who do not immediately take a near and a steady view of
their sins, in order thereby to produce the conviction that they have
deserved the wrath of God. And yet we see how thoughtless and insensible
almost all men are on this subject; for while they cry out that they are
afflicted and miserable, scarcely one among a hundred looks to the hand
which strikes. From whatever quarter, therefore, our afflictions come,
let us learn to turn our thoughts instantly to God, and to acknowledge
him as the Judge who summons us as guilty before his tribunal, since we,
of our own accord, do not anticipate his judgment. But as men, when they
are compelled to feel that God is angry with them, often indulge in
complaints full of impiety, rather than find fault with themselves and
their own sins, it is to be particularly noticed that David does not
simply ascribe to God the afflictions under which he is now suffering,
but acknowledges them to be the just recompense of his sins. He does not
take God to task as if he had been an enemy, treating him with cruelty
without any just cause; but yielding to him the right of rebuking and
chastening, he desires and prays only that bounds may be set to the
punishment inflicted on him. By this he declares God to be a just Judge
in taking vengeance on the sins of men.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) But as soon as he has confessed that he
is justly chastised, he earnestly beseeches God not to deal with him in
strict justice, or according to the utmost rigour of the law. He does
not altogether refuse punishment, for that would be unreasonable; and to
be without it, he judged would be more hurtful than beneficial to him:
but what he is afraid of is the wrath of God, which threatens sinners
with ruin and perdition. To anger and indignation David tacitly opposes
fatherly and gentle chastisement, and this last he was willing to bear.
We have a similar contrast in the words of Jeremiah, (<span
id="xii.i-p6.2"></span>[Jer 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span
id="xii.i-p6.2"></span>,) “O Lord,” says he, “correct me, but with
judgment; not in thine anger.” God is, indeed, said to be angry with
sinners whenever he inflicts punishment upon them, but not in the proper
and strict sense, inasmuch as he not only mingles with it some of the
sweetness of his grace to mitigate their sorrow, but also shows himself
favorable to them, in moderating their punishment, and in mercifully
drawing back his hand. But, as we must necessarily be stricken with
terror whenever he shows himself the avenger of wickedness, it is not
without cause that David, according to the sense of the flesh, is afraid
of his anger and indignation. The meaning therefore is this: I indeed
confess, O Lord, that I deserve to be destroyed and brought to nought;
but as I would be unable to endure the severity of thy wrath, deal not
with me according to my deserts, but rather pardon my sins, by which I
have provoked thine anger against me. As often, then, as we are pressed
down by adversity, let us learn, from the example of David, to have
recourse to this remedy, that we may be brought into a state of peace
with God; for it is not to be expected that it can be well or prosperous
with us if we are not interested in his favor. Whence it follows, that
we shall never be without a load of evils, until he forgive us our sins.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
6:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah, for I
am weak; heal me, O Jehovah, for my bones are afraid. **3.** And my soul
is exceedingly troubled;  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) and thou,
O Jehovah, how long?  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83)

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**2.** *Have mercy upon me.* As he earnestly
calls upon God to be merciful to him, it is from this the more clearly
manifest, that by the terms *anger* and *indignation* he did not mean
cruelty or undue severity, but only such judgment as God executes upon
the reprobate, whom he does not spare in mercy as he does his own
children. If he had complained of being unjustly and too severely
punished, he would now have only added something to this effect:
Restrain thyself, that in punishing me thou mayest not exceed the
measure of my offense. In betaking himself, therefore, to the mercy of
God alone, he shows that he desires nothing else than not to be dealt
with according to strict justice, or as he deserved. In order to induce
God to exercise his forgiving mercy towards him, he declares that he is
ready to fail: *Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah, for I am weak* As I have
said before, he calls himself weak, not because he was sick, but because
he was cast down and broken by what had now befallen him. And as we know
that the design of God in inflicting punishment upon us, is to humble
us; so, whenever we are subdued under his rod, the gate is opened for
his mercy to come to us. Besides, since it is his peculiar office to
heal the diseased to raise up the fallen, to support the weak, and,
finally, to give life to the dead; this, of itself, is a sufficient
reason why we should seek his favor, that we are sinking under our
afflictions.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>After David has protested that he placed his
hope of salvation in the mercy of God alone, and has sorrowfully set
forth how much he is abased, he subjoins the effect which this had in
impairing his bodily health, and prays for the restoration of this
blessing: *Heal me, O Jehovah* And this is the order which we must
observe, that we may know that all the blessings which we ask from God
flow from the fountain of his free goodness, and that we are then, and
then only, delivered from calamities and chastisements,  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) when he has had mercy upon us. — *For my
bones are afraid* This confirms what I have just now observed, namely,
that, from the very grievousness of his afflictions, he entertained the
hope of some relief; for God, the more he sees the wretched oppressed
and almost overwhelmed, is just so much the more ready to succor them.
He attributes fear to his *bones,* not because they are endued with
feeling, but because the vehemence of his grief was such that it
affected his whole body. He does not speak of his flesh, which is the
more tender and susceptible part of the corporeal system, but he
mentions his bones, thereby intimating that the strongest parts of his
frame were made to tremble for fear. He next assigns the cause of this
by saying, *And my soul is greatly afraid.* The connective particle
*and,* in my judgment, has here the meaning of the causal particle
*for,* as if he had said, so severe and violent is the inward anguish of
my heart, that it affects and impairs the strength of every part of my
body. I do not approve of the opinion which here takes *soul* for life,
nor does it suit the scope of the passage.

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>**3.** *And thou, O Jehovah, how long?*
This elliptical form of expression serves to express more strongly the
vehemence of grief, which not only holds the minds of men bound up, but
likewise their tongues, breaking and cutting short their speech in the
middle of the sentence. The meaning, however, in this abrupt expression
is doubtful. Some, to complete the sentence, supply the words, *Wilt
thou afflict me, or continue to chasten me*? Others read, *How long wilt
thou delay thy mercy*? But what is stated in the next verse shows that
this second sense is the more probable, for he there prays to the Lord
to look upon him with an eye of favor and compassion. He, therefore,
complains that God has now forsaken him, or has no regard to him, just
as God seems to be far of from us whenever his assistance or grace does
not actually manifest itself in our behalf. God, in his compassion
towards us, permits us to pray to him to make haste to succor us; but
when we have freely complained of his long delay, that our prayers or
sorrow, on this account, may not pass beyond bounds we must submit our
case entirely to his will, and not wish him to make greater haste than
shall seem good to him.

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
6:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#004)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Return, O Lord, deliver my soul;
save me for thy mercy’s sake. **5.** For in death there is no
remembrance of thee; and in the grave who shall acknowledge thee?  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>**4.** *Return, O Lord.* In the preceding
verses the Psalmist bewailed the absence of God, and now he earnestly
requests the tokens of his presence, for our happiness consists in this,
that we are the objects of the Divine regard, but we think he is
alienated front us, if he does not give us some substantial evidence of
his care for us. That David was at this time in the utmost peril, we
gather from these words, in which he prays both for the deliverance of
his soul, as it were, from the jaws of death, and for his restoration to
a state of safety. Yet no mention is made of any bodily disease, and,
therefore, I give no judgment with respect to the kind of his
affliction. David, again, confirms what he had touched upon in the
second verse *concerning the mercy of God,* namely, that this is the
only quarter from which he hopes for deliverance: *Save me for thy
mercy’s sake* Men will never find a remedy for their miseries until,
forgetting their own merits, by trusting to which they only deceive
themselves, they have learned to betake themselves to the free mercy of
God.

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span><span id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>**5.** *For in death there is no
remembrance of thee.* After God has bestowed all things freely upon us,
he requires nothing in return but a grateful remembrance of his
benefits. To this gratitude reference is made when David says, that
*there will be no remembrance of God in death, nor any celebration of
his praise in the grave* His meaning is, that if, by the grace of God,
he shall be delivered from death, he will be grateful for it, and keep
it in remembrance. And he laments, that if he should be removed out of
the world, he would be deprived of the power and opportunity of
manifesting his gratitude, since in that case he would no longer mingle
in the society of men, there to commend or celebrate the name of God.
From this passage some conclude, that the dead have no feeling, and that
it is wholly extinct in them; but this is a rash and unwarranted
inference, for nothing is here treated of but the mutual celebration of
the grace of God, in which men engage while they continue in the land of
the living. We know that we are placed on the earth to praise God with
one mind and one mouth, and that this is the end of our life. Death, it
is true, puts an end to such praises; but it does not follow from this,
that the souls of the faithful, when divested of their bodies, are
deprived of understanding, or touched with no affection towards God. It
is also to be considered, that, on the present occasion, David dreaded
the judgment of God if death should befall him, and this made him dumb
as to singing the praises of God. It is only the goodness of God
sensibly experienced by us which opens our mouth to celebrate his
praise; and whenever, therefore, joy and gladness are taken away,
praises also must cease. It is not then wonderful if the wrath of God,
which overwhelms us with the fear of eternal destruction, is said to
extinguish in us the praises of God.

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span>From this passage, we are furnished with
the solution of another question, why David so greatly dreaded death, as
if there had been nothing to hope for beyond this world. Learned men
reckon up three causes why the fathers under the law were so much kept
in bondage by the fear of death. The first is, because the grace of God,
not being then made manifest by the coming of Christ, the promises,
which were obscure, gave them only a slight acquaintance with the life
to come. The second is, because the present life, in which God deals
with us as a Father, is of itself desirable. And the third, because they
were afraid lest, after their decease, some change to the worse might
take place in religion. But to me these reasons do not appear to be
sufficiently solid. David’s mind was not always occupied by the fear he
now felt; and when he came to die, being full of days and weary of this
life, he calmly yielded up his soul into the bosom of God. The second
reason is equally applicable to us at the present day, as it was to the
ancient fathers, inasmuch as God’s fatherly love shines forth towards us
also even in this life, and with much more illustrious proofs than under
the former dispensation. But, as I have just observed, I consider this
complaint of David as including something different, namely, that
feeling the hand of God to be against him, and knowing his hatred of
sin,  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) he is overwhelmed with fear
and involved in the deepest distress. The same may also be said of
Hezekiah, inasmuch as he did not simply pray for deliverance from death,
but from the wrath of God, which he felt to be very awful, (<span
id="xii.iii-p10.2"></span>[Isa
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#003)<span id="xii.iii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006)<span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**6.** I have become wearied in my groaning;
I make my bed to swim  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) every night;
I water my couch with my tears. **7.** Mine eye hath waxed dim for
vexation; it hath waxed old among my persecutors.

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span><span id="xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span>These forms of expression are hyperbolical,
but it must not be imagined that David, after the manner of poets,
exaggerates his sorrow;  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) but he
declares truly and simply how severe and bitter it had been. It should
always be kept in mind, that his affliction did not proceed so much from
his having been severely wounded with bodily distress; but regarding God
as greatly displeased with him, he saw, as it were, hell open to receive
him; and the mental distress which this produces exceeds all other
sorrows. Indeed, the more sincerely a man is devoted to God, he is just
so much the more severely disquieted by the sense of his wrath; and
hence it is that holy persons, who were otherwise endued with uncommon
fortitude, have showed in this respect the greatest softness and want of
resolution. And nothing prevents us at this day from experiencing in
ourselves what David describes concerning himself but the stupidity of
our flesh. Those who have experienced, even in a moderate degree, what
it is to contend with the fear of eternal death, will be satisfied that
there is nothing extravagant in these words. Let us, therefore, know
that here David is represented to us as being afflicted with the terrors
of his conscience,  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) and feeling
within him torment of no ordinary kind, but such as made him almost
faint away, and lie as if dead. With respect to the words, he says,
*Mine eye hath waxed dim*; for grief of mind easily makes its way to the
eyes, and from them very distinctly shows itself. As the word <span
id="xii.iv-p8.2"></span>עתק *athak,* which I have translated *it hath
waxed old,* sometimes signifies to depart from one’s place, some expound
it, that the goodness of his eyesight was lost, and his sight, as it
were, had vanished. Others understand by it that his eyes were hidden by
the swelling which proceeds from weeping. The first opinion, however,
according to which David complains of his eyes failing him, as it were,
through old age, appears to me the more simple. As to what he adds,
*every night,* we learn from it that he was almost wholly wasted away
with protracted sorrow, and yet all the while never ceased from praying
to God.

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span><span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
6:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008)<span id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>**8.** Depart from me, all ye workers of
iniquity; for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. **9.** The
Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord will receive  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) my prayer. **10.** Let all mine enemies
be put to shame and greatly confounded; let them turn back, and be
ashamed suddenly.  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span><span id="xii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span>After David has disburdened his griefs and
troubles into the bosom of God, he now, as it were, assumes a new
character. And, without doubt, he had been afflicted with long-continued
despondency of spirit before he could recover himself, and attain to
such a degree of assurance as he here displays;  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) for we have already seen that he had
spent many nights in continual weeping. Now, the more he had been
distressed and wearied by the long delay of his deliverance, with so
much the more alacrity does he stir up himself to sing of victory.
Directing his discourse against his adversaries, he represents it as not
the least part of his temptations that ungodly men triumphed over him,
and derided him as lost, and in a hopeless condition; for we know with
what insolence their pride and cruelty magnify themselves against the
children of God, when they see them oppressed under the cross. And to
this Satan moves them, in order to drive the faithful to despair, when
they see their hope made the subject of mockery. This passage teaches
us, that the grace of God is the only light of life to the godly; and
that, as soon as He has manifested some token of his anger, they are not
only greatly afraid, but also, as it were, plunged into the darkness of
death; while, on the other hand, as soon as they discover anew that God
is merciful to them, they are immediately restored to life. David, it is
to be noticed, repeats three times that his prayers were heard, by which
he testifies that he ascribes his deliverance to God, and confirms
himself in this confidence, that he had not betaken himself to God in
vain. And if we would receive any fruit from our prayers, we must
believe that God’s ears have not been shut against them. By the word
*weeping,*  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) he not only indicates
vehemence and earnestness, but also intimates that he had been wholly
occupied in mourning and sorrowful lamentations. The confidence and
security which David takes to himself from the favor of God ought also
to be noticed. From this, we are taught that there is nothing in the
whole world, whatever it may be, and whatever opposition it may make to
us,  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) which we may not despise, if
we are fully persuaded of our being beloved by God; and by this also we
understand what his fatherly love can do for us. By the adverb
*suddenly,* he signifies, that when there is apparently no means of
delivering the faithful from affliction, and when all seems desperate or
hopeless, then they are delivered by the power of God contrary to all
expectation. When God suddenly changes men’s afflicted condition into
one of joy and happiness, he thereby manifests more illustriously his
power, and makes it appear the more wonderful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc08011.htm#fr_80) <span
id="xii-p4.4"></span>

<span id="xii-p5"></span> *Sheminith,* or *the eighth, “*is thought to
be the shrillest or loftiest note, *as Alomoth is* the lowest; of which
see <span id="xii-p5.1"></span>[1 Chr.
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#021)<span id="xii-p5.1"></span>. But
all this is only conjecture; and the Jews themselves have no certain
knowledge of their ancient music, and of the signification of the terms
belonging to it.” — *Poole’s Annotations.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc08011.htm#fr_81) <span
id="xii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p6.1"></span>En faisant
vengence des forfaits des hommes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc08011.htm#fr_82) <span
id="xii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span> Or greatly terrified. This is a very
correct rendering of the original words <span
id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>נבהלה מאד; *nibhalah meod:* and they are very
like those uttered by the Savior in his agony, “My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc08011.htm#fr_83) <span
id="xii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>Mais toy,
Seigneur, jusques a quand m’affligeras-tu?” — *Fr*. “But thou, O Lord,
how long wilt thou afflict me?”

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc08011.htm#fr_84) <span
id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>Des maux et
chastiemens.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc08011.htm#fr_85) <span
id="xii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p3.1"></span>Car il
n’est fait nulle mention de toy en la mort: qui est-ce qui to louera au
sepulcher?” — *Fr*. “For there is no mention made of thee in death; and
who shall praise thee in the grave?”

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc08011.htm#fr_86) <span
id="xii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xii.iii-p10.1"></span>Ascavoir
que sentant la main de Dieu contraire, veu qu’il l’advertissoit de sa
vengence contre le peche.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc08011.htm#fr_87) <span
id="xii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p3.1"></span>Je baigne ma
couche. — *Fr*. “I soak my couch.” “<span id="xii.iv-p3.2"></span>Ou, je
fay nager.” — *Fr. marg. “*or, I make to swim.”

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc08011.htm#fr_88) <span
id="xii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span> *“*<span id="xii.iv-p7.1"></span>II ne taut
pas penser toutesfois que David amplifie sa tristesse a la facon des
Poetes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc08011.htm#fr_89) <span
id="xii.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xii.iv-p8.1"></span>Des frayeurs
de la morte.” — *Fr. “*With the terrors of death.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc08011.htm#fr_90) <span
id="xii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span> “<span id="xii.v-p3.1"></span>A receu.” —
*Fr*. “Hath received.” This is the rendering which is adopted in all the
ancient versions, although the Hebrew verb is in the future tense.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc08011.htm#fr_91) <span
id="xii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span> “<span id="xii.v-p4.1"></span>En un moment.”
— *Fr*. “In a moment.”

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc08011.htm#fr_92) <span
id="xii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p8"></span> *“*<span id="xii.v-p8.1"></span>Avant que
pouvoir se relever et venir a sentir telle asseurance qu’il monstre
yci.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc08011.htm#fr_93) <span
id="xii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p9"></span> *“The voice of my weeping,* my loud
weeping.” says *Hengstenberg*, and then he adds, quoting from *Roberts’
Orient. Illustr. of the Sacred Scrip.,* “Silent grief is not much known
in the East. Hence, when the people speak of lamentation, they say, Have
I not heard the voice of his mourning?”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc08011.htm#fr_94) <span
id="xii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="xii.v-p10.1"></span>Qu’il n’y a
rien en tout le monde qui se dresse contre nous.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 7](cc08012)
