[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08036)  [Next](cc08038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxviii"></span>

<span id="xxxviii-p1"></span>PSALM 32.

<span id="xxxviii-p2"></span>David having largely and painfully
experienced what a miserable thing it is to feel God’s hand heavy on
account of sin, exclaims that the highest and best part of a happy life
consists in this, that God forgives a man’s guilt, and receives him
graciously into his favor. After giving thanks for pardon obtained, he
invites others to fellowship with him in his happiness, showing, by his
own example, the means by which this may be obtained.

<span id="xxxviii-p3"></span>A Psalm of David giving instruction.

<span id="xxxviii-p4"></span>The title of this psalm gives some idea of
its subject. Some think that the Hebrew word <span
id="xxxviii-p4.1"></span>משכיל, *maskil,* which we have rendered *giving
instruction,*  <span id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) is taken from
verse 7th;  <span id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659) but it is more
accurate to consider it as a title given to the psalm in accordance with
its whole scope and subject matter. David, after enduring long and
dreadful torments, when God was severely trying him, by showing him the
tokens of his wrath, having at length obtained favor, applies this
evidence of the divine goodness for his own benefit, and the benefit of
the whole Church, that from it he may teach himself and them what
constitutes the chief point of salvation. All men must necessarily be
either in miserable torment, or, which is worse, forgetting themselves
and God, must continue in deadly lethargy, until they are persuaded that
God is reconciled towards them. Hence David here teaches us that the
happiness of men consists only in the free forgiveness of sins, for
nothing can be more terrible than to have God for our enemy; nor can he
be gracious to us in any other way than by pardoning our transgressions.

<span id="xxxviii.i"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
32:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span
id="xxxviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Blessed are they whose iniquity is
forgiven, and whose transgression is covered. **2.** Blessed is the man
to whom Jehovah imputeth no sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile.

<span id="xxxviii.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxviii.i-p4"></span><span id="xxxviii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Blessed are they whose iniquity
is forgiven.* This exclamation springs from the fervent affection of the
Psalmist’s heart as well as from serious consideration. Since almost the
whole world turning away their thoughts from God’s judgment, bring upon
themselves a fatal forgetfulness, and intoxicate themselves with
deceitful pleasures; David, as if he had been stricken with the fear of
God’s wrath, that he might betake himself to Divine mercy, awakens
others also to the same exercise, by declaring distinctly and loudly
that those only are blessed to whom God is reconciled, so as to
acknowledge those for his children whom he might justly treat as his
enemies. Some are so blinded with hypocrisy and pride, and some with
such gross contempt of God, that they are not at all anxious in seeking
forgiveness, but all acknowledge that they need forgiveness; nor is
there a man in existence whose conscience does not accuse him at God’s
judgment-seat, and gall him with many stings. This confession,
accordingly, that all need forgiveness, because no man is perfect, and
that then only is it well with us when God pardons our sins, nature
herself extorts even from wicked men. But in the meantime, hypocrisy
shuts the eyes of multitudes, while others are so deluded by a perverse
carnal security, that they are touched either with no feelings of Divine
wrath, or with only a frigid feeling of it.

<span id="xxxviii.i-p6"></span>From this proceeds a twofold error:
first, that such men make light of their sins, and reflect not on the
hundredth part of their danger from God’s indignation; and, secondly,
that they invent frivolous expiations to free themselves from guilt and
to purchase the favor of God. Thus in all ages it has been everywhere a
prevailing opinion, that although all men are infected with sin, they
are at the same time adorned with merits which are calculated to procure
for them the favor of God, and that although they provoke his wrath by
their crimes, they have expiations and satisfactions in readiness to
obtain their absolution. This delusion of Satan is equally common among
Papists, Turks, Jews, and other nations. Every man, therefore, who is
not carried away by the furious madness of Popery, will admit the truth
of this statement, that men are in a wretched state unless God deal
mercifully with them by not laying their sins to their charge. But David
goes farther, declaring that the whole life of man is subjected to God’s
wrath and curse, except in so far as he vouchsafes of his own free grace
to receive them into his favor; of which the Spirit who spake by David
is an assured interpreter and witness to us by the mouth of Paul, (<span
id="xxxviii.i-p6.1"></span>[Ro
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006)<span id="xxxviii.i-p6.1"></span>.)
Had Paul not used this testimony, never would his readers have
penetrated the real meaning of the prophet; for we see that the Papists,
although they chant in their temples, “Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven,” etc., yet pass over it as if it were some common saying
and of little importance. But with Paul, this is the full definition of
the righteousness of faith; as if the prophet had said, Men are then
only blessed when they are freely reconciled to God, and counted as
righteous by him. The blessedness, accordingly, that David celebrates
utterly destroys the righteousness of works. The device of a partial
righteousness with which Papists and others delude themselves is mere
folly; and even among those who are destitute of the light of heavenly
doctrine, no one will be found so mad as to arrogate a perfect
righteousness to himself, as appears from the expiations, washings, and
other means of appeasing God, which have always been in use among all
nations. But yet they do not hesitate to obtrude their virtues upon God,
just as if by them they had acquired of themselves a great part of their
blessedness.

<span id="xxxviii.i-p7"></span>David, however, prescribes a very
different order, namely, that in seeking happiness, all should begin
with the principle, that God cannot be reconciled to those who are
worthy of eternal destruction in any other way than by freely pardoning
them, and bestowing upon them his favor. And justly does he declare that
if mercy is withheld from them, all men must be utterly wretched and
accursed; for if all men are naturally prone only to evil, until they
are regenerated, their whole previous life, it is obvious, must be
hateful and loathsome in the sight of God. Besides, as even after
regeneration, no work which men perform can please God unless he pardons
the sin which mingles with it, they must be excluded from the hope of
salvation. Certainly nothing will remain for them but cause for the
greatest terror. That the works of the saints are unworthy of reward
because they are spotted with stains, seems a hard saying to the
Papists. But, in this they betray their gross ignorance in estimating,
according to their own conceptions, the judgment of God, in whose eyes
the very brightness of the stars is but darkness. Let this therefore
remain an established doctrine, that as we are only accounted righteous
before God by the free remission of sins, this is the gate of eternal
salvation; and, accordingly, that they only are blessed who rely upon
God’s mercy. We must bear in mind the contrast which I have already
mentioned between believers who, embracing the remission of sins, rely
upon the grace of God alone, and all others who neglect to betake
themselves to the sanctuary of Divine grace.

<span id="xxxviii.i-p8"></span>Moreover, when David thrice repeats the
same thing, this is no vain repetition. It is indeed sufficiently
evident of itself that the man must be blessed whose iniquity is
forgiven; but experience teaches us how difficult it is to become
persuaded of this in such a manner as to have it thoroughly fixed in our
hearts. The great majority, as I have already shown you, entangled by
devices of their own, put away from them, as far as they can, the
terrors of conscience and all fear of Divine wrath. They have, no doubt,
a desire to be reconciled to God; and yet they shun the sight of him,
rather than seek his grace sincerely and with all their hearts. Those,
on the other hand, whom God has truly awakened so as to be affected with
a lively sense of their misery, are so constantly agitated and
disquieted that it is difficult to restore peace to their minds. They
taste indeed God’s mercy, and endeavor to lay hold of it, and yet they
are frequently abashed or made to stagger under the manifold assaults
which are made upon them. The two reasons for which the Psalmist insists
so much on the subject of the forgiveness of sins are these, - that he
may, on the one hand, raise up those who are fallen asleep, inspire the
careless with thoughtfulness, and quicken the dull; and that he may, on
the other hand, tranquillise fearful and anxious minds with an assured
and steady confidence. To the former, the doctrine may be applied in
this manner: ”What mean ye, O ye unhappy men! that one or two stings of
conscience do not disturb you? Suppose that a certain limited knowledge
of your sins is not sufficient to strike you with terror, yet how
preposterous is it to continue securely asleep, while you are
overwhelmed with an immense load of sins?” And this repetition furnishes
not a little comfort and confirmation to the feeble and fearful. As
doubts are often coming upon them, one after another, it is not
sufficient that they are victorious in one conflict only. That despair,
therefore, may not overwhelm them amidst the various perplexing thoughts
with which they are agitated, the Holy Spirit confirms and ratifies the
remission of sins with many declarations.

<span id="xxxviii.i-p9"></span>It is now proper to weigh the particular
force of the expressions here employed. Certainly the remission which is
here treated of does not agree with satisfactions. God, in lifting off
or taking away sins, and likewise in covering and not imputing them,
freely pardons them. On this account the Papists, by thrusting in their
satisfactions and works of supererogation as they call them, bereave
themselves of this blessedness. Besides, David applies these words to
complete forgiveness. The distinction, therefore, which the Papists here
make between the remission of the punishment and of the fault, by which
they make only half a pardon, is not at all to the purpose. Now, it is
necessary to consider to whom this happiness belongs, which may be
easily gathered from the circumstance of the time. When David was taught
that he was blessed through the mercy of God alone, he was not an alien
from the church of God; on the contrary, he had profited above many in
the fear and service of God, and in holiness of life, and had exercised
himself in all the duties of godliness. And even after making these
advances in religion, God so exercised him, that he placed the alpha and
omega of his salvation in his gratuitous reconciliation to God. Nor is
it without reason that Zacharias, in his song, represents “the knowledge
of salvation” as consisting in knowing “the remission of sins,” (<span
id="xxxviii.i-p9.1"></span>[Lu
1:77](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#077)<span
id="xxxviii.i-p9.1"></span>.) The more eminently that any one excels in
holiness, the farther he feels himself from perfect righteousness, and
the more clearly he perceives that he can trust in nothing but the mercy
of God alone. Hence it appears, that those are grossly mistaken who
conceive that the pardon of sin is necessary only to the beginning of
righteousness. As believers are every day involved in many faults, it
will profit them nothing that they have once entered the way of
righteousness, unless the same grace which brought them into it
accompany them to the last step of their life. Does any one object, that
they are elsewhere said to be blessed “who fear the Lord,” “who walk in
his ways,” “who are upright in heart,” etc., the answer is easy, namely,
that as the perfect fear of the Lord, the perfect observance of his law,
and perfect uprightness of heart, are nowhere to be found, all that the
Scripture anywhere says, concerning blessedness, is founded upon the
free favor of God, by which he reconciles us to himself.

<span id="xxxviii.i-p10"></span><span id="xxxviii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.i-p11"></span>**2.** *In whose spirit there is no
guile.* In this clause the Psalmist distinguishes believers both from
hypocrites and from senseless despisers of God, neither of whom care for
this happiness, nor can they attain to the enjoyment of it. The wicked
are, indeed, conscious to themselves of their guilt, but still they
delight in their wickedness; harden themselves in their impudence, and
laugh at threatenings; or, at least, they indulge themselves in
deceitful flatteries, that they may not be constrained to come into the
presence of God. Yea, though they are rendered unhappy by a sense of
their misery, and harassed with secret torments, yet with perverse
forgetfulness they stifle all fear of God. As for hypocrites, if their
conscience as any time stings them, they soothe their pain with
ineffectual remedies: so that if God at any time cite them to his
tribunal, they place before them I know not what phantoms for their
defense; and they are never without coverings whereby they may keep the
light out of their hearts. Both these classes of men are hindered by
inward guile from seeking their happiness in the fatherly love of God.
Nay more, many of them rush frowardly into the presence of God, or puff
themselves up with proud presumption, dreaming that they are happy,
although God is against them. David, therefore, means that no man can
taste what the forgiveness of sins is until his heart is first cleansed
from guile. What he means, then, by this term, *guile,* may be
understood from what I have said. Whoever examines not himself, as in
the presence of God, but, on the contrary, shunning his judgment, either
shrouds himself in darkness, or covers himself with leaves, deals
deceitfully both with himself and with God. It is no wonder, therefore,
that he who feels not his disease refuses the remedy. The two kinds of
this guile which I have mentioned are to be particularly attended to.
Few may be so hardened as not to be touched with the fear of God, and
with some desire of his grace, and yet they are moved but coldly to seek
forgiveness. Hence it comes to pass, that they do not yet perceive what
an unspeakable happiness it is to possess God’s favor. Such was David’s
case for a time, when a treacherous security stole upon him, darkened
his mind, and prevented him from zealously applying himself to pursue
after this happiness. Often do the saints labor under the same disease.
If, therefore, we would enjoy the happiness which David here proposes to
us, we must take the greatest heed lest Satan, filling our hearts with
guile, deprive us of all sense of our wretchedness, in which every one
who has recourse to subterfuges must necessarily pine away.

<span id="xxxviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
32:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003)<span
id="xxxviii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** When I kept silence, my bones
wasted away, and when I cried out all the day. **4.** For day and night
thy hand was heavy upon me; and my greenness was turned into the drought
of summer.

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxxviii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p5"></span>**3.** *When I kept silence, my bones
wasted away.* Here David confirms, by his own experience, the doctrine
which he had laid down; namely, that when humbled under the hand of God,
he felt that nothing was so miserable as to be deprived of his favor: by
which he intimates, that this truth cannot be rightly understood until
God has tried us with a feeling of his anger. Nor does he speak of a
mere ordinary trial, but declares that he was entirely subdued with the
extremest rigour. And certainly, the sluggishness of our flesh, in this
matter, is no less wonderful than its hardihood. If we are not drawn by
forcible means, we will never hasten to seek reconciliation to God so
earnestly as we ought. In fine, the inspired writer teaches us by his
own example, that we never perceive how great a happiness it is to enjoy
the favor of God, until we have thoroughly felt from grievous conflicts
with inward temptations, how terrible the anger of God is. He adds, that
whether he was silent, or whether he attempted to heighten his grief by
his crying and roaring,  <span id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660) his
bones waxed old; in other words, his whole strength withered away. From
this it follows, that whithersoever the sinner may turn himself, or
however he may be mentally affected, his malady is in no degree
lightened, nor his welfare in any degree promoted, until he is restored
to the favor of God. It often happens that those are tortured with the
sharpest grief who gnaw the bit, and inwardly devour their sorrow, and
keep it enclosed and shut up within, without discovering it, although
afterwards they are seized as with sudden madness, and the force of
their grief bursts forth with the greater impetus the longer it has been
restrained. By the term *silence,* David means neither insensibility nor
stupidity, but that feeling which lies between patience and obstinacy,
and which is as much allied to the vice as to the virtue. For his bones
were not consumed with age, but with the dreadful torments of his mind.
His silence, however, was not the silence of hope or obedience, for it
brought no alleviation of his misery.

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxxviii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p8"></span>**4.** *For day and night thy hand was
heavy upon me.* In this verse he explains more fully whence such heavy
grief arose; namely, because he felt the hand of God to be sore against
him. The greatest of all afflictions is to be so heavily pressed with
the hand of God, that the sinner feels he has to do with a Judge whose
indignation and severity involve in them many deaths, besides eternal
death. David, accordingly, complains that his moisture was dried up, not
merely from simply meditating on his sore afflictions, but because he
had discovered their cause and spring. The whole strength of men fails
when God appears as a Judge and humbles and lays them prostrate by
exhibiting the signs of his displeasure. Then is fulfilled the saying of
Isaiah,

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p9"></span>“The grass withereth, the flower fadeth,
because the Spirit of the Lord bloweth upon it.” (<span
id="xxxviii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)<span
id="xxxviii.ii-p9.1"></span>)

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p10"></span>The Psalmist, moreover, tells us, that
it was no common chastisement by which he had been taught truly to fear
the divine wrath; for the hand of the Lord ceased not to be heavy upon
him both day and night. From a child, indeed, he had been inspired with
the fear of God, by the secret influence of the Holy Spirit, and had
been taught in true religion and godliness by sound doctrine and
instruction. And yet so insufficient was this instruction for his
attainment of this wisdom, that he had to be taught again like a new
beginner in the very midst of his course. Yea, although he had now been
long accustomed to mourn over his sins, he was every day anew reduced to
this exercise, which teaches us, how long it is ere men recover
themselves when once they have fallen; and also how slow they are to
obey until God, from time to time, redouble their stripes, and increase
them from day to day. Should any one ask concerning David, whether he
had become callous under the stripes which he well knew were inflicted
on him by the hand of God, the context furnishes the answer; namely,
that he was kept down and fettered by perplexing griefs, and distracted
with lingering torments, until he was well subdued and made meek, which
is the first sign of seeking a remedy. And this again teaches us, that
it is not without cause that the chastisements by which God seems to
deal cruelly with us are repeated, and his hand made heavy against us,
until our fierce pride, which we know to be un-tameable, unless subdued
with the heaviest stripes, is humbled.

<span id="xxxviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="xxxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
32:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005)<span
id="xxxviii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p2"></span>**5.** I have acknowledged my sin unto
thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid. I said, I will confess against
myself to Jehovah my wickedness; and thou didst remit the guilt  <span
id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661) of my sin. Selah. **6.** Therefore
shall every one that is meek pray unto thee in the time of finding thee;
so that in a flood of many waters,  <span
id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662) they shall not come nigh unto him.
**7.** Thou art my hiding-place; thou shalt preserve me from trouble;
thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance. Selah.

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxxviii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p7"></span>**5.** *I have acknowledged my sin unto
thee.* The prophet now describes the issue of his misery, in order to
show to all the ready way of obtaining the happiness of which he makes
mention. When his feeling of divine wrath sorely vexed and tormented
him, his only relief was unfeignedly to condemn himself before God, and
humbly to flee to him to crave his forgiveness. He does not say,
however, that his sins merely came to his remembrance, for so also did
the sins of Cain and Judas, although to no profit; because, when the
consciences of the wicked are troubled with their sins, they cease not
to torment themselves, and to fret against God: yea, although he forces
them unwillingly to his bar, they still eagerly desire to hide
themselves. But here there is described a very different method of
acknowledging sin; namely, when the sinner willingly betakes himself to
God, building his hope of salvation not on stubbornness or hypocrisy,
but on supplication for pardon. This voluntary confession is always
conjoined with faith; for otherwise the sinner will continually seek
lurking-places where he may hide himself from God. David’s words clearly
show that he came unfeignedly and cordially into the presence of God,
that he might conceal nothing. When he tells us that *he acknowledged
his sin,* and *did not hide it,* the latter clause is added, according
to the Hebrew idiom, for the sake of amplification. There is no doubt,
therefore, that David, when he appeared before God, poured out all his
heart. Hypocrites, we know, that they may extenuate their evil doings,
either disguise or misrepresent them; in short, they never make an
honest confession of them, with an ingenuous and open mouth. But David
denies that he was chargeable with this baseness. Without any
dissimulation he made known to God whatever grieved him; and this he
confirms by the words, *I have said* While the wicked are dragged by
force, just as a judge compels offenders to come to trial, he assures us
that he came deliberately and with full purpose of mind; for the term,
*said,* just signifies that he deliberated with himself. It therefore
follows, that he promised and assured himself of pardon through the
mercy of God, in order that terror might not prevent him from making a
free and an ingenuous confession of his sins.

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p8"></span>The phrase, *upon myself,* or *against
myself,* intimates that David put away from him all the excuses and
pretences by which men are accustomed to unburden themselves,
transferring their fault, or tracing it to other people. David,
therefore, determined to submit himself entirely to God’s judgment, and
to make known his own guilt, that being self-condemned, he might as a
suppliant obtain pardon.

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p9"></span>*And thou didst remit the guilt of my
sin.* This clause is set in opposition to the grievous and direful
agitations by which he says he was harassed before he approached by
faith the grace of God. But the words also teach, that as often as the
sinner presents himself at the throne of mercy, with ingenuous
confession, he will find reconciliation with God awaiting him. In other
words, the Psalmist means that God was not only willing to pardon him,
but that his example afforded a general lesson that those in distress
should not doubt of God’s favor towards them, so soon as they should
betake themselves to him with a sincere and willing mind. Should any one
infer from this, that repentance and confession are the cause of
obtaining grace, the answer is easy; namely, that David is not speaking
here of the cause but of the manner in which the sinner becomes
reconciled to God. Confession, no doubt, intervenes, but we must go
beyond this, and consider that it is faith which, by opening our hearts
and tongues, really obtains our pardon. It is not admitted that every
thing which is necessarily connected with pardon is to be reckoned
amongst its causes. Or, to speak more simply, David obtained pardon by
his confession, not because he merited it by the mere act of confessing,
but because, under the guidance of faith, he humbly implored it from his
judge. Moreover, as the same method of confession ought to be in use
among us at this day, which was formerly employed by the fathers under
the law, this sufficiently refutes that tyrannical decree of the Pope,
by which he turns us away from God, and sends us to his priests to
obtain pardon.

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xxxviii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p11"></span>**6.** *Therefore shall every one that
is meek pray unto thee.* Here the Psalmist expressly states that
whatever he has hitherto set forth in his own person belongs in common
to all the children of God. And this is to be carefully observed,
because, from our native unbelief, the greater part of us are slow and
reluctant to appropriate the grace of God. We may also learn from this,
that David obtained forgiveness, not by the mere act of confession, as
some speak, but by faith and prayer. Here he directs believers to the
same means of obtaining it, bidding them betake themselves to prayer,
which is the true sacrifice of faith. Farther, we are taught, that in
David God gave an example of his mercy, which may not only extend to us
all, but may also show us how reconciliation is to be sought. The words,
*every one,* serve for the confirmation of every godly person; but the
Psalmist at the same time shows, that no one can obtain the hope of
salvation but by prostrating himself as a suppliant before God, because
all without exception stand in need of his mercy.

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p12"></span>The expression, *The time of finding,*
which immediately follows, some think, refers to the ordinary and
accustomed hours of prayer; but others more accurately, in my opinion,
compare it  <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663) with that place in
Isaiah, (<span id="xxxviii.iii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)<span
id="xxxviii.iii-p13.1"></span>,) where it is said, “Seek ye the Lord
while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near.” It is never
out of season, indeed, to seek God, for every moment we need his grace,
and he is always willing to meet us. But as slothfulness or dullness
hinders us from seeking him, David here particularly intimates the
critical seasons when believers are stimulated by a sense of their own
need to have recourse to God. The Papists have abused this place to
warrant their doctrine, that we ought to have advocates in heaven to
pray for us;  <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664) but the attempt to
found an argument in support of such a doctrine from this passage is so
grossly absurd that it is unworthy of refutation. We may see from it,
however, either how wickedly they have corrupted the whole Scripture, or
with what gross ignorance they blunder in the plainest matters.

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p15"></span>*In the flood of many waters.* This
expression agrees with that prophecy of Joel,

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p16"></span>“Whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord, shall be delivered.” (<span id="xxxviii.iii-p16.1"></span>[Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span
id="xxxviii.iii-p16.1"></span>)

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p17"></span>The meaning is, that although the deep
whirlpools of death may compass us round on every side, we ought not to
fear that they shall swallow us up; but rather believe that we shall be
safe and unhurt, if we only betake ourselves to the mercy of God. We are
thus emphatically taught that the godly shall have certain salvation
even in death, provided they betake themselves to the sanctuary of God’s
grace. Under the term *flood* are denoted all those dangers from which
there appears no means of escape.

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p18"></span><span id="xxxviii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p19"></span>At last the Psalmist gives himself to
thanksgiving, and although he uses but few words to celebrate the divine
favor, there is, notwithstanding, much force in his brevity. In the
first place, he denies that there is any other haven of safety but in
God himself. Secondly, he assures himself that God will be his faithful
keeper hereafter; for I willingly retain the future tense of the verb,
though some, without any reason, translate it into the past. He is not,
however, to be understood as meaning that he conceived himself safe from
future tribulations, but he sets God’s guardianship over against them.
Lastly, whatever adversity may befall him, he is persuaded that God will
be his deliverer. By the word *compass,* he means manifold and various
kinds of deliverance; as if he had said, that he should be under
obligation to God in innumerable ways, and that he should, on every
side, have most abundant matter for praising him. We may observe in the
meantime, how he offers his service of gratitude to God, according to
his usual method, putting *songs of deliverance* instead of *help.*

<span id="xxxviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
32:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)<span
id="xxxviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p2"></span>**8.** I will instruct thee, and teach
thee in the way that thou mayest walk: I will counsel thee with mine
eye.  <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665) **9.** Be not like the
horse or mule, which have no understanding: thou shalt bind his jaw with
bit and bridle, lest they kick against \[or become obstreperous against
or obstinately disobey\] thee.  <span id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666)
**10.** Many sorrows shall be to the wicked: but the man who hopeth in
Jehovah, mercy shall surround him. **11.** Be glad in Jehovah, and
rejoice, ye righteous: sing all ye that are upright in heart.

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p6"></span><span id="xxxviii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p7"></span>**8.** *I will instruct thee, and teach
thee.* That his exhortation may have the greater force, the divine
speaker directs his discourse to every man individually; for the
doctrine which is spoken penetrates the mind more readily, when every
man applies it particularly to himself. When the way of salvation is
here shown to the children of God, the greatest care must be taken that
no man depart from it in the slightest degree. We may also learn from
this place, that we are reconciled to God upon condition that every man
endeavor to make his brethren partakers of the same benefit. David, the
more strongly to mark his care about them, describes it by *the sight of
the eye.*  <span id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667) By the way it should
be observed, that those who are solicitous about our welfare are
appointed by the Lord as guides of our way, from which it appears how
great is the paternal solicitude which he has about us.

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p9"></span><span id="xxxviii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p10"></span>**9.** *Be not like the horse or mule.*
David now briefly explains the amount of the counsel which he formerly
said he would give. He exhorts all to learn with quietness, to lay aside
stubbornness, and to put on the spirit of meekness. There is much
wisdom, too, in the advice which he gives to the godly to correct their
hardihood; for if we were as attentive to God’s corrections as we ought,
every one would eagerly hasten to seek his favor. Whence is so much
slowness to be found in all, but that we are either stupid or
refractory? By likening the refractory, therefore, to brute beasts,
David puts them to shame, and at the same time declares that it will
avail them nothing to “kick against the pricks.” Men, says he, know how
to tame the fierceness of horses by bridles and bits; what then do they
think God will do when he finds them intractable?

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p11"></span><span id="xxxviii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p12"></span>**10.** *Many sorrows shall be to the
wicked.* Without a figure he here declares what will be the condition of
the rebellious and stiff-necked.  <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) He mentioned before that God wanted
not bridles and bits with which to restrain their frowardness; and now
he adds, that there would be no end or measure of their miseries until
they were utterly consumed. Although God, therefore, may spare us for a
time, yet let this denunciation fill us with fear, and preserve us from
hardening ourselves, because we are as yet unpunished; nor let our
prosperity, which is cursed by God, so deceive us as to close our minds
against reflecting on those unseen sorrows which he threatens against
all the wicked. And as the Psalmist has told us, on the one hand, that
God is armed with innumerable plagues against the wicked, so he adds, on
the other hand, that he is furnished with infinite goodness, with which
he can succor all who are his. The sum is, that there is no other remedy
for our afflictions but to humble ourselves under God’s hand, and to
found our salvation on his mercy alone; and that those who rely on God
shall be blessed in all respects, because, on whatever side Satan may
assault them, there will the Lord oppose him, and shield them with his
protecting power.

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p14"></span><span id="xxxviii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p15"></span>**11.** *Be glad in Jehovah.* After
teaching how ready and accessible true happiness is to all the godly,
David, with much reason, exhorts them to gladness. He commands them to
rejoice in the Lord, as if he had said, There is nothing to prevent them
from assuring themselves of God’s favor, seeing he so liberally and so
kindly offers to be reconciled to them. In the meantime, we may observe
that this is the incomparable fruit of faith which Paul likewise
commends, namely, when the consciences of the godly being quiet and
cheerful, enjoy peace and spiritual joy. Wherever faith is lively, this
holy rejoicing will follow. But since the world’s own impiety prevents
it from participating in this joy, David, therefore, addresses the
righteous alone, whom he denominates *the upright in heart,* to teach us
that the external appearance of righteousness which pleases men is of no
avail in the sight of God. But how does he call those righteous, whose
whole happiness consists in the free mercy of God not imputing their
sins to them? I answer, that none others are received into favor but
those who are dissatisfied with themselves for their sins, and repent
with their whole heart; not that this repentance merits pardon, but
because faith can never be separated from the spirit of regeneration.
When they have begun to devote themselves to God, he accepts the upright
disposition of their hearts equally as if it were pure and perfect; for
faith not only reconciles a man to God, but also sanctifies whatever is
imperfect in him, so that by the free grace of God, he becomes righteous
who could never have obtained so great a blessing by any merit of his
own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_658"></span>[659](cc08037.htm#fr_658) <span
id="xxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxxviii-p5"></span> “<span id="xxxviii-p5.1"></span>Pour
lequel nous avons traduit, Donnant instruction.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[660](cc08037.htm#fr_659) <span
id="xxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxxviii-p6"></span> Where it is said, “I will instruct thee
and teach thee.”

<span id="fn_660"></span>[661](cc08037.htm#fr_660) <span
id="xxxviii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.ii-p6"></span> The translation of this verse in our
English Bible is, “When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my
roaring all the day long;” on which *Street* observes, “I must own I do
not understand how a man can be said *to keep silence* who *roars* all
the day long.” Accordingly, instead of *When I kept silence,* he reads,
*While I am lost in thought;* observing that, the verb <span
id="xxxviii.ii-p6.1"></span>חרש, in the Hiphil conjugation, signifies
*to ponder, to consider, to be deep in thought.”* But according to the
translation and exposition of Calvin, there is no inconsistency between
the first and the second clause of the verse. To avoid the apparent
contradiction of being at once *silent* and yet *roaring* all the day
long, *Dr* *Boothroyd*, instead of *roaring,* reads *pangs.*

<span id="fn_661"></span>[662](cc08037.htm#fr_661) <span
id="xxxviii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p3"></span> “<span
id="xxxviii.iii-p3.1"></span>Ou, peine.” — *Fr.* *marg.* “Or,
punishment.”

<span id="fn_662"></span>[663](cc08037.htm#fr_662) <span
id="xxxviii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p4"></span> “<span id="xxxviii.iii-p4.1"></span>De
grandes eaux.” — *Fr*. “Of great waters.”

<span id="fn_663"></span>[664](cc08037.htm#fr_663) <span
id="xxxviii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p13"></span> In the Septuagint version it is
rendered, “In the time of finding favor;” in the Arabic, “In a time of
hearing;” and in the Syriac, “In an acceptable time.”

<span id="fn_664"></span>[665](cc08037.htm#fr_664) <span
id="xxxviii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iii-p14"></span> “<span
id="xxxviii.iii-p14.1"></span>Qu’ils nous faut avoir des advocats au
ciel qui prient pour nous.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[666](cc08037.htm#fr_665) <span
id="xxxviii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xxxviii.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou,
je guideray de mon oeil.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, I will guide thee with
mine eye.”

<span id="fn_666"></span>[667](cc08037.htm#fr_666) <span
id="xxxviii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p4"></span> This verse in the Hebrew is very
elliptical and obscure. Hence, besides the translation of Calvin, which
agrees very well with the scope of the passage, various other
translations have been given of it. In our English Bible, the last
clause is rendered, “lest they come near unto thee,” that is, to attack
thee. But this is evidently an incorrect translation. This is not the
common practice of these animals, which are timid, and not ferocious;
bits and bridles are not used for the purpose of keeping them away from
us, but of subduing, guiding, and making them subservient to our will;
and were this the sense, the figure would be inappropriate, since the
object of the Psalmist is to induce men to approach God. The clause,
therefore, is rendered by many critics, “Or they will not come nigh unto
thee;” that is, they will flee from thee. The Hebrew for this last
phrase is, “There is not a coming to thee.”

<span id="fn_667"></span>[668](cc08037.htm#fr_667) <span
id="xxxviii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p8"></span> Most commentators consider Jehovah as
the person speaking in this verse. Calvin, however, views David as the
speaker. In this opinion he is followed by *Walford*. “In <span
id="xxxviii.iv-p8.1"></span>[Ps
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#013)<span
id="xxxviii.iv-p8.1"></span>,” says this critic, “written about the same
time and on the same occasion, David urges as a reason why God should
restore to him the joy of his salvation, that he might be enabled to
teach transgressors his ways, and that sinners might be converted to
him. So in the passage before us, he addresses himself to sinners, and
says, ‘I will instruct time, and teach thee the way in which thou shalt
go.’”

<span id="fn_668"></span>[669](cc08037.htm#fr_668) <span
id="xxxviii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxviii.iv-p13"></span> *Fry* reads, “Many are the wounds of
the refractory;” on which he has the following note:- “We perceive in
this place the exact idea of <span id="xxxviii.iv-p13.1"></span>ושץ, in
its allusion to the restive, disobedient, unyielding, ungovernable mule
or horse. It is opposed to <span id="xxxviii.iv-p13.2"></span>בטח, *to
confide in, to yield to,* or *succumb,* as the gentle beast fully
confides and yields himself to the management of his guide.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 33](cc08038)
