[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08032)  [Next](cc08034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xxxiv-p1"></span>PSALM 28.

<span id="xxxiv-p2"></span>After being delivered by God’s help from
great dangers, David, in this psalm, according to his custom, first
records the vows that he had made in the midst of his difficulties, and
then his thanksgivings and praises to God, to induce others to follow
his example. It is probable that he speaks of his persecutions by Saul.

<span id="xxxiv-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xxxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
28:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)<span id="xxxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Unto thee, O Jehovah! will I cry; O
my strength! hold not thy peace from me; lest, shouldst thou be silent
to me, I become like them that go down to the grave. **2.** Hear the
voice of my prayers when I cry to thee, when I lift up my hands to the
sanctuary of thy holiness.

<span id="xxxiv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxiv.i-p4"></span><span id="xxxiv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Unto thee, O Jehovah! will I cry.*
The Psalmist begins by declaring that he would betake himself to the
help of God alone, which shows both his faith and his sincerity.
Although men labor every where under a multitude of troubles, yet
scarcely one in a hundred ever has recourse to God. Almost all having
their consciences burdened with guilt, and having never experienced the
power of divine grace which might lead them to betake themselves to it,
either proudly gnaw the bit or fill the air with unavailing complaints,
or, giving way to desperation, faint under their afflictions. By calling
God *his strength,* David more fully shows that he confided in God’s
assistance, not only when he was in the shade and in peace, but also
when he was exposed to the severest temptations. In comparing himself to
the dead, too, he intimates how great his straits were, although his
object was not merely to point out the magnitude of his danger, but also
to show that when he needed succor, he looked not here and there for it,
but relied on God alone, without whose favor there remained no hope for
him. It is, therefore, as if he had said, I am nothing if thou leavest
me; if thou succourest me not, I perish. It is not enough for one who is
in such a state of affliction to be sensible of his misery, unless,
convinced of his inability to help himself, and renouncing all help from
the world, he betake himself to God alone. And as the Scriptures inform
us that God answers true believers when he shows by his operations that
he regards their supplications, so the word *silent* is set in
opposition to the sensible and present experience of his aid, when he
appears, as it were, not to hear their prayers.

<span id="xxxiv.i-p6"></span><span id="xxxiv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p7"></span>**2.** *Hear the voice of my prayers when I
cry to thee.* This repetition is a sign of a heart in anguish. David’s
ardor and vehemence in prayer are also intimated by the noun signifying
*voice,* and the verb signifying *to cry.* He means that he was so
stricken with anxiety and fear, that he prayed not coldly, but with
burning, vehement desire, like those who, under the pressure of grief,
vehemently cry out. In the second clause of the verse, by synecdoche,
the thing signified is indicated by the sign. It has been a common
practice in all ages for men to lift up their hands in prayer. Nature
has extorted this gesture even from heathen idolaters, to show by a
visible sign that their minds were directed to God alone. The greater
part, it is true, contented with this ceremony, busy themselves to no
effect with their own inventions; but the very lifting up of the hands,
when there is no hypocrisy and deceit, is a help to devout and zealous
prayer. David, however, does not say here that he lifted his hands to
heaven, but to *the sanctuary,* that, aided by its help, he might ascend
the more easily to heaven. He was not so gross, or so superstitiously
tied to the outward sanctuary, as not to know that God must be sought
spiritually, and that men then only approach to him when, leaving the
world, they penetrate by faith to celestial glory. But remembering that
he was a man, he would not neglect this aid afforded to his infirmity.
As the sanctuary was the pledge or token of the covenant of God, David
beheld the presence of God’s promised grace there, as if it had been
represented in a mirror; just as the faithful now, if they wish to have
a sense of God’s nearness to them, should immediately direct their faith
to Christ, who came down to us in his incarnation, that he might lift us
up to the Father. Let us understand, then, that David clung to the
sanctuary with no other view than that by the help of God’s promise he
might rise above the elements of the world, which he used, however,
according to the appointment of the Law. The Hebrew word <span
id="xxxiv.i-p7.1"></span>דביר, *debir,* which we have rendered
*sanctuary,*  <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593) signifies the
inner-room of the tabernacle or temple, or the most holy place, where
the ark of the covenant was contained, and it is so called from the
answers or oracles which God gave forth from thence, to testify to his
people the presence of his favor among them.

<span id="xxxiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
28:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003)<span id="xxxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Draw me not away with wicked men,
nor with the workers of iniquity, who speak peace to their neighbors,
while malice is in their hearts. **4.** Give them according to their
works, and according to the wickedness of their doings; give them
according to the work of their hands; render them their reward. **5.**
Because they regard not the doings of Jehovah, neither the work of his
hands, let him destroy them, and not build them up.

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xxxiv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p5"></span>**3.** *Draw me not away with wicked men.*
The meaning is, that in circumstances so dissimilar, God should not
mingle the righteous with the wicked in the same indiscriminate
destruction.  <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) Undoubtedly, too,
in speaking of his enemies, he indirectly asserts his own integrity. But
he did not pray in this manner, because he thought that God was
indiscriminately and unreasonably angry with men; he reasons rather from
the nature of God, that he ought to cherish good hope, because it was
God’s prerogative to distinguish between the righteous and the wicked,
and to give every one his due reward. By *the workers of iniquity,* he
means man wholly addicted to wickedness. The children of God sometimes
fall, commit errors, and act amiss in one way or other, but they take no
pleasure in their evil doings; the fear of God, on the contrary, stirs
them up to repentance. David afterwards defines and enlarges upon the
wickedness of those whom he describes; for, under pretense of friendship
they perfidiously deceived good men, professing one thing with their
tongue, while they entertained a very different thing in their hearts.
Open depravity is easier to be borne with than this craftiness of the
fox, when persons put on fair appearances in order to find opportunity
of doing mischief.  <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) This truth,
accordingly, admonishes us that those are most detestable in God’s
sight, who attack the simple and unwary with fair speeches as with
poison.

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxxiv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p9"></span>**4.** *Give them according to their
works.* Having thus requested God to have a regard to his innocence, the
Psalmist thunders forth a curse against his enemies. And the
accumulation of words shows that he had groaned long and grievously
under the burden before he broke forth to desire such vengeance. He
intimates that the wicked of whom he speaks had transgressed not once,
nor for a short time, nor in one way, but that they had proceeded so far
in their constant evil doings, that their audacity was no longer to be
endured. We know how troublesome and grievous a temptation it is to see
the ungodly proceeding without measure or end, as if God connived at
their wickedness. David, therefore, wearied as it were with continual
forbearing, and fainting under the burden, implores God, at length, to
restrain the wantonness of his enemies, who of late ceased not to heap
wickedness upon wickedness. Thus we perceive that there is nothing
superfluous in this verse, when to *works* he adds *the wickedness of
their doings,* and *the work of their hands,* and thrice petitions that
they may receive the *reward* which they have deserved. Add to this,
that he at the same time bears testimony to his own faith, to which
boasting hypocrites often compel the children of God, while by their
deceit and cavils, they impose upon the judgments of the world. We see
how men who are distinguished for wickedness, not content with impunity
themselves, cannot abstain from oppressing the innocent by false
accusations, just as the wolf, desirous of making a prey  <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) of the lambs, according to the common
proverb, accused them of troubling the water. David is therefore
compelled by this exigency to call upon God for protection. Here again
occurs the difficult question about praying for vengeance, which,
however, I shall despatch in few words, as I have discussed it
elsewhere. In the first place, then, it is unquestionable, that if the
flesh move us to seek revenge, the desire is wicked in the Sight of God.
He not only forbids us to imprecate evil upon our enemies in revenge for
private injuries, but it cannot be otherwise than that all those desires
which spring from hatred must be disordered. David’s example, therefore,
must not be alleged by those who are driven by their own intemperate
passion to seek vengeance. The holy prophet is not inflamed here by his
own private sorrow to devote his enemies to destruction; but laying
aside the desire of the flesh, he gives judgment concerning the matter
itself. Before a man can, therefore, denounce vengeance against the
wicked, he must first shake himself free from all improper feelings in
his own mind. In the second place, prudence must be exercised, that the
heinousness of the evils which offend us drive us not to intemperate
zeal, which happened even to Christ’s disciples, when they desired that
fire might be brought from heaven to consume those who refused to
entertain their Master, (<span id="xxxiv.ii-p10.2"></span>[Lu
9:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#054)<span
id="xxxiv.ii-p10.2"></span>.) They pretended, it is true, to act
according to the example of Elias; but Christ severely rebuked them, and
told them that they knew not by what spirit they were actuated. In
particular, we must observe this general rule, that we cordially desire
and labor for the welfare of the whole human race. Thus it will come to
pass, that we shall not only give way to the exercise of God’s mercy,
but shall also wish the conversion of those who seem obstinately to rush
upon their own destruction. In short, David, being free from every evil
passion, and likewise endued with the spirit of discretion and judgment,
pleads here not so much his own cause as the cause of God. And by this
prayer, he farther reminds both himself and the faithful, that although
the wicked may give themselves loose reins in the commission of every
species of vice with impunity for a time, they must at length stand
before the judgment-seat of God.

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxxiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p12"></span>**5.** *Because they regard not the
doings of Jehovah.* In this verse he lays open the root of impiety,
declaring that the ungodly are so bold to do mischief, because, while
they are thus indulging their hatred, and perpetrating every species of
wickedness, they think that they have nothing to do with God. And when
conscience stings them, they soothe themselves with false hopes, and at
last stubbornly harden themselves into insensibility. First, being
intoxicated with prosperity, they flatter themselves that God is their
friend, while he has no regard for those good men who are overwhelmed
with so many afflictions; and, next, they persuade themselves that the
world is governed by chance, thus blinding themselves in the midst of
the clear light of day. In this manner, David’s adversaries, willingly
ignorant that God had appointed him to be king, emboldened themselves to
persecute him. He therefore complains of their gross ignorance of this,
just as Isaiah (<span id="xxxiv.ii-p12.1"></span>[Isa
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span id="xxxiv.ii-p12.1"></span>)
brings the same complaint, in general terms, against all the ungodly of
his days. This doctrine, then, has a twofold use. First, it is no small
consolation to the children of God to be persuaded, while they are
unrighteously vexed, that by the providence of God they are thus
profitably exercised to patience; and that while the affairs of this
world are all in a state of disturbance and confusion, God nevertheless
sits supreme in heaven conducting and governing all things.  <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) In the second place, this is a very
proper curb to subdue the passions of our flesh, that we may not, like
the Andabates,  <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) contend in the
dark, and with shut eyes, as if God saw not and cared not about what is
done here below. Let us, therefore, learn carefully to consider that the
judgments which God executes are just so many proofs of his
righteousness in governing mankind, and that although all things should
be huddled together in confusion, the eye of faith should be directed to
heaven, to consider God’s secret judgments. And as God never ceases,
even in the midst of the greatest darkness, to give some tokens of his
providence, it is inexcusable indolence not to attend to them. This
perverseness the prophet aggravates, by repeating again, *the works of
God’s hands* He thus intimates, that the ungodly, by recklessly pursuing
their course, trample under foot whatever of God’s works they may meet
with to check their madness.

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p15"></span>*Let him destroy them, and not build them
up.* Some are of opinion that the first part of this verse is the
nominative in the room of a substantive to the verbs in the last clause;
as if David had said, This brutal madness shall destroy them; but the
name of God should rather be supplied, and then the context will run
excellently. As the verbs, however, in the Hebrew are in the future
tense  <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) the sentence may be
explained as meaning that David now assures himself of the destruction
of the reprobates for which he had lately prayed. I do not reject this
interpretation; but, in my opinion, the words are just a continuance of
his petitions. In this way, he prays that the wicked may be overthrown,
so as not to rise again, or recover their former state. The expression,
*Let him destroy them, and not build them up,* is a common figure of
speech among the Hebrews, according to what Malachi says concerning
Edom, “Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, They shall build, but I shall throw
down,” (<span id="xxxiv.ii-p16.1"></span>[Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004)<span id="xxxiv.ii-p16.1"></span>.)
Lest we should be struck, therefore, with an incurable plague, let us
learn to awake our minds to the consideration of God’s works, that we
may be taught to fear him, to persevere in patience, and to advance in
godliness.

<span id="xxxiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
28:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006)<span
id="xxxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iii-p2"></span>**6.** Blessed be Jehovah, for he hath
heard the voice of my supplication. **7.** Jehovah is my strength and my
shield, my heart hath trusted in him, and I have been helped: therefore
shall my heart rejoice, and with my song will I praise him. **8.**
Jehovah is their strength; and he is also the strength of the salvations
\[or deliverances\] of his anointed.

<span id="xxxiv.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxiv.iii-p4"></span><span id="xxxiv.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iii-p5"></span>**6.** *Blessed be Jehovah, who hath
heard.* This is the second part of the psalm in which the prophet begins
to give thanks to God. We have already seen how he employed himself in
prayer in the midst of his dangers; and now by this thanksgiving he
teaches us that his prayers were not in vain. Thus he confirms by his
own example, that God is ready to bring help to his people whenever they
seek him in truth and sincerity. He declares the same truth more fully
in the next verse, calling God *his strength* and *his shield;* for he
was persuaded that God had heard him from this, that he had been
wonderfully preserved. He adds, that he had been *helped* in respect of
his confidence and hope; for it often comes to pass, that those who call
upon God, notwithstanding come short of his grace through their own
unbelief. Thirdly, he says that he will add to his joy a testimony of
his gratitude. Wicked men and hypocrites flee to God when they are
overwhelmed with difficulties, but as soon as they escape from them,
forgetting their deliverer, they rejoice with frantic mirth. In short,
David trusted not in vain, since he truly found by experience that God
possesses ever present power to preserve his servants; and that this was
matter of true and solid joy to him, that he found God ever favorable to
him. On this account, likewise, he promises that he would be mindful of
God, and grateful to him. And undoubtedly, when God spreads cheerfulness
through our hearts, it is to open our mouths to sing his praises.

<span id="xxxiv.iii-p6"></span><span id="xxxiv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iii-p7"></span>**8.** *Jehovah is their strength.* By
way of explanation, he repeats what he had said before, that God had
been his strength; namely, because he had blessed his armies. David had
indeed employed the hand and labor of men, but to God alone he ascribes
the victory. As he knew that whatever help he had obtained from men
proceeded from God, and that his prosperous success flowed likewise from
his gratuitous favor, he discerned his hand in these means, as palpably
as if it had been stretched forth from heaven. And surely it is passing
shameful, that human means, which are only the instruments of God’s
power, should obscure his glory; although there is no sin more common.
It is a manner of speaking which has great weight, when, speaking of his
soldiers, he uses only the pronoun *their,* as if he pointed to them
with the finger. The second clause assigns the reason of the other. He
declares that himself and his whole army were endued with victorious
valor from heaven, because he fought under the standard of God. This is
the meaning of the word *anointed;* for, had not God appointed him king,
and freely adopted him, he would not have favored him any more than he
did Saul. By this means, in extolling solely the power of God which
advanced him to the kingdom, he attributes nothing to his own policy or
power. In the meantime, we may learn, that when one is satisfied of the
lawfulness of his calling, this doctrine encourages him to entertain
good hope with respect to the prosperous issue of his affairs. In
particular, it is to be observed, as we have briefly noticed in another
place, that the fountain whence all the blessings God bestows upon us
flows is, that he hath chosen us in Christ. David employs *salvations*
or *deliverances* in the plural number, because he had been often and in
various ways preserved. The meaning, therefore, is, that from the time
when God had anointed him by the hand of Samuel, he never ceased to help
him, but delivered him in innumerable ways, until he had accomplished
the work of his grace in him.

<span id="xxxiv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009)<span id="xxxiv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p2"></span>**9.** Save thy people, and bless thine
inheritance; feed them, and lift them up for ever.

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p4"></span><span id="xxxiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p5"></span>In this verse he shows that it was not so
much his own welfare as the welfare of the whole Church which was the
object of his concern, and that he neither lived nor reigned for
himself, but for the common good of the people. He well knew that he was
appointed king for no other end. In this he declares himself to be a
type of the Son of God, of whom, when Zechariah (<span
id="xxxiv.iv-p5.1"></span>[Zec
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span id="xxxiv.iv-p5.1"></span>)
predicts that he would come “having salvation,” there is no doubt that
he promises nothing to him apart from his members, but that the effects
of this salvation would diffuse themselves throughout his whole body. By
this example, accordingly, he prescribes a rule to earthly kings, that,
devoting themselves to the public good, they should only desire to be
preserved for the sake of their people.  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) How very far otherwise it is, it is
needless to say. Blinded with pride and presumption they despise the
rest of the world, just as if their pomp and dignity raised them
altogether above the common state of man. Nor is it to be wondered at,
that mankind are so haughtily and contumeliously trampled under foot of
kings, since the greatest part cast off and disdain to bear the cross of
Christ.  <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) Let us therefore
remember that David is like a mirror, in which God sets before us the
continual course of his grace. Only we must be careful, that the
obedience of our faith may correspond to his fatherly love, that he may
acknowledge us for his people and inheritance. The Scriptures often
designate David by the name of a shepherd; but he himself assigns that
office to God, thus confessing that he is altogether unfit for it,
 <span id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) save only in as far as he is
God’s minister.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_593"></span>[594](cc08033.htm#fr_593) <span
id="xxxiv.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p8"></span> <span id="xxxiv.i-p8.1"></span>דביר,
*debir,* is derived from <span id="xxxiv.i-p8.2"></span>דבר, *dabar, to
speak.*

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc08033.htm#fr_594) <span
id="xxxiv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p6"></span> The verb <span
id="xxxiv.ii-p6.1"></span>משך, *mashak,* here rendered *draw,*
“signifies,” as *Hammond* observes, “both to draw and apprehend,” and
may “be best rendered here, *Seize not on me,* as he that seizeth on any
to carry or drag him to execution. The Septuagint, after having
literally rendered the Hebrew by <span id="xxxiv.ii-p6.2"></span>Μὴ
συνελκύσὟς την ψυχήν μου, *draw not my soul together with, etc.,* adds
<span id="xxxiv.ii-p6.3"></span>Κίαν μὴ συναπολέσὟς με etc., *and
destroy me not together with, etc.* Calvin here evidently takes the same
view; though he does not express it in the form of criticism.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc08033.htm#fr_595) <span
id="xxxiv.ii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xxxiv.ii-p7.1"></span>Que
ceste finesse de renard, quand on use de beaux semblans pour avoir
occasion de nuire.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc08033.htm#fr_596) <span
id="xxxiv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p10"></span> “<span
id="xxxiv.ii-p10.1"></span>Voulant devorer les agneaux.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_597"></span>[598](cc08033.htm#fr_597) <span
id="xxxiv.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p13"></span> “<span
id="xxxiv.ii-p13.1"></span>Conduisant et gouvernant toutes choses.” —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_598"></span>[599](cc08033.htm#fr_598) <span
id="xxxiv.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p14"></span> “<span
id="xxxiv.ii-p14.1"></span>C’estoyent certains peuples ou escrimeurs qui
souloyent ainsi comme etre. Voyez les Chiliades d’Erasme.” — *Note, Fr.
marg.* “These were certain people or fencers, who were wont to fight in
this manner. See the *Chiliades* of *Erasmus*.”

<span id="fn_599"></span>[600](cc08033.htm#fr_599) <span
id="xxxiv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.ii-p16"></span> “He will destroy them, and not build
them up.”

<span id="fn_600"></span>[601](cc08033.htm#fr_600) <span
id="xxxiv.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p6"></span> “<span id="xxxiv.iv-p6.1"></span>Que tout
la prospetite qu’ils se souhaitent soit a cause du peuple. — *Fr.* “That
all the prosperity they desire should be for the sake of the people.”

<span id="fn_601"></span>[602](cc08033.htm#fr_601) <span
id="xxxiv.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xxxiv.iv-p7.1"></span>Veu que
la plus grand part rejette et desdaigne de porter le joug de Christ.” —
*Fr.*

<span id="fn_602"></span>[603](cc08033.htm#fr_602) <span
id="xxxiv.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="xxxiv.iv-p8.1"></span>Qu’il
n’en est pas digne.” — *Fr.* “That he is not worthy of it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 29](cc08034)
