[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08018)  [Next](cc08020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>PSALM 14.

<span id="xx-p2"></span>In the beginning the Psalmist describes the
wicked contempt of God into which almost the whole people had broken
forth. To give the greater weight to his complaint, he represents God
himself as uttering it. Afterwards he comforts himself and others with
the hope of a remedy, which he assures himself God will very soon
provide, although, in the meantime, he groans and feels deep distress at
the disorder which he beholds.  <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)

<span id="xx-p4"></span>To the chief musician of David.

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** The fool hath said in his heart, There
is no God; they have corrupted;  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277)
, They have done abominable work; there is none that doeth good.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span><span id="xx.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>Many of the Jews are of opinion that in this
psalm there is given forth a prediction concerning the future oppression
of their nation: as if David, by the revelation of the Holy Spirit,
bewailed the afflicted condition of the Church of God under the tyranny
of the Gentiles. They therefore refer what is here spoken to the
dispersed condition in which we see them at the present day, as if they
were that precious heritage of God which the wild beasts devour. But it
is very apparent, that in wishing to cover the disgrace of their nation,
they wrest and apply to the Gentiles, without any just ground, what is
said concerning the perverse children of Abraham.  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) We cannot certainly find a better
qualified interpreter than the Apostle Paul, and he applies this psalm
expressly to the people who lived under the law, (<span
id="xx.i-p7.2"></span>[Ro 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span
id="xx.i-p7.2"></span>.) Besides, although we had not the testimony of
this Apostle, the structure of the psalm very clearly shows that David
means rather the domestic tyrants and enemies of the faithful than
foreign ones; a point which it is very necessary for us to understand.
We know that it is a temptation which pains us exceedingly, to see
wickedness breaking forth and prevailing in the midst of the Church, the
good and the simple unrighteously afflicted, while the wicked cruelly
domineer according to their pleasure. This sad spectacle almost
completely disheartens us; and, therefore, we have much need to be
fortified from the example which David here sets before us: so that, in
the midst of the greatest desolations which we behold in the Church, we
may comfort ourselves with this assurance, that God will finally deliver
her from them. I have no doubt that there is here described the
disordered and desolate state of Judea which Saul introduced when he
began to rage openly. Then, as if the remembrance of God had been
extinguished from the minds of men, all piety had vanished, and with
respect to integrity or uprightness among men, there was just as little
of it as of godliness.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>*The fool hath said.* As the Hebrew word <span
id="xx.i-p8.1"></span>נבל*, nabal,* signifies not only a fool, but also
a perverse, vile, and contemptible person, it would not have been
unsuitable to have translated it so in this place; yet I am content to
follow the more generally received interpretation, which is, that all
profane persons, who have cast off all fear of God and abandoned
themselves to iniquity, are convicted of madness. David does not bring
against his enemies the charge of common foolishness, but rather
inveighs against the folly and insane hardihood of those whom the world
accounts eminent for their wisdom. We commonly see that those who, in
the estimation both of themselves and of others, highly excel in
sagacity and wisdom, employ their cunning in laying snares, and exercise
the ingenuity of their minds in despising and mocking God. It is
therefore important for us, in the first place, to know, that however
much the world applaud these crafty and scoffing characters, who allow
themselves to indulge to any extent in wickedness, yet the Holy Spirit
condemns them as being fools; for there is no stupidity more brutish
than forgetfulness of God. We ought, however, at the same time,
carefully to mark the evidence on which the Psalmist comes to the
conclusion that they have cast off all sense of religion, and it is
this: that they have overthrown all order, so that they no longer make
any distinction between right and wrong, and have no regard for honesty,
nor love of humanity. David, therefore, does not speak of the hidden
affection of the heart of the wicked, except in so far as they discover
themselves by their external actions. The import of his language is, How
does it come to pass, that these men indulge themselves in their lusts
so boldly and so outrageously, that they pay no regard to righteousness
or equity; in short, that they madly rush into every kind of wickedness,
if it is not because they have shaken off all sense of religion, and
extinguished, as far as they can, all remembrance of God from their
minds? When persons retain in their heart any sense of religion, they
must necessarily have some modesty, and be in some measure restrained
and prevented from entirely disregarding the dictates of their
conscience. From this it follows, that when the ungodly allow themselves
to follow their own inclinations, so obstinately and audaciously as they
are here represented as doing, without any sense of shame, it is an
evidence that they have cast off all fear of God.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>The Psalmist says that they speak *in their
heart* They may not utter this detestable blasphemy, *There is no God,*
with their mouths; but the unbridled licentiousness of their life loudly
and distinctly declares that in their hearts, which are destitute of all
godliness, they soothingly sing to themselves this song. Not that they
maintain, by drawn out arguments or formal syllogisms, as they term
them, that there is no God, (for to render them so much the more
inexcusable, God from time to time causes even the most wicked of men to
feel secret pangs of conscience, that they may be compelled to
acknowledge his majesty and sovereign power;) but whatever right
knowledge God instils into them they partly stifle it by their malice
against him, and partly corrupt it, until religion in them becomes
torpid, and at last dead. They may not plainly deny the existence of a
God, but they imagine him to be shut up in heaven, and divested of his
righteousness and power; and this is just to fashion an idol in the room
of God. As if the time would never come when they will have to appear
before him in judgment,  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) they
endeavor, in all the transactions and concerns of their life, to remove
him to the greatest distance, and to efface from their minds all
apprehension of his majesty.  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)
And when God is dragged from his throne, and divested of his character
as judge, impiety has come to its utmost height; and, therefore, we must
conclude that David has most certainly spoken according to truth, in
declaring that those who give themselves liberty to commit all manner of
wickedness, in the flattering hope of escaping with impunity, deny in
their heart that there is a God. As the fifty-third psalm, with the
exception of a few words which are altered in it, is just a repetition
of this psalm, I will show in the proper places, as we proceed, the
difference which there is between the two psalms. David here complains
that they have done *abominable work;* but for the word *work,* the term
there employed is *iniquity.* It should be observed that David does not
speak of one work or of two; but as he had said, that they have
perverted or *corrupted* all lawful order, so now he adds, that they
have so polluted their whole life, as to make it abominable, and the
proof of this which he adduces is, that they have no regard to
uprightness in their dealings with one another, but have forgotten all
humanity, and all beneficence towards their fellow-creatures.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Jehovah looked down from heaven upon
the children of men, to see whether there were any that did understand,
and seek after God. **3.** Every one of them has gone aside, they have
altogether become putrid, \[or rotten;\] there is none that doeth good,
not even one,

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span><span id="xx.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**2.** *Jehovah looked down from heaven.* God
himself is here introduced as speaking on the subject of human
depravity, and this renders the discourse of David more emphatic than if
he had pronounced the sentence in his own person. When God is exhibited
to us as sitting on his throne to take cognisance of the conduct of men,
unless we are stupified in an extraordinary degree, his majesty must
strike us with terror. The effect of the habit of sinning is, that men
grow hardened in their sins, and discern nothing, as if they were
enveloped in thick darkness. David, therefore, to teach them that they
gain nothing by flattering and deceiving themselves as they do, when
wickedness reigns in the world with impunity, testifies that God looks
down from heaven, and casts his eyes on all sides, for the purpose of
knowing what is done among men. God, it is true, has no need to make
inquisition or search; but when he compares himself to an earthly judge,
it is in adaptation to our limited capacity, and to enable us gradually
to form some apprehension of his secret providence, which our reason
cannot all at once comprehend. Would to God that this manner of speaking
had the effect of teaching us to summon ourselves before his tribunal;
and that, while the world are flattering themselves, and the reprobate
are trying to bury their sins in forgetfulness by their want of thought,
hypocrisy, or shamelessness, and are blinded in their obstinacy as if
they were intoxicated, we might be led to shake off all indifference and
stupidity by reflecting on this truth, that God, notwithstanding, looks
down from his high throne in heaven, and beholds what is going on here
below!

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>*To see if there were any that did
understand* As the whole economy of a good and righteous life depends
upon our being governed and directed by the light of understanding,
David has justly taught us in the beginning of the psalm, that folly is
the root of all wickedness. And in this clause he also very justly
declares, that the commencement of integrity and uprightness of life
consists in an enlightened and sound mind. But as the greater part
misapply their intellectual powers to deceitful purposes, David
immediately after defines, in one word, what true understanding is,
namely, that it consists *in seeking after God;* by which he means, that
unless men devote themselves wholly to God, their life cannot be well
ordered. Some understand the word <span id="xx.ii-p6.1"></span>משכיל,
*maskil,* which we translated, *that did understand,* in too restricted
a sense; whereas David declares that the reprobate are utterly destitute
of all reason and judgment.

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span><span id="xx.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>*Every one of them has gone aside.* Some
translate the word <span id="xx.ii-p8.2"></span>סר, *sar,* which is here
used, *to stink*,  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) as if the
reading were, *Every one of them emits an offensive odour,* that it may
correspond in meaning with the verb in the next clause, which in Hebrew
signifies *to become putrid* or *rotten.* But there is no necessity for
explaining the two words in the same way, as if the same thing were
repeated twice. The interpretation is more appropriate, which supposes
that men are here condemned as guilty of a detestable revolt, inasmuch
as they are estranged from God, or have departed far from him; and that
afterwards there is pointed out the disgusting corruption or putrescence
of their whole life, as if nothing could proceed from apostates but what
smells rank of rottenness and infection. The Hebrew word <span
id="xx.ii-p9.6"></span>סר, *sar,* is almost universally taken in this
sense. In the 53rd Psalm, the word <span id="xx.ii-p9.7"></span>סג*,
sag,* is used, which signifies the same thing. In short, David declares
that all men are so carried away by their capricious lusts, that nothing
is to be found either of purity or integrity in their whole life. This,
therefore, is defection so complete, that it extinguishes all godliness.
Besides, David here not only censures a portion of the people, but
pronounces them all to be equally involved in the same condemnation.
This was, indeed, a prodigy well fitted to excite abhorrence, that all
the children of Abraham, whom God had chosen to be his peculiar people,
were so corrupt from the least to the greatest.

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span>But it might be asked, how David makes no
exception, how he declares that not a righteous person remains, *not
even one,* when, nevertheless, he informs us, a little after, that the
poor and afflicted put their trust in God? Again, it might be asked, if
all were wicked, who was that Israel whose future redemption he
celebrates in the end of the psalm? Nay, as he himself was one of the
body of that people, why does he not at least except himself? I answer:
It is against the carnal and degenerate body of the Israelitish nation
that he here inveighs, and the small number constituting the seed which
God had set apart for himself is not included among them. This is the
reason why Paul, in his Epistle to the <span id="xx.ii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)<span id="xx.ii-p10.1"></span>,
extends this sentence to all mankind. David, it is true, deplores the
disordered and desolate state of matters under the reign of Saul. At the
same time, however, he doubtless makes a comparison between the children
of God and all who have not been regenerated by the Spirit, but are
carried away according to the inclinations of their flesh.  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) Some give a different explanation,
maintaining that Paul, by quoting the testimony of David, did not
understand him as meaning that men are naturally depraved and corrupt;
and that the truth which David intended to teach is, that the rulers and
the more distinguished of the people were wicked, and that, therefore,
it was not surprising to behold unrighteousness and wickedness
prevailing so generally in the world. This answer is far from being
satisfactory. The subject which Paul there reasons upon is not, what is
the character of the greater part of men, but what is the character of
all who are led and governed by their own corrupt nature. It is,
therefore, to be observed, that when David places himself and the small
remnant of the godly on one side, and puts on the other the body of the
people, in general, this implies that there is a manifest difference
between the children of God who are created anew by his Spirit, and all
the posterity of Adam, in whom corruption and depravity exercise
dominion. Whence it follows, that all of us, when we are born, bring
with us from our mother’s womb this folly and filthiness manifested in
the whole life, which David here describes, and that we continue such
until God make us new creatures by his mysterious grace.

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span><span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)<span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Have all the workers of iniquity no
knowledge, who eat up my people as they eat bread? they call not upon
the Lord.  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span><span id="xx.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p6"></span>This question is added to give a more
amplified illustration of the preceding doctrine. The prophet had said
that God observed from heaven the doings of men, and had found all of
them gone out of the way; and now he introduces him exclaiming with
astonishment, What madness is this, that they who ought to cherish my
people, and assiduously perform to them every kind office, are
oppressing and falling upon them like wild beasts, without any feeling
of humanity? He attributes this manner of speaking to God, not because
any thing can happen which is strange or unexpected to him, but in order
the more forcibly to express his indignation. The Prophet Isaiah, in
like manner, (<span id="xx.iii-p6.2"></span>[Isa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#016)<span id="xx.iii-p6.2"></span>,)
when treating of almost the same subject, says,

<span id="xx.iii-p7"></span>“And God saw that there was no man, and
wondered that there was no intercessor.” (<span
id="xx.iii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#016)<span id="xx.iii-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="xx.iii-p8"></span>God, it is true, does not actually
experience in himself such affections, but he represents himself as
invested with them, that we may entertain the greatest horror and dread
on account of our sins, when he declares them to be of so monstrous a
character, that he is as it were thrown into agitation and disorder by
them. And were we not harder than the stones, our horror at the
wickedness which prevails in the world would make the hair of our head
to stand on end,  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) seeing God
exhibits to us in his own person such a testimony of the detestation
with which he regards it. Moreover, this verse confirms what I have said
in the commencement, that David does not speak in this psalm of foreign
tyrants, or the avowed enemies of the church, but of the rulers and
princes of his people, who were furnished with power and honor. This
description would not apply to men who were altogether strangers to the
revealed will of God; for it would be nothing wonderful to see those who
do not possess the moral law, the rule of life, devoting themselves to
the work of violence and oppression. But the heinousness of the
proceedings condemned is not a little aggravated from this circumstance,
that it is the shepherds themselves, whose office it is to feed and to
take care of the flock,  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) who
cruelly devour it, and who spare not even the people and heritage of
God. There is a similar complaint in <span id="xx.iii-p10.2"></span>[Mic
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001)<span id="xx.iii-p10.2"></span>,

<span id="xx.iii-p11"></span>“And I said, Hear I pray you, O heads of
Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel: Is it not for you to know
judgment? Who hate the good and love the evil; who pluck off their skin
from off them; and their flesh from off their bones; who also eat the
flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them,”

<span id="xx.iii-p12"></span>etc. If those who profess to know and to
serve God were to exercise such cruelty towards the Babylonians or
Egyptians, it would be a piece of injustice which could admit of no
excuse; but when they glut themselves with the blood and flesh of the
saints, as they devour bread, this is such monstrous iniquity, that it
may well strike both angels and men with astonishment. Had such persons
a particle of sound understanding remaining in them, it would restrain
them from conduct so fearfully infatuated. They must, therefore, be
completely blinded by the devil, and utterly bereft of reason and
understanding, seeing they knowingly and willingly flay and devour the
people of God with such inhumanity. This passage teaches us how
displeasing to God, and how abominable is the cruelty which is exercised
against the godly, by those who pretend to be their shepherds. In the
end of the verse, where he says that *they call not upon the Lord,* he
again points out the source and cause of this unbridled wickedness,
namely, that such persons have no reverence for God. Religion is the
best mistress for teaching us mutually to maintain equity and
uprightness towards each other; and where a concern for religion is
extinguished, then all regard for justice perishes along with it. With
respect to the phrase, *calling upon God,* as it constitutes the
principal exercise of godliness, it includes by synecdoche, (a figure of
rhetoric, by which a part is put for the whole,) not only here, but in
many other passages of Scripture, the whole of the service of God.

<span id="xx.iv"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p1"></span><span id="xx.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
14:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005)<span id="xx.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p2"></span>**5.** There did they tremble with fear,
 <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) for God is in \[or with, or for
 <span id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) \] the generation of the
righteous. **6.** Ye deride the counsel of the poor, because Jehovah is
his hope.

<span id="xx.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xx.iv-p6"></span><span id="xx.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p7"></span>**5.** *There did they tremble with fear,*
The prophet now encourages himself and all the faithful with the best of
all consolations, namely, that God will not forsake his people even to
the end, but will at length show himself to be their defender. Some
explain the adverb of place *there,* as meaning that God will take
vengeance on the wicked in the presence of his saints, because they
exercised their tyranny upon them. But I rather think that by this word
there is expressed the certainty of their punishment,  <span
id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) as if the Psalmist pointed to it with
the finger.  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) It may also
intimate what we may gather from <span id="xx.iv-p9.2"></span>[Ps
53](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#000)<span id="xx.iv-p9.2"></span>, that
the judgment of God would come upon them suddenly, and when they were
not thinking about it; for it is there added, *where no fear is,* or,
*where no fear was.*  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290)
Expositors, I am aware, differ in their interpretation of these words.
Some supply the word *equal* or *like,* and read, There is no fear equal
to it. Others refer them to those secret alarms with which the ungodly
are tormented, even when there may be no ground for apprehension. God
threatens the transgressors of his law with such mental torment that
they “shall flee when none pursueth them,” (<span
id="xx.iv-p10.3"></span>[Le 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#017)<span
id="xx.iv-p10.3"></span>, and <span id="xx.iv-p10.4"></span>[Pr
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)<span id="xx.iv-p10.4"></span>)
and that “the sound of a shaking leaf shall chase them,” (<span
id="xx.iv-p10.5"></span>[Le 26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036)<span
id="xx.iv-p10.5"></span>) just as we see that they are themselves their
own tormentors, and are agitated with mental trouble even when there is
no external cause to create it. But I think the meaning of the prophet
is different, namely, that when their affairs are in a state of the
greatest tranquillity and prosperity, God will suddenly launch against
them the bolts of his vengeance.

<span id="xx.iv-p11"></span>“For when they shall say, Peace and safety,
then sudden destruction cometh upon them,” (<span
id="xx.iv-p11.1"></span>[1Th 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span
id="xx.iv-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.iv-p12"></span>The prophet, therefore, encourages and
supports the faithful with this prospect, that the ungodly, when they
think themselves free from all danger, and are securely celebrating
their own triumphs, shall be overwhelmed with sudden destruction.

<span id="xx.iv-p13"></span>The reason of this is added in the last
clause of the verse, namely, because God is determined to defend the
righteous, and to take in hand their cause: *For God is in the
generation of the righteous* Now, in order to preserve them safe, he
must necessarily thunder in his wrath from heaven against their enemies,
who unjustly oppress and waste them by violence and extortion.  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) There is, however, some ambiguity in
the word <span id="xx.iv-p14.2"></span>דור*, dor,* which we have
translated *generation.* As this noun in Hebrew sometimes signifies *an
age,* or, *the course of human life,* the sentence might be explained as
follows: Although God for a time may seem to take no notice of the
wrongs inflicted upon his servants by the wicked, yet he is ever present
with them, and exercises his grace towards them during their whole life.
But it seems to me a more simple and natural exposition to interpret the
clause thus: That God is on the side of the righteous, and takes their
part, as we say,  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) so that <span
id="xx.iv-p15.2"></span>דור*, dor,* will have the same signification
here which the word *natio,* \[nation,\] sometimes has among the Latins.

<span id="xx.iv-p16"></span>In <span id="xx.iv-p16.2"></span>[Ps
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#005)<span id="xx.iv-p16.2"></span>,
the Psalmist adds a sentence which does not occur in this psalm, *For
God hath scattered the bones of him that besiegeth thee, thou shalt put
them to shame; because God hath rejected them.* By these words the
prophet explains more clearly how God protects the righteous, that it is
by delivering them from the jaws of death, just as if one were to put to
flight those who had laid siege to a town, and were to set at liberty
its inhabitants, who before were in great extremity and quite shut up.
 <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) Whence it follows, that we must
patiently bear oppression, if we desire to be protected and preserved by
the hand of God, at the time of our greatest danger. The expression,
*bones,* is used metaphorically for *strength* or *power.* The prophet
particularly speaks of their power; for if the wicked were not possessed
of riches, ammunition, and troops, which render them formidable, it
would not appear, with sufficient evidence, that it is the hand of God
which at length crushes them. The Psalmist next exhorts the faithful to
a holy boasting, and bids them rest assured that an ignominious
destruction hangs over the heads of the wicked. The reason of this is,
because *God hath rejected them;* and if he is opposed to them, all
things must ultimately go ill with them. As <span
id="xx.iv-p17.2"></span>מאס, *maäs,* which we have translated *to
reject,* sometimes signifies *to despise,* some render it thus, *Because
God hath despised them;* but this, I think, does not suit the passage.
It would be more appropriate to read, — *He hath rendered them
contemptible,* or, *subjected them to disgrace and ignominy.* Whence it
follows, that they only draw down upon themselves dishonor and infamy
while they strive to elevate themselves, as it were, in despite of God.

<span id="xx.iv-p18"></span><span id="xx.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p19"></span>**6.** *Ye deride the counsel of the poor.*
He inveighs against those giants who mock at the faithful for their
simplicity, in calmly expecting, in their distresses, that God will show
himself to be their deliverer. And, certainly, nothing seems more
irrational to the flesh than to betake ourselves to God when yet he does
not relieve us from our calamities; and the reason is, because the flesh
judges of God only according to what it presently beholds of his grace.
Whenever, therefore, unbelievers see the children of God overwhelmed
with calamities, they reproach them for their groundless confidence, as
it appears to them to be, and with sarcastic jeers laugh at the assured
hope with which they rely upon God, from whom, notwithstanding, they
receive no sensible aid. David, therefore, defies and derides this
insolence of the wicked, and threatens that their mockery of the poor
and the wretched, and their charging them with folly in depending upon
the protection of God, and not sinking under their calamities, will be
the cause of their destruction. At the same time, he teaches them that
there is no resolution to which we can come which is better advised than
the resolution to depend upon God, and that to repose on his salvation,
and on the assistance which he hath promised us, even although we may be
surrounded with calamities, is the highest wisdom.

<span id="xx.v"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p1"></span><span id="xx.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007)<span id="xx.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p2"></span>**7.** Who shall give salvation \[or
deliverance\] to Israel out of Sion? When Jehovah shall have brought
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall
be glad.

<span id="xx.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.v-p4"></span><span id="xx.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.v-p5"></span>David, after having laid down the doctrine of
consolation, again returns to prayers and groanings. By this he teaches
us, that although God may leave us for a long time to languish, yet we
ought not to weary, or lose courage, but should always glory in him;
and, again, that while our troubles continue, the most effectual solace
we can have is often to return to the exercise of prayer. When he asks
the question, *Who shall give salvation?* this does not imply, that he
was looking either to the right hand or to the left, or that he turned
away his eyes from God in search of another deliverer; he intends only
to express the ardor of his desire, as if he had said, When will the
time at length come when God will display his salvation, and make it
fully manifest? By the word *Sion,* which he adds, he testifies that his
hope is fixed on God; for Sion was the holy place from which God had
promised to hear the prayers of his servants; and it was the
dwelling-place of the ark of the covenant, which was an external pledge
and symbol of the presence of God. He does not, therefore, doubt who
would be the author of his salvation; but he asks, with a sorrowful
heart, when at length that salvation will come forth which is to be
expected from no other source than from God alone. The question may,
however, be put, if this prayer refers to the time of Saul, how can
Sion, with propriety, be named as being already the sanctuary of God? I
will not deny that the Psalmist, by the spirit of prophecy, may have
predicted what had not yet actually taken place; but I think it highly
probable, that this psalm was not composed until the ark of the covenant
had been placed on mount Sion. David, as we know, employed his leisure
hours in committing to writing, for the benefit of posterity, events
which had happened long before. Besides, by expressing his desire for
the deliverance of Israel, we are taught that he was chiefly anxious
about the welfare of the whole body of the Church, and that his thoughts
were more occupied about this than about himself individually. This is
worthy of being the more carefully marked when we consider, that, while
our attention is engrossed with our own particular sorrows, we are in
danger of almost entirely neglecting the welfare of our brethren. And
yet the particular afflictions with which God visits each of us are
intended to admonish us to direct our attention and care to the whole
body of the Church, and to think of its necessities, just as we see
David here including Israel with himself.

<span id="xx.v-p6"></span>*When the Lord shall have brought back the
captivity of his people,* In these words, David concludes, that God will
not suffer the faithful to languish under continual sorrow, according as
it is said in another psalm, (<span id="xx.v-p6.1"></span>[Ps
126:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005)<span id="xx.v-p6.1"></span>)
“They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.” He doubtless aims at
confirming and encouraging himself and all the godly to hope for the
promised deliverance. He therefore says, in the first place, that
although God may delay, or at least may not make so much haste as we
would wish, he will, nevertheless, show himself to be the defender of
his people, by redeeming them from captivity. And, in the next place, he
assuages their sorrow, by setting forth that the issue of it will be
joyful, seeing it will at length be turned into gladness. *The
captivity,* of which he makes mention, is not the Babylonish, or the
dispersion of his people among the heathen nations; it rather refers to
an oppression at home, when the wicked exercise dominion like tyrants in
the Church. We are, therefore, taught by these words, that when such
furious enemies waste and destroy the flock of God, or proudly tread it
under foot, we ought to have recourse to God, whose peculiar office it
is to gather together his Israel from all places whither they have been
dispersed. And the term *captivity,* which he employs, implies, that
when the wicked overthrow at their pleasure all good and lawful order in
the midst of the Church, it is converted into a Babylon or Egypt.
Farther, although David defers the joy of the holy people, to the time
of their deliverance, yet the consolatory prospect of this should serve
not only to moderate our grief, but also to mix and season it with joy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[277](cc08019.htm#fr_276) <span
id="xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx-p3"></span> “<span id="xx-p3.1"></span>Combien que
cependant il gemisse et se sente angoisse du desordre qu’il veoit.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[278](cc08019.htm#fr_277) <span
id="xx.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span> Calvin has here given a literal rendering of
the Hebrew words, *They have corrupted.* Some suppose that *themselves*
is to be understood, as in <span id="xx.i-p3.1"></span>[Ex
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007)<span id="xx.i-p3.1"></span>;
others, *their ways*, as in <span id="xx.i-p3.2"></span>[Ge
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012)<span id="xx.i-p3.2"></span>, but
the meaning which Calvin has attached to the phrase is, They have
corrupted or perverted all good order.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc08019.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xx.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>Ce qui est dit
de ceux qui, fausses enseignes serenomment enfans d’Abraham vivans
autrement qu’il n’appartient.” — *Fr*. “What is said of those who,
according to false marks, call themselves the children of Abraham, while
living a different life from what they ought.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc08019.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xx.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span> Some critics observe, that as <span
id="xx.i-p10.1"></span>יהוה, *Yehovah,* the name which denotes the
infinite, self-existent essence of God, is not the word here employed,
but <span id="xx.i-p10.2"></span>אלוהס, a name which they regard as
referring to God as judge and governor of the world, the meaning of the
first verse is not that the fool denies the existence of God, but only
his providence and government of the world; that he persuades himself
God has no concern about the actions of men, and that there will be no
judgment to come; and, therefore, goes on in sin, in the hope of
escaping with impunity. — See *Poole’s Synopsis Criticorum.* The Targum
paraphrases the words, “There is no God,” thus, “There is no <span
id="xx.i-p10.3"></span>אלוהס *government* of God in the earth.”

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc08019.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xx.i-p10.4"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p11.1"></span>Et abolir de
leurs esprits toute apprehension de sa majeste.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc08019.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xx.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span> *Hammond* admits that the word <span
id="xx.ii-p9.1"></span>סר, *sar,* means *to go aside,* or *to decline,*
and that it is commonly applied to a way or path, declining from the
right way, or going in a wrong way. But he thinks that the idea here is
different, that it is taken from wine when it grows dead or sour, just
as the word is used in this sense in <span id="xx.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ho
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#018)<span id="xx.ii-p9.2"></span>,
<span id="xx.ii-p9.3"></span>סר סבאם, *sar sobim,* “Their drink is gone
aside, or grown sour.” He considers this view corroborated from the
clause which immediately follows, <span id="xx.ii-p9.4"></span>נאלחו,
*ne-elachu, they are become putrid,* which is derived from <span
id="xx.ii-p9.5"></span>אלה, *alach, to be rotten* or putrified,
referring properly to flesh which has become putrid. “Thus,” says he,
“the proportion is well kept between drink and meat, the one growing
dead or sour, as the other putrifies and stinks, and then is good for
nothing, but is thrown away.”

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc08019.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xx.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span> David speaks of all mankind, with the
exception of the “people of God,” and “the generation of the righteous,”
spoken of in verses 4, 5 who are opposed to the rest of the human race.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc08019.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xx.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span> Calvin here reads <span
id="xx.iii-p3.2"></span>*Dominus,* although the word in the Hebrew text
is <span id="xx.iii-p3.3"></span>יהוה *Yehovah,* which he almost
uniformly retains. In the Septuagint, <span
id="xx.iii-p3.4"></span>יהוה, is always rendered by <span
id="xx.iii-p3.5"></span>ὁ Κυριος, *the Lord,* which is equivalent to
<span id="xx.iii-p3.6"></span>*Dominus,* and is expressive of dominion
or property, — a word which implies a different idea from the name
*Jehovah,* which denotes independent and eternal existence. The
translators of the Septuagint used <span id="xx.iii-p3.7"></span>ὁ
Κυριος*,* for <span id="xx.iii-p3.8"></span>יהו in accommodation to the
scruples of the Jews, who directed <span id="xx.iii-p3.9"></span>אדני to
be read wherever <span id="xx.iii-p3.10"></span>יהוה occurs.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc08019.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xx.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p9.1"></span>Il faut que
l’horreur des meschancetez qui regnent au monde nous face dresser les
cheveux en la teste.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc08019.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xx.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xx.iii-p10.1"></span>Desquels
l’office est de paistre et governer le troupeau.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc08019.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xx.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p3"></span> It is the general opinion that this psalm
was composed during the alarm and danger which were occasioned by
Absalom’s rebellion, and that this is a prediction of the failure of the
conspiracy. But *Calmet* and *Mudge* refer the psalm to the captivity in
Babylon, and the latter supposes that in this and the preceding verse
there is an allusion to the great terror into which the heathen were
thrown, in the midst of their impious carousals; which some refer to the
scene which took place at Belshazzar’s feast, when the hand was seen
writing on the wall. There is, however, great uncertainty as to the
occasions on which most of the psalms were composed; and those who have
examined the different opinions of interpreters on this subject must be
convinced of the difficulty of arriving at any thing like certainty in
regard to it.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc08019.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xx.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p4"></span> “<span id="xx.iv-p4.1"></span>Avec ou pour.”
— *Fr*. *marg.*

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc08019.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xx.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p8"></span> Though punishment had not as yet been
actually inflicted on the oppressors of the people of God, of whom the
Psalmist had spoken in the preceding verse, he speaks of their
punishment as if it had taken place. The reason of this manner of
speaking concerning things future in prophetic poetry, *Horsley*
explains to be this, “That a scene typical of futurity is presented to
the prophet’s imagination, and what he sees in that scene he speaks of
as done.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc08019.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xx.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p9"></span> The particle <span
id="xx.iv-p9.1"></span>שם, is used demonstratively, in reference to the
scene which lies before the inspired poet’s fancy. “See there!” —
*Horsley.*

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc08019.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xx.iv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p10"></span> In the Septuagint version, to the words,
*there were they in great fear,* there is added the words <span
id="xx.iv-p10.1"></span>οὑ ουκ ἠν ὁ φόβος, *Where there was no fear,*
the transcribers, perhaps, transferring it by memory from <span
id="xx.iv-p10.2"></span>[Ps 53:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#006)<span
id="xx.iv-p10.2"></span>, or the translators adding the words by way of
paraphrase.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc08019.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xx.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xx.iv-p14.1"></span>Qui les
foullent injustement et usent de violence et extorsion.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc08019.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xx.iv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p15"></span> “<span id="xx.iv-p15.1"></span>Et tient
leur parte, comme on dit.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc08019.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xx.iv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="xx.iv-p17"></span> “<span id="xx.iv-p17.1"></span>Ne plus ne
morns que si quelqu’un mettoit en fuite ceux qui auroyent dress, le
siege derant une ville, et mettoit en liber, les habitans d’icelle qui
estoyent auparavant en grande extremit, et bien enserrez.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 15](cc08020)
