[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08039)  [Next](cc08041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xli"></span>

<span id="xli-p1"></span>PSALM 35.

<span id="xli-p2"></span>So long as Saul was the enemy of David, the
nobles, and such as at that time bore any authority, had (according to
the subservient spirit which always prevails in the courts of kings)
eagerly conspired to destroy an innocent man. They had also succeeded in
inducing the common people to participate with them in their hatred and
cruelty, so that all of them, from the highest to the lowest, burned
with implacable hatred against him. But as he knew that the greatest
part of them were thoughtlessly impelled to this by error and folly, and
ignorance of the true state of affairs, he accounts those only his
enemies who, from deliberate malice and wickedness, endeavored in this
way to please Saul, in order to obtain his favor. Against them he calls
upon God for vengeance. And, first, as he was conscious of no crime, he
alleges his innocence before God; and, secondly, as they sought to
inflict unmerited punishment upon him, he implores God for deliverance.
After he has complained of their impious cruelty, he calls down upon
them the punishment which they deserved. Moreover, as in confident
reliance upon the oracle of God, which had been spoken by Samuel, and
the holy anointing, he hoped for a better issue, he intersperses
throughout the psalm testimonies of his thankfulness. Finally, he
concludes the psalm by saying, that after he has been delivered, he will
celebrate the praises of God all his life.

<span id="xli-p3"></span>A Psalm of David.

<span id="xli.i"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p1"></span><span id="xli.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
35:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#001)<span id="xli.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p2"></span>**1.** Plead my cause, O Jehovah! with them
that plead against me; fight against them who fight against me. **2.**
Take the shield and the buckler, and rise up for my help. **3.** Bring
forth the spear, and oppose my persecutors: say unto my soul, “I am thy
salvation.”

<span id="xli.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xli.i-p4"></span><span id="xli.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p5"></span>**1.** *Plead my cause, O Jehovah!* As the
enemies of David not only avowedly sought to take away his life, but
also troubled him by calumny and misrepresentation, he pleads for the
redress of both these grievances. In the first place, by appealing to
God for his aid in defense of his cause, he intimates, that he has to do
with wicked and maligning men. In the second place, by urging him to
take up arms, he shows that he was grievously oppressed. It was a very
dishonorable thing, that this holy man, alike eminent for his
beneficence and inoffensiveness towards all men, and who by his courtesy
and meekness had merited, both in public and private, the esteem and
favor of all, was not permitted to escape the reproach and calumny of
wicked men; but it is important for us to know this, and it sets before
us a very profitable example. If even David did not escape the malice of
wicked men, it ought not to seem wonderful or strange to us, if they
blame and bite at us. The injuries they inflict upon us may be grievous
and painful, but there is incomparable consolation presented to us in
this consideration, that God himself interposes for our protection and
defense against false accusations. Though calumniators, then, should
arise, and tear us, as it were, to pieces, by falsely charging us with
crimes, we need not be disturbed, so long as God undertakes to plead our
cause against them. There can be no doubt, that in the second clause of
the verse David implores God to resist the armed violence of his
enemies. The amount of the whole is, that being falsely accused and
cruelly persecuted, and finding no help at the hands of men, the Prophet
commits the preservation of his life and his reputation to God.

<span id="xli.i-p6"></span><span id="xli.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p7"></span>**2.** *Take the shield.* These words
certainly cannot be applied, in the strict and proper sense, to God, who
has no need of the spear or buckler: for by the breath of his mouth
alone, or merely with his nod, he is able to overthrow all his enemies.
But although such figures at first sight appear rude, yet the Holy Ghost
employs them in accommodation to the weakness of our understanding, for
the purpose of impressing more effectually upon our minds the conviction
that God is present to aid us. When troubles and dangers arise, when
terrors assail us on every side, when even death presents itself to our
view, it is difficult to realize the secret and invisible power of God,
which is able to deliver us from all anxiety and fear; for our
understandings, which are gross and earthly, tend downward to the earth.
That our faith, therefore, may ascend by degrees to the heavenly power
of God, he is here introduced armed, after the manner of men, with sword
and shield. In the same way, also, when he is in another place termed “a
man of war,” it is doubtless in adaptation to the imperfection of our
present state, because our minds, from their limited capacity, could in
no other way comprehend the extent of that infinite power, which
contains in itself every form of help, and has no need of aid from any
other quarter. This, therefore, is a prayer that God, by the exercise of
his secret and intrinsic power, would show that he alone is able to
encounter the whole strength and forces of the ungodly. Some suppose
that the Hebrew word <span id="xli.i-p7.1"></span>צנה, *tsinnah,* here
used, means *a dart,* or some other kind of weapon; but as we have
already seen, in the fifth psalm, that it properly signifies a
*buckler,* I see no reason why it should be differently interpreted in
this place. Nor is there any thing at all inconsistent in connecting
here, as is often done in other places, the buckler and the shield.
 <span id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701) If the expression here employed
had been designed to signify a dart, or a similar weapon, it would have
been more natural to connect it with the spear, of which mention is made
in the following verse. David, then, first makes mention of defensive
armor, praying that God would sustain and repel the assaults of the
enemy. The Hebrew word <span id="xli.i-p8.4"></span>ריק*, rik,* which
signifies *to unsheath,* or *make bare,* I take simply to mean, *to draw
out,* or *bring forth.* The Hebrew word <span
id="xli.i-p8.5"></span>סגור, *segor,* which I have translated *to
oppose,* literally signifies *to shut* or *to close.* But as David’s
meaning is, that God, by setting himself as a wall or rampart, would
prevent his enemies from approaching him, it appears to me that I have
faithfully translated it. At the same time, if any should prefer the
translation to *shut,* or *close the way,* or *to impede it by some
obstacle,* the meaning; is substantially the same. The opinion of those
who contend that it is a noun,  <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702)
is not at all probable.

<span id="xli.i-p10"></span><span id="xli.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p11"></span>**3.** *Say to my soul.* Some expound these
words thus: Declare to me by secret inspiration; and others, Make me to
feel indeed that my salvation is in thy hand. In my opinion, David
desires to have it thoroughly fixed in his mind, and to be fully
persuaded that God is the author of his salvation. This he was unable,
from the present aspect of things, to ascertain and determine; for such
is the insensibility and dulness of our natures, that God often delivers
us whilst we sleep and are ignorant of it. Accordingly, he makes use of
a very forcible manner of expression, in praying that God would grant
him a lively sense of his favor, so that being armed with this buckler,
he might sustain every conflict, and surmount every opposing obstacle;
as if he had said, Lord, whatever may arise to discourage me, confirm me
in this persuasion, that my salvation is assuredly in thee; and although
temptations drive me hither and thither, recall my thoughts to thee in
such a manner, as that my hope of salvation may rise superior to all the
dangers to which I shall be exposed;  <span
id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703) nay, more, that I may become as
infallibly certain as if thou hadst said it, that through thy favor I
shall be saved.

<span id="xli.ii"></span>

<span id="xli.ii-p1"></span><span id="xli.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
35:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#004)<span id="xli.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xli.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Let those who seek my soul be
confounded and put to shame; and let those who devise my hurt be turned
back, and brought to confusion. **5.** Let them be as chaff before the
wind, and let the angel of Jehovah thrust \[or impel\] them.  <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704) **6.** Let their way be darkness and
slipperiness, and let the angel of Jehovah pursue them. **7.** For they
have hid for me without cause their net in a pit, without cause they
have digged a pit  <span id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705) for my soul.

<span id="xli.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xli.ii-p6"></span><span id="xli.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xli.ii-p7"></span>**4.** *Let those who seek my soul be
confounded.* David now calls upon God to take vengeance upon his
enemies; and he asks not only that he would disappoint and destroy their
designs, but also that he would recompense them according to their
deserts. In the first place, he desires that they may be confounded and
put to shame in seeing their expectation and desire fail; and then he
proceeds farther, desiring that while they imagine themselves to be
firmly established, and deeply rooted, they may be like chaff or
stubble. As the chaff is driven with the wind, so also he desires, that,
being disquieted by the secret impulse of the angel of the Lord, they
may never have rest. The imprecation which follows is even more
dreadful, and it is this: that wherever they go they may meet with
darkness and slippery places; and that in their doubt and perplexity the
angel of the Lord would pursue them. In fine, whatever they devise, and
to whatever side they turn, he prays that all their counsels and
enterprises may come to a disastrous termination. When he desires that
they may be driven by the angel of the Lord, we learn from this that the
reason why the ungodly are troubled, though no man pursues them, is,
that God smites them with a spirit of amazement, and distracts them with
such fears that they tremble and are troubled.

<span id="xli.ii-p8"></span><span id="xli.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xli.ii-p9"></span>The same thing he expresses more clearly in
the following verse, praying that the angel of the Lord would drive them
through dark and slippery places, so that reason and understanding might
fail them, and that they might not know whither to go, nor what to
become, nor have even time given them to draw their breath. We need not
be surprised that this work should be assigned to the angels, by whose
instrumentality God executes his judgments. At the same time, this
passage may be expounded of the devils as well as of the holy angels,
who are ever ready to execute the divine behests. We know that the devil
is permitted to exercise his dominion over the reprobate; and hence it
is often said that “an evil spirit from God came upon Saul,” (<span
id="xli.ii-p9.1"></span>[1Sa
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010)<span id="xli.ii-p9.1"></span>.)
But as the devils never execute the will of God, unless compelled to do
it when God wishes to serve himself of them; the Sacred Scriptures
declare that the holy and elect angels are in a much higher sense the
servants of God. God, then, executes his judgments by the wicked and
reprobate angels; but he gives the elect angels the pre-eminence over
them. On this account, also, good angels only are called rightfully
“principalities,” as in <span id="xli.ii-p9.2"></span>[Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span id="xli.ii-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="xli.ii-p9.3"></span>[Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span id="xli.ii-p9.3"></span>,
and other similar passages. If it is objected that it is not meet that
the angels, who are the ministers of grace and salvation, and the
appointed guardians of the faithful, should be employed in executing
judgment upon the reprobate, the explanation is simply this, that they
cannot watch for the preservation of the godly without being prepared
for fighting — that they cannot succor them by their aid without also
opposing their enemies, and declaring themselves to be against them. The
style of imprecation which the Psalmist here employs can be explained
only by bearing in mind what I have elsewhere said, namely, that David
pleads not simply his own cause, nor utters rashly the dictates of
passion, nor with unadvised zeal desires the destruction of his enemies;
but under the guidance of the Holy Spirit he entertains and expresses
against the reprobate such desires as were characterised by great
moderation, and which were far removed from the spirit of those who are
impelled either by desire of revenge or hatred, or some other inordinate
emotion of the flesh.

<span id="xli.ii-p10"></span><span id="xli.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xli.ii-p11"></span>**7.** *For they have hid for me without a
cause.* He here declares that he did not take the name of God in vain,
nor call upon him for protection without just cause, for he openly
asserts his innocence, and complains that he was thus severely afflicted
without having committed any crime, or given any occasion to his
enemies. It becomes us carefully to mark this, so that no one may rush
unadvisedly into God’s presence, nor call upon him for vengeance,
without the assurance and testimony of a good conscience. When he says
that he was assailed by stratagem, fraud, and wicked practices, there is
implied in this a tacit commendation of his own integrity.

<span id="xli.iii"></span>

<span id="xli.iii-p1"></span><span id="xli.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
35:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#008)<span id="xli.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iii-p2"></span>**8.** Let confusion of which he is not
aware come upon him; and let his own net which he hath hidden catch
himself: let him fall into it with confusion. **9.** And my soul is
joyful in Jehovah, it shall be glad in his salvation. **10.** All my
bones shall say, O Jehovah! who is like thee, that deliverest the poor
from him that is stronger than he, the poor and miserable from him that
spoileth him?

<span id="xli.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xli.iii-p4"></span><span id="xli.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iii-p5"></span>**8.** *Let confusion of which he is not
aware come upon him.* David again prays that God would cause to return
upon the head of his enemies the mischief which they had directed
against a just and an inoffensive man. The change from the plural to the
singular number, even when the same subject, is spoken of, is, we know,
a thing very common among the Hebrews. Accordingly, what is here said of
one man is applicable to all David’s enemies in general, unless,
perhaps, we are rather inclined to suppose that allusion is here made to
Saul or some one of his nobles. But as it is certain that the prayer
which he here offers against Saul as the head extends to the whole body,
in other words, to all his followers,  <span
id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706) it matters little in which way we
understand it. The Hebrew word <span id="xli.iii-p6.2"></span>שואה,
*shoah,* sometimes signifies *confusion,* and sometimes *destruction;*
and, therefore, many translate it, *Let destruction,* or *desolation,*
or *ruin, come upon him.* The other rendering, however, seems more
suitable, for he immediately adds, *Let his own net which he hath hidden
catch him, let him fall into it with confusion* The way in which others
render it, *Let him fall into destruction itself,* is certainly forced
and unnatural. But the meaning of the clause will be brought out very
suitable if it is viewed as a prayer of David, that as the wicked settle
down like wine upon the lees, in present enjoyments, and fear nothing,
as if they were placed beyond the reach of all danger, some calamity
which they think not of may suddenly come upon them like a tempest, and
overwhelm them. It never for a moment occurs to them as at all possible
that their stratagems and craft, their wicked practices, and all the
snares which they lay for the good and the simple, turn to the
destruction of themselves who have devised them. David, therefore, very
properly desires that they may fall with confusion into the nets which
they have laid; in other words, that they may be filled with amazement
and terror when they are suddenly and unexpectedly visited with
calamity. The more unbounded and extravagant the exultation of men is,
through their vainly and foolishly imagining that they shall escape
unpunished, the more are they filled with amazement and fear when
calamity suddenly overtakes them. I have, however, no doubt that David
here refers to some strange and extraordinary calamity. Let *confusion,*
then, of which he thinks not, come upon him; that is to say, when he
shall have persuaded himself that all goes well with him, and promised
himself peace in his deceitful fascinations, then let unwonted terror
strike him to the heart, and let him feel by his tumultuous fear that he
is caught in his own snares.

<span id="xli.iii-p7"></span><span id="xli.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iii-p8"></span>**9.** *And my soul is joyful in Jehovah.*
Others read this in the optative mood, *May my soul rejoice in Jehovah,
and may it be glad in his salvation* But instead of continuing to
express his desires, David, in my opinion, rather promises in this verse
that he will be grateful to God. This is still more evident from the
following verse, in which extolling very highly the goodness of God, he
says that he will celebrate the remembrance of it with every member of
his body. While, therefore, some ascribe to fortune, and others to their
own skill, the praise of their deliverance from danger, and few, if any,
yield the whole praise of it to God, David here declares that he will
not forget the favor which God had bestowed upon him. My soul, says he,
shall rejoice, not in a deliverance of the author of which it is
ignorant, but in the salvation of God. To place the matter in a still
stronger light, he assigns to his very bones the office of declaring the
divine glory. As if not content that his tongue should be employed in
this, he applies all the members of his body to the work of setting
forth the praises of God. The style of speaking which he employs is
hyperbolical, but in this way he shows unfeignedly that his love to God
was so strong that he desired to spend his sinews and bones in declaring
the reality and truth of his devotion.

<span id="xli.iii-p9"></span><span id="xli.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iii-p10"></span>**10.** *O Jehovah! who is like thee?*
Here he explains more fully the nature of his joy in the salvation of
God of which he had spoken, showing that it consisted in his ascribing
entirely to God the deliverance which he had obtained. Men, in general,
praise God in such a manner that he scarcely obtains the tenth part of
his due. But David, distinguishing him from all others, distinctly
declares that the whole glory of his deliverance is due to him alone.
And, certainly, we then only yield to God what belongs to him, when,
investing him with his own power, we rest all our hopes on him. For what
purpose does it serve, loudly to celebrate the name of God with our
mouths, if we tear in pieces his power and goodness at our pleasure?
David, therefore, in the true spirit of godliness, extols the greatness
of God by this high encomium, that he is the guardian and defender of
the poor, and rescues the needy and afflicted from the hand of those who
oppress them; as if he had said, It is God’s peculiar duty to succor the
miserable. By these words we are taught to cling to the hope of better
things in adversity; for the power and resources of our enemies, however
great they may be, is no reason why we should lose our confidence, since
God declares to us from heaven that he reigns expressly for the purpose
of resisting the strong and powerful. If the children of this world, who
employ their power in injuring and oppressing the weak, had the least
degree of sound understanding, it would certainly serve to restrain
their audacity, and prevent them proceeding farther in provoking the
wrath of God.

<span id="xli.iv"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p1"></span><span id="xli.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
35:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011)<span id="xli.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p2"></span>**11.** Violent witnesses rise up, they
charge me with things which I know not. **12.** They render me evil for
good, to the bereaving  <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707) of my
soul. **13.** But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was
sackcloth: I afflicted my soul with fasting; and have poured my prayer
into my own bosom. **14.** I behaved myself towards him as if he had
been my friend and brother: I humbled myself as one that mourneth
heavily for his mother. **15.** But they rejoiced at my halting, they
gathered themselves together; yea, even the abjects whom I knew not
gathered themselves against me: they have torn me with their lips, and
have not ceased.

<span id="xli.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xli.iv-p5"></span><span id="xli.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p6"></span>**11.** *Violent witnesses*  <span
id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708) *rise up.* The Hebrew is, *they shall
rise up;* but in using the future tense, the Psalmist intimates that he
is speaking of what he had suffered for a long time. And he complains
that he was so oppressed with calumny that he had no opportunity of
defending himself; than which nothing more grievous and painful can ever
happen to those of an ingenuous mind, and who are conscious of no blame.
Besides, he not only says that he had been falsely accused, but he also
condemns the audacity and insolence of those who violently rose up to
bear witness against him. To this belongs what he adds, *They charge me
with things which I know not.* David then was not only spoiled of his
worldly goods, and basely driven into exile, but was also accused and
loaded with infamy under color of justice. Being involved in such
distress, he resorted directly to God, hoping that he would maintain his
innocence. So ought the children of God to walk through good report and
bad report, and patiently suffer reproach, until he assert and declare
their innocence from on high. In old times, it was a common proverb
among the heathen, “There is no theater more beautiful than a good
conscience;” and in this they uttered a noble sentiment; but no man can
be sustained and supported by the purity of his conscience unless he has
recourse to God.

<span id="xli.iv-p8"></span><span id="xli.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p9"></span>**12.** *They render me evil for good.*
David again shows that the malice of his enemies was of a very
aggravated character, because they not only oppressed him wrongfully,
seeing he was innocent, and had given them no occasion of offense, but
also because even those who had received much enjoyment and many favors
from him, recompensed him in a very strange and ungrateful manner. Such
disgraceful conduct wounds the feelings of good men very severely, and
seems quite intolerable. But it is an inexpressibly great consolation
when we can testify before God, that we have attempted by every means in
our power to soothe the minds of our enemies, and to bow them to
gentleness, although, notwithstanding, they are hurried on by insatiable
cruelty in desiring our hurt; for God will not suffer this barbarous and
brutal ingratitude to pass unpunished. Their cruelty is farther
expressed when it is said that they endeavored to bereave (for so it is
properly in the Hebrew  <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709) ) the
soul of a meek and peaceable man; that is to say, to deprive it of
comfort, and render it so desolate as to overwhelm it with despair and
destroy it. David afterwards recounts certain acts of kindness which he
had done them, and which, if they had had any sense of equity and
humanity, ought to have been as so many sacred bonds of mutual love. He
does not say that he aided them with money or with goods, or that he had
by some other means exercised liberality towards them, for it may
sometimes happen that when the hand is open the heart may be shut; but
he mentions certain tokens of true and genuine love — that he lamented
their misfortunes before God, and was troubled for them, as if he had
mourned for the death of his mother; and, finally, that he felt for and
took an interest in them as if they had been his own brothers. Since
then he had thus laid them under high obligations to him, of what baser
ingratitude could they be guilty than to vomit against him in his
adversity the poison of their hatred? With respect to the meaning of the
words, I take the term *sickness,* in this place, to signify
metaphorically any kind of trouble or sorrow. David’s meaning is, that
as often as any calamity had befallen them he was a partaker of their
grief. A good evidence of this was the prayer which he says he *poured
out into his own bosom.* The proper meaning of the expression is, that
he did not ostentatiously utter his prayers aloud before men, like many
who pretend much more affection than they really feel, but that by
praying in secret, and without making the world privy to it, he showed
that he was sincerely and from the heart distressed by reason of their
affliction. As we say that a man rejoices in his own bosom, who is
satisfied with the secret and inward feeling of his heart, without
declaring it to others, so also one may be said to weep or pray in his
own bosom, who pours not forth his tears and prayers before men to
secure their favor, but, contented with having God alone for his
witness, conceals his emotions in his own heart. I do not, however, deny
that in this manner of speaking there is expressed the attitude of one
who prays, as if the Psalmist had said, that he bowed down his body, and
prayed with his head hanging down, and his arms folded, as men in
heaviness are accustomed to do.  <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710)
But this especially we ought to regard as his meaning, that there was no
dissimulation in his prayer. Some think that there is an imprecation in
his words, and they explain them in this sense. Lord, if it is true that
I have not desired all prosperity to them, let all mischief fall upon
me: but this is a forced explanation. There is still another exposition,
which has as little plausibility in it; and it is this: Because I
profited nothing by praying for them, the fruit of my prayer returned to
myself. The sense, which is more in unison with the purpose and also the
words of the prophet, is, I prayed for them just as I pray for myself.
But what I have already advanced concerning the secret affection of the
Psalmist will, I hope, prove satisfactory to the judicious reader. With
respect to *sackcloth and fasting,* he used them as helps to prayer. The
faithful pray even after their meals, and do not observe fasting every
day as necessary for prayer, nor consider it needful to put on sackcloth
whenever they come into the presence of God. But we know that those who
lived in ancient times resorted to these exercises when any urgent
necessity pressed upon them. In the time of public calamity or danger
they all put on sackcloth, and gave themselves to fasting, that by
humbling themselves before God, and acknowledging their guilt, they
might appease his wrath. In like manner, when any one in particular was
afflicted, in order to excite himself to greater earnestness in prayer,
he put on sackcloth and engaged in fasting, as being the tokens of
grief. When David then, as he here tells us, put on sackcloth, it was
the same as if he had taken upon himself the sins of his enemies, in
order to implore from God mercy for them, while they were exerting all
their power to accomplish his destruction. Although we may reckon the
wearing of sackcloth and sitting in ashes among the number of the legal
ceremonies, yet the exercise of fasting remains in force amongst us at
this day as well as in the time of David. When God, therefore, calls us
to repentance, by showing us signs of his displeasure, let us bear in
mind that we ought not only to pray to him after the ordinary manner,
but also to employ such means as are fitted to promote our humility. In
conclusion, the Psalmist says that he behaved and acted towards them as
if each of them had been his brother.

<span id="xli.iv-p12"></span><span id="xli.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p13"></span>**15.** *But they rejoiced at my halting.*
I see no reason why interpreters should trouble themselves as they do
about the word *halting.* Some conjecture that David had his leg put out
of joint, and others suppose that he halted from some disease. But when
we consider carefully the whole passage, nothing is more evident than
that he refers by this expression to the calamities which befell him; as
if he had said, As soon as they saw me begin to stagger and ready to
fall, they did as it were gather together against me, and endeavored
entirely to overthrow me. There is, therefore, in this expression almost
the same metaphor as we have already seen in the word *sickness.* Now,
as men often relent at seeing the misfortunes of their enemies, so that
they cease to hate or persecute those who are already miserably
wretched, it was an evidence of the very cruel and fierce spirit by
which David’s former friends were actuated against him, when, upon
seeing him cast down and afflicted, they were rather by this incited
furiously and insolently to assail him. At the commencement he speaks
only of a few; but immediately after, in order to show still farther the
indignity which had been done to him, he adds to them the base and
ignoble of the common people; not that he blames all alike, but that he
may the better show with what bitter hostility he was assailed on all
sides. It is probable that those who were then in power were as it were
firebrands, who endeavored to kindle every where the flame of hatred
against David, that the people every where might rise up to destroy him,
and strive with each other in this enterprise. And he repeats twice
*that they gathered themselves together,* in order to show how resolute
and determined they were in their opposition to him; unless, perhaps,
some would prefer to explain the words thus: They gathered themselves
together, not only those who had some pretext for doing so, but even the
lowest of the people. The Hebrew word <span
id="xli.iv-p13.1"></span>נכים, *nekim,* literally signifies *the
whipped,* or *beaten,*  <span id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711) but it
is here to be understood as denoting base and disreputable persons. Some
interpreters, indeed, derive it from the word <span
id="xli.iv-p14.7"></span>כאה, *kaäh,* which signifies *to make sad,* and
expound it actively, Those who make me sad: but the previous
interpretation agrees better with the design of the passage, namely,
that David was shamefully treated by the lowest dregs of the people. The
words, *I knew not,* may be referred to the cause as well as to the
persons. I, however, explain it as referring to the persons in this
sense: So far from having any cause to complain that I have offended
them, or done them any harm, I did not even know them. At the same time,
these words may be understood as implying a complaint on the part of
David, that the people were enraged against him without any cause, since
he is conscious of no crime, and can conceive of no ground for such
fierce hatred towards him. As to the last clause of the verse, also,
although interpreters entertain different opinions, it appears to me
that I have given the true and natural meaning. Literally it is, *they
did cut, and ceased not;* but there can be no doubt that the language is
metaphorical, and that the word *cut*  <span
id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712) signifies that they opened their
mouth; as if David had said, They have insolently poured forth with open
mouth their scoffing and reproachful words against me. The additional
clause in the sentence, *and ceased not,* is a repetition common in the
Hebrew language, and is employed to express the vehemence with which
David’s enemies proceeded against him. It implies that there was no end
or measure to their evil-speaking, and that they continued to pour forth
with distended throats whatever first occurred to them.

<span id="xli.v"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p1"></span><span id="xli.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
35:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#016)<span id="xli.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p2"></span>**16.** Among perfidious jesters at feasts,
they gnash upon me with their teeth. **17.** O Lord!  <span
id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713) how long wilt thou look on? deliver my
soul from their tumults, and my only one  <span
id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714) from the lions. **18.** I will magnify
thee in the great congregation:  <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715)
I will praise thee before a great people.  <span
id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716)

<span id="xli.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="xli.v-p8"></span><span id="xli.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p9"></span>**16.** *Among perfidious jesters.* Others
translate it, *With hypocrites,* but in my opinion David simply relates
the combination of his enemies. And the meaning of the expression is to
this effect, That among men of a crafty disposition, who had been
addicted to deceit, and were consequently lost to all sense of shame,
the only and the constant subject of their deliberations was, how they
might destroy this afflicted man. David again reverts to the leaders of
the people, and to those in power, as the source whence all the mischief
took its rise; for this description could not apply to a great part of
the common people, who acted rather by thoughtless impulse. He therefore
speaks particularly of the rulers, and others of a similar character,
and accuses them of cruelty, saying, that they gnash their teeth upon
him like furious wild beasts. He first calls them *perfidious* or
*wicked,* that he may the more easily obtain help and aid of God, as if
calling upon him in the extremity of distress; and, secondly, he calls
them *jesters* or *mockers,* by which he means that they have such
effrontery, and are so far lost to all sense of shame, that there is
nothing which they will not dare to do. As to the meaning of the word
<span id="xli.v-p9.1"></span>מעוג, *maog,* which follows, interpreters
are not agreed. Properly, it signifies bread baked upon the hearth upon
the embers. Some, however, because they could not elicit from it a
meaning suitable to the passage, have thought that it should be taken
for talkative jesting, or idle speech. Others, presuming to give a still
wider range to their fancy, have supposed the meaning of the Psalmist to
be, that the scoffing of such persons was as bread to them, because they
take pleasure in scoffing and jesting. To me, it appears that we ought
to retain the proper signification of the word, while, at the same time,
it may be understood in a twofold sense. Some taking <span
id="xli.v-p9.2"></span>מעוג, *maog,* for *a cake* or *tart,* are of
opinion that David here censures people of a delicate taste, who seek
after fine and dainty fare, many of whom are always to be found in the
courts of princes. Others rather suppose that he rebukes persons of a
servile and sordid spirit, who, for the most trifling consideration,
would employ their tongues in reviling others, just as in all ages there
have been found men who, for a bit of bread, as we say, set their
tongues to sale. When I carefully consider other passages in which David
describes the nature and character of his enemies, I am disposed to
think that those who indulged in jesting and scoffing at feasts, and
who, in sitting over their cups, consulted about putting David to death,
are here referred to. He therefore complains, that even in the midst of
their feasting and banqueting, the ungodly, who had shaken off all
shame, communed how they might take away his life.

<span id="xli.v-p10"></span><span id="xli.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p11"></span>**17.** *O Lord! how long wilt thou look
on?* The meaning of the word which I have translated *how long,* is
ambiguous in the Hebrew. In Latin it signifies, How long wilt thou see
it, and suffer it without uttering a word? But the other interpretation
is equally appropriate, namely, After having seemed to take no notice of
the matter for a long time, when wilt thou at length begin to see it?
The meaning, however, is substantially the same, for David complains of
God’s long forbearance, declaring that while the wicked are running to
every excess, God connives at them, and delays too much to take
vengeance. And although God inculcates upon the faithful the duty of
quietly and patiently waiting till the time arrive when he shall judge
it proper to help them, yet he allows them to bewail in prayer the grief
which they experience on account of his delay. At the same time, David
shows, that in so speaking he is not carried headlong merely by the
importunity of his desire, but that he is constrained to it by the
extremity of his distress. For he says that they tumultuously rush upon
him to take away his life, and he compares them to *lions,* and calls
*his soul solitary,* or *alone.* Some think that the expression, *only
soul,* means *clear and precious,* or *well beloved;* but such do not
sufficiently consider the design of David, as has been stated in the
22nd Psalm at the twenty-first verse.

<span id="xli.v-p12"></span><span id="xli.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p13"></span>**18.** *I will magnify thee in the great
congregation.* In this verse David again engages to give thanks to God
for all his goodness, since the faithful can render him no other
recompense than the sacrifice of praise, as we shall see in <span
id="xli.v-p13.1"></span>[Ps
116:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#017)<span id="xli.v-p13.1"></span>.
Thus even whilst he was surrounded by the impetuous billows of fear and
danger, he sets himself to the exercise of giving thanks, as if he had
already obtained his desire; and by this he intended to encourage and
confirm himself in the assurance of obtaining his requests. In this we
may discern a striking and decided evidence of invincible fortitude, for
though an outcast and a fugitive, destitute of all help, and, in short,
in a state of great extremity and despair as to all his affairs, yet
still he thinks of praising God’s grace, and makes vows of solemn
sacrifice to him, as if, in the midst of the darkness of death, he saw
deliverance clearly shining upon him. And he speaks not only of giving
thanks in private, but of such thanksgiving as those who were delivered
out of any great perils were wont to yield in the public assembly, by
the appointment of the law. Some translate the latter clause of the
verse *a strong and powerful people,*  <span
id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717) but I do not see the propriety of it.
It is a mere subtilty to argue that the Church is endued with great
strength, and therefore is called a *strong people.* But as David simply
means the great crowd and multitude of people who were wont to go up to
the sanctuary to hold their solemn assembly before God, I have no doubt
that when he speaks of the *great congregation,* and afterwards of *much
people,* he only repeats, according to his custom, the same thing twice,
for the Hebrew word is used in both these senses.

<span id="xli.vi"></span>

<span id="xli.vi-p1"></span><span id="xli.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
35:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019)<span id="xli.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vi-p2"></span>**19.** Let not those who are my enemies
wrongfully rejoice over me; neither let those who hate me without a
cause wink with the eye. **20.** For they speak not peace;  <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718) but devise deceitful words upon the
clefts of the earth. **21.** They have opened their mouth against me:
they have said, Aha! aha! our eye hath seen it.  <span
id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) **22.** O Jehovah! thou hast also seen
it: keep not silence: O Lord! be not far from me. **23.** Stir up
thyself, and awake for my judgment, O my God! even for my cause, O my
Lord!

<span id="xli.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xli.vi-p6"></span><span id="xli.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vi-p7"></span>**19.** *Let not those who are my enemies
wrongfully rejoice over me.* Because David’s enemies already exulted in
the hope of seeing his overthrow and destruction, he prays that God
would not suffer them to realize a desire so wicked. In order to render
God favorable to his cause, he again protests that they hated him
without any fault or occasion on his part, and that it was their own
malice which urged them to such cruelty against him; for in order to
secure the help of God, it is necessary to come before him with the
testimony of a good conscience.

<span id="xli.vi-p8"></span>The Hebrew word <span
id="xli.vi-p8.1"></span>שקר*, sheker,* which we have rendered
*wrongfully,* is by some translated *deceitfully,* as if David meant
that his enemies lay in wait for him. But this is to reason with too
much subtilty. Besides, the repetition which immediately follows shows
that he complains of their wilful hatred, inasmuch as of their own
accord, and from deliberate design, they persecuted a man who had given
them no cause of offense, but was their friend and benefactor. The
Hebrew word <span id="xli.vi-p8.2"></span>קרף, *karats,* here signifies
*to wink with the eyes askance in mockery,* as in <span
id="xli.vi-p8.3"></span>[Ps 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008)<span
id="xli.vi-p8.3"></span>, it denotes, *to wag the head,* and *to shoot
out the lip.*

<span id="xli.vi-p9"></span><span id="xli.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vi-p10"></span>In the following verse, that he may cherish
still greater confidence in God, David again declares, that he has to do
with enemies of an irreconcilable character, and who are fully bent upon
cruelty. Of this we ought to be firmly persuaded, that the more
grievously we are oppressed, so much the more certainly ought we to
expect deliverance. He therefore says, that they speak of nothing but of
tumults and slaughter. The meaning of the latter clause is somewhat
obscure, arising from the ambiguous signification of the word <span
id="xli.vi-p10.1"></span>רגע*, rige.* As the word from which it is
derived sometimes signifies *to cut,* and sometimes *to rest,* or *to be
quiet and peaceable,* there are some who translate it *the meek and
peaceable of the earth:* others translate it, *with the tranquil and
easy of the earth;* meaning by this, those who live in the midst of
riches and abundance, in the enjoyment of undisturbed repose. Both these
seem to me to be forced interpretations. Others, too, though not more
correctly, expound the word *in caves* or *secret places,* in order
that, as they say, the wicked and deceitful counsels of such persons may
not come to light. But it may be very appropriately rendered, *the
clefts of the earth,* and by this metaphor are meant the miserable and
afflicted, who are, as it were, broken and maimed. David, therefore,
declares that as soon as his enemies see any opening, that is to say,
some calamity befall him, they instantly put forth all their efforts to
accomplish his destruction. Those who, in the time of his prosperity and
power, never dared even to utter a word against him, began now, when
they saw that his influence was feeble, to plot his ruin, just as we
know that the wicked are for the most part persons of a servile and
cowardly disposition, and assume not the tone of insolence save when an
advantageous opportunity presents itself, as when the good and simple
are in adversity. To the same purpose he represents them in the next
verse, as crying out with open mouth, Aha! aha! and clapping their hands
for joy that they saw David overcome, and, as it were, laid prostrate in
the dust, a spectacle in which they took great delight.

<span id="xli.vi-p11"></span><span id="xli.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vi-p12"></span>**22.** *O Jehovah! thou hast also seen
it.* There is in these words an implied contrast between the view which
God is here represented as taking, and the sight at which, as we are
told in the preceding verse, the ungodly rejoiced. The import of David’s
language is, You have rejoiced exceedingly at the sight of my miseries;
but God also sees and takes notice of the cruelty and malice of those
who feel a pleasure and gratification in seeing others afflicted and in
trouble. David, however, in thus speaking, stays not to reason with his
enemies, but rather addresses himself directly to God, and sets his
providence as a rampart of defense in opposition to all the assaults of
those who sought to shake his confidence, and who caused him much
trouble. And certainly, if we would fortify ourselves against the
scoffing and derision of our enemies, the best means which we can employ
for this end is to overlook them, and to elevate our thoughts to God,
and in the confidence of his fatherly care over us, to entreat him to
show, in very deed, that our troubles are not unknown to him; yea, that
the more he sees the wicked eagerly watching every opportunity to
accomplish our ruin, he would the more speedily come to our aid. This
David expresses by these various forms of expression — *Keep not
silence, be not far from me, stir up thyself, awake for my judgment* He
might justly make use of such expressions, seeing he was already fully
persuaded that God regards the poor and afflicted, and marks all the
wrongs which are done to them. If, therefore, we would frame our
requests aright, a clear conviction and persuasion of the providence of
God must first shine into our hearts; nor is it necessary only that this
should precede, in point of order, all our desires; it must also
restrain and govern them.

<span id="xli.vii"></span>

<span id="xli.vii-p1"></span><span id="xli.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
35:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#024)<span
id="xli.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vii-p2"></span>**24.** Judge me, O Jehovah my God!
According to thy righteousness; and let them not rejoice over me.
**25.** Let them not say in their heart, Aha! our soul!  <span
id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720) let them not say, We have swallowed
him up. **26.** Let those who rejoice at my hurt be ashamed and
confounded together; let those who magnify themselves against me be
clothed with shame and dishonor. **27.** But let those who favor my
righteous cause shout and be glad, and let them say continually, Jehovah
be magnified, who loveth the peace of his servant. **28.** And my tongue
shall declare thy righteousness and thy praise all the day.

<span id="xli.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xli.vii-p6"></span><span id="xli.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vii-p7"></span>**24.** *Judge me, O Jehovah my God!* David
here confirms the prayer of the preceding verse that God would be his
defender, and would maintain his righteous cause. Having been for a time
subjected to suffering as one who had been forsaken and forgotten, he
sets before himself *the righteousness of God,* which forbids that he
should altogether abandon the upright and the just. It is, therefore,
not simply a prayer, but a solemn appeal to God, that as he is
righteous, he would manifest his righteousness in defending his servant
in a good cause. And certainly, when we seem to be forsaken and deprived
of all help, there is no remedy which we can employ, more effectual to
overcome temptation than this consideration, that the righteousness of
God, on which our deliverance depends, can never fail. Accordingly, the
Apostle Paul, in exhorting the faithful to patience, says in <span
id="xli.vii-p7.1"></span>[2Th 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span
id="xli.vii-p7.1"></span>,

<span id="xli.vii-p8"></span>“It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation  
to them that trouble you.”

<span id="xli.vii-p9"></span>Now David again appeals to God in this
place, and entreats him to manifest his righteousness in restraining the
insolence of his enemies: for the more proudly they assail us, God is so
much the more ready to help us. Besides, by again introducing them as
speaking, he portrays in a graphic style the cruelty of their desires;
and by this he means to show, that if things should happen according to
their wishes, they would set no limit to their frowardness. But as the
more they vaunt themselves, the more they provoke the wrath of God
against them, David with good reason uses this as an argument to
encourage his hope, and employs it for his support and confirmation in
prayer.

<span id="xli.vii-p10"></span><span id="xli.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vii-p11"></span>**26.** *Let those who rejoice at thy hurt
be ashamed and confounded together.* This imprecation has already been
expounded; and it is only necessary to remark, that there is peculiar
force in the expression, *together,* or *at once.* It shows that it was
not only one or two, but a great multitude, who waged war against him,
and that he yielded not to the influence of fear, but believed that as
soon as God should lift up his hand, he could at one stroke easily
overthrow them all. When it is said that they seek after and *rejoice in
David’s hurt,* this shows that they were filled with cruel hatred
against him. And when it is said, that they *magnify themselves against
him,* this is a token of pride. David, therefore, in order to render
them more hateful in the sight of God, represents them as filled with
pride and cruelty. And as this form of prayer was dictated by the Holy
Spirit to David, there can be no doubt that the end of all the proud
shall be such as is here predicted, that they shall turn back
overwhelmed with shame and disgrace.

<span id="xli.vii-p12"></span><span id="xli.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vii-p13"></span>**27.** *Let those who favor my righteous
cause rejoice and be glad.* These two expressions, which are rendered in
the optative mood, might have been translated with equal propriety in
the future tense; but as this is a matter of little consequence, I leave
it undecided. David here extols the deliverance which he asks of God,
and exults in the results which should flow from it; namely, that it
would be an occasion of general rejoicing and good hope to all the
godly, while at the same time it would stir them up to celebrate the
praises of God. He attributes to all the faithful the credit of
desiring, that as an innocent man his righteous cause should be
maintained. David, it is true, was the object of almost universal hatred
among the simple and unsuspecting, who were imposed upon by false and
unjust reports made concerning him; but it is certain that there were
among the people some who formed a just and impartial estimate of
things, and who were sorely grieved that a holy man, and one too whose
benevolence was well known, should have been so unjustly and so
wrongfully oppressed. And surely the common feelings of humanity
require, that when we see men unjustly oppressed and afflicted, if we
are not able to help them, we should at least pity them. When David uses
the language, *Jehovah be magnified,* his design seems to be tacitly to
set this in opposition to the pride of the wicked, of which he made
mention above. As they presume in the pride, of their hearts, and by
their insolent and overbearing conduct, to obscure, as far as in them
lies, the divine glory, so may the faithful, on the other hand, with
good reason present the prayer that God would shine forth in the majesty
of his character, and demonstrate in very deed that he exercises a
special care over all his servants, and takes a peculiar pleasure in
their peace. Finally, the Psalmist again declares, in the conclusion of
the psalm, his resolution to celebrate in appropriate praises the
righteousness of God, by which he had been preserved and delivered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_701"></span>[702](cc08040.htm#fr_701) <span
id="xli.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p8"></span> The word rendered *shield* is in the Hebrew
text <span id="xli.i-p8.1"></span>מגך, *magen,* which was a short
buckler intended merely for defense. The word rendered *buckler* is
<span id="xli.i-p8.2"></span>צנה, *tsinnah,* for an account of which see
note, p. 64. The *tsinnah* was double the weight of the magen, and was
carried by the infantry; the magen, being lighter and more manageable,
was used by the cavalry. The *tsinnah* answered to the *scutum,* and the
*magen* to the *clypeus,* among the Romans. — See *Paxton’s
Illustrations of Scripture,* vol. 3, pp. 866, 867.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[703](cc08040.htm#fr_702) <span
id="xli.i-p8.6"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p9"></span> Those who are of opinion that <span
id="xli.i-p9.1"></span>סגור, *segor,* is a noun, translate it “the
scymitar,” and read, “Draw out the spear, and the scymitar, to oppose my
persecutors.” According to *Drusius, Vitringa, Michaelis, Dr Kennicott*,
and others, the word means <span id="xli.i-p9.2"></span>σαγαρις, or
scymitar, a sort of battle-axe, which was used by the Persians,
Scythians, and other nations in ancient times.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[704](cc08040.htm#fr_703) <span
id="xli.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xli.i-p12"></span> “<span id="xli.i-p12.1"></span>Que
l’esperance de mon salut surpasse tous les dangers qui me seront
livrez.“ — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_704"></span>[705](cc08040.htm#fr_704) <span
id="xli.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xli.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xli.ii-p3.1"></span>C’est,
chasse et presse.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, chase and pursue them.”

<span id="fn_705"></span>[706](cc08040.htm#fr_705) <span
id="xli.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xli.ii-p4"></span> The allusion here is to the custom of
digging pits and putting nets in them, covered with straw, etc., to
catch wild beasts.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[707](cc08040.htm#fr_706) <span
id="xli.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iii-p6"></span> “<span id="xli.iii-p6.1"></span>Qu’il fait
yci contre Saul comme le chef, s’estend a tout le corps, c’est a dire,
tous ses adherens.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[708](cc08040.htm#fr_707) <span
id="xli.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xli.iv-p3.1"></span>C’est,
desconforter.” *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, to the discomfort;”

<span id="fn_708"></span>[709](cc08040.htm#fr_708) <span
id="xli.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xli.iv-p7.1"></span>עדי חמס
*witnesses of wrong or violence;* i.e., witnesses deponing to acts of
violence, as committed by the person accused. See <span
id="xli.iv-p7.2"></span>[Ps 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#012)<span
id="xli.iv-p7.2"></span>.” — *Horsley.*

<span id="fn_709"></span>[710](cc08040.htm#fr_709) <span
id="xli.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="xli.iv-p10.1"></span>Ont tasch,
de rendre orpheline car il y a ainsi proprement en Hebrieu.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[711](cc08040.htm#fr_710) <span
id="xli.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p11"></span> “When the Orientals,” says *Boothroyd*,
“pray seriously in grief, they hide their face in their bosom: and to
this custom the Psalmist here alludes. *Rabbi Levi, Dathe,* and others,
explain it in like manner.”

<span id="fn_711"></span>[712](cc08040.htm#fr_711) <span
id="xli.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p14"></span> The word is derived from <span
id="xli.iv-p14.1"></span>נכה, *nakah, to strike* or *to smite.* The LXX.
render it <span id="xli.iv-p14.2"></span>μαστιγες, *scourges;* and
*Jerome* reads <span id="xli.iv-p14.3"></span>*percutientes, smiters,*
in which he is followed by *Ainsworth*, who understands the word as
meaning smiters with the tongue, or calumniators, and who thinks that
the LXX., in translating it *scourges,* alluded to the scourge of the
tongue, as in <span id="xli.iv-p14.4"></span>[Job
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#021)<span id="xli.iv-p14.4"></span>;
and if *smiters* is the proper rendering, we may certainly conclude,
that as this smiting is represented as done upon the person who was its
object in his absence, it was a smiting by the tongue. At the same time,
this critic observes, that the word may be read *the smitten,* that is,
*abjects, vile persons,* as in <span id="xli.iv-p14.5"></span>[Job
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008)<span id="xli.iv-p14.5"></span>
*Dr Kennicott* translates it by *verbcrones, whipt slaves, vile
scoundrels.* Another meaning of the word, according to *Buxtorff*, is,
*the wry-legged, the lame.* In this sense it is used in <span
id="xli.iv-p14.6"></span>[2Sa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#004)<span
id="xli.iv-p14.6"></span>, and 9:3; and hence the epithet of *Necho* was
given to one of the Pharaohs, who halted in his gait. Thus it easily
came to be employed as a term of contempt. Calvin and the translators of
our English Bible agree in the meaning which they attach to this word.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[713](cc08040.htm#fr_712) <span
id="xli.iv-p14.8"></span>

<span id="xli.iv-p15"></span> The verb <span
id="xli.iv-p15.1"></span>קרע, *kara,* for *cut,* “is significant of
tearing or rending, and by an easy metaphor, is applicable to wounds
inflicted by evil speaking and slander.” — *Walford.*

<span id="fn_713"></span>[714](cc08040.htm#fr_713) <span
id="xli.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p3"></span> <span id="xli.v-p3.1"></span>Domine — *Lat*
<span id="xli.v-p3.2"></span>אדני*,* Adonai — *Hebrews* “More than
fifteen copies collected by *Dr Kennicott* have <span
id="xli.v-p3.3"></span>יהוה here instead of <span
id="xli.v-p3.4"></span>אדני Among which is one of the best manuscripts
that has been collated. The Jews, in later ages, had a superstitious
fear of pronouncing the word <span id="xli.v-p3.5"></span>יהוה and
therefore inserted <span id="xli.v-p3.6"></span>אדני or <span
id="xli.v-p3.7"></span>אלהים, <span id="xli.v-p3.8"></span>c’est a dire
in the place of it very frequently.” — *Street.*

<span id="fn_714"></span>[715](cc08040.htm#fr_714) <span
id="xli.v-p3.9"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p4"></span> “<span id="xli.v-p4.1"></span>Assavoir, mon
ame unique; c’est a dire, solitaire et delaissee.” — *Note, Fr. marg.*
“Namely, my soul alone; that is to say, solitary and forsaken.” See note
3, p. 432. In our English Bible the phrase is, “My darling;” but David
rather means to intimate his forsaken and unprotected condition, unless
God interposed in his behalf. *Green* reads, “my helpless person.”

<span id="fn_715"></span>[716](cc08040.htm#fr_715) <span
id="xli.v-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p5"></span> “<span id="xli.v-p5.1"></span>Devant un
grand peuple.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[717](cc08040.htm#fr_716) <span
id="xli.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p6"></span> “<span id="xli.v-p6.1"></span>C’est,
beaucoup de peuple.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, much people.”

<span id="fn_717"></span>[718](cc08040.htm#fr_717) <span
id="xli.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xli.v-p14"></span> *Horsley* takes this view. He reads,
“*Among a mighty people*;” and observes, that this is the rendering of
the Chaldee, and that <span id="xli.v-p14.1"></span>עצם, seems more
properly to express strength or power than number.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[719](cc08040.htm#fr_718) <span
id="xli.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xli.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xli.vi-p3.1"></span>C’est, ne
tienent propos d’amis.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, their discourse is
not that of friends.”

<span id="fn_719"></span>[720](cc08040.htm#fr_719) <span
id="xli.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xli.vi-p4"></span> “<span id="xli.vi-p4.1"></span>C’est, ce
que nous desirions.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, that which we
desire.” *French* and *Skinner* read, “Aha! aha! our eye seeth!” “that
is,” they observe, “beholds our enemy in the fallen condition in which
we desire to see him. See verse 25, compare <span
id="xli.vi-p4.3"></span>[Ps 92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011)<span
id="xli.vi-p4.3"></span>.”

<span id="fn_720"></span>[721](cc08040.htm#fr_720) <span
id="xli.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xli.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="xli.vii-p3.1"></span>C’est,
nostre desire nous avons ce que desirions: ou, nostre ame, assavoir
s’esjouisse, comme on dit en nostre langue, Grande chere.” — *Note, Fr.
marg.* “That is, our desire — we have what we desire: or, our soul, that
is to say, is glad: as we say in our language, Great cheer.” *French*
and *Skinner* read, “Let them not say in their hearts, Aha! our desire!”
and observe, “that *our desire!* means our desire is accomplished.”

<span id="xli.vii-p4"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Psalms 1-35](cc08041)
