[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08023)  [Next](cc08025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv-p1"></span>PSALM 19

<span id="xxv-p2"></span>To the chief musician. A song of David.

<span id="xxv-p3"></span>David, with the view of encouraging the
faithful to contemplate the glory of God, sets before them in the first
place, a mirror of it in the fabric of the heavens, and in the exquisite
order of their workmanship which we behold; and in the second place, he
recalls our thoughts to the Law, in which God made himself more
familiarly known to his chosen people. Taking occasion from this, he
continues to discourse at considerable length on this peculiar gift of
Heaven, commending and exalting the use of the law. Finally, he
concludes the psalm with a prayer.

<span id="xxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
19:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p2"></span>**1.** The heavens declare the glory of God;
and the expanse  <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) proclaims the
works of his hands. **2.** Day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto
night publishes knowledge.  <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442)
**3.** There is no language and no speech \[where\] their voice is not
heard. **4.** Their writing has gone forth through all the earth, and
their words to the end of the world: he hath set in them a tabernacle
for the sun. **5.** And he goeth forth as a bridegroom out of his
chamber: he rejoiceth as a strong man to run his race. **6.** His going
forth is from the end of the heavens, and his circuit is to their utmost
limits, and none is hidden from his heat.

<span id="xxv.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxv.i-p6"></span><span id="xxv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p7"></span>**1.** *The heavens declare the glory of
God.*  <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) I have already said, that
this psalm consists of two parts, in the first of which David celebrates
the glory of God as manifested in his works; and, in the other, exalts
and magnifies the knowledge of God which shines forth more clearly in
his word. He only makes mention of the heavens; but, under this part of
creation, which is the noblest, and the excellency of which is more
conspicuous, he doubtless includes by synecdoche the whole fabric of the
world. There is certainly nothing so obscure or contemptible, even in
the smallest corners of the earth, in which some marks of the power and
wisdom of God may not be seen; but as a more distinct image of him is
engraven on the heavens, David has particularly selected them for
contemplation, that their splendor might lead us to contemplate all
parts of the world. When a man, from beholding and contemplating the
heavens, has been brought to acknowledge God, he will learn also to
reflect upon and to admire his wisdom and power as displayed on the face
of the earth, not only in general, but even in the minutest plants. In
the first verse, the Psalmist repeats one thing twice, according to his
usual manner. He introduces the heavens as witnesses and preachers of
the glory of God, attributing to the dumb creature a quality which,
strictly speaking, does not belong to it, in order the more severely to
upbraid men for their ingratitude, if they should pass over so clear a
testimony with unheeding ears. This manner of speaking more powerfully
moves and affects us than if he had said, The heavens *show* or
*manifest* the glory of God. It is indeed a great thing, that in the
splendor of the heavens there is presented to our view a lively image of
God; but, as the living voice has a greater effect in exciting our
attention, or at least teaches us more surely and with greater profit
than simple beholding, to which no oral instruction is added, we ought
to mark the force of the figure which the Psalmist uses when he says,
that the heavens by their preaching declare the glory of God.

<span id="xxv.i-p9"></span>The repetition which he makes in the second
clause is merely an explanation of the first. David shows how it is that
the heavens proclaim to us the glory of God, namely, by openly bearing
testimony that they have not been put together by chance, but were
wonderfully created by the supreme Architect. When we behold the
heavens, we cannot but be elevated, by the contemplation of them, to Him
who is their great Creator; and the beautiful arrangement and wonderful
variety which distinguish the courses and station of the heavenly
bodies, together with the beauty and splendor which are manifest in
them, cannot but furnish us with an evident proof of his providence.
Scripture, indeed, makes known to us the time and manner of the
creation; but the heavens themselves, although God should say nothing on
the subject, proclaim loudly and distinctly enough that they have been
fashioned by his hands: and this of itself abundantly suffices to bear
testimony to men of his glory. As soon as we acknowledge God to be the
supreme Architect, who has erected the beauteous fabric of the universe,
our minds must necessarily be ravished with wonder at his infinite
goodness, wisdom, and power.

<span id="xxv.i-p10"></span><span id="xxv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p11"></span>**2.** *Day unto day uttereth speech.*
Philosophers, who have more penetration into those matters than others,
understand how the stars are arranged in such beautiful order, that
notwithstanding their immense number there is no confusion; but to the
ignorant and unlettered, the continual succession of days is a more
undoubted proof of the providence of God. David, therefore, having
spoken of the heavens, does not here descend from them to other parts of
the world; but, from an effect more sensible and nearer our
apprehension, he confirms what he has just now said, namely, that the
glory of God not only shines, but also resounds in the heavens. The
words may be variously expounded, but the different expositions which
have been given of them make little difference as to the sense. Some
explain them thus, that no day passes in which God does not show some
signal evidence of his power. Others are of opinion that they denote the
augmentations of instruction and knowledge, - that every succeeding day
contributes something new in proof of the existence and perfections of
God. Others view them as meaning that the days and nights talk together,
and reason concerning the glory of their Creator’, but this is a
somewhat forced interpretation. David, I have no doubt, here teaches,
from the established alternations of days and nights, that the course
and revolutions of the sun, and moon, and stars, are regulated by the
marvellous wisdom of God. Whether we translate the words *Day after
day,* or *one day to another day,* is of little consequence; for all
that David means is the beautiful arrangement of time which the
succession of days and nights effects. If, indeed, we were as attentive
as we ought to be, even one day would suffice to bear testimony to us of
the glory of God, and even one night would be sufficient to perform to
us the same office. But when we see the sun and the moon performing
their daily revolutions, — the sun by day appearing over our heads, and
the moon succeeding in its turns — the sun ascending by degrees, while
at the same time he approaches nearer us, — and afterwards bending his
course so as to depart from us by little and little; — and when we see
that by this means the length of the days and nights is regulated, and
that the variation of their length is arranged according to a law so
uniform, as invariably to recur at the same points of time in every
successive year, we have in this a much brighter testimony to the glory
of God. David, therefore, with the highest reason, declares, that
although God should not speak a single word to men, yet the orderly and
useful succession of days and nights eloquently proclaims the glory of
God, and that there is now left to men no pretext for ignorance; for
since the days and nights perform towards us so well and so carefully
the office of teachers, we may acquire, if we are duly attentive, a
sufficient amount of knowledge under their tuition.

<span id="xxv.i-p12"></span><span id="xxv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p13"></span>**3.** *There is no language nor speech
\[where\] their voice is not heard.* This verse receives two almost
contrary interpretations, each of which, however, has the appearance of
probability. As the words, when rendered literally, read thus — *No
language, and no words, their voice is not heard* — some connect the
third and fourth verses together, as if this sentence were incomplete
without the clause which follows in the beginning of the fourth verse,
*Their writing has gone forth through all the earth,* etc. According to
them, the meaning is this:— The heavens, it is true, are mute and are
not endued with the faculty of speech; but still they proclaim the glory
of God with a voice sufficiently loud and distinct. But if this was
David’s meaning, what need was there to repeat three times that they
have not articulate speech? It would certainly be spiritless and
superfluous to insist so much upon a thing so universally known. The
other exposition, therefore, as it is more generally received, seems
also to be more suitable. In the Hebrew tongue, which is concise, it is
often necessary to supply some word; and it is particularly a common
thing in that language for the relatives to be omitted, that is to say,
the words *which, in which,* etc., as here, *There is no language, there
is no speech,* \[*where*  <span id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) \]
*their voice is not heard.*  <span id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445)
Besides, the third negation, <span id="xxv.i-p15.2"></span>בלי, *beli,*
 <span id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) rather denotes an exception to
what is stated in the preceding members of the sentence, as if it had
been said, The difference and variety of languages does not prevent the
preaching of the heavens and their language from being heard and
understood in every quarter of the world. The difference of languages is
a barrier which prevents different nations from maintaining mutual
intercourse, and it makes him who in his own country is distinguished
for his eloquence, when he comes into a foreign country either dumb or,
if he attempt to speak, barbarous. And even although a man could speak
all languages, he could not speak to a Grecian and a Roman at the same
time; for as soon as he began to direct his discourse to the one, the
other would cease to understand him. David, therefore, by making a tacit
comparison, enhances the efficacy of the testimony which the heavens
bear to their Creator. The import of his language is, Different nations
differ from each other as to language; but the heavens have a common
language to teach all men without distinction, nor is there any thing
but their own carelessness to hinder even those who are most strange to
each other, and who live in the most distant parts of the world, from
profiting, as it were, at the mouth of the same teacher.

<span id="xxv.i-p17"></span>**4.** *Their writing has gone forth, etc.*
Here the inspired writer declares how the heavens preach to all nations
indiscriminately, namely, because men, in all countries and in all parts
of the earth, may understand that the heavens are set before their eyes
as witnesses to bear testimony to the glory of God. As the Hebrew word
<span id="xxv.i-p17.2"></span>קו, *kav signifies* sometimes *a line,*
and sometimes *a building,* some deduce from it this meaning, that the
fabric of the heavens being framed in a regular manner, and as it were
by line, proclaims the glory of God in all parts of the world. But as
David here metaphorically introduces the splendor and magnificence of
the heavenly bodies, as preaching the glory of God like a teacher in a
seminary of learning, it would be a meagre and unsuitable manner of
speaking to say, that the line of the heavens goes forth to the
uttermost ends of the earth. Besides, he immediately adds, in the
following clause, that *their words* are every where heard; but what
relation is there between words and the beauty of a building? If,
however, we render <span id="xxv.i-p17.3"></span>קו, *kav, writing,*
these two things will very well agree, first, that the glory of God is
written and imprinted in the heavens, as in an open volume which all men
may read; and, secondly, that, at the same time, they give forth a loud
and distinct voice, which reaches the ears of all men, and causes itself
to be heard in all places.  <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) Thus
we are taught, that the language of which mention has been made before
is, as I may term it, a visible language, in other words, language which
addresses itself to the sight; for it is to the eyes of men that the
heavens speak, not to their ears; and thus David justly compares the
beautiful order and arrangement, by which the heavenly bodies are
distinguished, to a writing. That the Hebrew word <span
id="xxv.i-p18.2"></span>קו, *kav,* signifies a line in writing,  <span
id="fr_448"></span>[449](#fn_448) is sufficiently evident from <span
id="xxv.i-p19.2"></span>[Isa
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010)<span id="xxv.i-p19.2"></span>,
where God, comparing the Jews to children who are not yet of sufficient
age to make great proficiency, speaks thus:

<span id="xxv.i-p20"></span>“For precept must be upon precept, precept
upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a
little.”

<span id="xxv.i-p21"></span>In my judgment, therefore, the meaning is,
that the glory of God is not written in small obscure letters, but
richly engraven in large and bright characters, which all men may read,
and read with the greatest ease. Hitherto I have explained the true and
proper meaning of the inspired writer. Some have wrested this part of
the psalm by putting upon it an allegorical interpretation; but my
readers will easily perceive that this has been done without reason. I
have shown in the commencement, and it is also evident from the scope of
the whole discourse, that David, before coming to the law, sets before
us the fabric of the world, that in it we might behold the glory of God.
Now, if we understand the heavens as meaning the apostles, and the sun
Christ, there will be no longer place for the division of which we have
spoken; and, besides, it would be an improper arrangement to place the
gospel first and then the law. It is very evident that the inspired poet
here treats of the knowledge of God, which is naturally presented to all
men in this world as in a mirror; and, therefore, I forbear discoursing
longer on that point. As, however, these allegorical interpreters have
supported their views from the words of Paul, this difficulty must be
removed. Paul, in discoursing upon the calling of the Gentiles, lays
down this as an established principle, that, “Whoever shall call upon
the name of the Lord, shall be saved;” and then he adds, that it is
impossible for any to call upon him until they know him by the teaching
of the gospel. But as it seemed to the Jews to be a kind of sacrilege
that Paul published the promise of salvation to the Gentiles, he asks
whether the Gentiles themselves had not heard? And he answers, by
quoting this passage, that there was a school open and accessible to
them, in which they might learn to fear God, and serve him, inasmuch as
“the writing  <span id="fr_449"></span>[450](#fn_449) of the heavens has
gone forth *through all the earth,* and their words unto the ends of the
world,” (<span id="xxv.i-p22.2"></span>[Ro
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="xxv.i-p22.2"></span>.)
But Paul could not at that time have said with truth, that the voice of
the gospel had been heard through the whole world from the mouth of the
apostles, since it had scarcely as yet reached even a few countries. The
preaching of the other apostles certainly had not then extended to far
distant parts of the world, but was confined within the boundaries of
Judea. The design of the apostle it is not difficult to comprehend. He
intended to say that God, from ancient times, had manifested his glory
to the Gentiles, and that this was a prelude to the more ample
instruction which was one day to be published to them. And although
God’s chosen people for a time had been in a condition distinct and
separate from that of the Gentiles, it ought not to be thought strange
that God at length made himself known indiscriminately to both, seeing
he had hitherto united them to himself by certain means which addressed
themselves in common to both; as Paul says in another passage, that when
God,

<span id="xxv.i-p23"></span>“in times past, suffered all nations to walk
in their own ways, he nevertheless left not himself without a
witness,”  
(<span id="xxv.i-p23.2"></span>[Acts
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span id="xxv.i-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxv.i-p24"></span>Whence we conclude, that those who have
imagined that Paul departed from the genuine and proper sense of David’s
words are grossly mistaken. The reader will understand this still more
clearly by reading my commentaries on the above passage of St. Paul.

<span id="xxv.i-p25"></span>*He hath set in them a tabernacle \[or
pavilion\] for the sun.* As David, out of the whole fabric of the world,
has especially chosen the heavens, in which he might exhibit to our view
an image of God, because there it is more distinctly to be seen, even as
a man is better seen when set on an elevated stage; so now he shows us
the sun as placed in the highest rank, because in his wonderful
brightness the majesty of God displays itself more magnificently than in
all the rest. The other planets, it is true, have also their motions,
and as it were the appointed places within which they run their race,
 <span id="fr_450"></span>[451](#fn_450) and the firmament, by its own
revolution, draws with it all the fixed stars, but it would have been
lost time for David to have attempted to teach the secrets of astronomy
to the rude and unlearned; and therefore he reckoned it sufficient to
speak in a homely style, that he might reprove the whole world of
ingratitude, if, in beholding the sun, they are not taught the fear and
the knowledge of God. This, then, is the reason why he says that a tent
or pavilion has been erected for the sun, and also why he says, that he
goes forth from one end of the heaven, and quickly passes to the other
and opposite end. He does not here discourse scientifically (as he might
have done, had he spoken among philosophers) concerning the entire
revolution which the sun performs, but, accommodating himself to the
rudest and dullest, he confines himself to the ordinary appearances
presented to the eye, and, for this reason, he does not speak of the
other half of the sun’s course, which does not appear in our hemisphere.
He proposes to us three things to be considered in the sun, — the
splendor and excellency of his forms — the swiftness with which he runs
his course, — and the astonishing power of his heat. The more forcibly
to express and magnify his surpassing beauty and, as it were,
magnificent attire, he employs the similitude of a bridegroom. He then
adds another similitude, that of a valiant man who enters the lists as a
racer to carry off the prize of the course. The swiftness of those who
in ancient times contended in the stadium, whether on chariots or on
foot, was wonderful; and although it was nothing when compared with the
velocity with which the sun moves in his orbit, yet David, among all
that he saw coming under the ordinary notice of men, could find nothing
which approached nearer to it. Some think that the third clause, where
he speaks of the heat of the sun, is to be understood of his vegetative
heat, as it is called; in other words, that by which the vegetating
bodies which are in the earth have their vigor, support, and growth.
 <span id="fr_451"></span>[452](#fn_451) But I do not think that this
sense suits the passage. It is, indeed, a wonderful work of God, and a
signal evidence of his goodness, that the powerful influence of the sun
penetrating the earth renders it fruitful. But as the Psalmist says,
that *no man* or *nothing is hidden from his heat,* I am rather inclined
to understand it of the violent heat which scorches men and other living
creatures as well as plants and trees. With respect to the enlivening
heat of the sun, by which we feel ourselves to be invigorated, no man
desires to avoid it.

<span id="xxv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
19:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)<span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p2"></span>**7.** The law of the Lord  <span
id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452) is perfect, restoring the soul; the
testimony of Jehovah is faithful, \[or true,  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) \] instructing the babes in wisdom.
**8.** The statutes of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart; the
commandment of the Lord  <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) is
pure, enlightening the eyes. **9.** The fear of Jehovah is clean,
enduring for ever; the judgments of Jehovah are truth, and justified
together.

<span id="xxv.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxv.ii-p7"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p8"></span>**7.** *The law of the Lord.* Here the
second part of the psalm commences. After having shown that the
creatures, although they do not speak, nevertheless serve as instructors
to all mankind, and teach all men so clearly that there is a God, as to
render them inexcusable, the Psalmist now turns towards the Jews, to
whom God had communicated a fuller knowledge of himself by means of his
word. While the heavens bear witness concerning God, their testimony
does not lead men so far as that thereby they learn truly to fear him,
and acquire a well-grounded knowledge of him; it serves only to render
them inexcusable. It is doubtless true, that if we were not very dull
and stupid, the signatures and proofs of Deity which are to be found on
the theater of the world, are abundant enough to incite us to
acknowledge and reverence God; but as, although surrounded with so clear
a light, we are nevertheless blind, this splendid representation of the
glory of God, without the aid of the word, would profit us nothing,
although it should be to us as a loud and distinct proclamation sounding
in our ears. Accordingly, God vouchsafes to those whom he has determined
to call to salvation special grace, just as in ancient times, while he
gave to all men without exception evidences of his existence in his
works, he communicated to the children of Abraham alone his Law, thereby
to furnish them with a more certain and intimate knowledge of his
majesty. Whence it follows, that the Jews are bound by a double tie to
serve God. As the Gentiles, to whom God has spoken only by the dumb
creatures, have no excuse for their ignorance, how much less is their
stupidity to be endured who neglect to hear the voice which proceeds
from his own sacred mouth? The end, therefore, which David here has in
view, is to excite the Jews, whom God had bound to himself by a more
sacred bond, to yield obedience to him with a more prompt and cheerful
affection. Farther, under the term *law,* he not only means the rule of
living righteously, or the Ten Commandments, but he also comprehends the
covenant by which God had distinguished that people from the rest of the
world, and the whole doctrine of Moses, the parts of which he afterwards
enumerates under the terms *testimonies, statutes,* and other names.
These titles and commendations by which he exalts the dignity and
excellence of the Law would not agree with the Ten Commandments alone,
unless there were, at the same time, joined to them a free adoption and
the promises which depend upon it; and, in short, the whole body of
doctrine of which true religion and godliness consists. As to the Hebrew
words which are here used, I will not spend much time in endeavoring
very exactly to give the particular signification of each of them,
because it is easy to gather from other passages, that they are
sometimes confounded or used indifferently. <span
id="xxv.ii-p8.1"></span>עדות, *eduth,* which we render *testimony,* is
generally taken for the covenant, in which God, on the one hand,
promised to the children of Abraham that he would be their God, and on
the other required faith and obedience on their part. It, therefore,
denotes the mutual covenant entered into between God and his ancient
people. The word <span id="xxv.ii-p8.2"></span>פקודים, *pikkudim,* which
I have followed others in translating *statutes,* is restricted by some
to ceremonies, but improperly in my judgment: for I find that it is
every where taken generally for ordinances and edicts. The word <span
id="xxv.ii-p8.3"></span>מצוה, *mitsvah,* which follows immediately
after, and which we translate *commandment,* has almost the same
signification. As to the other words, we shall consider them in their
respective places.

<span id="xxv.ii-p9"></span>The first commendation of the law of God is,
that it is *perfect.* By this word David means, that if a man is duly
instructed in the law of God, he wants nothing which is requisite to
perfect wisdom. In the writings of heathen authors there are no doubt to
be found true and useful sentences scattered here and there; and it is
also true, that God has put into the minds of men some knowledge of
justice and uprightness; but in consequence of the corruption of our
nature, the true light of truth is not to be found among men where
revelation is not enjoyed, but only certain mutilated principles which
are involved in much obscurity and doubt. David, therefore, justly
claims this praise for the law of God, that it contains in it perfect
and absolute wisdom. As *the conversion of the soul,* of which he speaks
immediately after, is doubtless to be understood of its *restoration,* I
have felt no difficulty in so rendering it. There are some who reason
with too much subtilty on this expression, by explaining it as referring
to the repentance and regeneration of man. I admit that the soul cannot
be restored by the law of God, without being at the same time renewed
unto righteousness; but we must consider what is David’s proper meaning,
which is this, that as the soul gives vigor and strength to the body, so
the law in like manner is the life of the soul. In saying that the soul
is restored, he has an allusion to the miserable state in which we are
all born. There, no doubt, still survive in us some small remains of the
first creation; but as no part of our constitution is free from
defilement and impurity, the condition of the soul thus corrupted and
depraved differs little from death, and tends altogether to death. It
is, therefore, necessary that God should employ the law as a remedy for
restoring us to purity; not that the letter of the law can do this of
itself, as shall be afterwards shown more at length, but because God
employs his word as an instrument for restoring our souls.

<span id="xxv.ii-p10"></span>When the Psalmist declares, *The testimony
of Jehovah is faithful,* it is a repetition of the preceding sentence,
so that *the integrity* or *perfection of the law* and *the
faithfulness* or *truth of his testimony,* signify the same thing;
namely, that when we give ourselves up to be guided and governed by the
word of God, we are in no danger of going astray, since this is the path
by which he securely guides his own people to salvation. *Instruction in
wisdom* seems here to be added as the commencement of the restoration of
the soul. Understanding is the most excellent endowment of the soul; and
David teaches us that it is to be derived from the law, for we are
naturally destitute of it. By the word *babes,* he is not to be
understood as meaning any particular class of persons, as if others were
sufficiently wise of themselves; but by it he teaches us, in the first
place, that none are endued with right understanding until they have
made progress in the study of the law. In the second place, he shows by
it what kind of scholars God requires, namely, those who are fools in
their own estimation, (<span id="xxv.ii-p10.1"></span>[1Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)<span id="xxv.ii-p10.1"></span>,)
and who come down to the rank of children, that the loftiness of their
own understanding may not prevent them from giving themselves up, with a
spirit of entire docility, to the teaching of the word of God.

<span id="xxv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p12"></span>**8.** *The statutes of Jehovah are right.*
The Psalmist at first view may seem to utter a mere common-place
sentiment when he calls the statutes of the Lord *right.* If we,
however, more attentively consider the contrast which he no doubt makes
between the rectitude of the law and the crooked ways in which men
entangle themselves when they follow their own understandings, we will
be convinced that this commendation implies more than may at first sight
appear. We know how much every man is wedded to himself, and how
difficult it is to eradicate from our minds the vain confidence of our
own wisdom. It is therefore of great importance to be well convinced of
this truth, that a man’s life cannot be ordered aright unless it is
framed according to the law of God, and that without this he can only
wander in labyrinths and crooked bypaths. David adds, in the second
place, *that God’s statutes rejoice the heart.* This implies that there
is no other joy true and solid but that which proceeds from a good
conscience; and of this we become partakers when we are certainly
persuaded that our life is pleasing and acceptable to God. No doubt, the
source from which true peace of conscience proceeds is faith, which
freely reconciles us to God. But to the saints who serve God with true
affection of heart there arises unspeakable joy also, from the knowledge
that they do not labor in his service in vain, or without hope of
recompense, since they have God as the judge and approver of their life.
In short, this joy is put in opposition to all the corrupt enticements
and pleasures of the world, which are a deadly bait, luring wretched
souls to their everlasting destruction. The import of the Psalmist’s
language is, Those who take delight in committing sin procure for
themselves abundant matter of sorrow; but the observance of the law of
God, on the contrary, brings to man true joy. In the end of the verse,
the Psalmist teaches that *the commandment of God is pure, enlightening
the eyes* By this he gives us tacitly to understand that it is only in
the commandments of God that we find the difference between good and
evil laid down, and that it is in vain to seek it elsewhere, since
whatever men devise of themselves is mere filth and refuse, corrupting
the purity of the life. He farther intimates that men, with all their
acuteness, are blind, and always wander in darkness, until they turn
their eyes to the light of heavenly doctrine. Whence it follows, that
none are truly wise but those who take God for their conductor and
guide, following the path which he points out to them, and who are
diligently seeking after the peace which he offers and presents by his
word.

<span id="xxv.ii-p13"></span>But here a question of no small difficulty
arises; for Paul seems entirely to overthrow these commendations of the
law which David here recites. How can these things agree together: that
the law restores the souls of men, while yet it is a dead and deadly
letter? that it rejoices men’s hearts, and yet, by bringing in the
spirit of bondage, strikes them with terror? that it enlightens the
eyes, and yet, by casting a veil before our minds, excludes the light
which ought to penetrate within? But, in the first place, we must
remember what I have shown you at the commencement, that David does not
speak simply of the precepts of the Moral Law, but comprehends the whole
covenant by which God had adopted the descendants of Abraham to be his
peculiar people; and, therefore, to the Moral Law, the rule of living
well — he joins the free promises of salvation, or rather Christ
himself, in whom and upon whom this adoption was founded. But Paul, who
had to deal with persons who perverted and abused the law, and separated
it from the grace and the Spirit of Christ, refers to the ministry of
Moses viewed merely by itself, and according to the letter. It is
certain, that if the Spirit of Christ does not quicken the law, the law
is not only unprofitable, but also deadly to its disciples. Without
Christ there is in the law nothing but inexorable rigour, which adjudges
all mankind to the wrath and curse of God. And farther, without Christ,
there remains within us a rebelliousness of the flesh, which kindles in
our hearts a hatred of God and of his law, and from this proceed the
distressing bondage and awful terror of which the Apostle speaks. These
different ways in which the law may be viewed, easily show us the manner
of reconciling these passages of Paul and David, which seem at first
view to be at variance. The design of Paul is to show what the law can
do for us, taken by itself; that is to say, what it can do for us when,
without the promise of grace, it strictly and rigorously exacts from us
the duty which we owe to God; but David, in praising it as he here does,
speaks of the whole doctrine of the law, which includes also the gospel,
and, therefore, under the law he comprehends Christ.

<span id="xxv.ii-p14"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p15"></span>**9.** *The fear of Jehovah is clean.* By
the *fear of God* we are here to understand the way in which God is to
be served; and therefore it is taken in an active sense for the doctrine
which prescribes to us the manner in which we ought to fear God. The way
in which men generally manifest their fear of God, is by inventing false
religions and a vitiated worship; in doing which they only so much the
more provoke his wrath. David, therefore, here indirectly condemns these
corrupt inventions, about which men torment themselves in vain,  <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) and which often sanction impurity; and
in opposition to them he justly affirms, that in the keeping of the law
there is an exemption from every thing which defiles. He adds, that *it
endures for ever;* as if he had said, This is the treasure of
everlasting happiness. We see how mankind, without well thinking what
they are doing, pursue, with impetuous and ardent affections, the
transitory things of this world; but, in thus catching at the empty
shadow of a happy life, they lose true happiness itself. In the second
clause, by calling the commandments of God *truth,* David shows that
whatever men undertake to do at the mere suggestion of their own minds,
without having a regard to the law of God as a rule, is error and
falsehood. And, indeed, he could not have more effectually stirred us up
to love, and zealously to live according to the law, than by giving us
this warning, that all those who order their life, without having any
respect to the law of God, deceive themselves, and follow after mere
delusions. Those who explain the word *judgments,* as referring only to
the commandments of the second table, are, in my opinion, mistaken: for
David’s purpose was to commend, under a variety of expressions, the
advantages which the faithful receive from the law of God. When he says,
*They are justified together,* the meaning is, They are all righteous
from the greatest to the least, without a single exception. By this
commendation he distinguishes the law of God from all the doctrines of
men, for no blemish or fault can be found in it, but it is in all points
absolutely perfect.

<span id="xxv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
19:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p2"></span>**10.** More to be desired are they than
gold, yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than honey, and the
droppings of honeycombs.  <span id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456)
**11.** Moreover, by them is thy servant made circumspect; and in the
keeping of them there is great reward.

<span id="xxv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p6"></span>**10.** *More to be desired are they than
gold.* The Psalmist now exalts the law of God both on account of its
price and sweetness. This commendation depends on the commendations
given in the preceding verses; for the many and great advantages which
he has just now enumerated, ought justly to make us account heavenly
truth the highest and most excellent treasure, and to despise, when
compared with it, all the gold and silver of the world. Instead of the
word *fine gold,* which the Latins have called *Aurum obryzum,*  <span
id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) some render the Hebrew word *a jewel,*
or *precious stones,*  <span id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) but the
other translation is more generally received, namely, *fine gold,* that
is, gold which is pure and well refined in the furnace; and there are
many passages of Scripture by which this rendering is confirmed.  <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459) The Hebrew word <span
id="xxv.iii-p9.3"></span>פז, *paz,* is derived from <span
id="xxv.iii-p9.4"></span>פזה, *pazah,* which signifies *to strengthen;*
 <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460) from which we may conjecture
that the Psalmist does not mean the gold of any particular country, as
if one should say the gold of Ophir, but gold completely refined and
purified by art. So far is <span id="xxv.iii-p10.2"></span>פז, *paz,*
from being derived from the name of a country, that, on the contrary, it
appears from <span id="xxv.iii-p10.3"></span>[Jer
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009)<span id="xxv.iii-p10.3"></span>,
that the land of Uphaz took its name from this Hebrew word, because it
had in it mines of the finest gold. As to the origin of the word
*obrizum,* which the Latins have used, we cannot say any thing with
certainty, except that, according to the conjecture of Jerome, it
signifies *brought from the land of Ophir,* as if it had been said,
*aurum Ophrizum.* In short, the sense is, that we do not esteem the law
as it deserves, if we do not prefer it to all the riches of the world.
If we are once brought thus highly to prize the law, it will serve
effectually to deliver our hearts from an immoderate desire of gold and
silver. To this esteem of the law there must be added love to it, and
delight in it, so that it may not only subdue us to obedience by
constraint, but also allure us by its sweetness; a thing which is
impossible, unless, at the same time, we have mortified in us the love
of carnal pleasures, with which it is not wonderful to see us enticed
and ensnared, so long as we reject, through a vitiated taste, the
righteousness of God. From this we may again deduce another evidence,
that David’s discourse is not to be understood simply of the
commandments, and of the dead letter, but that he comprehends, at the
same time, the promises by which the grace of God is offered to us. If
the law did nothing else but command us, how could it be loved, since in
commanding it terrifies us, because we all fail in keeping it?  <span
id="fr_461"></span>[462](#fn_461) Certainly, if we separate the law from
the hope of pardon, and from the Spirit of Christ, so far from tasting
it to be sweet as honey, we will rather find in it a bitterness which
kills our wretched souls.

<span id="xxv.iii-p12"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p13"></span>**11.** *Moreover, by them is thy servant
made circumspect.* These words may be extended generally to all the
people of God; but they are properly to be understood of David himself,
and by them he testifies that he knew well, from his own experience, all
that he had stated in the preceding verses respecting the law. No man
will ever speak truly and in good earnest of heavenly truth, but he who
has it deeply fixed in his own heart. David therefore acknowledges, that
whatever prudence he had for regulating and framing his life aright, he
was indebted for it to the law of God. Although, however, it is properly
of himself that he speaks, yet by his own example he sets forth a
general rule, namely, that if persons wish to have a proper method for
governing the life well, the law of God alone is perfectly sufficient
for this purpose; but that, on the contrary, as soon as persons depart
from it, they are liable to fall into numerous errors and sins. It is to
be observed that David, by all at once turning his discourse to God,
appeals to him as a witness of what he had said, the more effectually to
convince men that he speaks sincerely and from the bottom of his heart.
As the Hebrew word <span id="xxv.iii-p13.1"></span>זהר, *zahar,* which I
have translated *made circumspect,* signifies *to teach,* as well as *to
be on one’s guard,* some translate it in this place, *Thy servant is
taught,* or *warned,* by the commandments of the law. But the sentence
implies much more, when it is viewed as meaning that he who yields
himself to God to be governed by him is made circumspect and cautious,
and, therefore, this translation seems to me to be preferable. In the
second clause the Psalmist declares, that whoever yield themselves to
God to observe the rule of righteousness which he prescribes, do not
lose their labor, seeing he has in reserve for them a great and rich
reward: *In keeping of them there is great reward.* It is no mean
commendation of the law when it is said, that in it God enters into
covenant with us, and, so to speak, brings himself under obligation to
recompense our obedience. In requiring from us whatever is contained in
the law, he demands nothing but what he has a right to; yet such is his
free and undeserved liberality, that he promises to his servants a
reward, which, in point of justice, he does not owe them. The promises
of the law, it is true, are made of no effect; but it is through our
fault: for even he who is most perfect amongst us comes far short of
full and complete righteousness; and men cannot expect any reward for
their works until they have perfectly and to the full satisfied the
requirements of the law. Thus these two doctrines completely harmonize:
first, that eternal life shall be given as the reward of works to him
who fulfils the law in all points; and, secondly, that the law
notwithstanding denounces a curse against all men, because the whole
human family are destitute of the righteousness of works. This will
presently appear from the following verse. David, after having
celebrated this benefit of the law - that it offers an abundant reward
to those who serve God — immediately changes his discourse, and cries
out, *Who* *can understand his errors?* by which he pronounces all men
liable to eternal death, and thus utterly overthrows all the confidence
which men may be disposed to place in the merit of their works. It may
be objected, that this commendation, *In the keeping of thy commandments
there is great reward,* is in vain ascribed to the law, seeing it is
without effect. The answer is easy, namely, that as in the covenant of
adoption there is included the free pardon of sins, upon which depends
the imputation of righteousness, God bestows a recompense upon the works
of his people, although, in point of justice, it is not due to them.
What God promises in the law to those who perfectly obey it, true
believers obtain by his gracious liberality and fatherly goodness,
inasmuch as he accepts for perfect righteousness their holy desires and
earnest endeavors to obey.

<span id="xxv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
19:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span id="xxv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p2"></span>**12.** Who can understand his errors?
 <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) Cleanse thou me from my secret
sins. **13.** Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins,  <span
id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) that they may not have dominion over
me; then shall I be upright and clean from much wickedness.  <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) **14.** Let the words of my mouth, and
the meditations of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Jehovah, my
strength and my redeemer.

<span id="xxv.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iv-p7"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p8"></span>**12.** *Who can understand his errors?*
This exclamation shows us what use we should make of the promises of the
law, which have a condition annexed to them. It is this: As soon as they
come forth, every man should examine his own life, and compare not only
his actions, but also his thoughts, with that perfect rule of
righteousness which is laid down in the law. Thus it will come to pass,
that all, from the least to the greatest, seeing themselves cut off from
all hope of reward from the law, will be constrained to flee for refuge
to the mercy of God. It is not enough to consider what the doctrine of
the law contains; we must also look into ourselves, that we may see how
far short we have come in our obedience to the law. Whenever the Papists
hear this promise,

<span id="xxv.iv-p9"></span>“He who doeth these things shall live in
them,”  
(<span id="xxv.iv-p9.2"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="xxv.iv-p9.2"></span>,)

<span id="xxv.iv-p10"></span>they do not hesitate at once to connect
eternal life with the merit of their works, as if it were in their own
power to fulfill the law, of which we are all transgressors, not only in
one point, but in all its parts. David, therefore, being involved as it
were in a labyrinth on all sides, acknowledges with astonishment that he
is overwhelmed under a sense of the multitude of his sins. We ought then
to remember, in the first place, that as we are personally destitute of
the righteousness which the law requires, we are on that account
excluded from the hope of the reward which the law has promised; and, in
the next place, that we are guilty before God, not of one fault or of
two, but of sins innumerable, so that we ought, with the bitterest
sorrow, to bewail our depravity, which not only deprives us of the
blessing of God, but also turns to us life into death. This David did.
There is no doubt that when, after having said that God liberally offers
a reward to all who observe his law, he cried out, *Who can understand
his errors? it* was from the terror with which he was stricken in
thinking upon his sins. By the Hebrew word <span
id="xxv.iv-p10.1"></span>שגיאות, *shegioth,* which we have translated
*errors,* some think David intends lesser faults; but in my judgment he
meant simply to say, that Satan has so many devices by which he deludes
and blinds our minds, that there is not a man who knows the hundredth
part of his own sins. The saints, it is true, often offend in lesser
matters, through ignorance and inadvertence; but it happens also that,
being entangled in the snares of Satan, they do not perceive even the
grosser faults which they have committed. Accordingly, all the sins to
the commission of which men give themselves loose reins, not being duly
sensible of the evil which is in them, and being deceived by the
allurements of the flesh, are justly included under the Hebrew word here
used by David, which signifies *faults* or *ignorances.*  <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) In summoning himself and others before
the judgment-seat of God, he warns himself and them, that although their
consciences do not condemn them, they are not on that account absolved;
for God sees far more clearly than men’s consciences, since even those
who look most attentively into themselves, do not perceive a great part
of the sins with which they are chargeable.

<span id="xxv.iv-p12"></span>After making this confession, David adds a
prayer for pardon, *Cleanse thou me from my secret sins.* The word
*cleanse* is to be referred not to the blessing of regeneration, but to
free forgiveness; for the Hebrew verb <span
id="xxv.iv-p12.1"></span>נקה, *nakah,* here used, comes from a word
which signifies *to* *be innocent.* The Psalmist explains more clearly
what he intended by the word *errors,* in now calling them *secret
sins;* that is to say, those with respect to which men deceive
themselves, by thinking that they are no sins, and who thus deceive
themselves not only purposely and by expressly aiming at doing so, but
because they do not enter into the due consideration of the majesty of
the judgment of God. It is in vain to attempt to justify ourselves under
the pretext and excuse of ignorance. Nor does it avail any thing to be
blind as to our faults, since no man is a competent judge in his own
cause. We must, therefore, never account ourselves to be pure and
innocent until we are pronounced such by God’s sentence of absolution or
acquittal. The faults which we do not perceive must necessarily come
under the review of God’s judgment, and entail upon us condemnation,
unless he blot them out and pardon them; and if so, how shall he escape
and remain unpunished who, besides these, is chargeable with sins of
which he knows himself to be guilty, and on account of which his own
conscience compels him to judge and condemn himself? Farther, we should
remember that we are not guilty of one offense only, but are overwhelmed
with an immense mass of impurities. The more diligently any one examines
himself, the more readily will he acknowledge with David, that if God
should discover our secret faults, there would be found in us an abyss
of sins so great as to have neither bottom nor shore, as we say;  <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) for no man can comprehend in how many
ways he is guilty before God. From this also it appears, that the
Papists are bewitched, and chargeable with the grossest hypocrisy, when
they pretend that they can easily and speedily gather all their sins
once a year into a bundle. The decree of the Lateran Council commands
every one to confess all his sins once every year, and at the same time
declares that there is no hope of pardon but in complying with that
decree. Accordingly, the blinded Papist, by going to the confessional,
to mutter his sins into the ear of the priest, thinks he has done all
that is required, as if he could count upon his fingers all the sins
which he has committed during the course of the whole year; whereas,
even the saints, by strictly examining themselves, can scarcely come to
the knowledge of the hundredth part of their sins, and, therefore, with
one voice unite with David in saying, *Who can understand his errors?*
Nor will it do to allege that it is enough if each performs the duty of
reckoning up his sins to the utmost of his ability. This does not
diminish, in any degree, the absurdity of this famous decree.  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467) As it is impossible for us to do what
the law requires, all whose hearts are really and deeply imbued with the
principle of the fear of God must necessarily be overwhelmed with
despair, so long as they think themselves bound to enumerate all their
sins, in order to their being pardoned; and those who imagine they can
disburden themselves of their sins in this way must be persons
altogether stupid. I know that some explain these words in a different
sense, viewing them as a prayer, in which David beseeches God, by the
guidance of his Holy Spirit, to recover him from all his errors. But, in
my opinion, they are to be viewed rather as a prayer for forgiveness,
and what follows in the next verse is a prayer for the aid of the Holy
Spirit, and for success to overcome temptations.

<span id="xxv.iv-p15"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p16"></span>**13.** *Keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous sins.* By *presumptuous sins* he means known and evident
transgressions,  <span id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) accompanied
with proud contempt and obstinacy. By the word *keep back,* he
intimates, that such is the natural propensity of the flesh to sin, that
even the saints themselves would immediately break forth or rush
headlong into it, did not God, by his own guardianship and protection,
keep them back. It is to be observed, that while he calls himself *the
servant of God,* he nevertheless acknowledges that he had need of the
bridle, lest he should arrogantly and rebelliously break forth in
transgressing the law of God. Being regenerated by the Spirit of God, he
groaned, it is true, under the burden of his sins; but he knew, on the
other hand, how great is the rebellion of the flesh, and how much we are
inclined to forgetfulness of God, from which proceed contempt of his
majesty and all impiety. Now, if David, who had made so much progress in
the fear of God, was not beyond the danger of transgressing, how shall
the carnal and unrenewed man, in whom innumerable lusts exercise
dominion, be able to restrain and govern himself by his own free will?
Let us learn, then, even although the unruliness of our wayward flesh
has been already subdued by the denial of ourselves, to walk in fear and
trembling; for unless God restrain us, our hearts will violently boil
with a proud and insolent contempt of God. This sense is confirmed by
the reason added immediately after, *that they may not have dominion
over me.* By these words he expressly declares, that unless God assist
him, he will not only be unable to resist, but will be wholly brought
under the dominion of the worst vices. This passage, therefore, teaches
us not only that all mankind are naturally enslaved to sin, but that the
faithful themselves would become the bond-slaves of sin also, if God did
not unceasingly watch over them to guide them in the path of holiness,
and to strengthen them for persevering in it. There is also another
useful lesson which we have here to attend to, namely, that we ought
never to pray for pardon, without, at the same time, asking to be
strengthened and fortified by the power of God for the time to come,
that temptations, in future, may not gain advantage over us. And
although we may feel in our hearts the incitements of concupiscence
goading and distressing us, we ought not, on that account, to become
discouraged. The remedy to which we should have recourse is to pray to
God to restrain us. No doubt, David could have wished to feel in his
heart no stirrings of corruption; but knowing that he would never be
wholly free from the remains of sin, until at death he had put off this
corrupt nature, he prays to be armed with the grace of the Holy Spirit
for the combat, that iniquity might not reign victorious over him. In
the end of the verse there are two things to be observed. David, in
affirming that *he shall then be upright and clean from much
wickedness,* attributes, in the first place, the honor of preserving him
innocent to the spiritual assistance of God; and depending upon it, he
confidently assures himself of victory over all the armies of Satan. In
the second place, he acknowledges, that unless he is assisted by God, he
will be overwhelmed with an immense load, and plunged as it were into a
boundless abyss of wickedness: for he says, that aided by God, he will
be clear not of one fault or of two, but of many. From this it follows,
that as soon as we are abandoned by the grace of God, there is no kind
of sin in which Satan may not entangle us. Let this confession of David
then quicken us to earnestness in prayer; for in the midst of so many
and various snares, it does not become us to fall asleep or to be
indolent. Again, let the other part of the Psalmist’s exercise
predominate in our hearts — let us boast with him, that although Satan
may assault us by many and strong armies, we will nevertheless be
invincible, provided we have the aid of God, and will continue, in
despite of every hostile attempt, to hold fast our integrity.

<span id="xxv.iv-p18"></span><span id="xxv.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p19"></span>**14.** *Let the words of my mouth, and the
meditation of my heart.* David asks still more expressly to be fortified
by the grace of God, and thus enabled to live an upright and holy life.
The substance of the verse is this: I beseech thee, O God, not only to
keep me from breaking forth into the external acts of transgression, but
also to frame my tongue and my heart to the obedience of thy law. We
know how difficult it is, even for the most perfect, so to bridle their
words and thoughts, as that nothing may pass through their heart or
mouth which is contrary to the will of God; and yet this inward purity
is what the law chiefly requires of us. Now, the rarer this virtue — the
rarer this strict control of the heart and of the tongue is, let us
learn so much the more the necessity of our being governed by the Holy
Spirit, in order to regulate our life uprightly and honestly. By the
word *acceptable,* the Psalmist shows that the only rule of living well
is for men to endeavor to please God, and to be approved of him. The
concluding words, in which he calls God *his strength and his redeemer,*
he employs to confirm himself in the assured confidence of obtaining his
requests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](cc08024.htm#fr_441) <span
id="xxv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p3.1"></span>L’entour du
ciel et de l’air.” — *Note, Fr. marg.* “That is, the cope or vault of
the heaven and of the air.” *Bishop* *Mant* reads also *expanse,* which
he considers more correct than *firmament.* “The latter word,” says he,
“is adopted from the Greek version; but the Hebrew word is derived from
a verb, signifying *to spread abroad, stretch forth, extend, expand.*
The proper rendering therefore is, ‘expanse,’ agreeably to other
passages of Scripture which speak of the Creator as *stretching out* the
heavens as a curtain, and spreading them out as a tent to dwell in.”
(See <span id="xxv.i-p3.2"></span>[Ps
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)<span id="xxv.i-p3.2"></span>;
<span id="xxv.i-p3.3"></span>[Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)<span id="xxv.i-p3.3"></span>.)
“The expanse of heaven is a frequent phrase with *Milton*, as with other
poets.”

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](cc08024.htm#fr_442) <span
id="xxv.i-p3.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p4.1"></span>Un jour
desgorge propos a l’autre jour, et la nuict declare science a l’autre
nuict.” — *Fr*. “One day uttereth speech to another day, and the night
declares knowledge to another night.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](cc08024.htm#fr_443) <span
id="xxv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p8"></span> *Dr Geddes* has remarked, in reference to
this psalm, that “no poem ever contained a finer argument against
Atheism, nor one better expressed.”

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](cc08024.htm#fr_444) <span
id="xxv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p14"></span> Both Calvin and the translators of our
English version appear to have followed the Septuagint and Vulgate
versions in inserting the word *where,* which is not in the Hebrew text.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](cc08024.htm#fr_445) <span
id="xxv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p15.1"></span>C’est as
avoir ces mots, Lequel, Laquelle, etc., comme yci Il n’y a langage, il
n’y a paroles esquelles la voix de ceux ne soit ouye.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[447](cc08024.htm#fr_446) <span
id="xxv.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p16"></span> <span id="xxv.i-p16.1"></span>בלי, *beli,*
commonly signifies *not;* but it is also often used for all sort of
exclusive particles, *without, besides, unless.* Hence *Grotius* renders
it here *without.* As, <span id="xxv.i-p16.2"></span>בל *bal,* means in
Arabic *but,* and as the Arabic is just a dialect of the Hebrew, Hammond
concludes that this may have been its meaning among the Jews; and
therefore proposes to render the verse thus:— “Not speech, nor words,
but, or notwithstanding, \[<span id="xxv.i-p16.3"></span>בלי, *beli,*\]
their voice is, or has been heard.”

<span id="fn_447"></span>[448](cc08024.htm#fr_447) <span
id="xxv.i-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p18"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p18.1"></span>Et se fait
ouir en totals endroits.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[449](cc08024.htm#fr_448) <span
id="xxv.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p19"></span> The reading in the English Geneva Bible is,
“Their line is gone forth through all the earth, and their words unto
the ends of the world.” The marginal note in explanation of this is,
“The heavens are as a line of great capital letters to show unto us
God’s glory.”

<span id="fn_449"></span>[450](cc08024.htm#fr_449) <span
id="xxv.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p22"></span> Paul reads, “their sound,” quoting from the
Septuagint, the version of the Old Testament then chiefly used, and it
employs here the word <span id="xxv.i-p22.1"></span>φθόγγος.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[451](cc08024.htm#fr_450) <span
id="xxv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p26"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p26.1"></span>Quasi
stadia.” — *Lat*. “<span id="xxv.i-p26.2"></span>Comme des lieues
ordonnees dedans les quelles elles font leurs courses.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[452](cc08024.htm#fr_451) <span
id="xxv.i-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p27"></span> “<span id="xxv.i-p27.1"></span>Aucuns
l’entendent de sa chaleur vegetative, qu’on appelle, c’est dire par
laquelle ces choses basses ont vigueur, sont maintenues, et prenent
accrossement.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[453](cc08024.htm#fr_452) <span
id="xxv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p3"></span> Here our author uses <span
id="xxv.ii-p3.1"></span>Dominus, but in the Hebrew text it is <span
id="xxv.ii-p3.2"></span>יהוה, *Yehovah.*

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](cc08024.htm#fr_453) <span
id="xxv.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p4"></span> In Tyndale’s Bible the reading is, “And
giveth wisdom even unto babes.” *Babes* is the word employed in most of
the versions.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](cc08024.htm#fr_454) <span
id="xxv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p5"></span> In the Hebrew text it is <span
id="xxv.ii-p5.1"></span>יהוה, *Yehovah.*

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](cc08024.htm#fr_455) <span
id="xxv.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xxv.ii-p16.1"></span>Apres
lesquelles les hommes se tourmentent en vain.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc08024.htm#fr_456) <span
id="xxv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p3"></span> “<span id="xxv.iii-p3.1"></span>Et ce qui
distille des rais de miel.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc08024.htm#fr_457) <span
id="xxv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xxv.iii-p7.1"></span>Lequel les
Latins ont nomm, *Aurum obryzum.”* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc08024.htm#fr_458) <span
id="xxv.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p8"></span> The rendering of the Septuagint is, <span
id="xxv.iii-p8.1"></span>λιθον τιμιον, *precious stone;* and in <span
id="xxv.iii-p8.2"></span>[Ps
119:127](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127)<span
id="xxv.iii-p8.2"></span>, they translate the same Hebrew word, <span
id="xxv.iii-p8.3"></span>τοπαζιον, *a topaz,* which is a precious stone.
This last Greek word, according to *Hesychius*, is derived from the
Hebrew word <span id="xxv.iii-p8.4"></span>פז, *paz.*

<span id="fn_459"></span>[460](cc08024.htm#fr_459) <span
id="xxv.iii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p9"></span> The word is evidently used for *fine gold*
in <span id="xxv.iii-p9.1"></span>[Ps
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)<span id="xxv.iii-p9.1"></span>,
and <span id="xxv.iii-p9.2"></span>[Job
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#017)<span id="xxv.iii-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[461](cc08024.htm#fr_460) <span
id="xxv.iii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p10"></span> Or *to consolidate:* and hence <span
id="xxv.iii-p10.1"></span>פז, *paz,* means *solid gold,* or *gold “well
purified”* for the more it is purified, it is the more solid, and
consequently of greater weight and value.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[462](cc08024.htm#fr_461) <span
id="xxv.iii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xxv.iii-p11.1"></span>Veu
qu’en commandant elle nous espouante, a cause que nous deraillons tous
en l’observation d’icelle?” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[463](cc08024.htm#fr_462) <span
id="xxv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xxv.iv-p3.1"></span>*Ses*
fautes.” — *Fr*. “*His* faults.” “<span id="xxv.iv-p3.2"></span>Erreurs
ou ignorances.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Errors or ignorances.”

<span id="fn_463"></span>[464](cc08024.htm#fr_463) <span
id="xxv.iv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p4"></span> The word which our author uses denotes
literally *arrogances* or *proudnesses;* and this is also the literal
rendering of the Hebrew word here used. Calvin has the following note on
the margin of the French version, explanatory of *arrogances,* “<span
id="xxv.iv-p4.1"></span>Pechez commis par contumace et rebellion.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[465](cc08024.htm#fr_464) <span
id="xxv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p5"></span> *From much wickedness.* This translation
conveys the precise meaning of what David intended. He was afraid of
incurring accumulated guilt. In our English translation it is “the great
transgression,” on which *Walford* remarks, “The insertion of the
definite article ‘the’ is not authorised by the original, and leads to a
supposition which is incorrect, that some definite crime, such as ‘the
sin against the Holy Ghost,’ is intended.”

<span id="fn_465"></span>[466](cc08024.htm#fr_465) <span
id="xxv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="xxv.iv-p11.1"></span>Dont a bon
droict toutes pechez ausquels les hommes se laschent la bride, pource
qu’ils ne sentent pas abon escient le real qui y est, et sont deceus par
les allechemens de la chair, sont nommez du mot Hebrie a duquel David
use yci qui signifie *Fautes* ou *Ignorances.”* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_466"></span>[467](cc08024.htm#fr_466) <span
id="xxv.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="xxv.iv-p13.1"></span>Il se
trouvera en nous un tel abysme de pechez, qu’il n’y aura no fond ne
rive, comme on dit.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[468](cc08024.htm#fr_467) <span
id="xxv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xxv.iv-p14.1"></span>Cela ne
diminue en rien l’absurdite de ce beau decret.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[469](cc08024.htm#fr_468) <span
id="xxv.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iv-p17"></span> That is, known and evident to the person
committing them. He sins against knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 20](cc08025)
