[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08014)  [Next](cc08016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>PSALM 10.

<span id="xvi-p2"></span>David here complains, in his own name, and in
the name of all the godly, that fraud, extortion, cruelty, violence, and
all kind of injustice, prevailed every where in the world; and the cause
which he assigns for this is, that ungodly and wicked men, being
intoxicated with their prosperity, have shaken off all fear of God, and
think they may do whatever they please with impunity. Accordingly, he
earnestly beseeches God to help him, and to remedy his desperate
calamities. In the close, he comforts himself and the rest of the
faithful with the hope of obtaining deliverance in due time. This
description represents, as in a mirror, a lively image of a widely
corrupt and disorganised state of society. When, therefore, we see
iniquity breaking out like a flood, that the strangeness of such a
temptation may not shake the faith of the children of God and cause them
to fall into despair, let them learn to look into this mirror. It tends
greatly to lighten grief, to consider that nothing befalls us at this
day which the Church of God has not experienced in the days of old; yea,
rather that we are just called to engage in the same conflicts with
which David and the other holy patriarchs were exercised. Farther, the
faithful are admonished to have recourse to God in such a confused state
of things; for unless they are convinced that it belongs to God to
succor them, and to remedy such a state of matters, they will gain
nothing by indulging in confused murmurings, and rending the air with
their cries and complaints.

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Why standest thou afar off, O Jehovah?
and winkest at seasonable times in trouble?  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) **2.** The ungodly in his pride doth
persecute the poor;  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) let them be
caught in the devices  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) which
they imagine.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span><span id="xvi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Lord, why standest thou afar off?* We
here see how the prophet, seeking a remedy for his calamities, which
were apparently past hope, directly addresses himself to God at the very
commencement. And the rule which we should observe, when we are in
trouble and sorrow, is this: We should seek comfort and solace in the
providence of God; for amidst our agitations, vexations, and cares, we
ought to be fully persuaded that it is his peculiar office to give
relief to the wretched and afflicted. It is in an improper sense, and by
anthropathy,  <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) that the Psalmist
speaks of God as standing afar off. Nothing can be hid from his eyes;
but as God permits us to speak to him as we do to one another, these
forms of expression do not contain any thing absurd, provided we
understand them as applied to God, not in a strict sense, but only
figuratively, according to the judgment which mere sense forms from the
present appearance of things. It is possible that a righteous man may
not check an injury which is done to a poor man before his eyes, because
he is destitute of the power; but this cannot be the case with respect
to God, who is always armed with invincible power. If, therefore, he act
as if he took no notice, it is the same as if he withdrew himself afar
off. The word <span id="xvi.i-p9.2"></span>תעלים, *taelim,* which
signifies *to hide,* is explained in two ways. According to some, David
here complains of God for hiding himself, as if he accounted the care of
human affairs beneath him. Others understand it as meaning *to shut the
eyes;* and this appears to me to be the more simple view. It is to be
observed, that although David here complains that God kept himself afar
off, he was, notwithstanding, fully persuaded of his presence with him,
otherwise it would have been in vain to have called upon him for aid.
The interrogation which he employs is to this effect: Lord, since it is
thy prerogative to govern the world, and also to regulate it by thy
righteousness as thou sustainest it by thy power, why is it that thou
dost not more quickly show thyself a defender of thine own people
against the arrogance and incredible pride of the ungodly? David,
however, speaks thus not so much in the way of complaining, as to
encourage himself in the confidence of obtaining what he desired.
Through the infirmity of sense, he says, that it is unbecoming of God to
cease so long from executing his office; and yet, at the same time, he
fails not to yield to him the honor which is his due, and by his prayers
he deposits into his bosom the great burden of trouble with which he was
laden. The expression which follows, *at needful times,* relates to the
same subject. Although God may not stretch forth his hand to take
vengeance  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) at every moment, yet
when he beholds the simple and innocent oppressed, it is not time for
him to defer any longer. David briefly defines the fit time for putting
the hand to the work to be when the faithful are in distress. Of this
form of speech we have spoken in the preceding psalm, at the tenth
verse.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span><span id="xvi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**2.** *The ungodly in his pride, etc*
Before uttering his prayer against the ungodly, the Psalmist briefly
sets forth their wickedness in cruelly vexing the afflicted, for no
other reason but because they disdain and despise them, through the
pride with which they are inflated. And their cruelty is not a little
enhanced from this, that, forgetful of all humanity, they contemptuously
triumph over the poor and afflicted, mocking them and inflicting
injuries upon them.  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) Cruelty is,
indeed, always proud, yea, rather, pride is the mother of all wrongs;
for if a man did not through pride magnify himself above his neighbors,
and through an overweening conceit of himself despise them, even common
humanity would teach us with what humility and justice we ought to
conduct ourselves towards each other. But David here intended to state
that the only cause why the ungodly, whom he accuses, exercise their
cruelty against the wretched and the needy, from whom they receive no
provocation, is the pride and arrogance of their own spirits. Let every
one, therefore, who desires to live justly and unblameably with his
brethren, beware of indulging or taking pleasure in treating others
disdainfully; and let him endeavor, above all things, to have his mind
freed from the disease of pride. The word <span
id="xvi.i-p13.2"></span>דלק, *dalak,* signifies *to suffer persecution,*
as well as *to persecute;* and, therefore, some prefer translating the
words, *The poor is persecuted in the pride of the ungodly.*  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) They may also not improperly be
rendered thus, *The poor burns in the pride of the ungodly,* because
this is the more common signification of the word. The pride of the
wicked, like fire, devours the poor and afflicted.

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
10:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For the ungodly praiseth himself on
account of the desire of his own soul; and the violent man blesseth
himself; he despiseth Jehovah. **4.** The ungodly, in the pride of his
countenance,  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) inquireth not: all
his devices say, There is no God.

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>**3.** *For the ungodly praiseth himself.*
This verse is variously explained. Literally the reading is, *For
praiseth the wicked or ungodly;* and it is therefore necessary to supply
some word, but what word is disputed.  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) Some translate the words, *ungodly*
and *violent man,* in the accusative case, thus: *He praiseth the
ungodly, and blesseth the violent man;* because they think it strange
that after “praiseth” the sentence should end abruptly, without any
thing being said of who or what was praised. But since it is quite
common in Hebrew, when the agent and the subject are one and the same
person, to express the word only once, while we repeat it in order to
complete the sense, the interpretation which I have followed appears to
me the most proper, namely, that the ungodly man praises himself, and
boasts of the desire of his soul, and blesses himself. Now, it may be
asked, What is *this desire of soul?* It is usually understood in this
sense,  <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) that the ungodly flatter
and applaud themselves, while fortune smiles on them, and they obtain
their wishes, and enjoy whatever they desire; just as David adds, a
little after, that they abuse their prosperity, in attempting whatever
comes into their fancy. But, in my opinion, *desire of soul* here
denotes rather lust, and the intemperate gratification of passion and
appetite; and thus the meaning is, that they indulge themselves with
delight in their depraved desires, and, despising the judgment of God,
fearlessly absolve themselves from all guilt, maintain their innocence,
 <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) and justify their impiety.
Moses uses a similar form of expression in <span
id="xvi.ii-p9.2"></span>[De 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019)<span
id="xvi.ii-p9.2"></span>,

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span>“I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart.”

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span>David, indeed, says a little after, that
the ungodly abuse their prosperity, by flattering themselves; but here,
in my judgment, he expresses something more weighty, namely, that they
acquire praise from their presumptuousness, and glory in their
wickedness; and this foolish confidence, or bold assurance, is the cause
of their throwing off all restraint and breaking forth into every kind
of excess. Accordingly, I interpret the words *praise* and *bless* as
having the same meaning, just as the words, *ungodly* and *violent man,*
are synonymous in this place, although they differ from each other as
genus and species. With these statements agrees what is immediately
added in the end of the verse that these ungodly persons *despise God.*
To translate the verb, *to blaspheme,* as has been done by some, or *to
provoke to anger,* as has been done by others, is too remote from the
scope of the passage. David rather teaches, that the cause of their
careless indulgence in the gratification of their lusts, is their base
contempt of God. He who duly reflects that God will be his judge is so
much alarmed by this reflection, that he dares not bless his soul while
his conscience accuses him of guilt and of being given to the practice
of sin.  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span>**4.** *The ungodly, in the pride of his
countenance, etc* Others translate the words, *The ungodly man, by
reason of the violence of his anger,* or, *in the pride which he
displays, does not inquire after God.* But this partly perverts the
meaning, and partly weakens the force of what David intended to express.
In the first place, the word *inquire,* which is here put absolutely,
that is, without any noun which it governs, is, according to this
translation, improperly limited to God. David simply means, that the
ungodly, without examination, permit themselves to do any thing, or do
not distinguish between what is lawful and unlawful, because their own
lust is their law, yea, rather, as if superior to all laws, they fancy
that it is lawful for them to do whatever they please. The beginning of
well-doing in a man’s life is inquiry; in other words, we can only begin
to do well when we keep ourselves from following, without choice and
discrimination, the dictates of our own fancy, and from being carried
away by the wayward propensities of our flesh. But the exercise of
inquiring proceeds from humility, when we assign to God, as is
reasonable, the place of judge and ruler over us. The prophet,
therefore, very properly says, that the reason why the ungodly, without
any regard or consideration, presume to do whatever they desire, is
because, being lifted up with pride, they leave to God nothing whatever
of the prerogative of a judge. The Hebrew word <span
id="xvi.ii-p14.1"></span>פף, *aph,* which we have translated
*countenance,* I have no doubt is here taken in its proper and natural
signification, and not metaphorically for *anger;* because haughty
persons show their effrontery even by their countenance.

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span>In the second clause, the prophet more
severely, or, at least, more openly, accuses them, declaring that all
their wicked imaginations show that they have no God. *All his devices
say, There is no God*  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) By these
words I understand, that through their heaven-daring presumption, they
subvert all piety and justice, as if there were no God sitting in
heaven. Did they truly believe that there is a God, the fear of the
judgment to come would restrain them. Not that they plainly and
distinctly deny the existence of a God, but then they strip him of his
power. Now, God would be merely like an idol, if, contented with an
inactive existence, he should divest himself of his office as judge.
Whoever, therefore, refuse to admit that the world is subject to the
providence of God, or do not believe that his hand is stretched forth
from on high to govern it, do as much as in them lies to put an end to
the existence of God. It is not, however, enough to have some cold and
unimpressive knowledge of him in the head; it is only the true and
heartfelt conviction of his providence which makes us reverence him, and
which keeps us in subjection  <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) to
him. The greater part of interpreters understand the last clause as
meaning generally, that all the thoughts of a wicked man tend to the
denial of a God. In my opinion, the Hebrew word <span
id="xvi.ii-p17.2"></span>מזמות, *mezimmoth,* is here, as in many other
places, taken in a bad sense for cunning and wicked thoughts,  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) so that the meaning, as I have noticed
already, is this: Since the ungodly have the hardihood to devise and
perpetrate every kind of wickedness, however atrocious, it is from this
sufficiently manifest, that they have cast off all fear of God from
their hearts.

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005)<span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**5.** His ways are prosperous at all
times; on high are thy judgments before him; he puffeth at all his
enemies. **6.** He saith in his heart, I shall not be moved from
generation to generation, because he is not in adversity.

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span>There is a great diversity of opinion among
interpreters respecting the first clause of this verse. The translators
of the Septuagint version, thinking the word <span
id="xvi.iii-p5.1"></span>יחילו, *yachilu,* which is in the future tense,
derived from the root <span id="xvi.iii-p5.2"></span>חלל, *chalal,*
which it is not, have rendered it, *his ways are defiled.* But it is
agreed among the Jewish expositors, that it is derived from the root
<span id="xvi.iii-p5.3"></span>חול, *chol.* Many among them, however,
take it actively for *to put one in fear,* or *to put one to trouble,*
as if it had been said, The ways of the ungodly are dreadful to the
good, and torment them.  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) Some
also apply the words to God, reading the sentence thus, *His ways come,*
that is to say, *have their course,* or *prosper at all times.* This,
however, in my judgment, is too forced. But as this word, in other texts
of Scripture, means *to be prosperous,* I am surprised that there should
be any difference of opinion among the learned concerning this passage,
when immediately, in the next clause, the prophet clearly shows that he
is speaking of the prosperous condition of the ungodly, and the
continued course of pleasure which intoxicates them. He not only
complains of this their prosperity, but from it he aggravates their
guilt, in that they take occasion, from the goodness of God, to harden
themselves in their wickedness. I would, therefor explain the verse
thus: As they enjoy a continued course of prosperity, they dream that
God is bound or plighted to them, and hence they put his judgments far
from them; and if any man oppose them, they are confident they can
immediately put him down, or dash him to pieces with a puff or breath.
Now, we understand the simple meaning of the prophet to be, that the
ungodly mock God, taking encouragement from his forbearance; as that
base tyrant, Dionysius, because he had a prosperous voyage, after having
plundered the temple of Proserpine,  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) boasted that God favored the
sacrilegious.  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) Hence it is, that
they put far from them the judgments of God.

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span>In the opinion of some, these words, *On
high are thy judgments before him,* mean much the same thing as if the
prophet had said, God treats them with too much clemency, and spares
them; just as he elsewhere complains of their being exempted from the
common afflictions of life. But this interpretation does not so well
agree with the words; yea, it appears to be unnatural and forced. *The
judgments of God* then are said *to be on high to the ungodly,* because,
presuming upon the great distance of God from them,  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) they promise themselves not only a
truce with death during their whole life, but also an everlasting
covenant with it. We see how, by procrastinating the evil day, they
harden themselves, and become more and more obstinate in evil;  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) yea, persuading themselves that God is
shut up in heaven, as if they had nothing to do with him, they
strengthen themselves in the hope of escaping unpunished;  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) as we see them, in Isaiah, (<span
id="xvi.iii-p12.2"></span>[Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span id="xvi.iii-p12.2"></span>)
jesting at the threatenings of the prophets, saying, “Let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we shall die.” When the prophets, in order to
inspire the people with terror, denounced the dreadful vengeance of God,
which was ready to be inflicted upon them, these wicked men cried out
that it was all whims or idle stories. God therefore bitterly inveighs
against them, because, when he called the people to mourning, ashes, and
sackcloth, these mockers encouraged them to minstrelsy and feasting; and
at length he swears, “As I live, surely this iniquity shall not be
purged from you till ye die.” The faithful, indeed, lift up their eyes
to heaven to behold the judgments of God; and they are not less afraid
of them than if they were just ready to fall upon their heads. The
ungodly, on the contrary, despise them, and yet, in order not to be
disturbed or tormented with the fear or apprehension of them, they would
banish them into heaven; just as the Epicureans, although they did not
presume avowedly to deny the existence of a God, yet imagined that he is
confined to heaven, where he indulges himself in idleness, without
taking any concern about what is done here below.  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) From this infatuation flows their
presumptuous confidence of which David speaks, by which they assure
themselves of being able to destroy, with a puff or blast alone, all who
are enemies to them. The word <span id="xvi.iii-p13.2"></span>פוח,
*phuach,* which sometimes signifies *to ensnare,* is here more properly
taken for *to puff,* or *to blow out.*

<span id="xvi.iii-p14"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p15"></span>The Psalmist confirms these statements in
the next verse, where he tells us that the persons of whom he speaks are
fully persuaded in their hearts that they are beyond all danger of
change. *He saith in his heart, I shall not be moved from generation to
generation* The ungodly often pour forth proud language to this effect.
David, however, only touches the hidden ulcer of their vile arrogance,
which they cherish in their own breasts, and therefore he does not say
what they speak with their mouth, but what they persuade themselves of
in their hearts. It may here be asked, Why does David blame in others
what he professes concerning himself in so many places?  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) for trusting to the protection of God,
he courageously triumphs over all dangers.  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) And surely it becomes the children of
God effectually to provide for their safety, so that, although the world
should a hundred times fall into ruins, they may have the comfortable
assurance that they will remain unmoved. The answer to this question is
easy, and it is this, The faithful promise themselves security in God,
and no where else; and yet while they do this, they know themselves to
be exposed to all the storms of affliction, and patiently submit to
them. There is a very great difference between a despiser of God who,
enjoying prosperity today, is so forgetful of the condition of man in
this world, as through a distempered imagination to build his nest above
the clouds, and who persuades himself that he shall always enjoy comfort
and repose,  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) — there is a very
great difference between him and the godly man, who, knowing that his
life hangs only by a thread, and is encompassed by a thousand deaths,
and who, ready to endure any kind of afflictions which shall be sent
upon him, and living in the world as if he were sailing upon a
tempestuous and dangerous sea, nevertheless, bears patiently all his
troubles and sorrows, and comforts himself in his afflictions, because
he leans wholly upon the grace of God, and entirely confides in it.
 <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) The ungodly man says, I shall
not be moved, or I shall not shake for ever; because he thinks himself
sufficiently strong and powerful to bear up against all the assaults
which shall be made upon him. The faithful man says, What although I may
happen to be moved, yea, even fall and sink into the lowest depths? my
fall will not be fatal, for God will put his hand under me to sustain
me. By this, in like manner, we are furnished with an explanation of the
different effects which an apprehension of danger has upon the good and
the bad. Good men may tremble and sink into despondency, but this leads
them to flee with all haste to the sanctuary of God’s grace;  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) whereas the ungodly, while they are
affrighted even at the noise of a falling leaf,  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) and live in constant uneasiness,
endeavor to harden themselves in their stupidity, and to bring
themselves into such a state of giddy frenzy, that being, as it were,
carried out of themselves, they may not feel their calamities. The cause
assigned for the confidence with which the prosperous ungodly man
persuades himself that no change shall come upon him is, *because he is
not in adversity* This admits of two senses. It either means, that the
ungodly, because they have been exempted from all calamity and misery
during the past part of their life, entertain the hope of a peaceful and
joyful state in the time to come; or it means, that through a deceitful
imagination they exempt themselves from the common condition of men;
just as in Isaiah, (<span id="xvi.iii-p21.2"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span id="xvi.iii-p21.2"></span>)
they say,

<span id="xvi.iii-p22"></span>“When the overflowing scourge shall pass
through,  
it shall not come upon us.”

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
10:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007)<span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**7.** His mouth is full of cursing, and
deceit, and malice: under his tongue are mischief and iniquity. **8.**
He will sit in the ensnaring places of the villages; in his lurking
places will he murder the innocent: his eyes will take their aim against
the poor. **9.** He will lie in wait secretly, as a lion in his den; he
will lie in wait to catch the poor; he will catch the poor by drawing
him into his net. **10.** He will crouch low, and cast himself down, and
then shall an army of the afflicted fall by his strengths.  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215)

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span>**7.** *His mouth is full of cursing.* The
scope of these four verses is this: If God intends to succor his
servants, it is now a proper time for doing so, inasmuch as the
lawlessness of the ungodly has burst forth to the utmost possible
excess. In the first place, he complains that their tongues are full of
perjuries and deceits, and that they carry or hide mischief and wrongs,
it being impossible to have any dealings with them in any matter without
loss and damage. The word <span id="xvi.iv-p6.1"></span>אלה, *alah,*
which some render *cursing,* does not signify the execrations which they
throw out against others, but rather those which they call down upon
their own heads: for they do not scruple to utter the most awful
imprecations against themselves, that thereby they may the better
succeed in deceiving others. It is, therefore, not improperly rendered
by some, *perjury,* for this word ought to be joined to the other two,
*deceit and malice.* Thus the wicked are described as cursing or
swearing falsely, so far as it contributes to forward their purposes of
deceiving and doing injury. Hence follow mischief and injustice, because
it is impossible for the simple, without suffering detriment, to escape
their snares, which are woven of deceits, perjuries, and malice.

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span>**8.** *He will sit in the ensnaring places
of the villages.*  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) I have
purposely avoided changing the verbs of the future tense into another
tense, because they imply a continued act, and also because this Hebrew
idiom has extended even to other languages. David, therefore, describes
what ungodly men are accustomed to do. And, in the first place, he
compares them to highwaymen, who lie in wait at the narrow parts of
roads, and choose for themselves hiding-places from which they may fall
upon travelers when off their guard. He says also, that *their eyes are
bent or leering,*  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) by a
similitude borrowed from the practice of dart-shooters, who take their
aim with leering, or half shut eyes, in order to hit the mark the surer.
Nor does he here speak of the common sort of highwaymen who are in the
woods;  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) but he directs his
language against those great robbers who hide their wickedness under
titles of honor, and pomp, and splendor. The word <span
id="xvi.iv-p14.2"></span>חצרים, *chatserim,* therefore, which we have
rendered *villages,* is by some translated palaces; as if David had
said, they have converted their royal mansions into places of robbery,
where they may cut the throats of their unhappy victims. But granting
the word to have this allusion, I consider that it refers principally to
the practice of robbers, to which there is a reference in the whole
verse, and I explain it thus: Like as robbers lie in wait at the
egresses of villages, so these persons lay their snares wherever they
are.

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p16"></span>In the next verse, he sets forth their
cruelty in a light still more aggravated, by another comparison, saying,
that they thirst for their prey *like lions in their dens* Now, it is a
step higher in wickedness to equal in cruelty wild beasts than to make
havoc after the manner of robbers. It is worthy of remark, that he
always joins deceits and snares with violence, in order the better to
show how miserable the children of God would be, unless they were
succoured by help from heaven. There is also added another similitude,
which expresses more clearly how craft in catching victims is mingled
with cruelty. *They catch them,* says he but it is by *drawing them into
their net* By these words he means, that they not only rush upon them
with open force and violence, but that, at the same time also, they
spread their nets in order to deceive.

<span id="xvi.iv-p17"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p18"></span>He again repeats all this in the tenth
verse, giving a beautiful and graphic description of the very mien or
gesture of such wicked men, just as if he set before our eyes a picture
of them. *They crouch low,* says he, *and cast themselves down,*  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) that they may not, by their cruelty,
frighten away their victims to a distance; for they would fain catch in
their entanglements those whom they cannot hurt without coming close to
them. We see how he joins these two things together, first snares or
gins, and then sudden violence, as soon as the prey has fallen into
their hands. For, by the second clause, he means, that whenever they see
the simple to be fully in their power, they rush upon them by surprise
with a savage violence, just as if a lion should furiously rise from his
couch to tear in pieces his prey.  <span
id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) The obvious meaning of the Psalmist
is, that the ungodly are to be dreaded on all sides, because they
dissemble their cruelty, till they find those caught in their toils whom
they wish to devour. There is some obscurity in the words, to which we
shall briefly advert. In the clause which we have rendered *an army of
the afflicted,* the Hebrew word <span id="xvi.iv-p20.2"></span>חלכאים,
*chelcaim, an army,* in the opinion of some, is a word of four letters.
 <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) Those, however, think more
accurately who hold it to be compound, and equivalent to two words.
 <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) Although, therefore, the verb
<span id="xvi.iv-p22.4"></span>נפל, *naphal,* is in the singular number,
yet the prophet, doubtless, uses <span id="xvi.iv-p22.5"></span>חל כאים,
*chel caim,* collectively, to denote a great company of people who are
afflicted by every one of these lions. I have rendered <span
id="xvi.iv-p22.6"></span>עצומימ, *atsumim, his strengths,* as if it were
a substantive; because the prophet, doubtless, by this term, intends the
talons and teeth of the lion, in which the strength of that beast
chiefly consists. As, however, the word is properly an adjective in the
plural number, signifying *strong,* without having any substantive with
which it agrees, we may reasonably suppose that, by the talons and teeth
of the lion, he means to express metaphorically a powerful body of
soldiers. In short, the meaning is this: These wicked men hide their
strength, by feigned humility and crafty courteous demeanour, and yet
they will always have in readiness an armed band of satellites, or claws
and teeth, as soon as an opportunity of doing mischief is presented to
them.

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span><span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
10:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#011)<span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**11.** He hath said in his heart, God hath
forgotten it: he hideth his face that he may never see it. **12.**
Arise, O Jehovah God, lift up thine hand: forget not the poor. **13.**
Why do the wicked despise God? He saith in his heart, Thou wilt not
require it.

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span><span id="xvi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span>**11.** *He hath said in his heart.* The
Psalmist again points out the source from which the presumption of the
ungodly proceeds. Because God seems to take no notice of their wicked
practices, they flatter themselves with the hope of escaping unpunished.
As, however, they do not openly utter with their mouth the detestable
blasphemy, that *God hath forgotten their conduct, and hath shut his
eyes that he may never see it,* but hide their thoughts in the deep
recesses of their own hearts, as Isaiah declares, (<span
id="xvi.v-p5.1"></span>[Isa 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)<span
id="xvi.v-p5.1"></span>) the Psalmist uses the same form of expression
which he used before, and which he repeats a little after the third
time, namely, that the ungodly say to themselves, in their hearts, that
God takes no concern whatever in the affairs of men. And it is to be
observed, that the ungodly, when all things happen to them according to
their wishes, form such a judgment of their prosperity as to persuade
themselves that God is in a manner bound or obliged to them.  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) Whence it comes to pass, that they
live in a state of constant security,  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) because they do not reflect, that
after God has long exercised patience towards them, they will undergo a
solemn reckoning, and that their condemnation will be the more terrible,
the greater the long-suffering of God.

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span><span id="xvi.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p9"></span>**12.** *Arise, O Jehovah.* It is a disease
under which men in general labor, to imagine, according to the judgment
of the flesh, that when God does not execute his judgments, he is
sitting idle, or lying at ease. There is, however, a great difference
with respect to this between the faithful and the wicked. The latter
cherish the false opinion which is dictated by the weakness of the
flesh, and in order to soothe and flatter themselves in their vices,
they indulge in slumbering, and render their conscience stupid,  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) until at length, through their wicked
obstinacy, they harden themselves into a gross contempt of God. But the
former soon shake from their minds that false imagination, and chastise
themselves, returning of their own accord to a due consideration of what
is the truth on this subject.  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226)
Of this we have here set before us a striking example. By speaking of
God after the manner of men, the prophet declares that the same error
which he has just now condemned in the despisers of God had gradually
stolen in upon his own mind. But he proceeds at once to correct it, and
resolutely struggles with himself, and restrains his mind from forming
such conceptions of God, as would reflect dishonor upon his
righteousness and glory. It is therefore a temptation to which all men
are naturally prone, to begin to doubt of the providence of God, when
his hand and judgment are not seen. The godly, however, differ widely
from the wicked. The former, by means of faith, check this apprehension
of the flesh; while the latter indulge themselves in their froward
imagination. Thus David, by the word *Arise,* does not so much stir up
God, as he awakens himself, or endeavors to awaken himself, to hope for
more of the assistance of God than he presently experienced.
Accordingly, this verse contains the useful doctrine, that the more the
ungodly harden themselves, through their slothful ignorance, and
endeavor to persuade themselves that God takes no concern about men and
their affairs, and will not punish the wickedness which they commit, the
more should we endeavor to be persuaded of the contrary; yes, rather
their ungodliness ought to incite us vigorously to repel the doubts
which they not only admit, but studiously frame for themselves.

<span id="xvi.v-p12"></span><span id="xvi.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p13"></span>**13.** *Why doth the wicked despise God?*
It is, indeed, superfluous to bring arguments before God, for the
purpose of persuading him to grant us what we ask; but still he permits
us to make use of them, and to speak to him in prayer, as familiarly as
a son speaks to an earthly father. It should always be observed, that
the use of praying is, that God may be the witness of all our
affections; not that they would otherwise be hidden from him, but when
we pour out our hearts before him, our cares are hereby greatly
lightened, and our confidence of obtaining our requests increases. Thus
David, in the present passage, by setting before himself how
unreasonable and intolerable it would be for the wicked to be allowed to
despise God according to their pleasure, thinking he will never bring
them to an account,  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) was led to
cherish the hope of deliverance from his calamities. The word which is
here rendered *despise,* is the same as that which he had used before.
Some translate it *to provoke,* and others *to blaspheme.* But the
signification which I have preferred certainly agrees much better with
the context; for when persons take from God the power and office of
judging, this is ignominiously to drag him from his throne, and to
degrade him, as it were, to the station of a private individual.  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) Moreover, as David had a little before
complained that the ungodly deny the existence of a God, or else imagine
him to be constantly asleep, having no care about mankind, so now he
complains to the same purpose that they say, *God will not require it.*

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
10:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#014)<span id="xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>**14.** Thou hast seen it; for thou
considerest mischief and vexation,  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) that thou mayest take the matter into
thine own hand: upon thee shall the poor leave, for thou wilt be the
helper of the fatherless. **15.** Break thou the arm of the wicked and
the evil man; thou shalt seek his wickedness, and shalt not find it.

<span id="xvi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vi-p5"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p6"></span>**14.** *Thou hast seen it; for thou, etc*
Here David, suddenly kindled with a holy zeal, enters into conflict,
and, armed with the shield of faith, courageously repels these execrable
opinions; but as he could derive no advantage by making his appeal to
men, he has recourse to God, and addresses him. As the ungodly, in the
hope of enjoying unrestrained license in the commission of all kinds of
wickedness, withdraw to the greatest possible distance from God,  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) and through the dictates of a perverse
mind, imagine themselves to be far beyond his reach; so, on the
contrary, the faithful ought carefully to keep themselves aloof from
those wild opinions, which are afloat in the world, and with minds
lifted upward, to speak to God as if present with them. Accordingly,
David, in order to prevent himself from being overcome by the
blasphemies of men, very properly turns away his attention from them.
There is added a reason in confirmation of the first sentence of the
verse, namely, because *God considers mischief and vexation* Since it is
the peculiar province of God to take cognisance of all wrongs, David
concludes that it is impossible for God to shut his eyes when the
ungodly are recklessly and without restraint committing their outrages.
Moreover, he descends from the general to the particular, which ought to
be attentively marked: for nothing is easier than to acknowledge in
general terms that God exercises a care about the world, and the affairs
of men; but it is very difficult to apply this doctrine to its various
uses in every-day life. And yet, all that the Scripture says concerning
the power and righteousness of God will be of no advantage to us, and,
as it were, only matter of meagre speculation,  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) unless every one apply these
statements to himself, as his necessity may require. Let us therefore
learn, from the example of David, to reason thus: that, since it belongs
to God to take notice of all the mischief and injuries which are
inflicted on the good and simple, He considers our trouble and sorrows
even when he seems for a time to take no notice of them. The Psalmist
also adds, that God does not look down from heaven upon the conduct of
men here below as an idle and unconcerned spectator, but that it is his
work to pass judgment upon it; for *to take the matter into his own
hand,* is nothing else than duly and effectually to examine and
determine it as a judge.

<span id="xvi.vi-p9"></span>It is, however, our duty to wait patiently
so long as vengeance is reserved in the hand of God, until he stretch
forth his arm to help us. We see, therefore, the reason why it is
immediately added, *Upon thee shall the poor leave.* By these words
David means, that we ought to give the providence of God time to
manifest itself. The godly, when they are afflicted, may with confidence
cast their cares into his bosom, and commit themselves to his
protection. They ought not, however, to be in haste for the
accomplishment of their wishes; but, being now disburdened, they should
take their breath till God manifestly declare that the fit time of
interfering in their behalf is come. The man, therefore, *leaves upon
God* who betakes himself to his protection, and who, fully persuaded of
his faithfulness in keeping what is entrusted to him, quietly waits till
the fit time of his deliverance come. Some read the verb passively, *The
poor shall be left upon thee.* The first reading, however, is more
correct, and it agrees with the rules of grammar; only it is a defective
form of expression, inasmuch as the thing which the poor leaves is not
expressed. But this defect is common in Hebrew; and there is no
obscurity in the thing itself, namely, that, when the godly commit
themselves and their concerns to God by prayer, their prayers will not
be in vain; for these two clauses are closely connected, *Upon thee
shall the poor leave,* and, *Thou shalt be a helper to the fatherless*
By a metaphor he terms the person fatherless whom he had in the
preceding clause called poor. And the verb being in the future tense
denotes a continued act.

<span id="xvi.vi-p10"></span><span id="xvi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p11"></span>**15.** *Break thou the arm.* This form of
expression just means breaking the power of the wicked. And it is not
simply a prayer; it may also be regarded as a prophecy. As the
ungovernable fury of our enemies very often makes us lose courage, as if
there were no means by which it could be restrained, David, in order to
support his faith, and preserve it from failing through the fears which
presented themselves, sets before himself the consideration, that
whenever it shall please God to break the power of the ungodly, he will
bring to nothing both themselves and all their schemes. To make the
meaning the more evident, the sentence may be explained in this way, —
Lord, as soon as it shall seem good to thee to break the arm of the
wicked, thou wilt destroy him in a moment, and bring to nought his
powerful and violent efforts in the work of doing mischief. David,
indeed, beseeches God to hasten his assistance and his vengeance; but,
in the meantime, while these are withheld, he sustains himself by the
consolatory reflection, that the ungodly cannot break forth into
violence and mischief except in so far as God permits them; since it is
in his power, whenever he ascends into the judgment-seat, to destroy
them even with his look alone. And certainly, as the rising sun
dissipates the clouds and vapours by his heat, and clears up the dark
air, so God, when he stretches forth his hand to execute the office of a
Judge, restores to tranquillity and order all the troubles and
confusions of the world. The Psalmist calls the person of whom he speaks
not only *wicked,* but *the wicked and the evil man,* and he does so, in
my judgment, for the purpose of setting forth in a stronger light the
greatness of the wickedness of the character which he describes. His
words are as if he had said, Wicked men may even be frantic in their
malice and impiety; but God can promptly and effectually remedy this
evil whenever he pleases.

<span id="xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
10:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016)<span
id="xvi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p2"></span>**16.** Jehovah is King for ever and ever:
the heathen are perished out of his land. **17.** Thou hast heard the
desire of the needy, O Jehovah: thou, wilt direct  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) their hearts, and thine ear shall hear
them. **18.** To judge the fatherless and the poor, that the man who is
of earth may no more terrify them.

<span id="xvi.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p6"></span>**16.** *Jehovah is King for ever and
ever.* David now, as if he had obtained the desires of his heart, rises
up to holy rejoicing and thanksgiving. When he calls God *King for ever
and ever,* it is a token of his confidence and joy. By the title of
*King,* he vindicates God’s claim to the government of the world, and
when he describes him as *King for ever and ever,* this shows how absurd
it is to think to shut him up within the narrow limits of time. As the
course of human life is short, even those who sway the scepter over the
greatest empires, being but mortal men, very often disappoint the
expectations of their servants,  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233)
as we are taught in <span id="xvi.vii-p7.2"></span>[Ps.
146:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004)<span id="xvi.vii-p7.2"></span>,

<span id="xvi.vii-p8"></span>“Put not your trust in princes, nor in the
son of man, in whom there is no help. His breath goeth forth, he
returneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish.”

<span id="xvi.vii-p9"></span>Often the power of giving assistance to
others fails them, and while they are delaying to give it, the
opportunity slips away from them. But we ought to entertain more exalted
and honorable conceptions of our heavenly King; for although he does not
immediately execute his judgments, yet he has always the full and the
perfect power of doing so. In short, he reigns, not for himself in
particular; it is for us that he reigns for ever and ever. As this,
then, is the duration of his reign, it follows that a long delay cannot
hinder him from stretching forth his hand in due season to succor his
people, even when they are, as it were, dead, or in a condition which,
to the eye of sense and reason, is hopeless. — *The heathen are perished
out of the land* The meaning is, that the holy land was at length purged
from the abominations and impurities with which it had been polluted. It
was a dreadful profanation, when the land which had been given for an
inheritance to the people of God, and allotted to those who purely
worshipped him, nourished ungodly and wicked inhabitants. By *the
heathen* he does not mean foreigners, and such as did not belong to the
race of Abraham according to the flesh,  <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) but hypocrites, who falsely boasted
that they belonged to the people of God, just as at this day many, who
are Christians only in name, occupy a place in the bosom of the Church.
It is no new thing for the prophets to call apostates, who have
degenerated from the virtues and holy lives of their fathers, by the
reproachful name of *heathen,* and to compare them not only to the
uncircumcised, but also to the Canaanites, who were the most detestable
among all the heathen.

<span id="xvi.vii-p11"></span>“Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother
an Hittite,” (<span id="xvi.vii-p11.1"></span>[Eze
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003)<span id="xvi.vii-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="xvi.vii-p12"></span>Many other similar passages are to be met
with in Scripture. David, therefore, in applying the dishonorable name
of *heathen* to the false and bastard children of Abraham, gives God
thanks for having expelled such a corrupt class out of his Church. By
this example we are taught, that it is no new thing if we see in our own
day the Church of God polluted by profane and irreligious men. We ought,
however, to beseech God quickly to purge his house, and not leave his
holy temple exposed to the desecration of swine and dogs, as if it were
a dunghill.

<span id="xvi.vii-p13"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p14"></span>**17.** *O Jehovah, thou hast heard the
desire of the needy.* In these words the prophet confirms what I have
just now said, that when hypocrites prevail in the Church, or exceed the
faithful in number, we ought, unceasingly, to beseech God to root them
out; for such a confused and shameful state of things ought surely to be
matter of deep grief to all the true servants of God. By these words,
also, the Holy Spirit assures us, that what of old God granted to the
fathers in answer to their prayers, we at the present day will obtain,
provided we have that anxious solicitude about the deliverance of the
Church which we ought to entertain. The clause which follows, *Thou wilt
direct their hearts,* is variously interpreted by expositors. Some think
it signifies the same thing, as if it had been said, Thou wilt give
success to their desires. According to others, the meaning is, Thou wilt
frame and sanctify their hearts by thy grace, that they may ask nothing
in prayer but what is right and according to the divine will, as Paul
teaches us that the Holy Spirit

<span id="xvi.vii-p15"></span>“stirs up within us groanings which cannot
be uttered,” (<span id="xvi.vii-p15.1"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="xvi.vii-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="xvi.vii-p16"></span>Both these expositions are perhaps too
forced. David, in this clause, magnifies the grace of God in sustaining
and comforting his servants in the midst of their troubles and
distresses, that they may not sink into despondency, — in furnishing
them with fortitude and patience, - in inspiring them with good hope, -
and in stirring them up also to prayer. This is the import of the verb
<span id="xvi.vii-p16.1"></span>כין, *Kin,* which signifies not only *to
direct,* but also *to establish.* It is a singular blessing which God
confers upon us, when, in the midst of temptation, he upholds our
hearts, and does not suffer them to recede from him, or to turn aside to
any other quarter for support and deliverance. The meaning of the clause
which immediately follows, *Thou wilt cause thine ear to hear,* is, that
it is not in vain that God directs the hearts of his people, and leads
them, in obedience to his command, to look to Himself, and to call upon
him in hope and patience — it is not in vain, because his ears are never
shut against their groanings. Thus the mutual harmony between two
religious exercises is here commended. God does not suffer the faith of
his servants to faint or fail, nor does he suffer them to desist from
praying; but he keeps them near him by faith and prayer, until it
actually appear that their hope has been neither vain nor ineffectual.
The sentence might, not improperly, be rendered thus: Thou shalt
establish their heart, until thine ear hear them.

<span id="xvi.vii-p17"></span><span id="xvi.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p18"></span>**18.** *That thou mayest judge.* Here the
Psalmist applies the last sentence of the preceding verse to a special
purpose, namely, to prevent the faithful, when they are unjustly
oppressed, from doubting that God will at length take vengeance on their
enemies, and grant them deliverance. By these words he teaches us, that
we ought to bear with patience and fortitude the crosses and afflictions
which are laid upon us, since God often withholds assistance from his
servants until they are reduced to extremity. This is, indeed, a duty of
difficult performance, for we would all desire to be entirely exempted
from trouble; and, therefore, if God does not quickly come to our
relief, we think him remiss and inactive. But if we are anxiously
desirous of obtaining his assistance, we must subdue our passion,
restrain our impatience, and keep our sorrows within due bounds, waiting
until our afflictions call forth the exercise of his compassion, and
excite him to manifest his grace in succouring us.

<span id="xvi.vii-p19"></span>*That the man who is of earth may no more
terrify them.* David again commends the power of God in destroying the
ungodly; and he does it for this purpose, - that in the midst of their
tumultuous assaults we may have this principle deeply fixed in our
minds, that God, whenever he pleases, can bring all their attempts to
nothing. Some understand the verb <span id="xvi.vii-p19.1"></span>ארף,
*arots,* which we have translated *to terrify,* as neuter, and read the
words thus, — *that mortal man may be no more afraid.* But it agrees
better with the scope of the passage to render it transitively, as we
have done. And although the wicked prosper in their wicked course, and
lift up their heads above the clouds, there is much truth in describing
them as *mortal,* or *men liable to many calamities.* The design of the
Psalmist is indirectly to condemn their infatuated presumption, in that,
forgetful of their condition, they breathe out cruel and terrible
threatenings, as if it were beyond the power of even God himself to
repress the violence of their rage. The phrase, *of earth,* contains a
tacit contrast between the low abode of this world and the height of
heaven. For whence do they go forth to assault the children of God?
Doubtless, from the earth, just as if so many worms should creep out of
the crevices of the ground; but in so doing, they attack God himself,
who promises help to his servants from heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc08015.htm#fr_187) <span
id="xvi.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p3.1"></span>et tu caches
au temps que sommes en tribulation?” — *Fr*. “And hidest thyself when we
are in trouble?” — *Hebrews* “<span id="xvi.i-p3.2"></span>Aux
opportunitez, ou, aux temps opportuns.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “In
opportunities, or, at seasonable times.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc08015.htm#fr_188) <span
id="xvi.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p4.1"></span>Ou, le poure
est persecute, ou, il brusle en l’orgueil des meschans.” — *Fr. marg.*
“Or, the poor is persecuted; or, he burns in the pride of the wicked.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc08015.htm#fr_189) <span
id="xvi.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span> *Horsley* reads “subtleties,” and observes
in a note, “I choose this ambiguous word; being in doubt whether the
petition against the wicked be that they may be ruined by their own
stratagems against the righteous, or that they may be the dupes of their
own atheistical speculations upon moral and religious subjects. It seems
to me that the word <span id="xvi.i-p5.1"></span>מזמות, may signify
either ‘crafty tricks,’ or ‘refined theories,’ and, in this latter
sense, it is used in the fourth verse.” *Horsley* considers this psalm
as a general description of the oppression of the righteous by apostate
spirits, atheists, and idolaters, who have all conspired against them,
and not as referring to any particular calamity of the Jewish nation, or
of any individual.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc08015.htm#fr_190) <span
id="xvi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p9.1"></span>C’est quand
nous attribuons a Dieu les passions, affections, et fatOhs de faire des
hommes.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “That is, when we attribute to God the
passions, affections, and manners of men.”

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc08015.htm#fr_191) <span
id="xvi.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p10.1"></span>Pour faire
vengence.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc08015.htm#fr_192) <span
id="xvi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span> “<span id="xvi.i-p13.1"></span>En se
mocquant d’eux et les outrageant.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc08015.htm#fr_193) <span
id="xvi.i-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span> <span id="xvi.i-p14.1"></span>דלק, *dalak,*
signifies two things, to *persecute,* and *to be set on fire;* and
though we render it in the former sense, and so apply it to <span
id="xvi.i-p14.2"></span>רשע*, rasha, the wicked,* in the active *tense,*
— *the wicked persecutes the poor, yet* the ancient interpreters
generally render it in the passive, and apply it to <span
id="xvi.i-p14.3"></span>עני, *anay, the poor,* that *in the pride of the
wicked he is set on fire,* that is, brought into great *tribulation.”* —
*Hammond.* The word used by the Septuagint is <span
id="xvi.i-p14.4"></span>ἐμπυριζέται. There may be an allusion in the
Hebrew word to the fires which persecutors have kindled for burning to
death the confessors and martyrs of Christ.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc08015.htm#fr_194) <span
id="xvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>In
altitudine naris;” — literally, “In the height of his nose.” This also
is the literal rendering of the Hebrew text, “The nose and casting up of
it signifies a proud, scornful, and sometimes an angry countenance.” —
*Ainsworth.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc08015.htm#fr_195) <span
id="xvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p7.1"></span>Il y a mot
en mot, Car louis le meschant et il y faut, suppleer quelque petit mot:
or, cela on y besongne diversement.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc08015.htm#fr_196) <span
id="xvi.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>On la repete
pour patnaire le sense.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc08015.htm#fr_197) <span
id="xvi.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p9.1"></span>Es s’osent
bien absoudre et tenir pour innocens.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc08015.htm#fr_198) <span
id="xvi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p12.1"></span>Cependant
qu’il se sent coulpable et adonne k mM faire.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc08015.htm#fr_199) <span
id="xvi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p16"></span> The sentence in the Hebrew text is
elliptical, and hence it has been variously translated. Literally it is,
“No God all his thoughts.” The Syriac version renders it, “There is no
God in all his thoughts.” The Septuagint reads, <span
id="xvi.ii-p16.1"></span>Οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ θεὸς ἐνώπιον αὐτου, “God is not
before him.” *Mudge* renders it, “No God is all his wicked politics;”
*Horsley*, “No God is the whole of his philosophy.” and *Fry*, “There is
no Elohim is all his thought.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc08015.htm#fr_200) <span
id="xvi.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p17"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p17.1"></span>Qui nous
le fait avoir en reverence et nous tient le subjets.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc08015.htm#fr_201) <span
id="xvi.ii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p18"></span> “<span id="xvi.ii-p18.1"></span>Pour
meschantes et malicieuses pensees.” — *Fr.* “Wicked and malicious
thoughts.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc08015.htm#fr_202) <span
id="xvi.iii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span> The Greek word which they use is <span
id="xvi.iii-p6.1"></span>Βεβηλουνται,. Aben *Ezra’s* rendering is, “His
ways always cause terror.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc08015.htm#fr_203) <span
id="xvi.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p7.1"></span>Apres
qu’il ent pilld le temple de Proserpine.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc08015.htm#fr_204) <span
id="xvi.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span> Vale. lib. 1, chapter 2.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc08015.htm#fr_205) <span
id="xvi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p10"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p10.1"></span>Pource
que se confians de la longue distance qui est entre Dieu et eux.” —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc08015.htm#fr_206) <span
id="xvi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p11.1"></span>Car nous
voyons comme delayans le temps, il s’endureissent et obstinent au mal de
plus en plus.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc08015.htm#fr_207) <span
id="xvi.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p12.1"></span>En
l’esperance de jamais ne venir le conte.” — *Fr*. “In the hope of never
being called to account.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc08015.htm#fr_208) <span
id="xvi.iii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p13"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p13.1"></span>Font a
croire qu’il est au ciel, on il se donne du bon temps sans se soucier de
ce qu’il se fait yci bas.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc08015.htm#fr_209) <span
id="xvi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p16"></span> <span id="xvi.iii-p16.1"></span>[Ps.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007), [Ps.
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004), [Ps.
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#003)<span id="xvi.iii-p16.1"></span>,
*etc.* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc08015.htm#fr_210) <span
id="xvi.iii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p17"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p17.1"></span>Il ose
dire hardiment qu’il ne redoute nuls dangers et les desfie tous.” —
*Fr*. “He courageously declares that he is not afraid of any dangers,
and defies them all.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc08015.htm#fr_211) <span
id="xvi.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p18"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p18.1"></span>Et se
fait a croire qu’il sera tousjours a son aise et repos.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc08015.htm#fr_212) <span
id="xvi.iii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p19"></span> “<span
id="xvi.iii-p19.1"></span>Toutesfois pource qu’il s’appuye du tout sur
la grace de Dieu, et s’y confie, porte patienment toutes molestes et
ennuis et se console en ses afflictions.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc08015.htm#fr_213) <span
id="xvi.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p20"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p20.1"></span>Se
retirent de bonne heure vers la grace de Dieu pour se mettre au sauvete
comme en un lien de refuge et asseurance.”— *Fr*. “Betake themselves
with all haste to the grace of God, to put themselves in safety as in a
place of refuge and security.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc08015.htm#fr_214) <span
id="xvi.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p21"></span> “<span id="xvi.iii-p21.1"></span>Au bruit
des fueilles qui tombent des arbres.” — *Fr*. “At the noise of leaves
falling from the trees.”

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc08015.htm#fr_215) <span
id="xvi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou, par ses
forts, asavoir membres.” — *Fr*. “Or, by his strong members.” That is,
his teeth, or claws. The adjective for *strong, in* the original, is in
the plural, and there is no substantive with which it agrees. We have
examples of a similar ellipsis in other parts of Scripture. *Thus* in
<span id="xvi.iv-p3.2"></span>[2Sa
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#016)<span id="xvi.iv-p3.2"></span>,
we have new, for a new sword; and in <span id="xvi.iv-p3.3"></span>[Ps
73:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#010)<span id="xvi.iv-p3.3"></span>,
full, for a full cup; and in <span id="xvi.iv-p3.4"></span>[Mt
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042)<span id="xvi.iv-p3.4"></span>,
cold, for cold *water.* — *Poole’s Annotations.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc08015.htm#fr_216) <span
id="xvi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span> *Horsley* renders the eighth verse thus:

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>“He sitteth in ambush\* in the villages in
secret places;  
He murdereth the innocent;  
his eyes are ever watching for the helpless.”

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span>And he has the following note: ”*Symmachus*
and *St* *Jerome* certainly read thus <span id="xvi.iv-p11.1"></span>ישכ
מארב בחצרים, and they both render, <span id="xvi.iv-p11.2"></span>ה, as
a participle. ‘He sitteth prowling about the farm-houses.’ This I take
to be the true reading and the true rendering. The image is that of a
beast of prey of the lesser order, a fox or a wolf, lying upon the watch
about the farm-yard in the evening.”

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span>\*Or, “he sitteth prowling about the
farmyard.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc08015.htm#fr_217) <span
id="xvi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span> *Bishop Mant* reads “peering eyes.”
Concerning the word, says he, “which I have rendered *peering,
Parkhurst* says that it is applied to winking or half closing the eyes
in order to see more distinctly. The Septuagint and Vulgate
translations, which mean *look at, behold,* give the general sense, but
not the beautiful image expressed in the Hebrew.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc08015.htm#fr_218) <span
id="xvi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p14.1"></span>Qui sont
parmi les bois.” — *Fr*

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc08015.htm#fr_219) <span
id="xvi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p19"></span> The allusion is to the practice of the
lion, who, when he intends to seize upon his prey, crouches, or lies
down, and gathers himself together, both to conceal himself, and that he
may make the greater spring upon his prey when it comes within his
reach, (<span id="xvi.iv-p19.1"></span>[Job
38:39](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#040)<span id="xvi.iv-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc08015.htm#fr_220) <span
id="xvi.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="xvi.iv-p20.1"></span>Comme si
un lion sortant de son giste se levoit furieusement pour mettre sa proye
par pieces.” — *Fr.* “As if a lion issuing from his den, furiously
raised himself to spring upon his prey, and to tear it to pieces.” “When
the lion” says Buffon “leaps up on his prey, he gives a spring of ten or
fifteen feet, falls on, seizes it with his fore-paws, tears it with his
claws, and afterwards devours it with his teeth.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc08015.htm#fr_221) <span
id="xvi.iv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p21"></span> Being the plural of, <span
id="xvi.iv-p21.1"></span>חלכה, *chelcah,* which occurs three times in
this psalm, namely, here and in the eighth and fourteenth verses, where
it is rendered *poor.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc08015.htm#fr_222) <span
id="xvi.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p22"></span>Namely, <span id="xvi.iv-p22.1"></span>חל
כאים *chel caim.* Those who adopt this reading observe, that according
to the other view, the verb <span id="xvi.iv-p22.2"></span>נפל,
*naphal,* translated *may fall,* which is singular, is joined with a
plural noun, <span id="xvi.iv-p22.3"></span>חלכאים *chelcaim,* but that,
by dividing this last word into two, we get a singular nominative to the
verb. *Hammond*, however, who adopts the first opinion, observes, “That
it is an elegance, both in the Hebrew and Arabic, to use the verb
singular with the nominative plural, especially when the verb is placed
first, as here it is;” and, therefore, he denies the validity of that
objection against the ordinary rendering.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc08015.htm#fr_223) <span
id="xvi.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p6.1"></span>Or il faut
noter que les meschans voyans que tout leur vient ‘X souchair sont
tellement estat de leur prosperite, qu’ils se sont a croire que Dieu est
aucunement obligd a eux.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc08015.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xvi.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p7.1"></span>Qu’ils vivent
sans crainte ne souci de l’advenir.” — *Fr*. “That they live without any
fear or concern about the future.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc08015.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xvi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p10"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p10.1"></span>Et prenent
plaisir kassop et rendre leur conscience stupide, afin de se flatter en
leurs vices.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc08015.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xvi.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p11"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p11.1"></span>Retournans
d’eux mesmes a bien considerer ce qui enest a la verite.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc08015.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xvi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p14"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p14.1"></span>A leur
plaisir n’estimans pas que jamais il les amenast le conte.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc08015.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xvi.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p15"></span> “<span id="xvi.v-p15.1"></span>Au rang des
hommes.” — *Fr*. “To the rank of men.”

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc08015.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xvi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p3.1"></span>Oppression.”
— *Fr*.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc08015.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xvi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p7.1"></span>Se reeulent
le plus loin de Dieu qu’ils peuvent.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc08015.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xvi.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p8"></span> “<span id="xvi.vi-p8.1"></span>Sera de
nulle utilite et comme un speculation maigre.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc08015.htm#fr_232) <span
id="xvi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p3"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p3.1"></span>Ou,
fortifieras.” — *Fr*. *marg.* “Or, thou wilt strengthen or establish.”

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc08015.htm#fr_233) <span
id="xvi.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p7"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p7.1"></span>Bien
souvent frustrent leurs serviteurs de leur attente.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc08015.htm#fr_234) <span
id="xvi.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p10"></span> “<span id="xvi.vii-p10.1"></span>Et des
personnes qui ne fussent de la race d’Abraham selon la chair.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 11](cc08016)
