[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc08008)  [Next](cc08010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 8: Psalms, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>PSALM 4.

<span id="x-p2"></span>After David in the beginning of the psalm has
prayed to God to help him, he immediately turns his discourse to his
enemies, and depending on the promise of God, triumphs over them as a
conqueror. He, therefore, teaches us by his example, that as often as we
are weighed down by adversity, or involved in very great distress, we
ought to meditate upon the promises of God, in which the hope of
salvation is held forth to us, so that defending ourselves by this
shield, we may break through all the temptations which assail us.

<span id="x-p3"></span>To the chief musician on Neginoth. A psalm of
David.

<span id="x-p4"></span>It is uncertain at what time this psalm was
composed. But from the tenor of it, it is conjectured, with probability,
that David was then a fugitive and an exile. I therefore refer it to the
time when he was persecuted by Saul. If, however, any person is disposed
rather to understand it as referring to the time when he was compelled
by the conspiracy of Absalom to secure his safety by flight, I will not
greatly contend about the matter. But as, a little after, he uses an
expression, namely, “How long?” (verse 3)  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) which indicates that he had a lengthened
struggle, the opinion which I have already brought forward is the more
probable. For we know with what varied trials he was harassed, before he
obtained complete deliverance, from the time when Saul began to be his
enemy. Concerning the words which are contained in this verse, I shall
only make one or two brief observations. Some translate the word <span
id="x-p5.2"></span>מנתה, *Lamnetsah, for ever*; and they say that it was
the commencement of a common song, to the tune of which this psalm was
composed:  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) but this I reject as a
forced translation. Others, with more truth, are of opinion, that <span
id="x-p6.2"></span>מנצה, *Menetsah,* signifies one who excels and
surpasses all others. But because expositors are not agreed as to the
particular kind of excellence and dignity here spoken of, let it
suffice, that by this word is denoted the chief master or president of
the band.  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) I do not approve of
rendering the word, *conqueror;* for although it answers to the
subject-matter of the present psalm, yet it does not at all suit other
places where we shall find the same Hebrew word used. With respect to
the second word, *Neginoth,* I think it comes from the verb <span
id="x-p7.2"></span>נגך, *Nagan,* which signifies to strike or sound;
and, therefore, I doubt not, but it was an instrument of music. Whence
it follows, that this psalm was designed to be sung, not only with the
voice, but also with musical instruments, which were presided over, and
regulated by the chief musician of whom we have just now spoken.

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** Answer me when I cry, O God of my
righteousness; thou hast enlarged me in distress; have pity upon me, and
hear my prayer.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p4"></span><span id="x.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>In these words there is shown the faith of
David, who, although brought to the uttermost distress, and indeed
almost consumed by a long series of calamities, did not sink under his
sorrow; nor was he so broken in heart as to be prevented from betaking
himself to God his deliverer. By his praying, he testified, that when
utterly deprived of all earthly succor, there yet remained for him hope
in God. Moreover, he calls him *the God of his righteousness,* which is
the same thing as if he had called him the vindicator of his right;
 <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) and he appeals to God, because all
men everywhere condemned him, and his innocence was borne down by the
slanderous reports of his enemies and the perverse judgments of the
common people. And this cruel and unjust treatment which David met with,
ought to be carefully marked. For while nothing is more painful to us
than to be falsely condemned, and to endure, at one and the same time,
wrongful violence and slander; yet to be ill spoken of for doing well,
is an affliction which daily befalls the saints. And it becomes them to
be so exercised under it as to turn away from all the enticements of the
world, and to depend wholly upon God alone. *Righteousness*, therefore,
is here to be understood of a good cause, of which David makes God the
witness, while he complains of the malicious and wrongful conduct of men
towards him; and, by his example, he teaches us, that if at any time our
uprightness is not seen and acknowledged by the world, we ought not on
that account to despond, inasmuch as we have one in heaven to vindicate
our cause. Even the heathen have said there is no better stage for
virtue than a man’s own conscience. But it is a consolation far
surpassing this, to know when men vaunt themselves over us wrongfully,
that we are standing in the view of God and of the angels. Paul, we
know, was endued with courage arising from this source, (<span
id="x.i-p6.2"></span>[1Co 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span
id="x.i-p6.2"></span>) for when many evil reports were spread abroad
concerning him among the Corinthians, he appeals to the judgment-seat of
God. Isaiah also, fortified by the same confidence, (<span
id="x.i-p6.3"></span>[Isa 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)<span
id="x.i-p6.3"></span> and following verse) despises all the slanders by
which his enemies calumniated him. If, therefore, we cannot find justice
anywhere in the world the only support of our patience is to look to
God, and to rest contented with the equity of his judgment. It may,
however, be asked by way of objection, Since all the purity of men is
mere pollution in the sight of God, how can the godly dare to bring
forward their own righteousness before him? With respect to David, it is
easy to answer this question. He did not boast of his own righteousness
except in reference to his enemies, from whose calumnies he vindicated
himself. He had the testimony of a good conscience that he had attempted
nothing without the call and commandment of God, and therefore he does
not speak rashly when he calls God the protector and defender of his
right. Hence we learn that David honored God with this title of praise,
in order the more readily to set him in contrast with the whole world.
And as he asks twice to be heard, in this there is expressed to us both
the vehemence of his grief and the earnestness of his prayers. In the
last clause of the verse, he also shows whence he expected to obtain
what he needed, namely, from the mercy of God. And certainly, as often
as we ask anything from God, it becomes us to begin with this, and to
beseech him, according to his free goodness, to relieve our miseries.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>*Thou hast enlarged me when I was in distress.*
Some think that David here promises himself what he had not yet
experienced; and in the exercise of hope anticipates the manifestations
of God’s grace with which he should afterwards be favored. But, in my
opinion, he rather mentions the benefits which he formerly received from
God, and by these strengthens himself against the time to come. Thus the
faithful are accustomed to call to their remembrance those things which
tend to strengthen their faith. We shall, hereafter meet with many
passages similar to this, where David, in order to give energy to his
faith against terrors and dangers,  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)
brings together the many experiences from which he had learned that God
is always present with his own people and will never disappoint their
desires. The mode of expression which he here employs is metaphorical,
and by it he intimates that a way of escape was opened up to him even
when he was besieged and enclosed on every side. The distress of which
he speaks, in my opinion, refers not less to the state of his mind than
to circumstances of outward affliction; for David’s heart was not of
such an iron mould as to prevent him from being cast into deeper mental
anguish by adversity.

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span><span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
4:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002)<span id="x.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span>**2.** O ye sons of men, how long will ye try
to turn my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and seeking
after lying? Selah **3.** But know that Jehovah hath chosen for himself
one who is merciful: Jehovah will hear when I call upon him.

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span><span id="x.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>**2.** *O ye sons of men.* The happy result of
the prayer of David was, that resuming courage, he was able not only to
repel the fury of his enemies, but also to challenge them on his part,
and fearlessly to despise all their machinations. That our confidence,
therefore, may remain unshaken, we ought not, when assailed by the
wicked, to enter into conflict without being furnished like David with
the same armor. The sum is, that since God was determined to defend
David by his own power, it was in vain for all the men in the world to
endeavor to destroy him; however great the power which they otherwise
might have of doing him injury. By calling those whom he addresses the
sons, not of Adam, or of some common persons but *of men,* he seems by
the way to reprove their pride.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) I
do not agree with certain Jewish expositors who think that nobles or men
of rank are meant. It is rather an ironical concession of what they
claimed to themselves, by which he ridicules their presumption, in
esteeming themselves to be noble and wise, whereas it was only blind
rage which impelled them to wicked enterprises. In the words *how long,*
he condemns their perverse obstinacy; for what he means, is not that
they were stirred up against him merely by some sudden impulses, but
that the stubborn purpose of injuring him was deeply fixed in their
hearts. Had not their maliciousness deprived them of their
understanding, the many instances in which God had proved himself to be
David’s defender would have compelled them to desist from their attempts
against him. But as they were fully determined to disgrace *him* whom
God had exalted to the royal throne he asks them, How long they will
persevere in their endeavors *to turn his glory into shame* And it is to
be observed that although loaded with every kind of reproach, both among
the high and the low he yet courageously keeps fast hold of the glory or
the honor of royalty which God had graciously promised him, or had
conferred upon him, and is fully persuaded that God will at length
vindicate his right to it, however much his enemies might wickedly
endeavor to blot and obscure it by treating his pretensions with
derision and scorn.

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span>*How long will ye love vanity?* In these
words, he partly reproaches his enemies for the wicked and perverse
passions with which he saw them to be impelled, although they falsely
pretended to be actuated by a godly zeal; and he partly derides their
folly in flattering themselves with the hope of success while fighting
against God. And it is a most pointed rebuke. Even when the ungodly rush
headlong into all manner of wickedness with the grossest  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) malice, they soothe themselves with
deceitful flatteries in order not to be disturbed with the feelings of
remorse. David, therefore, cries out, that wilfully to shut their eyes
and varnish their unrighteousness with deceitful colors, would avail
them nothing. The ungodly may indeed flatter and delude themselves, but
when they are brought in good earnest to the trial, it will be always
manifest that the reason why they are deceived is, because from the
beginning they were determined to deal deceitfully. Now, from this
place, we ought to take a shield of invincible steadfastness as often as
we see ourselves overmatched in prudence and subtlety by the wicked. For
with whatever engines they assault us, yet if we have the testimony of a
good conscience, God will remain on our side, and against him they shall
not prevail. They may greatly excel in ingenuity, and possess much power
of hurting us, and have their plans and subsidiary aid in the greatest
readiness, and be very shrewd in discernment, yet whatever they may
invent, it will be but lying and vanity.

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span><span id="x.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span>**3.** *Know that Jehovah hath set apart,
etc* This is a confirmation of the preceding verse, for it shows that
the cause of David’s boldness consisted in this, that he depended upon
God, the founder of his kingdom. And surely we may then safely triumph
over our enemies when we are assured of having the call of God to the
office which we hold, or the work in which we are engaged. Accordingly,
David does not here boast of his own strength, or riches, or armies by
which he obtained the kingdom. But as he was chosen by God, he intimates
that the many attempts of his enemies against him would be without
success, because they would find from experience, that God, whose power
they could not successfully resist, was against them. In the first
place, he says that he was *set apart* by God, by which he means that he
was advanced to the throne, not by the will of man, or by his own
ambition, but by the appointment of God. The Hebrew word <span
id="x.ii-p10.1"></span>פלה, *Phalah,* signifies to separate, and it here
refers to separation to honor and dignity; as if he had said you admit
no one as king but he who is chosen by your own suffrages, or who
pleases you; but it is the peculiar prerogative of God to make choice of
whom he will. By the word *merciful* or *bountiful,* he doubtless
vindicates his right to be king, from the fact that this was a quality
which belonged to himself; it is as if he had produced the mark or badge
of his calling. For it was truly said in the old proverb, Mercy is the
virtue most suitable for kings. Now, God usually furnishes those whom he
reckons worthy of having this honor conferred upon them, with the
endowments requisite for the exercise of their office, that they may not
be as dead idols. Some understand the word <span
id="x.ii-p10.2"></span>חסיד, *chasid,* in a passive sense, not as
denoting a beneficent person, but one who is placed on the throne by the
favor of God. As, however, I meet with no examples of this signification
of the word in Scripture, I think it safer to follow the common
interpretation, which is this: God has chosen a king, who answers to the
character which should be possessed by all who are called to fill such
an exalted station, in as much as he is merciful and beneficent. Hence,
he infers that he would be heard by God as often as he called upon him;
for God principally proves his faithfulness in this, that he does not
forsake the work of his own hands, but continually defends those whom he
has once received into his favor. Hence, we are taught fearlessly to
proceed in our path; because whatever we may have undertaken according
to his will, shall never be ineffectual. Let this truth then, obtain a
fixed place in our minds, that God will never withhold his assistance
from those who go on sincerely in their course. Without this comfort,
the faithful must inevitably sink into despondency every moment.

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Tremble then, and sin not: commune
with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Selah. **5.** Sacrifice
the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord.

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span><span id="x.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**4.** *Tremble then.* Now he exhorts his
enemies to repentance, if peradventure, their madness was not wholly
incorrigible. In the first place, he bids them *tremble,* or *be
troubled*; a word by which he rebukes their stupidity in running
headlong in their wicked course, without any fear of God, or any sense
of danger. And certainly the great presumption of all the ungodly in not
hesitating to engage in war against God, proceeds from their being
hardened through an infatuated security; and by their thoughtlessness,
they render themselves stupid, and become more obdurate by forgetting
both God and themselves, and following whithersoever lust leads them. He
tells them that the best remedy to cure their rage, and prevent them
from *sinning* any longer, would be to awaken from their lethargy and
begin to be afraid and tremble; as if he had said, As soon as you shall
have shaken off your drowsiness and insensibility, your desire of
sinning will abate; for the reason why the ungodly are troublesome to
the good and the simple, and cause so much confusion, is because they
are too much at peace with themselves.

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span>He afterwards admonishes them *to commune
with their own heart upon their bed,* that is, to take an account of
themselves at leisure, and as it were, in some place of deep retirement;
 <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) an exercise which is opposed to
their indulgence of their unruly passions. In the end of the verse he
enjoins them *to be still.* Now, it is to be observed, that the cause of
this stillness is the agitation and trembling, of which he before made
mention. For if any have been hurried into sin by their infatuated
recklessness, the first step of their return to a sound mind is to
awaken themselves from their deep sleep to fearfulness and trembling.
After this follows calm and deliberate reflection; then they consider
and reconsider to what dangers they have been exposing themselves; and
thus at length they, whose audacious spirits shrink at nothing, learn to
be orderly and peaceable, or, at least, they restrain their frantic
violence.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span>*To commune upon one’s bed,* is a form of
expression taken from the common practice and experience of men. We know
that, during our intercourse with men in the day time, our thoughts are
distracted, and we often judge rashly, being deceived by the external
appearance; whereas in solitude, we can give to any subject a closer
attention; and, farther, the sense of shame does not then hinder a man
from thinking without disguise of his own faults. David, therefore,
exhorts his enemies to withdraw from those who witnessed and judged of
their actions on the public stage of life, and to be alone, that they
may examine themselves more truthfully and honestly. And this
exhortation has a respect to us all; for there is nothing to which men
are more prone than to deceive one another with empty applause, until
each man enter into himself, and commune alone with his own heart. Paul,
when quoting this passage in <span id="x.iii-p8.1"></span>[Eph
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span id="x.iii-p8.1"></span>, or,
at least when alluding to the sentiment of David, follows the
Septuagint, “Be ye angry and sin not.” And yet he has skilfully and
beautifully applied it to his purpose. He there teaches us that men,
instead of wickedly pouring forth their anger against their neighbors,
have rather just cause to be angry with themselves, in order that, by
this means, they may abstain from sin. And, therefore, he commands them
rather to fret inwardly, and be angry with themselves; and then to be
angry, not so much at the persons, as at the vices of others.

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span><span id="x.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span>**5.** *Sacrifice ye.* Many are of opinion
that David exhorts his enemies to give some evidence of their
repentance; and I certainly admit, that sacrifices were partly enjoined
for the purpose of inducing men to walk in newness of life. But when I
consider the character of the men who opposed David, I am satisfied that
he here censures their hypocrisy, and beats down their groundless
boasting. David, when he wandered as a fugitive in deserts, or in caves,
or on mountains, or in the regions beyond his own country, might seem to
have been separated from the Church of God; and certainly he was
commonly accounted as a corrupt member cut off from the body and the
communion of the saints. Meanwhile the ark of the covenant was in the
hands of his enemies, they kept possession of the temple, and they were
the first in offering sacrifices. They, therefore, vaunted themselves
against David with the same boldness and presumption with which we know
hypocrites to have been always puffed up. Nor is it to be doubted, but
they proudly abused the name of God as if they only had been his true
worshippers.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) But as Jeremiah
(<span id="x.iii-p11.2"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="x.iii-p11.2"></span>)
rebukes the ungodly, because of the false confidence which they placed
in the temple of the Lord; so David also denies that God is pacified by
mere outward ceremonies, since he requires pure sacrifices. There is in
the words an implied contrast between the sacrifices of righteousness,
and all those vain and spurious rites  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) with which the counterfeit worshippers of
God satisfy themselves. The sum, therefore, is, “You boast of having God
on your side, because you have free access to his altar to offer your
sacrifices there with great pomp; and because I am banished from the
Holy Land, and not suffered to come to the temple, you think that I am
not an object of the divine care. But you must worship God in a far
different manner, if you would expect any good at his hand; for your
unclean sacrifices with which you pollute his altar, so far from
rendering him favorable to you, will do nothing else but provoke his
wrath.” Let us learn from this passage, that, in contending with the
corrupters of true religion, who may have the name of God continually in
their mouth, and vaunt themselves on account of their observance of his
outward worship, we may safely rebuke their boasting, because they do
not offer the right sacrifices. But, at the same time, we must beware
lest a vain pretense of godliness foster in us a perverse and ill
founded confidence, in place of true hope.

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**6.** Many say, Who will show us good?  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) Lift thou up upon us the light of thy
countenance, O Jehovah. **7.** Thou hast given more joy to my heart than
they have in the time when their corn and their wine are increased.

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span><span id="x.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span>**6.** *Many say.* Some are of opinion that
David here complains of the cruel malice of his enemies, because they
greedily sought for his life. But David, I have no doubt, compares the
sole wish with which his own heart was burning, to the many desires with
which almost all mankind are distracted. As it is not a principle held
and acted upon by ungodly men, that those only can be truly and
perfectly happy who are interested in the favor of God, and that they
ought to live as strangers and pilgrims in the world, in order through
hope and patience to obtain, in due time, a better life, they remain
contented with perishing good things; and, therefore, if they enjoy
outward prosperity, they are not influenced by any great concern about
God. Accordingly, while, after the manner of the lower animals, they
grasp at various objects, some at one thing, and some at another,
thinking to find in them supreme happiness, David, with very good
reason, separates himself from them, and proposes to himself an end of
an entirely opposite description. I do not quarrel with the
interpretation which supposes that David is here complaining of his own
followers, who, finding their strength insufficient for bearing the
hardships which befell them, and exhausted by weariness and grief,
indulged in complaints, and anxiously desired repose. But I am rather
inclined to extend the words farther, and to view them as meaning that
David, contented with the favor of God alone, protests that he
disregards, and sets no value on objects which others ardently desire.
This comparison of the desire of David with the desires of the world,
well illustrates this important doctrine,  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) that the faithful, forming a low estimate
of present good things, rest in God alone, and account nothing of more
value than to know from experience that they are interested in his
favor. David, therefore, intimates in the first place, that all those
are fools, who, wishing to enjoy prosperity, do not begin with seeking
the favor of God; for, by neglecting to do this, they are carried about
by the various false opinions which are abroad. In the second place, he
rebukes another vice, namely, that of gross and earthly men in giving
themselves wholly to the ease and comforts of the flesh, and in settling
down in, or contenting themselves with, the enjoyment of these alone,
without thinking of any thing higher.  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) Whence also it comes to pass, that as
long as they are supplied with other things according to their desire,
they are altogether indifferent about God, just as if they had no need
of him. David, on the contrary, testifies, that although he may be
destitute of all other good things, the fatherly love of God is
sufficient to compensate for the loss of them all. This, therefore, is
the purport of the whole: ”The greater number of men greedily seek after
present pleasures and advantages; but I maintain that perfect felicity
is only to be found in the favor of God.”

<span id="x.iv-p9"></span>David uses the expression, *The light of God’s
countenance,* to denote his serene and pleasant countenance — the
manifestations of his favor and love; just as, on the other hand, the
face of God seems to us dark and clouded when he shows the tokens of his
anger. This light, by a beautiful metaphor, is said to be *lifted up,*
when, shining in our hearts, it produces trust and hope. It would not be
enough for us to be beloved by God, unless the sense of this love came
home to our hearts; but, shining upon them by the Holy Spirit, he cheers
us with true and solid joy. This passage teaches us that those are
miserable who do not, with full resolution, repose themselves wholly in
God, and take satisfaction therein,  <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) even although they may have an
overflowing abundance of all earthly things; while, on the other hand,
the faithful, although they are tossed amidst many troubles, are truly
happy, were there no other ground for it but this, that God’s fatherly
countenance shines upon them, which turns darkness into light, and, as I
may say, quickens even death itself.

<span id="x.iv-p11"></span><span id="x.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p12"></span>**7.** *Thou hast given more joy to my
heart.* By another comparison he better expresses and illustrates the
strength of his affection, showing that, having obtained the good which
he had longed for, he does not in the least degree envy the wealth and
enjoyments of others, but is altogether contented with his own lot. The
sum is, that he had more satisfaction in seeing the reconciled
countenance of God beaming upon him, than if he had possessed garners
full of corn, and cellars full of wine.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) Interpreters are not agreed as to the
word <span id="x.iv-p13.1"></span>מעת*, me-eth,* which we have
translated, *in the time.* Some give this rendering, *Thou hast put
gladness into my heart,* Since The Time *that their corn and wine
increased;* as if David had said, I rejoice when I see mine enemies
prospering in the world.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) But the
former translation appears to me much more suitable; according to which
David declares, that he rejoices more in the favor of God alone, than
earthly men rejoice when they enjoy all earthly good things, with the
desire of which they are generally inflamed. He had represented them as
so bent upon, and addicted to, the pursuit of worldly prosperity, as to
have no great care about God; and now he adds, that their joy in the
abundance and increase of their wine and corn is not so great as is his
joy in a sense of the divine goodness alone. This verse contains very
profitable instruction. We see how earthly men, after they have despised
the grace of God, and plunged themselves over head and ears in
transitory pleasures, are so far from being satisfied with them, that
the very abundance of them inflames their desires the more; and thus, in
the midst of their fullness, a secret uneasiness renders their minds
uncomfortable. Never, therefore, shall we obtain undisturbed peace and
solid joy until the favor of God shine upon us. And although the
faithful also desire and seek after their worldly comforts, yet they do
not pursue them with immoderate and irregular ardor; but can patiently
bear to be deprived of them, provided they know themselves to be the
objects of the divine care.

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**8.** I will lay me down, and will sleep
together in peace; for thou, Lord, hast placed me alone  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) in safety.

<span id="x.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.v-p5"></span><span id="x.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p6"></span>He concludes, by stating, that as he is
protected by the power of God, he enjoys as much security and quiet as
if he had been defended by all the garrisons on earth. Now, we know,
that to be free from all fear, and from the torment and vexation of
care, is a blessing to be desired above all other things. This verse,
therefore, is a confirmation of the former sentence, intimating that
David justly prefers the joy produced by the light of God’s fatherly
love before all other objects for inward peace of mind certainly
surpasses all the blessings of which we can form any conception. Many
commentators explain this place as expressing David’s hope, that his
enemies will be reconciled to him, so that he may sleep with them in
peace, God having granted him the peculiar privilege of being able to
rest without being disturbed or disquieted by any man. But in my
judgment the proper meaning is this, that he will live as quietly and
securely alone, as in the midst of a great host of men, because God
defends him for in the words, *I will sleep together,* I consider the
particle *as* to be understood, as if the reading were *as together,*
that is to say, as with a multitude. Some refer <span
id="x.v-p6.1"></span>לבדד, *lebadad, alone,* to God, translating the
words thus, *Thou alone, O Lord, hast set me in safety;* but this I do
not at all approve, because, by taking away the contrast between these
two words, *together* and *alone,* much of the beauty of the sentence is
lost. In short, David boasts that the protection of God alone was
sufficient, and that under it he sleeps as securely, although destitute
of all human guardianship, as if he had had many to keep watch and ward
continually over him, or as if he had been defended on all sides by a
great company. Let us therefore, learn from his example, to yield this
honor to God — to believe, that although there may appear no help for us
from men, yet under his hand alone we are kept in peace and safety, as
if we were surrounded by a great host.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc08009.htm#fr_46) <span
id="x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x-p5"></span> “<span id="x-p5.1"></span>Ascavoir, Jusques a
quand, a vers. 3.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc08009.htm#fr_47) <span
id="x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="x-p6"></span> “<span id="x-p6.1"></span>Et ils disent que
c’estoit le commencement d’une chanson commune au chant de laquelle ce
psaume a este compose.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc08009.htm#fr_48) <span
id="x-p6.3"></span>

<span id="x-p7"></span> “<span id="x-p7.1"></span>Le principal
*chantre,* ou maitre de la musique qui avoit charge de mettre les
psaumes en chants et accords.” — *Fr.* The chief singer or leader of the
music who had the charge of setting the psalms to tunes and harmonies.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc08009.htm#fr_49) <span
id="x.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p6"></span> “<span id="x.i-p6.1"></span>Mon protecteur,
celuy qui maintient mon droit.” — *Fr.* My protector, he who maintains
my right.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc08009.htm#fr_50) <span
id="x.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p8"></span> “<span id="x.i-p8.1"></span>Contre les effrois
et dangers qui se presentoyent.” — *Fr.* Against the terrors and dangers
which presented themselves.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc08009.htm#fr_51) <span
id="x.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>Le mot Hebrieu
ne signifie pas simplement Homme, mais homme viril at robuste; en quoy
il semble taxer, en passant, leur arrogance.” — *Fr.* The Hebrew word
signifies not simply *man,* but a strong and robust man; and by this
word he seems, in passing, to rebuke their arrogance.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc08009.htm#fr_52) <span
id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>D’une malice si
evidente qu’on la pourroit toucher au doigt.” — *Fr.* With a malice so
evident that one could touch it with the finger.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc08009.htm#fr_53) <span
id="x.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p7.1"></span>Et estans
retirez a part pour sonder leurs consciences.” — *Fr.* And being retired
by themselves to probe or examine their consciences.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc08009.htm#fr_54) <span
id="x.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p11.1"></span>Comme s’ils
eussent este gens de bien, adonnez a son service et qu’il n’y eust eu
zele qu’en eux.” — *Fr.* As if they had been his genuine people devoted
to his service, and that there was no zeal but among them.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc08009.htm#fr_55) <span
id="x.iii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>Entre les
sacrifices de justice et toutes les ceremonies, quand elles sont
destituees de la verite interieure et destournees de leur droit usage et
par consequent falsifiees.” — *Fr.* Between the sacrifices of
righteousness, and all ceremonies, when they are unaccompanied with
sincerity of heart, and perverted from their proper use, and are
consequently spurious.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc08009.htm#fr_56) <span
id="x.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span> The reader will observe, that Calvin does not
use the word *any,* a supplement which is to be found in our English
version. The question is certainly more emphatic without this word. “The
word *any,” says* Dr Adam Clarke, “is not in the text, nor any thing
equivalent to it; and yet not a few have quoted *it*, and preached upon
the text, placing the principal emphasis upon this illegitimate word.”

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc08009.htm#fr_57) <span
id="x.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p7.1"></span>or ceste
comparaison du desir de David avec ceux des mondains amplifie bien la
substance de ceste doctrine.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc08009.htm#fr_58) <span
id="x.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p8.1"></span>Se contentent
d’en jouir sans panser plus haut.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc08009.htm#fr_59) <span
id="x.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p10.1"></span>Se repose
totalement en Dieu et y prendre contentement.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc08009.htm#fr_60) <span
id="x.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p13"></span> The allusion is to the joy of the harvest
and vintage.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc08009.htm#fr_61) <span
id="x.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p14"></span> “<span id="x.iv-p14.1"></span>Or combien que
les expositeurs varient en ce mot que nous avons traduit, Au temps:
pource qu’aucuns traduisent, Tu m’as donne liesse au coeur depuis le
temps que, etc., comme s’il disoit, Je suis joyeux quand je voy
prosperer mes ennemis en ce monde.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc08009.htm#fr_62) <span
id="x.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="x.v-p3"></span> “<span id="x.v-p3.1"></span>Seul ou a part.” —
*Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 5](cc08010)
