[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](um05)  [Next](um07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1878891014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Unveiled Mysteries*, by Godfré Ray King, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### CHAPTER II

### *The Sahara Desert*

"INSTEAD of going forth from the body as in your recent experience,
today we will use—the Projected Consciousness," he remarked, as he
placed the thumb of his right hand between my eyes and the rest of his
fingers over the top of my head. A feeling like a powerful electric
current passed over my entire body. Removing his hand, he continued:

"I wish you to fix firmly in mind, and recall frequently for
contemplation—the fact—that the Laws I explain, and teach you to use,
are to bring you into a condition—of Conscious Mastery—over all
forces—and things on earth. This means that—no matter what is being
experienced—you are always at every instant in complete, conscious
control of your own mind and body, and able to use your own free will—at
all times.

"In this state of Projected Consciousness—you are completely conscious
and have full mastery overall—your faculties every instant. There is
nothing whatsoever—about any of this instruction and its use—that is
either of the trance or hypnotic condition at any time, for in both
trance and hypnosis the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

experiencing individual's Conscious Will is not functioning—which is a
most dangerous and disastrous activity—to anyone—who permits it to take
place in his mind and body.

"There is—no—Conscious Mastery or Dominion—in trance or hypnotic
practices, and they are—most—uncertain and dangerous—to the Soul
Growth—of the one who permits such practice. Please understand
thoroughly—that the Conscious Control, Mastery, and use—of the forces
and things on this earth, should at all times be under the direction of
your—Inner—or God Self—through the perfect co-operation and obedience
of—all—outer faculties in both mind and body, to that—Inner Guidance.

"There is no such thing as Mastery without this, and those known as
the—Ascended Masters—never—never—intrude any activity upon the God-Given
prerogative of the individual's free will.

"A student may be given the experience of Projection—if an Ascended
Master chooses to expand his consciousness temporarily—so that he
experiences things happening in two or more places at the same time. In
such a condition—the student's faculties are—completely—under the
control and direction of his own free will—at every moment. He is fully
conscious and active—wherever his body may be—and also at the place—to
which the Ascended Master chooses to direct his attention for the
instruction.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

"The reason—an Ascended Master temporarily raises the consciousness of
the student—is to show him how he may do this same thing for himself—by
his own effort—consciously, and at will.

"Projected Consciousness is—but increasing the rate of vibration—of the
atomic structure in both the mind and body of the student. This is done
by the—Radiation—from an Ascended Master—and is an activity of
the—'Light'—which increases the vibratory rate—up to the keynote—he sets
for the experience. In the higher rate, one uses his faculties of sight
and hearing—exactly as he does—in daily life—except—that they are
expanded—into the next octave or zone above the human.

"Such use of our senses is the same—as we experience every moment of the
waking state—because we can become aware of that which is near and that
which is distant—at exactly the same instant. The expansion or
contraction of our consciousness is dependent—entirely—upon what the
individual—desires. This is—always—subject to the free will
and—conscious—direction of the student.

"One can—of his own choice—be conscious of a certain tree in his
garden—or—of the entire garden. He uses—the same faculty of sight—to
observe both, and uses it in—exactly—the same way. When he wants to see
all of the garden—he makes his sight enlarge its activity—until it takes
in all he desires. The larger

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

expansion still includes the smaller—so you see—you must—be conscious of
the full control of—all—your faculties in both places—at the same time.
The activity that takes place is really—an enlargement of the
force-field—in which the sight acts.

"The use of your faculty of sight—in this projection or expansion of
consciousness—is accomplished by the raising of the vibratory rate in
the optic nerve. The whole process corresponds to the thing that takes
place—when one uses a field or marine glass.

"In ordinary experience—human consciousness has been accustomed to use
its faculties—only within certain zones or force-fields—and the proof of
this is—that one can listen to the sound of a person's voice—who is
physically present in the room speaking to him—and he can also hear the
bell of a telephone ring somewhere else in the house—at identically the
same instant. All the faculties of the outer activity are—elastic. They
may be used as—either a microscope or a telescope—depending entirely
upon the—desire and will—of the individual.

"If he can be conscious of sound in the room in which his physical body
stands, and also be aware of sound two or three rooms distant—by exactly
the same process—in a still farther expansion of this faculty—he can
hear—at a more distant place. To do this—one must increase the vibratory
rate—until it reaches into the more distant zone.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

"When you contemplate this—Great Inner God Activity—do you not see
how—perfectly and readily—the outer senses—merge into the—Inner—and what
has been two becomes—*One*.

"This activity of consciousness can be applied to—all—the other
senses—as well as those of sight and hearing. Such a raising process is
natural, normal, and harmonious—as simple as the tuning of your radios
to any desired wave-length. Radio wavelengths and those of sight and
hearing—are—parts of the same activity. Sound contains color and color
contains sound. In ordinary daily experience—human beings can hear color
and see sound—whenever they become still enough.

"Within certain octaves or zones, vibration registers upon the nerves of
the eyes and the result is—what we call sight. Others register upon the
nerves of the ears and the result is—what we call hearing.
The—average—person's eyes only see objects whose vibratory rate comes
within these certain octaves—for they do not see below the infra red, or
above the ultra violet ray or zone. Through the—Radiation—of an—Ascended
Master—the atomic structure of the brain and eye—vibrates fast enough—to
expand into the next octave—above the human.

"This same activity can be expanded several octaves farther—either by
the Master's Radiation—or at the command of the—Inner—or—God-Self—of the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

individual. Many persons do have such experiences involuntarily—but
rarely understand—what they mean—or how they come about. In cases, where
individuals have had moments of Transcendent Consciousness or been
highly inspired—this is what has occurred—although they—seldom—recognize
the assistance they have been given.

"Projected Consciousness or Vision has nothing whatsoever to do—with
mental pictures—produced by suggestions—that exist only in the minds of
other human beings. Such thoughts and pictures are but—flashed—directly
into the mind of another person—by the one sending the suggestion. It is
the same activity that takes place—when one reflects the image of the
sun into a mirror—and then—deflects—it upon the wall.

"Suggestion is as different—from Projected Consciousness—as thinking
about a place is different from—being—physically present. Projection
is—vivid—Living—Real—as when your physical body is going through an
experience, for it is the action of your Inner God-Self—with whom the
Ascended Master is—ONE—The Supreme."

Saint Germain and I then became observers—and actors—in a scene of long
ago. Again, I was—outwardly—conscious of going through experiences shown
me in thought, feeling, and action. The entire operation was as—natural
and normal—as breathing,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

and the only—unusual sensation—about it was the feeling—of greater
freedom—and a sense of dominion. We both became very still for a few
moments, as he revivified the Etheric Records and my instruction began.

"This is the Sahara Desert," he said, "when it was fertile country
having a semi-tropical climate."

There were many streams of water carrying abundant moisture everywhere
in the land. In the midst of this empire lay the capital, famous
throughout the world for its splendor. The executive buildings were
placed in the center upon a slight elevation, and from these, the city
itself extended equally in every direction.

"This civilization," he went on, "rose to its apex seventy thousand
years ago."

We entered the city, and felt an unusual rhythmic activity that gave one
a strange sensation of—lightness—while walking. The people all moved
about with great ease and grace. I asked Saint Germain the reason for
this, and he replied:

"These people remembered their—Source—and knew themselves as—Sons of
God—hence, were the possessors and operators of power and wisdom that—to
you—may seem miraculous—and super-human. Truthfully speaking—there are
no such things as miracles—for all is according to—Law—and that, which
seems miraculous to the present concept of

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

humanity, is but—the result of the application of laws—to which
mankind's present consciousness is—unaccustomed—and so seems strange and
unusual.

"When the Reality of Life is—correctly—understood—all manifestation—that
seems miraculous to your present consciousness—is found to be just
as—natural and normal an experience—as the forming of words are to
one—who has learned the use of the alphabet. It is all but the action of
an ever-expanding, ever-progressing manifestation—of Life in form—and
that comes about at—all—times through an orderly process of—Law—in love
and peace.

"No matter how strange, unusual, and impossible an experience—seems—to
humanity's present mental state—it is no proof that there is not a
Greater Law and a Wiser Intelligence—acting to produce greater wonders
of creation and—surrounding us all the time.

"The knowledge—of the greatest minds of humanity—in the outer world
today is to this—Great Inner Wisdom and Power—as the understanding of a
small child is to the study—of calculus."

In one building of the central group, we found the attendants attired in
most gorgeous fabrics of soft, radiant colors, that harmonized with the
interior decoration. One of these acted as guide taking us to the
central building, and there he presented us to the king of this great
people. The king proved to be—Saint Germain.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Beside him stood a young girl, very beautiful. She had hair like spun
gold that hung almost to the floor and eyes of a piercing violet-blue.
Her entire bearing was one of loving command. I looked inquiringly at
Saint Germain, wondering who she could be, and he answered:

"Lotus."

Beside her stood a young man about twenty years of age and a lad perhaps
fourteen. The young man was he, whom we had seen as—the High Priest—in
the temple at Luxor, and the lad was the lesser priest. These were the
children of the king. Again, we four were working together.

"With this glimpse of former lives," he said, "let us enter into the
activity of that blessed people. I say blessed advisedly, and you shall
soon see why. The majority of them still retained the full conscious use
of all their wisdom and power—as Sons of God—and this—they wielded
almost without limit—knowing full well from—Whence—they sprang, and
to—What—they were heirs.

"The outer was but the instrument of the Divine Self, as it should be,
and was only permitted to do that for which it was created.
Naturally—the Great Inner Self—could act unfettered and, of course the
perfection and activity of that period, was one of magnificent
accomplishment."

At the time of this former civilization, the whole

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

empire was filled with great peace, happiness and prosperity. The
King-emperor was a—"Master of the Ancient Wisdom"—and a—"Real Cupbearer
of the Light." He—ruled by that "Light"—and his empire was the living
example of—Perfection.

"For hundreds of years," Saint Germain continued, "this Perfection was
maintained—without army or navy of any kind. The control of the people
was vested in the care of fourteen—Ascended Masters of Light—two working
on each of the Seven Rays. They thus formed points of focus for the
Mighty God Activity to be made visible. Under these fourteen—Luminous
Beings—were fourteen lesser—Masters—who formed the heads of seven
departments, controlling the activities of science, industry and art.
Each of the department heads guided the work under his care by conscious
and direct contact with the—God—in himself. Hence, direct from
their—Source—did all direction and instruction come for those under
them. Thus—Divine Perfection—was constantly flowing through without any
interference—from the human.

"This form of government was most remarkable, successful, and
satisfactory in every way. There has never been anything on earth since
that time—which has even approached such heights. In the ancient
records, that have come down to the present day, this former
civilization is always referred to as the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Golden Age—and so
it was in every activity of Life.

"In your beloved America—in the not so far distant future—will come
forth a similar recognition of the—Real Inner Self—and this her people
will express in high attainment. She is a—Land of Light—and
Her—Light—shall blaze forth—brilliant as the sun at noonday—among the
nations of the earth. She was a Land of Great Light—ages ago—and will
again come into her spiritual heritage for—nothing—can prevent it. She
is strong within her own mind and body—stronger than you think—and that
strength she will exert to rise out of and throw off from border to
border—all—that weighs heavily upon her at the present time.

"America has a destiny of great import to the other nations of the earth
and Those—who have watched over her for centuries—still watch. Through
Their protection and love—she shall fulfill that destiny. America!
We—the Ascended Host of Light—love and guard you. America! We love you.

"A similar form of perfect government—will—come at a later period, when
you have cast off certain activities within—that hang like fungi—and sap
your strength as a vampire. Beloved ones in America—be not
discouraged—when the seeming dark clouds hang low. Everyone of
them—shall—show you its golden lining. Back of the cloud that seems to
threaten, is the—'Crystal Pure Light of God and His

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Messengers, the
Ascended Masters of Love and Perfection'—watching over America, the
government, and her people. Again I say, 'America—we love you.'

"One by one, great awakened souls are coming forth who will become
clearly conscious of their own—Mighty, Inherent God-Power—and such as
these—will—be placed in all official positions of the government. They
will be more interested in the—welfare of America—than in their own
personal ambitions and—private fortunes. Thus—will another—Golden
Age—reign upon earth, and be maintained for—an aeon.

"In the period, just preceding this, which you have been experiencing,
the mass of the people used great airships for transportation purposes.
As the development reached a still higher point, they had little need
for them, except in the outlying districts. All the official class,
because they were the more spiritually advanced souls of that race, were
able to go from place to place—in the finer bodies—and do all they
desired—the same as in your recent experience at Luxor. They also were
able—to transport—the physical body at will—for the use of their
power—to overcome gravity—was as natural as breathing is to you.

"Gold was a common commodity in this age, as in all 'Golden Ages,'
because its natural emanation is a purifying, balancing, and vitalizing
energy or force. It is placed within the earth—by the 'Lords of
Creation'—

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

those 'Great Beings of Light and Love'—who create and direct
worlds—systems of worlds—and the evolution of the beings upon them.

"The outer mind or intellectual knowledge of humanity, holds within it
little—very little—understanding of the—Real—purpose for which gold
exists on this planet. It grows within the earth like a plant,
and—through it is constantly pouring a purifying, vitalizing, and
balancing current of energy—into the very ground we walk upon—as well as
into the growth of Nature—and the atmosphere we breathe.

"Gold is placed upon this planet for a variety of uses—two of its most
trivial and unimportant ones—being that of using gold as a—means of
exchange—and for ornamentation. The far-greater activity—and purpose of
it within and upon the earth is—the release—of its own inherent quality
and energy to purify, vitalize and balance the atomic structure of the
world.

"The scientific world today has no inkling as yet of this activity.
However, it serves the same purpose to our earth—that radiators do to
our homes. Gold is one of the—most important—ways by which the energy
from our sun is supplied to the interior of the earth, and a balance of
activities maintained. As a conveyor of this energy—it acts as a
transformer—to pass the sun's force into the physical substance of our
world—as well as to the Life evolving upon it.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The energy within
gold is—really—the radiant, electronic force from the sun—acting in a
lower octave. Gold is sometimes called a—precipitated sunray.

"As the energy within gold is of an extremely high vibratory rate, it
can only act upon the finer and more subtle expressions of Life—through
absorption. In all—'Golden Ages'—this metal comes into plentiful and
common use—by the mass of the people—and whenever such a condition
occurs—the spiritual—development of that people reaches—a very high
state. In these ages the gold is—never—hoarded but instead, is widely
distributed into the use of the mass—who absorbing its purifying
energy—are themselves—raised—into greater perfection. Such is the right
use of gold and when this—Law—is consciously understood and—obeyed—the
individual may draw any quantity he desires to himself by the use of
that—Law.

"Because of the gold deposits in all mountain ranges—one finds health
and vigor in Life upon the mountains—that he cannot find at any other
place—on the earth's surface. No one ever heard of detrimental effects
coming to those—who constantly handle—pure—gold. While in
its—pure—state, it is soft and wears away easily, still—that very
quality—is the fulfilling of this purpose of which I have just spoken.

"The more advanced of these people produced

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

much gold—by precipitation—direct from the Universal. The domes of many
buildings were covered with sheets of pure gold and the interiors
decorated with brilliant jewels in curious yet marvelous designs. These
jewels were also precipitated—direct from the One Eternal Substance.

"As in all ages past, there was a portion of the people—who became more
interested in the temporary pleasures of the senses—than in
the—larger—creative plan—of the Great God Self. This caused them—to
lose—consciousness of the God Power throughout the land—until it
remained active in little more than—the city itself. The capital was
called the—'City of the Sun.'

"Those governing—realized they must withdraw—and let the people
learn—through hard experience—that all their happiness and good came
from—the adoration to the God Within—and they must come back into the
'Light'—if they were to be happy."

The king-emperor—through the Inner Wisdom—seeing that the people were
becoming still more deeply enmeshed in the sense gratification, realized
that it was no longer the Divine Plan to further sustain the kingdom. He
was instructed—by those of greater spiritual authority than himself—to
give a banquet announcing his decision to withdraw, and thus—bid his
subjects farewell.

He called the councilors together, and gave directions

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

for the banquet, ordering it held in the most magnificent place of the
empire, known as—the Jeweled Room—in the king's palace. This was
lighted—by self-luminous globes—that emitted a brilliant, white
radiance. They were suspended from the ceiling by chains of crystal.
While the light within was intense and brilliant—yet it had an extremely
soothing effect upon the body—giving those in its radiance a sense of
great ease and calm. The light from the central globe set the jewels
ablaze—in the sunburst design—that formed the great medallion in the
middle of the ceiling.

The large banquet hall was elaborately decorated and set with
twenty-four white onyx tables, each seating twenty-four guests. This was
the first occasion upon which all the king's councilors and their staffs
were to be his guests at the same time. The announcement of the banquet
caused 'much comment among the people who discussed it thoroughly—each
with his neighbor—but to all it was a mystery—for none was able to
discern its purpose.

The evening of the event came at last. No one suspected the sorrow
within the heart of the noble ruler—nor did they dream of the change so
soon to come upon them. The hour arrived, the guests assembled, and
everyone breathed mystery.

The great bronze doors to the banquet hall swung majestically open, and
a burst of transcendent music,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

as if played by a gigantic symphony—in the invisible—came forth,
surprising even those—who knew the tremendous power—of their adored
monarch. He was looked upon—almost like a God—by the people, so great
was their love and admiration for the wisdom and help he constantly
poured out to them.

As the triumphal music ceased—the king entered—accompanied by his
children. The girl was a vision of loveliness. She wore a gown of soft
golden fabric—unlike any material of our modern world. The over-drape
appeared as if covered with diamonds for with every movement of her body
points of light flashed forth. The golden hair falling over her
shoulders was caught with two emerald clasps. On her forehead was a
single band of white metal, set with diamonds. In the center was what
appeared to be a large diamond but was—really—a powerful condensation of
"Light"—focused and maintained there by her father.

The king was the only one in the whole empire—who was entrusted with the
use of such—Transcendent—Power. The royal family had never used
these—Jewels of "Light"—in their contact with the outer world—until that
night. Such use of this power was only permitted—in their private
worship—of the Great God Self—of whose "Supreme" Presence—they were
keenly and constantly aware.

The ruler and his two sons wore form-fitting garments

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

of the same soft golden fabric as the daughter. These were as pliable as
leather but made of metallic gold with breast plates like a great sun of
jewels. They wore sandals of the same material, also set with precious
stones, and the wonderful—Jewel of "Light" rested upon the forehead of
each.

The king gave a signal, and the assembled guests were seated. In a voice
majestic and powerful, he poured out an invocation from the depths of
his heart to that—"Infinite Supreme One."

"O Thou Mighty Omnipresent Source, Thou who dost govern the Universe,
The Flame in each human heart! we give love, praise and gratitude unto
Thee for Thine own Life, Light, and Love in all things. We adore Thee,
and look only unto Thee, the 'Presence' in all things visible and
invisible, evolved and unevolved, Thou ceaselessly flowing stream of
Life, Who dost forever pour Thyself into all creation, the One Self in
All.

"My heart calls unto Thee as never before to arouse these, my people, to
their danger, for of late indifference to Thee is creeping over them
like a poisonous breath, producing a soul-sleep and drawing a veil
before them that shuts out 'Thy Shining Presence.'

"If they must have the experience that consumes and burns away the dross
and clouds of the outer self, then do Thou sustain and at last bring
them forth in

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thy Eternal
Perfection. I call unto Thee, Thou Creator of the Universe—Thou Supreme
Omnipotent God."

The king took his seat and all waited in silent expectation. In a few
moments the service for each individual appeared before him. Course
after course was served—as if by unseen hands—the food coming in
marvelous crystal and jeweled containers—then disappearing as soon as
the course was finished—followed immediately by the succeeding one.
Finally, the most elaborate banquet—the empire had ever known—came to an
end. All was silence again, as if in breathless expectancy—anticipating
some most unusual occurrence.

The king arose and stood a few moments—calmly waiting. Soon—a crystal
goblet—appeared at the right hand of each guest. These were filled with
a—condensation of Pure Electronic Essence—and for all who drank it, no
matter how far down the ages his life-stream extended or how varied his
experiences—he never could completely forget the—"God-Self Within." This
soul protection was granted to those at the banquet, as a reward for
their faith and loyalty—to the God in themselves—the king—and the
empire. The councilors and those present had served sincerely and
continuously for the good of the empire—and for that service—soul
protection—through the centuries was given to them.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Each lifted his goblet and drank to the "God in himself"—to his own
"Flame of the Most High Living One." The proceedings of the banquet were
broadcast to everyone in the empire—through a radio similar to
that—which we use today. It was no larger than a dinner plate—yet
powerful enough—to receive what was happening—at any point on the
earth's surface.

After the salutation to the Divine Self in each—all became very
still—the atmosphere itself seeming perfectly motionless. In a few
moments a—Wondrous "Presence"—slowly became visible—in front of the
king.

That "Presence" was a "Cosmic Master" from out the—"Great Silence." A
murmur of awe and surprise passed over the assembled guests at his
appearance—as they recognized in amazement—one of whom they had heard
for many centuries—yet whose visible—"Presence"—none had ever seen.
Raising his right hand, he addressed those present and all dwelling
within the empire.

"O Children of Earth, I bring you a warning of serious import, at a time
of great crisis. Arouse yourselves from the snare of the senses that is
engulfing you! Awake from your lethargy, before it is too late! This, my
'Brother of Light' must withdraw and leave you to the experience that
you have chosen, and which is slowly enticing you into its many
pitfalls.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You have opened
yourselves to the uncontrolled ignorance and emotions of the outer self.

"You give little attention and still less adoration to your 'Source'—the
Supreme, the Mighty, the Radiant, the Majestic, the Infinite Cause of
all that is—the Creator and Sustainer of all worlds. You give no
gratitude to the 'Great Glorious Presence'—the 'Lord of Love'—for the
very Life by which you exist.

"Oh! why are you not even grateful, for the blessings Nature pours out
so lavishly, for the abundance that comes to you through this fair land,
and from your own wise and unselfish ruler? You thank each other for
favors—the things of the senses and form that are so ephemeral—that pass
from one to another and then are no more—but why, Oh why! do you forget
the—'Source'—of all Life, all Love, all Intelligence, all Power?

"People! O People! where is your gratitude to Life for Love, for the
magnificence of experience that you enjoy every moment, every hour,
every day, year after year? All this you call your own, but it has
always belonged, does now, and always will belong to the—One Great
Source of Life, Light, Love and All Good—GOD—the Supreme—the
Adorable—the All-Pervading One.

"When by your own misuse of the energy of Life—which this All-Pervading
One showers upon you

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

constantly, pure, perfect, and uncontaminated—you have created
conditions so destructive and painful that they can no longer be
endured—you turn in either desperation, agony, or rebellion and call
upon—God—for relief from your misery. This is your offering to
the—'Giver of all Good'—in return for that Ceaseless Perfection which he
continually bestows in—Supreme Love. The only condition, upon which
the—'One Great Self'—gives all, is its right use—that it may bless the
rest of creation with infinite joy, harmony and activity.

"When in the depths of misery—you turn again to your Source, for relief
from your misdeeds—you either cry in the agony of despair or, if
rebellious, blame—Life—and the—Source of All Good—for allowing, what you
call injustice and wrong conditions to exist in you and your world.

"It is you, the little personal self—who are unjust to Life—you who are
unfair—you who create the misery of earth, for only humanity—because it
has free will to create as it chooses—each individual through his own
thought and feeling—only humanity—who dares to bring into existence the
discord, misery, and deformity that express upon earth. This is a blight
upon Creation and the Perfection that forever swings in the—Great Cosmic
Melody of Eternal Song.

"Only mankind is guilty of making a discord in the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

music of the spheres, for all else lives and acts in accordance with
the—'Law of Love, of Life, of Harmony, and of Light.' All else blends
into the harmonious whole—the 'Body of the Infinite, All-Loving One.'

"All other realms of—'Life and Light'—move and create according to the
fundamental principle upon which all Perfection rests. That principle is
Love. If it were not for the—'Great Selfless Ones'—like your ruler—the
Great Host of Ascended Masters—whose very keynote of existence is
Love—humanity would long ago have destroyed itself and the very planet
upon which it exists.

"The transcendent and magnificent activities of Love and Light are the
Natural Conditions in which God created and expected His human children
to manifest—obeying His command—'to Love.' There is no such thing as a
supernatural condition anywhere in the universe. All that is
Transcendent, Beautiful and Perfect is Natural and according to the 'Law
of Love.' Anything other than that is sub-natural. The daily experience
of the Host of Ascended Masters is—the Perfection—God's children were
meant to live in always. Earth's children did express this Perfection
once—in a former cycle, which was—'One Golden Age.'

"That former civilization—that Ancient Perfection—is older than you
dream—older than you believe

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the planet to be. All mankind at that period lived in a similar
transcendent state, as the Ascended Masters, and the condition of
misery, that has followed since that time down through the ages, came
about because they chose to look away from their 'Source'—Love—as the
plan by which to live Life.

"When the children of earth look away from Love—they are deliberately
and consciously choosing the experience of chaos. Whoever seeks to exist
without—Love—cannot survive long—anywhere in creation. Such efforts are
bound to bring failure, misery, and dissolution. By its very
condition—it must return to chaos—the unformed—so it may be used over
again in combination with Love, and thus produce a new form.

"This is the 'Law of Universal—as well as individual Life.' It is
Immutable, Irrevocable, Eternal, yet Beneficent, for creation in form
exists that God may have something upon which to pour out—Love—and so
express in action. This is the 'Law of the Mighty One' from which all
else proceeds. It is the 'Mandate of Eternity' and the Vastness and
Brilliance of that Perfection cannot be described in words.

"If there were not these Actual, Real, Permanent and Perfect conditions
of Life and experience, which far transcend human description—existence
would be but a travesty upon the stupendous activity of

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Life—that swings
forever throughout creation. There are those higher, harmonious,
Transcendent Spheres—realms of activity and consciousness—individual and
cosmic—where creation goes on continually in Joy, in Love, in Freedom,
and in Perfection.

"These are Real, Real, Real and much more permanent than your bodies and
buildings in the physical world about you. These Realms of Life are
created of Substance which is so charged with—Love—that they can never
have a quality or activity of discord, imperfection, or disintegration
imposed upon them or registered within them. Because they are based upon
Love, the Perfection of such a manifestation is forever maintained, ever
active, ever expanding, ever blessing with the joy of all that exists.

"You bring woe upon yourselves—which propels you into embodiment again
and again in the ignorance of the senses, the human appetites, and
desires of the outer self. These appetites in the feeling nature of
mankind are in themselves but an accumulation of energy which the
individual through his thought and feeling has given a quality of one
kind or another. This misqualified energy, gathers a momentum through
human expression and becomes habit. Habit is but energy specifically
qualified and held focused for a time upon one objective.

"The sense appetites of former lives become the driving forces and
habits of the next—keeping you

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

slaves, bound to the chariot wheels of discord, lack, and
necessity—whirling you through a maze of human problems and experiences
of your own creation—compelling you to learn and obey the—'Law of the
One'—'Love.'

"Your own miscreations drive you on, and on, and on, until you are
willing to understand Life and obey Its—One Law—Love. You whirl through
Life after Life, experiencing discord upon discord, until you do learn
to live the 'Law of Love.'

"This is a compelling activity—which none escape—and it continues until
the outer self asks-the reason—for its misery, and understands that its
release from the experience of suffering can only come
through—obedience—to the 'Law of Love.' Such obedience begins as calm,
peace, and kindliness in the feelings—whose center is in the heart. Its
contact with the outer world must come through the 'Inner Feeling.'

"Love is not an activity of the mind, but is the—'Pure and Luminous
Essence'—which creates mind. This—Essence—from the—Great God
Flame—streams into substance, and constantly pours itself out, as
Perfection in form and action. Love is Perfection manifest. It can only
express peace, joy, and an outpouring of those feelings to all
creation—unconditionally. It asks—nothing—for Itself because It
is—Eternally Self-Creating—being the Heartbeat—of the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Supreme.' Love
owns—All—and is only concerned with setting the Plan of Perfection into
action in all. Thus, It is a constant pouring out of Itself. It takes no
cognizance of what has been given in the past, but receives Its joy and
maintains Its balance by the continual—Out-streaming of Itself. Because
this Perfection is within Love—forever flowing forth—it is incapable of
recording anything but Itself.

"'Love' alone is the basis of harmony and the right use of all Life
energy. In human experience, this grows into a desire to give, and give,
and give of all the individual's peace and harmony unto the rest of
creation.

"People! O People! forever throughout the ages! only enough Love can
bring you back to the Heaven you once knew and abided in. Here, you will
once again embrace the fulness of the 'Great Light' that gives all
through Love.

"A visiting prince approaches your borders. He will enter this
city—seeking the daughter of your king. You will come under the rule of
this prince but the recognition of your mistake will be futile. Nothing
can avail, for the royal family will be drawn into the protection and
care of those—whose power and authority are of God—and against whom—no
human desire can ever prevail. These are the Great Ascended Masters of
Light—from the Golden Etheric City—over this land. Here your ruler and
his beloved children

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

will abide for a cycle of time." Turning to the king he addressed him,
saying:

"I bless you my noble, patient Brother! Loving and selfless has been the
service to your people. Deep and eternal is your devotion to the Supreme
One—the Source of All Creation. The Golden Etheric City awaits and
joyously welcomes you and your children.

"Within Its radiance you shall live serving through the Rays of Light
which are forever streaming out from those who dwell therein, until
these your people shall redeem themselves by—obedience—to the 'Law of
Love.'

"This 'Empire of Light' exists over the land you have loved so well. It
is composed of self-luminous, etheric substance and rests above the
physical city which is your capital. It is Real, very Real and much more
permanent than any earthly city, for—'Light'—is indestructible and the
Golden City is made of—'Light.' Into It, no inharmonious thought or
disturbing condition of any kind can ever enter.

"I will return in seven days to take you and your children into
the—'City of Light'—where we shall watch the progress of humanity, and
draw into the—'Light'—all who will discipline and make themselves ready.
Encircling the City is—an invincible belt of electronic force—through
which it is impossible for anything uninvited to pass."

When he had finished speaking, he blessed the

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

royal family, the guests and the empire and, in the moments of silence
that followed—His Light—and the outline of His Body within it—grew
fainter and fainter until it disappeared entirely.

A murmur passed through the great banquet hall, and as all looked toward
the king, his head was bowed in reverent silence. Then he slowly rose
and bid his guests good-night.

On the seventh day, the—"Brother from out the Silence"—returned and
enfolding the king and his children within his own blazing aura,
withdrew into the—"Golden Etheric City of Light."

The visiting prince arrived the next day, discovered the condition of
the empire, and the consternation that still held sway over its people.
He at once subtly planned to become its ruler. This he accomplished
without opposition. Two thousand years later—most of that empire had
become barren land, the streams dried up, and desolation stretched
everywhere—all the result of the discord and selfishness of mankind and
the blight it becomes upon the growth of plant life in nature. This
kingdom had extended the entire width of Africa on east—until it reached
the Himalayan Mountains.

There followed a great cataclysm—submerging all the land. Through that
change, an inland sea was formed where the Sahara Desert now lies.
Another earth change, which took place about twelve thousand

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

years ago—drained this sea—and a part of it later became the present
Sahara Desert. The River Nile, as it is today, most nearly resembles the
beautiful streams—of that long forgotten period.

Thus ended our observation of those very ancient scenes. I could hardly
believe my senses—I was so astonished at the way the experiences of the
past were revivified—the pictures projected in all three dimensions—and
the activity of the people in that remote age portrayed.

Realizing how surprised and unaccustomed to such activities I was—Saint
Germain promised to take me to the physical records of that period and
its people—and give me physical proof—that it was not—a vision—conjured
up by him.

Glancing around from the log upon which we were seated, we saw the
panther lying nearby fast asleep. Saint Germain took up the explanation
of several important phases on the application of higher laws, for the
manifesting of one's own inherent dominion over the things of the sense
world. This led to how he was able to express such youth and Perfection
in a body so old—according to the way human beings count time.

"Eternal Youth," he explained, "is the—Flame of God—abiding in the body
of man—the Father's gift of Himself—to His Creation. Youth and beauty of
both mind and body can only be kept—permanently—

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

by those individuals—who are strong enough to shut out discord, and
whoever does—that—can and will express—Perfection—and maintain it.

"Where Peace, Love, and Light do not abide within the thoughts and
feelings of a human being—no amount of physical effort can possibly keep
the outer self—expressing youth and beauty. These exist—Eternally—within
the God Flame which is the—Divine Self—of every individual. Whatever
discord the outer self allows to flash through the thought and feeling
is—that—instant stamped upon the flesh of the physical body. Eternal
Youth and Beauty are Self-Created and—forever Self-Existent—within the
Flame of God's Life—in every human being. This is—God's Plan—for
manifesting—His Perfection—into the world of form and maintaining it
forever.

"Youth, Beauty, and Perfection are attributes of Love which the—God
Principle—is continually pouring forth into—Its Creation. Within each
individual is placed the power and means for—maintaining and
increasing—that perfect ever-expanding activity of creation.

"The power of accomplishment is the energy of the—God Self—in each human
being born into the world. It is always active every moment in your
mind, body, and world. There is no instant in which this mighty energy
is not flowing through all individuals. You are privileged to qualify
it—as you

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

please—at the command of your own free will through consciously directed
thought and feeling.

"Thought is the only thing in the universe that can create vibration—and
through vibration—you qualify this ever-flowing energy with whatever you
desire to have manifest in your life and world. This limitless,
intelligent, radiant energy is flowing—ceaselessly through your nervous
system—and is the Eternal Life and vitality in the blood stream coursing
through your veins. It is an all-powerful, omnipresent, intelligent
activity given you by—the Father—the God Principle of Life—to be
consciously directed according to your freewill. Real Intelligence—which
uses everything constructively—comes only from Within the God
Principle—the Flame of Life—and is not merely the activity of the
intellect. Real Intelligence is Wisdom or—God knowledge—and this does
not and—cannot—think wrong thoughts. Wrong thoughts come only from
impressions made upon the intellect by the world—outside—of the
individual. If individuals would discriminate between their—own
thoughts—that is thoughts from within their own God Flame—and the
suggestions, thrown off by other people's intellects and the evidence of
the senses which consider appearances only—they would be able—to avoid
all discordant activities and conditions—in the world of experience.

"The Light—from within one's own—God Flame

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

is the criterion—the standard of Perfection—by which all thoughts and
feelings—that reach us through the five senses—should be tested. No one
can keep his thoughts and feelings qualified with Perfection—unless he
goes to the—'Source of Perfection'—for that quality and Perfection only
abides within the—God Flame.

"This is the individual's need—for meditation upon and communion
with—the Light of God—within himself. Pure Life Essence will not only
give and sustain Eternal youth and beauty in the body—but will enable
you to maintain—Perfect Balance between your God-Self and the outer or
personal self. In fact—this Pure Life Energy is the power—which the
outer self uses—to hold its connection with its Divine Source—the God
Self. In reality—these two are One—except, when the intellect or outer
activity of the mind—the sense consciousness—accepts imperfection,
inharmony, incompleteness or thinks itself a creation apart—from the
All-Pervading One 'Presence' of Life. If the sense consciousness thinks
itself something separate from God—Perfection—then that condition is
established unto it—for what the sense consciousness thinks into its
world—the world returns to it.

"When one lets an idea of imperfection or separation from God occupy his
attention, and therefore his mind—a condition corresponding to that
begins to

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

express itself in his body and world. This causes the person—to
feel—himself an entity apart from his Source. The moment he thinks
himself separated from God—he thinks his Life, Intelligence, and Power
has beginning and end.

"Life always has been, is now, and always will be. No one can really
destroy Life. Through various activities in the mental and physical
world—form can be disintegrated or temporarily demolished—but the
consciousness of the individual is Eternal; and can control all
substance everywhere in manifestation—when the God Life within is
acknowledged as the—'Knower, Giver, and Doer' of all good in creation.

"I tell you—Truth—when I say there is only one Source of all Good—God.
The conscious recognition and acceptance of this Fact—acknowledged by
the—outer activity—of the mind, knot two or three times a day—but every
few moments all day long—no matter what the outer self is doing, and
this maintained—will enable anyone to express his perfect freedom and
dominion over all things human.

"To most people the above sounds difficult—for they have lived so many
centuries in the belief that they are beings apart from God—while every
instant of every day, they are using—God Life—God Energy—God
Substance—and God Activity in everything they think and do without
realizing it. However, it requires the conscious admitting of this fact
in the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

outer activity of the mind, and constructive direction, to release Its
Full Power—through the personal self.

"Recognition, conscious direction, and constructive use of the—God
Energy—maintained within one's self at all times—is the way of
Perfection, Mastery, and Dominion over all things on earth—including the
conscious control of—all—natural forces. The instruction I have been
giving you will erase completely all false beliefs—if maintained. The
rapidity with which it is accomplished depends upon how continuously,
persistently, and deeply you feel and associate with your—God Self.

"In the attainment of Mastery or Adeptship—the conscious control of all
force and manipulation of substance are dependent first—upon the
acknowledgment of your own individual God Self; second, upon perfect
calmness of feeling—under all circumstances; and third, one must be
passed—all—temptation of misusing power. The stilling of all emotions at
the command of the conscious will is imperative—and the demand for it in
the Adept is unconditional—if Dominion is to be attained.

"It does—not—mean a repression of discord within one's self at any
time—but is a stilling and harmonizing of the feelings—no matter what
the circumstances are—which surround the mind or body of the student.
Such control is not an easy thing for humanity in the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Western
World—because the temperament—of most people in the Occident is
sensitive, emotional, and impulsive. This characteristic is energy of
tremendous power. It must be controlled—held in reserve—and released
only through conscious direction—for the accomplishment of something
constructive. Until the waste of energy is checked and completely
governed—the individual cannot, and never will, make—permanent progress.

"The student often asks, if one reaches a point—while still on the path
of attainment—where he rises above the use of affirmation? When an
individual sincerely uses affirmation—he brings about a full acceptance
of the—Truth—of whatever he affirms—for its use is but to focus the
attention of the outer mind—so steadily upon the Truth—that he accepts
it fully in his feelings—because feeling is the actual- God Energy
released—which manifests the—Truth affirmed.

"The continued use of affirmation brings one to the point where he has
such a deep realization of the—Truth in anything—he affirms that he is
no longer conscious of it—as an affirmation. One uses an affirmation,
mantram, or prayer because he desires something made manifest. Right
desire is the deepest form of prayer. Thus—by the use of affirmation—the
student raises his outer self into the full acceptance of its Truth
and—generates—the feeling by which it

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

becomes—a thing manifest. In this deep acceptance comes the
manifestation—for through concentration—the spoken word begins to cause
instantaneous activity."

My gratitude to Saint Germain for all I had received was too deep for
words. He read my thoughts and feelings as one reads a book, and so we
both sat silent for some few moments—in perfect attunement. He roused me
from my reverie to watch the gorgeous colors in the western sky—the
sunset's afterglow.

I wanted to remain on the mountain all night and return home in the
morning, enjoying the sunrise. I had no sooner felt the desire—than a
beautiful sleeping bag lay at my feet. It was unlike anything—I have
ever seen. I reached down to examine the unusual fabric of which it was
made, and to my astonishment—found it glowing and warm. I looked up, and
Saint Germain smilingly extended to me—a crystal cup—filled with golden
liquid—about the consistency of honey. Obedient to his slightest wish I
drank it, and instantly, a radiant glow passed through my body. When I
had finished, the cup disappeared in my hand.

"O why could I not keep this lovely creation?" I asked in surprise.
"Patience—my Son," he answered, "are not your desires being fulfilled
one by one? Your sleeping bag will remain until daybreak, and your
friend, the panther, will guard you during the night."

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

Bowing slightly, and with a smile that was graciousness itself, his body
became gradually indistinct and then disappeared entirely. I lay down in
the lovely bag and was soon fast asleep. As the rosy tints of dawn
touched the eastern horizon, I awoke, and the first thought in my mind
was concerning the bag, which I had so much enjoyed. With that
thought—it vanished back into the universal substance—from which it had
come.

The panther came toward me, and together we turned our footsteps
homeward. After walking for some distance, the sound of men's voices
caught our ears. The animal sniffed the air, suddenly stopped directly
in front of me, and looked up. I reached down and patting him, said:

"Now you may go." He bounded away into the thickly wooded section of the
mountain to the right of the trail. I continued on my way without
further incident, and at last reached my lodgings shortly after noon, in
a state of mind—hard to find words to describe.

I wanted to think—contemplate—digest—and become adjusted to an entirely
new set of ideas. The unusual—yet very real experiences—through which I
had passed within the forty-eight hours just preceding, were causing me
to reorder my entire world. I was happy in the extreme and yet, it
seemed as if another universe had manifested itself around me.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There was the same
old prosaic world on the outside that I had always known—to be sure, and
yet—was it? Within it all the time had been these wonderful
experiences—this tremendous power—these marvelous revelations of freedom
and dominion over—all manifestation—of which I had been so totally
unaware.

I had been surrounded all my life by these seeming miracles—to which in
my previous years I was as oblivious—as if no such thing existed in
creation. I thought and thought, deeper and deeper than I had ever
contemplated anything before—in my whole existence.

The dinner hour arrived but I was not hungry. However, to begin the
evening meal, I ordered a glass of milk. It was served and a few moments
later, as I tasted it—imagine my astonishment—to find that it had
become—the same creamy liquid—Saint Germain had first given me.

I finished the meal—returned home, and was preparing my bath before
retiring, when suddenly the familiar—electrical signal—thrilled me from
head to foot. Involuntarily—I held out my hand—and in a few seconds a
small cake of crystal-like substance formed in the palm. I somehow knew
this was to be put in my bath, and had no more than dropped the
substance into the water—than it immediately bubbled and sparkled—as
though alive.

I stepped in, and a tingling sensation—thrilled

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

every cell—in my body. I felt—charged—with a high powered electrical
current—that illumined and strengthened—my whole being. My bath
finished, I lay down, and soon dropped into a dreamless sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Royal Teton](um07)
