[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](um10)  [Next](um12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1878891014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Unveiled Mysteries*, by Godfré Ray King, \[1934\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

### CHAPTER VII

### *The Secret Valley*

ONE morning sometime later, I received a strange letter by post—asking
me to come to a certain address—in Tucson, Arizona. It conveyed the
idea—that the information to be given was of such a nature—as could only
be explained in person. I considered the extraordinary way in which the
request had reached me, and yet felt an Inner Desire to respond to the
call.

In a few days, I went to the address given, rang the bell, and in a
moment the door was opened by a tall slender gentleman about forty years
of age, with iron gray hair and gray eyes, who stood perhaps six feet
one inch in height.

I introduced myself, and he greeted me with a cordial, sincere hand
shake which revealed unmistakably—his was an absolutely true and
dependable nature. His eyes were steady and fearless, and he gave one
the impression—that he possessed great reserve energy.

I felt an unusual Inner harmony about him, and knew it could only mean
the starting of a deep and wonderful friendship. He too seemed aware of
an Inner something—that made each of us feel attracted

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

to the other. He asked me to come in, and be seated.

"You are here," he began, "at my request, and I am deeply grateful,
strange as it must have seemed to you. Your address was given me by one
of whom I shall speak later. In explanation, I have this to say—that I
have made some very remarkable discoveries which I must ask you to
accept on faith—until I can take you with me, and prove their Truth and
Reality to you.

"I was advised to get directly in touch with you personally—as the only
one to whom this should be revealed—and with which I am concerned. For a
starting point, I shall have to begin with things that occurred twenty
years ago.

"At that time, I had a beautiful wife. Now, I know she had great Inner
growth of which, however, I was not aware. A son was born—whom we both
idolized. For five years, our happiness was complete. Suddenly, without
any warning or apparent reason—the child disappeared.

"For many weeks, we searched and searched, and did everything humanly
possible to find him, but to no avail. Finally, we gave up all hope. His
mother never recovered from the shock and five months later—passed on.

"She had made a strange request during the last few days of her
life—that her body be held in the vault for seven days—after her passing
and then cremated.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It seemed rather
peculiar to me—for at no time had we ever discussed anything—in regard
to this subject. However, I complied with her wishes. Imagine my
surprise five days after her funeral, when I received a call from the
man in charge of the cemetery saying—he had found the vault open that
morning—and the body gone. No clue to anything concerning the whole
strange occurrence was ever discovered.

"Sixteen years later, I awakened one morning—to find a letter—upon the
floor of my room—addressed to me but with no postmark. I picked it up,
opened it, and read the contents—which left me mystified and
incredulous. It read:

"'Your wife and son are living, well, and strong. Soon you will see
them. Have patience until that time. Rejoice to know there is no death.
At the appointed time—directions will reach you in this manner—which you
are to follow—implicitly. All depends upon your absolute silence. You
shall see, and receive full explanation of all that has seemed so
mysterious. Then—you will understand why Truth is far stranger and more
wonderful than fiction—for even the most extraordinary fiction—is but
the record of a Truth—that is somewhere in the universe.

"'Signed,        

"'A Friend'

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

"My Friend, you can imagine my astonishment. At first—I did not believe
a word of it. The third evening after this—I was sitting in front of my
grate fire, when I heard my beloved wife's voice as clear and
distinct—as if she were in the room beside me, saying:

"'Robert, My Beloved—I am alive and well, and our son is with me. We
will be so happy, when you are with us again. Do not distrust the
message. It is all true. You will be brought to us—if you do not allow
doubt to shut the door. I speak to you through the Sound Ray which you
will one day learn to use.' I could stand the tension no longer—and
said:

"Show yourself to me, and I will believe." Instantly, the voice replied:

"'Wait a moment.' In about three minutes, a Brilliant Ray of Golden
Light came into the room—forming a tunnel, at the other end of which,
stood my beautiful wife. It was she—unmistakably.

"'Beloved,' she said, 'seeming miracles have taken place in the midst of
your Life for years but because your attention has not been called in
the right direction, we had to wait until this time. Trust the message
that will come to you. Then—you will come to us—and I assure you a new
world will open. To our great love there is no barrier.'

"Instantly—the Light Ray vanished and with It the voice. My joy knew no
bounds. I could no longer

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

doubt. I felt a relaxation, peace, and rest I had not known for years.
Then—came weeks of waiting which I now know was a preparation going
on—within me. At last the message, I longed for so much, came and with
it a diagram and directions to be followed.

"I saw this would lead me into the high mountains southeast of Tucson,
Arizona. I made preparation to go at once, saying to my friends I was
going to do a little prospecting. I took a horse and pack animal,
finding very little discomfort and no difficulty in following the
directions given. If I could have gone as the crow flies, I would easily
have covered the distance in two days.

"Just before sundown of the third day, I came to a blind canyon and
would have passed it unnoticed, if it had not been for the diagram. I
had just made camp, when it became dark. I rolled up in my blankets and
soon dropped off to sleep, dreaming most vividly—of waking in the
morning and seeing a young man—standing near by—looking at me.

"When I did awaken, to my astonishment—there stood the young man in Real
Life—looking at me intently. He greeted me with a beautiful
smile—saying:

"'My Friend, you are expected to follow me.' I noticed, he had my things
in readiness and turning without further discussion, led the way toward
the head of the canyon. After about an hour, we came

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

to a stop because of a cliff that seemed to close the way before us.

"He turned, placed his hands upon the rock, and pressed against it. A
section of the wall—perhaps ten by twelve feet—moved in to a depth of
about one foot—and then slid to one side. We entered a tunnel that
centuries ago—must have been the bed of an underground water-course. My
companion closed the entrance behind us and, as we turned to go forward,
a Soft Radiance spread everywhere—so we could see quite clearly. I was
astonished at all I saw but I remembered the admonition I had received
in my instruction—'to be silent.'

"We continued in the tunnel for more than an hour, and finally came to a
massive metal door. This opened slowly at my companion's touch. He stood
aside, and waited for me to pass through. I stepped out into the bright
sunlight, almost breathless with delight at the beauty of the scene
before me. Ahead of us, lay a valley of surpassing loveliness—about a
hundred acres in extent.

"'My Friend,' said the young man, 'you have returned home after a long
absence—all of which you shall soon understand.' He then led the way to
a beautiful building, near the foot of a sheer cliff at the upper end of
the valley. As we came nearer, I could see many kinds of fruit and
[vegetables](errata.htm#1) growing in abundance, among them oranges,
dates, English

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

walnuts, and pecans. A beautiful waterfall poured over the cliff—making
a limpid pool at its base. The building was a massive one, and looked as
though it had stood there for centuries.

"We had almost reached it, when a beautiful woman in white appeared at
the entrance. We came nearer—and my beloved wife—stood before us—more
beautiful than ever. In another instant, I held her in my arms, and
after all the agony I had been through in those years—it was almost more
than I could stand. She turned, putting her arm, around the young man
who had brought me, and said:

"'Robert, this is our son.'

"'Son!' was all I could say, so nearly was I overcome by my emotions.

"He stepped forward, put his arms around both of us, and we three—stood
there for a moment in deepest love and gratitude—happy once more. I
suddenly realized it was sixteen years since he had disappeared, and by
now he must be twenty-one. He answered my thought, by saying:

"'Yes Father, I am twenty-one. Tomorrow is my birthday.'

"'How can you read my thought so readily?'

"'O, that is a very ordinary and easy thing for us. It is all quite
natural, when you understand how to do it and really—quite simple,' he
replied.

"'Come,' he continued, 'you must be hungry. Let

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

us have something to eat.' With their arms around me, we entered the
ancient building. The interior was finished in pink marble and white
onyx. I was shown to a beautiful room where the morning sun flooded
everything with its glorious radiance. I refreshed myself, and found a
suit of white flannel—had been provided for me. I tried it on, and it
fitted perfectly. This surprised me but again I remembered the
admonition 'to be silent.' I went downstairs, and was presented to—a
striking looking gentleman—about my own height with large, dark,
piercing eyes.

"'Father,' said my son, 'this is our Beloved Master, Eriel. He is the
one—who saved the lives of both Mother and me—and has trained us all
these years—until you could be prepared to join us here. It was he—who
sent you the message and directions to come—because the time had arrived
for your definite training to begin.'

"We entered the dining-room which was magnificent, and I could not
refrain from expressing my admiration. It had been placed at the
south-east corner of the building on the main floor and was flooded with
sunshine morning and afternoon. The walls were made of heavily carved
walnut and the beamed ceiling, inlaid between the beams with motifs in
hexagonal design. A solid piece of walnut at least two inches thick
resting on an ornately carved pedestal, served as a table and looked as
if it were

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

thousands of years old. We took our places around it, and presently a
slender youth entered. My son introduced him by saying:

"'This is our Brother, Fun Wey, whom Our Master brought from China, when
he was an infant at a time—his Life was about to be taken. He is from a
very ancient Chinese family, and is able to do many wonderful things. He
has always wished to serve us, and we are privileged and happy to call
him—Brother. He is one of the most joyous natures I have ever known.'

"Among the things for breakfast were luscious strawberries with
delicious date and nut cakes. We went into the large living-room and the
Master Eriel said to me:

"'At the time your beloved wife—who is your Twin Ray—would have passed
on, I saw an opportunity to give certain assistance—which would enable
her to reach the Ascended State—and thus have much greater freedom and
wider capacity for service. It was my great privilege and joy to give
that assistance.

"'I opened the casket—restored her to conscious action—and enabled her
to raise the body. It had already reached a point of high
attenuation—because her desire for the "Light" was very great. It was
her intense adoration to and longing for the "Light" that made possible
her Ascension. I explained this to her the day you thought she had
passed on.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

"'All three of you were children of mine in an embodiment—of long ago. A
great love was generated then—which has lasted through the centuries.
Her deep love made possible—the assistance and raising—that has been
accomplished at this time.

"'Your son—who was stolen with the intention of being held for
ransom—was brought to this canyon. The two concerned with his kidnapping
began to quarrel, and one—planned to take the child's Life.

"'I appeared before them—and took him. They were paralyzed by their own
fear—and neither ever recovered. Both passed on a few weeks later. If
one deliberately takes the life of another human being—or determines
mentally to take it—he has set a cause into motion that will surely take
his own.

"'A feeling or desire—for the death of another person—will do the same
thing—for it goes forth to the person, and then begins its return
journey to the one who sent it out. Many times individuals allow
resentment against injustice to flash forth, with an intense feeling to
rid the world of a certain individual. This is a—subtle form—of the
thought of death—and to the one who sends it out—it must return.

"'Many, many people bring about their own dissolution—by this very
subtle activity of the human self—for no one ever escapes this
"Immutable Law." There are many phases of Its reaction—and it is because
humanity indulges—in such thoughts and feelings—

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

that the race as a whole—has been experiencing the dissolution of body
after body.

"'The number of mankind—that pass out through physical violence—is
infinitesimal—compared to the deaths brought about—by these subtle
activities—of thought, feeling, and the spoken word. The human race has
been killing itself off—for thousands of years in this subtle
way—because it will not learn "The Law of Life" and obey It.

"'There is only One Law of Life, and that is "Love." The Self-Conscious,
thinking individual who will not or does not—obey that—Eternal
Beneficent Decree—cannot and will not retain the physical body—because
all that is not Love—dissolves form and it matters not—whether it be
thought, word, feeling or deed—intentional or unintentional—the 'Law'
acts—regardless. Thoughts, feelings, words, and deeds are each but so
much force acting—and eternally move in an orbit of their own.

"'If man knew—he never ceases creating even for an instant—he would
realize, through the "Presence" of God within himself—he could purify
his miscreations—and thus be free from his own limitations.

"'He spins a cocoon of human discord around himself—and goes to sleep
within it forgetting—at least for a time, that if he can build it, he
can also—break through. By using the Wings of his Soul—Adoration and
Determination—he can break through his

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

self-created darkness. Then, he lives once more at the—Center of his
Being—in the "Light" and Freedom of his "God-Self."

"'However, in the activity of you and your beloved family, or shall I
say my beloved family, the cloud that has seemed to hold so much of
sorrow is now turned inside out and reveals its glorious golden lining.
You have now come within the—Radiant Splendor of the "Light"—from which
you will never again recede.

"'In most cases, if human beings knew the wonderful things that are
sometimes planned for them, they would unknowingly prevent the approach
of this greater good. You have been invited here, not only to join your
loved ones, but to receive—definite instruction—concerning the
existence, use, and direction of the Mighty God-Power—latent within you.
When you understand how to release and control It, anything will be
possible for you.

"'Your loved ones used the Light and Sound Rays in communicating with
you. This knowledge with its power will be explained, and you too shall
be enabled to operate them—consciously and at will. You feel deeply, and
when that characteristic is consciously governed, there will come an
Awareness of the Mighty God-Power—that stands ready to be released—at
any instant.

"'You are to remain here for six weeks of training.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

and then return to the outer world—to use—the understanding you have
received. Come again, at any time for you are now one of us.'

"I can never put in words—what those six weeks meant to me. To become
aware of my own ability to use the instruction and application of such
wisdom astonished me. Soon, I began to gain a confidence in myself—that
made everything much easier. What seems so mysterious and unusual to the
human—I found natural and normal—to this Stupendous 'Inner-Presence.'

"I had to realize that I was—Truly—the Son of God. As a Son of
the—Source of all Good—the Limitless Wisdom-Energy obeyed my conscious
direction, and when I directed it—as does a Master—produced results
instantly. As I gained confidence in my own ability to use the 'Great
Law,' the fulfillment naturally became more and more rapid. I marvel
yet—at the Ever-pouring Fountain of Love and Wisdom that streamed forth
from this—Great Master. We love him with a deep devotion—greater than
any love that could ever exist [between](errata.htm#2) parent and
child—for the Love Tie formed by the giving of Spiritual Understanding
is Eternal, and far deeper than any love generated through human
experience—no matter how beautiful and strong it may be. He often said
to us:

"'If you will make yourselves—an Eternal Fountain

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

of Divine Love—pouring it forth into every place your thought goes, you
will become such a Magnet for All Good—that you will have to call for
help to dispense it. Peace and Calmness of Soul release a power—which
compels obedience—of the outer mind. This must be—claimed—with
authority. Our home here in this Secret Valley has been used for over
four thousand years.'

"One day, after giving a remarkable discourse on 'God's Ownership,' he
looked at me very intently, and suggested we take a walk. He led the way
to the opposite side of the valley from which we had entered. Near the
south wall, and running parallel with it from east to west, was a ridge
beginning at the ground, rising to about seven feet in height, extending
about two thousand feet in length, and then descending to the ground
again. As we came closer, I saw it was a vein of white quartz. The
Master Eriel stepped to where the vein came to the ground and kicked a
piece loose with his foot. I saw it was—immensely rich—in gold. My human
love for gold attempted to surge forth but the 'Inner-Presence'
instantly checked it, and with a smile the Master remarked:

"'That is well done. Now, I have work to do in Europe and must leave you
for the present.' He smiled, and was gone instantly. It was the first
time—he had shown the Full Dominion he possessed, and

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

the things—he was able to do in this manner. Immediately—my son became
visible—in exactly the same spot—where Eriel had been standing the
instant before and laughed heartily at my surprise.

"'Mother and I,' he said, 'can take our bodies with us—wherever we
choose in the same way. Do not be surprised. It is a—Natural
Law—and—only seems strange and unusual—because you are not using it—as
yet. It really is no more extraordinary—than the telephone would have
been—to the people of the Middle Ages. If they had known the "Law" of
its construction, they could have used it then—just as well as we of
this century.'

"Since that visit to my family in the Secret Valley, I have been there
seven times. The last time, I returned to the outer world—the Master
gave me your address—which accounts for my asking you to come here. He
extends the invitation for you—to return with me."

My host suddenly realized he had been talking several hours, and begged
indulgence for taxing my patience. I told him the experiences were so
fascinating, and I had been so intensely interested that time was
non-existent, so far as I was concerned. I accepted and was deeply
grateful—for the Master Eriel's invitation to visit them, and said so
frankly. A moment later, a tall young man came into the room.

"Let me present our Brother, Fun Wey," said my

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

host, introducing him, and in the most perfect English, he replied:

"My Brother—with the Heart of Light—has journeyed far. My heart leaps in
ecstasy and joy. My soul feels your Serenity and Radiance." Addressing
my host directly, he continued.

"Knowing you were busy, I am here to serve you."

"It will give us great pleasure to have you break bread with us," said
my friend turning to me, and together we passed into the dining room.
Our dinner was delicious, and when finished my host again resumed his
conversation—relating many of his personal experiences with Eriel. They
were remarkable indeed—that is speaking from the human side of our
consciousness only—but from the standpoint of our—Divinity—all was and
is—Supremely Natural.

Suddenly, a Ray of Light—or rather a Tube of Light—came into the room,
and from the conversation I knew it was my host's Twin Ray speaking. In
a moment, the Ray was directed to me, and he said:

"Beloved, allow me to present the Brother—whom our Master Eriel has
requested I meet."

I saw his Twin Ray, and heard her as clearly—as if she stood in the room
beside us. This way of communicating is a wonderfully happy experience,
and—it is possible—to so condense "Light" as to form a Tube in which
Sound and Vision can be conveyed. It was as Real—as a search-light.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

My host insisted that I make his home mine—until the day of our
departure into the mountains. We started before daylight the seventh day
after our meeting, and it was one of the most memorable experiences of
my Life up to that time. All he had told me proved to be true—in the
minutest detail.

Our arrival at the Secret Valley was a most joyous event, and our
happiness was very great. I met my host's Twin Ray and their son, and
was then shown over the ancient building—where so many students had
received the True Understanding of the Laws of Being—and attained their
Eternal Freedom.

It was a marvelous sensation—to stand where the Great God-Power had been
focused for so many centuries, and—the Ascended Masters had made a
retreat—for some of their work. I sat contemplating the blessings the
students had received—who were privileged to come there, when the Master
Eriel addressed me.

"My Son," he began, "you are nearing wonderful liberation. Hold close to
the continuous acceptance of your own indwelling 'Master-Presence,' and
you will have just cause for great rejoicing." He extended his right
hand, and—the veil between the visible and invisible—was drawn aside.

"I want you to see," he continued, "as we who have Ascended—The Sublime
and Majestic Activity of Our World. Here, we continually bear witness,
as

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sons of God,
because there is no longer doubt, fear, or imperfection within us." I
shall always remember the joy and privilege that was mine during the
days I spent with those wonderful people.

"Every day," said Eriel, "you shall witness the use of the—Light and
Sound Rays—that annihilate time and space, and which mankind is destined
to use in the near future—as naturally as they now use the telephone.
This is one of the most Stupendous Activities the individual may learn
how to direct. A Light Ray can be drawn and controlled—so it may be used
as a pencil—to write upon metal—or in the sky, and the writing—remain
visible—as long as the one directing—desires.

"When the student is strong enough—to stand against the opinions of the
world of ignorance—then he or she is ready—to bear witness to
the—Marvels of the Individual Activities of God—manifested by the
Ascended Masters.

"Until he can do this—the power in suggestion and the radiation of doubt
from others will disturb him intermittently—to such an extent—that he
many times gives up the quest for Truth. Interruption to the steady flow
of instruction—is—discord. Discord is the wedge—and subtle way—by which
the sinister force on this earth—enters the outer activity of a
student—who has determined to face—'The Light.'

"Such activity is very subtle—because it is a feeling,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

and creeps in upon one before he is—really aware—of its existence. It is
persistent beyond belief—and the growth is so insidious—that one does
not realize what has been done—until the momentum is already under way.

"This feeling begins—as a slight doubt. A doubt need only be—felt—two or
three times, until it becomes—distrust. Distrust—whirls a time or two in
the emotional body—and becomes suspicion—and suspicion is
self-destruction.

"Remember this my son, as you return again to the outer world, and you
will find it a safeguard—that will carry you through every experience in
Life—keeping you untouched by discord. If one sends out suspicion,
he—will—be suspected, for every one has in his world just
exactly—that—which he puts into it, and this 'Eternal Irrevocable
Decree' exists throughout the Universe. All impulses of
consciousness—travel back to the central point—that sent them out—not
even an atom escapes.

"The Real student of 'Light' faces 'The Light'—sends it before him—sees
its Enfolding Radiance—everywhere he moves, and adores 'It'—constantly.
From the doubts, fears, suspicion, and ignorance of the human mind, he
turns away, and knows—only 'The Light.' This is His Source—His
True-Self."

With these parting words, Eriel bade me farewell, and I returned to the
daily routine of my outer life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. God's Omnipresent Power](um12)
