[This document can be acquired from a sub-directory coombspapers via
anonymous FTP and/or COOMBSQUEST gopher on the node COOMBS.ANU.EDU.AU]

The document's ftp filename and the full directory path are given in
the coombspapers top level INDEX file]

[This version: 23 November 1993]
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
This file was copied from an archive of Zen Buddhist texts established
at Sam Huston Univ, Texas, US on a Gopher Host: oac3.hsc.uth.tmc.edu
Path=1/computers/oac_staff/S_Newton/zen

The original document was provided by Steven Newton,
<snewton@oac.hsc.uth.tmc.edu> of the Southwest Chogye International Zen
Academeia 1375 Bunker Hill Houston, TX 77055 English (713) 467-0998
Korean (713) 467-0997 Fax (713) 467-0998
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

WHY WE BOW AND CHANT

One who bows to the Buddha-statue must correctly understand from where
that Buddha-statue comes.

Let me ask you once more!  Whence comes the Buddha-statue?  It comes
from the radiant twinkle within your own luminous eye-ball.
Buddha-statue becomes your mind.  Your mind be-comes Buddha-statue and
is no longer divided,

Second, one who bows to the Buddha-statue must understand how to do it
correctly, While bending one's body, one should direct deep sincerity,
not to the statue that is the twinkle of radiance within one's own
luminous eyeball, but to the "mind."

Third, one should know to what they bow.  Since the Buddha-statue is no
other than your mind, then bowing to the statue is bowing to the mind.
How is this possible, since the mind has no form, size or trace?  If one
bows and prays while within the living doubt of Koan (Kong-an) practice
in which the mind is totally revealed in itself, then we call this true
prayer to the mind.  Doing this, you are not worshiping a physical form
of Buddha, the Buddha-statue, but are worshiping the true Buddha that is
beyond our physical eyes.  This is true worship.  If, instead, one
chooses the outer form of the statue, becomes attached to it, and bows
to it, then, as Bodhidharma warned us, one will sow evil seeds and not
only may fall into the bad karmic sequence, but may lose all virtue and
merit.

It is the some when chanting the names of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.
True chanting to the mind is keeping in mind the thought, 'What is this
which is chanting?', whether chanting the names of Amitabha Buddha,
Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva, or Kshitigarbha Bodhisattva.  In the living
doubt, "What is this?"  the chanter becomes more sincere, more able to
see the true Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and more unhindered by the outer
forms of words, names, or Buddha-statues.  In this way of praying,
bowing, chanting, and reading the scriptures, the Kong-an is also
naturally studied simultaneously to accomplish the Great Tao.

Southwest Chogye International Zen Academeia
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
end of record
 

