[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th303)  [Next](th305) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126145/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

#### EXCERPT III.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF TRUTH

<span class="small">(Title from Patrizzi (p. 46b), preceded by: “Of
Thrice-greatest Hermes to Tat.”</span>

<span class="small">Text: Stob., *Flor*., xi. 23, under heading: “Of
Hermes from the \[Sermons\] to Tat”; G, i. 307-311; M. i. 248-251; H.
iii. 436-441.</span>

<span class="small">Ménard, Livre IV., No. ix. of “Fragments from the
Books of Hermes to his Son Tat,” pp. 251-255.)</span>

1\. \[*Her*.\] Concerning Truth, O Tat, it is not possible that man
should dare to speak, for man’s an animal imperfect, composed out of
imperfect members, his tabernacle <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53)
patched together from many bodies strange \[to him\].

But what is possible and right, this do I say,—that Truth is \[to be
found\] in the eternal bodies only, \[those things\] of which the bodies
in themselves are true, <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54)—fire very
fire and nothing else, earth very earth and nothing else, air very air
and nothing else, and water very water and naught else.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Our frames, however, are a compound of all these. For they have \[in
them\] fire, and they have also earth, they’ve water, too, and air; but
they are neither fire, nor earth, nor water, nor air, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) nor any \[element that’s\] true.

And if our composition has not had Truth for its beginning, how can it
either see or speak the Truth?

Nay, it can only have a notion of it,—\[and that too\] if God will.

2\. All things, accordingly, that are on earth, O Tat, are not the
Truth; they’re copies \[only\] of the True.

And these are not all things, but few \[of them\]; the rest consist of
falsity and error, Tat, and shows of seeming like unto images.

Whenever the appearance doth receive the influx from above, it turns
into a copy of the Truth; without its <span
id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56) energizing from above, it is left false.

Just as the portrait also indicates the body in the picture, but in
itself is not a body, in spite of the appearance of the thing that’s
seen.

’Tis seen as having eyes; but it sees naught, hears naught at all.

The picture, too, has all the other things, but they are false, tricking
the sight of the beholders,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —these thinking
that they see what’s true, while what they see is really false.

All, then, who do not see what’s false see truth.

If, then, we thus do comprehend, or see, each one of these <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) just as it really is, we really comprehend
and see.

But if \[we comprehend, or see, things\] contrary to that which is, we
shall not comprehend, nor shall we know aught true.

3\. \[*Tat*.\] There is, then, father, Truth e’en on the earth?

\[*Her.*\] Not inconsiderably, O son, art thou at fault.

Truth is in no wise, Tat, upon the earth, nor can it be.

But some men can, \[I say,\] have an idea of it,—should God grant them
the power of godly vision. <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58)

Thus there is nothing true on earth,—\[so much\] I know and say. All are
appearances and shows,—I know and speak true \[things\]. We ought not,
surely, though, to call the knowing and the speaking of true things the
Truth?

4\. \[*Tat*.\] Why, how on earth ought we to know and speak of things
being true,—yet nothing’s true on earth?

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

\[*Her*.\] This \[much\] is true,—that we do not know aught that’s true
down here. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) How could it be, O son?

For Truth is the most perfect virtue, the very highest Good, by matter
undisturbed, uncircumscribed by body,—naked, \[and\] evident,
changeless, august, unalterable Good.

But things down here, O son, thou seest what they are,—not able to
receive this Good, corruptible, \[and\] passible, dissolvable,
changeful, and ever altering, being born from one another.

Things, then, that are not true even to their own selves, how can they
\[possibly\] be true?

For all that alters is untrue; it does not stay in what it is, but shows
itself to us by changing into one another its appearances.

5\. \[*Tat*.\] And even man,—is he not true, O father?

\[*Her*.\] As man,—he is not true, O son. For that the True is that
which has its composition from itself alone, and in itself stays as it
is.

But man has been composed of many things, and does not stay in his own
self.

He changes and he alters, from age to age, from form to form, and that
too, even while he’s still in \[one and\] the \[same\] tent. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60)

Nay, many fail to recognize their children,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

when a brief space of time comes in between; and so again of children
with their parents.

That, then, which changes so that it’s no longer recognized,—can that be
true, O Tat?

Is it not, rather, false, coming and going, <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61) in the \[all\] varied shows of its
\[continual\] changes?

But do thou have it in thy mind that a true thing is that which stays
and lasts for aye.

But “man” is not for ever; wherefore it <span
id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62) is not true. “Man’s” an appearance. And
appearance is extreme untruth.

6\. \[*Tat*.\] But these external bodies, <span
id="fr_63"></span>[3](#fn_63) father, too, in that they change, are they
not true?

\[*Her.*\] All that is subject unto genesis and change, is verily not
true; but in as much as they are brought to being by the
Forefather <span id="fr_64"></span>[4](#fn_64) \[of them all\], they
have their matter true.

But even they have something false in that they change; for naught that
doth not stay with its own self is true.

\[*Tat*.\] True, father \[mine\]! Is one to say, then, that the Sun
alone,—in that in greater measure than the rest of them he doth not
change but stayeth with himself,—is Truth?

\[*Her*.\] \[Nay, rather, but\] because he, and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

he only, hath entrusted unto him the making of all things in
cosmos, <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65) ruling all and making
all;—to whom I reverence give, and worship pay unto his Truth, and
recognise him as the Demiurge after the One and First.

\[*Tat*.\] What then, O father, should’st thou say is the first Truth?

\[*Her*.\] The One and Only, Tat,—He who is not of matter, or in body,
the colourless, the figureless, the changeless \[One\], He who doth
alter not, who ever is.

But the untrue, O son, doth perish. All things, however, on the earth
that perish,—the Forethought of the True hath comprehended \[them\], and
doth and will encompass \[them\].

For birth without corruption <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66) cannot
be; corruption followeth on every birth, in order that it may be born
again.

For that things that are born, must of necessity be born from things
that are destroyed <span id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67); and things that
have been born, must of necessity be \[once again\] destroyed, in order
that the genesis of things existent may not stop.

First, \[then\], see that thou recognize him <span
id="fr_68"></span>[4](#fn_68) as the Demiurge for birth-and-death <span
id="fr_69"></span>[5](#fn_69) of \[all\] existent things.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

8\. Things that are born out of destruction, then, must of necessity be
false,—in that they are becoming now these things, now those. For ’tis
impossible they should *become* the same.

But that which is not “same,”—how can it possibly be true?

Such things we should, then, call appearances, \[my\] son; for instance,
if we give the man his proper designation, \[we ought to designate him\]
a man’s <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) appearance;—\[and so\] the
child a child’s appearance, the youth a youth’s appearance, the man a
man’s appearance, the old man an appearance of the same.

For man is not a man, nor child a child, nor youth a youth, nor grown up
man a grown up man, nor aged man a \[single\] aged man.

But as they change they are untrue,—both pre-existent things and things
existent.

But thus think of them, son,—as even these untruths being energies
dependent from above from Truth itself.

And this being so, I say untruth is Truth’s in-working. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### COMMENT

The excerpt seems complete in itself, but whether it lay before Stobæus
as a single sermon or as a part of a sermon it is impossible to say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[17:1](th304.htm#fr_53) σκῆνος. *Cf.* Ex. vii. 3
note, and also § 5 below.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[17:2](th304.htm#fr_54) Or real.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[18:1](th304.htm#fr_55) Compare Lact., *D*.
*I*., ii. 12.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[18:2](th304.htm#fr_56) That is, Truth’s.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[19:1](th304.htm#fr_57) This presumably refers
to the simple elements of things in themselves.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[19:2](th304.htm#fr_58) τὴν θεοπτικὴν . . .
δύναμιν.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[20:1](th304.htm#fr_59) Taking ἐνθάδε with the
preceding clause.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[20:2](th304.htm#fr_60) *Cf*. § 1 above.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[21:1](th304.htm#fr_61) Lit. becoming.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[21:2](th304.htm#fr_62) Neuter, that is, the
series of temporary appearances of the true man.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[21:3](th304.htm#fr_63) The heavenly bodies
presumably.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[21:4](th304.htm#fr_64) τοῦ προπάτορος; *cf*.
Ex. i. 3.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[22:1](th304.htm#fr_65) *Cf.* Ex. vii. 2, and §
7 below.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[22:2](th304.htm#fr_66) Or perishing.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[22:3](th304.htm#fr_67) Or are corrupted, or
perish.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[22:4](th304.htm#fr_68) That is, the Sun; *cf*.
§ 6 above.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[22:5](th304.htm#fr_69) Lit. genesis.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[23:1](th304.htm#fr_70) Lit. manhood’s.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[23:2](th304.htm#fr_71) Or operation; ἐνέργημα.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excerpt IV. God, Nature and the Gods](th305)
