[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th326)  [Next](th328) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126145/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 3*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

#### EXCERPT XXVI.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD \[II.\]

<span class="small">(Patrizzi (p. 32b) runs this on to the last without
a break.</span>

<span class="small">Text: Stob., *Phys*., ili. 45, under heading: “In
the Same”; G. pp. 420-427; M. i. 299-304; W. i. 407-414.</span>

<span class="small">Ménard; Livre III., No. ii. of “Fragment,” etc., as
above, pp. 201-208.)</span>

39\. <span class="smallcaps">Now</span> if thou wouldst, O son of mighty
soul, know aught beside, ask on!

And Horus said: O mother of great honour, I would know how royal souls
are born?

And Isis said: Son Horus, the distinction which marks out the royal
souls is somewhat of this kind.

Four regions are there in the universe which fall beneath a law and
leadership which cannot be transgressed—Heaven, and the Æther, and the
Air, and the most holy Earth.

Above in Heaven, son, the Gods do dwell, o’er whom with all the rest
doth rule the Architect of all; and in the Æther \[dwell\] the Stars,
o’er whom the mighty Light-giver the Sun holds sway; but

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

in the Air \[live\] only souls, <span id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_349)
o’er whom doth rule the Moon; and on the Earth \[do dwell\] men and the
rest of living things, o’er whom he who doth happen to be king holds
sway.

40\. The Gods engender, son, the kings it has deserved, to rule \[the
race\] that lives on Earth. The rulers are the emanations of the king,
of whom the nearer to him is more royal than the rest; for that the Sun,
in that ’tis nearer than the Moon to God, is far more vast and potent,
to whom the Moon comes second both in rank and power.

The king, then, is the last of all the other Gods, but first of men; and
so long as he is upon the Earth, he is divorced from his true godship,
but hath something that doth distinguish him from men and which is like
to God.

The soul which is sent down to dwell in him, is from that space which is
above those regions whence \[the souls\] descend to other men. Down from
that space the souls are sent to rule for those two reasons, son.

41\. They who have run a noble, blameless race throughout the cycle of
their lives, and are about to be changed into Gods, \[are born as
kings,\] in order that by exercise of kingship they may train themselves
to use the power the Gods enjoy; while certain souls who are already
Gods, but

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

have in some slight way infringed the rule of life which God inspired,
are born as kings, in order that they may not, in being clothed in
bodies, undergo the punishment of loss of dignity as well as nature, and
that they may not, when they are enfleshed, have the same lot as other
men, but have when bound what they enjoyed when free.

42\. The differences which are, however, in the dispositions shown by
those who play the part of kings, are not determined by distinguishing
their souls, for these are all divine, but by the constitution of the
angels and the daimons who attend on them. For that such souls as these
descending for such purposes do not come down without a guard and
escort; for Justice up above knows how to give to each what is its due
estate e’en though they be made exiles from their country ever fair.

When, then, my son, the angels and the daimons who bring down the soul
are of a warlike kind, it has to keep firm hold of their proclivities,
forgetting its own proper deeds, but all the more remembering the doings
of the other host attached to it.

When they are peaceful, then the soul as well doth order its own course
in peace.

When they love justice, then it too defends the right.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

When they are music-lovers, then it also sings.

And when they are truth-lovers, then it also doth philosophize.

For as it were out of necessity these souls keep a firm hold of the
proclivities of those that bring them here; for they are falling down to
man’s estate, forgetting their own nature, and the farther they depart
from it, the more they have in memory the disposition of those
\[powers\] which shut them \[into bodies\].

43\. Well hast thou, mother, all explained, said Horus. But noble
souls,—how they are born, thou hast not told me yet.

As on the Earth, son Horus, there are states which differ one from
other, so also is it in the case of souls. For they have regions whence
they start; and that which starts from a more glorious place, hath
nobler birth than one which doth not so. For just as among men the free
is thought more noble than the slave—(for that which is superior in
souls and of a ruling nature of necessity subjects what is inferior)—so
also, son, . . . . <span id="fr_350"></span>[1](#fn_350)

\*     \*     \*     \*     \*

44\. And how are male and female souls produced?

Souls, Horus, son, are of the self-same nature

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

in themselves, in that they are from one and the same place where the
Creator modelled them; nor male nor female are they. Sex is a thing of
bodies, not of souls.

That which brings it about that some of them are stouter, some more
delicate, is, son, that \[cosmic\] “air” in which all things are made.
“Air” for the soul is nothing but the body which envelopes it, an
element which is composed of earth and water, air and fire. <span
id="fr_351"></span>[1](#fn_351)

As, then, the composition of the female ones has more of wet and cold,
but less of dry and warm, accordingly the soul which is shut in a plasm
of this kind, becomes relaxed and delicate, just as the contrary is
found to be in case of males.

For in their case there’s more of dry and warm, and less of cold and
wet; wherefore the souls in bodies such as these are sturdy and more
active.

45\. And how do souls become intelligent, O mother mine?

And Isis answered:

The organ of the sight, my son, is swathed in wrappings. When these are
dense and thick, the eye is dim; but when they’re thin and light, then
is the sight most keen. So is it also for the soul. For it as well has
envelopes incorporal appropriate to it, just as it is itself incorporal.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These envelopes
are “airs” which are in us. When these are light and thin and clear,
then is the soul intelligent; but, on the contrary, when they are dense
and thick and turbid, then \[the soul\], as in bad weather, sees not at
distance but only things which lie about its feet.

46\. And Horus said:

What is the reason, mother, that the men outside our holiest land are
not so wise of mind as our compatriots?

And Isis said:

The Earth lies in the middle of the universe upon her back, like to a
human being, with eyes turned up to heaven, and portioned out into as
many regions as there are limbs in man.

She turns her eyes to Heaven as though to her own Sire, <span
id="fr_352"></span>[1](#fn_352) that with his changes she may also bring
about her own.

She hath her head set to the south of all, right shoulder to south-east,
left shoulder to south-west; her feet below the Bear, right foot beneath
its tail, left under its head; her thighs beneath those that succeed the
Bear; her waist beneath the middle \[Stars\].

47\. A sign of this is that men in the south, who dwell upon her head,
are fine about the head and have good hair.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

Those in the east are ready for a fight and archer folk—for this
pertains to the right hand.

Those in the west are steadier and for the most part fight with the left
hand, and what is done by others with the right, they for their part
attribute to the left.

Those underneath the Bear excel in feet and have especially good legs.

Those who come after them a little way, about the zone which is our
present Italy and Greece, they all have well-made thighs and
backs. . . .

Moreover, all these \[northern\] parts being whiter than the rest bear
whiter men upon them.

But since the holiest land of our forebears lies in the midst of Earth,
and that the midst of a man’s body serves as the precinct of the heart
alone, and heart’s the spot from which the soul doth start, the men of
it not only have no less the other things which all the rest possess,
but as a special thing are gifted with intelligence beyond all men and
filled with wisdom, in that they are begotten and brought up above her
heart.

48\. Further, my son, the south being the receiver of the clouds which
mass themselves together from the atmosphere . . . <span
id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_353)

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

For instance, it is just because there is this concentration of them in
the south, that it is said our river doth flow thence, upon the breaking
up of the frost there.

For whensoe’er a cloud <span id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_354) descends,
it turns the air about it into mist, and sends it downward in a kind of
fog; and fog or mist is an impediment not only to the eyes, but also to
the mind.

Whereas the east, O Horus, great in glory, in that ’tis thrown into
confusion and made overhot by the continual risings of the sun, and in
like fashion too, the west, its opposite, in that it suffers the same
things through its descents, <span id="fr_355"></span>[2](#fn_355)
afford the men born in them no conditions for clear observation. And
Boreas with his concordant cold, together with their bodies doth congeal
the minds of men as well.

Whereas the centre of all these being pure and undisturbed, foreknows
both for itself and all that are in it. For, free from trouble, ever it
brings forth, adorns and educates, and only with such weapons wars \[on
men\], and wins the victory, and with consummate skill, like a good

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

satrap, <span id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_356) bestows the fruit of its
own victory upon the vanquished.

49\. This too expound, O lady, mother mine! For what cause is it that
when men still keep alive in long disease, their rational part—their
very reason and their very soul—at times becomes disabled?

And Isis answer made:

Of living things, my son, some are made friends with fire, and some with
water, some with air, and some with earth, and some with two or three of
these, and some with all.

And, on the contrary, again some are made enemies of fire, and some of
water, some of earth, and some of air, and some of two of them, and some
of three, and some of all.

For instance, son, the locust and all flies flee fire; the eagle and the
hawk and all high-flying birds flee water; fish, air and earth; the
snake avoids the open air. Whereas snakes and all creeping things love
earth; all swimming things \[love\] water; winged things, air, of which
they are the citizens; while those that fly still higher \[love\] the
fire and have their habitat near it. Not that some of the animals as
well do not love fire; for instance salamanders, for they even have
their homes in it. It is because one or

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

another of the elements doth form their bodies outer envelope.

50\. Each soul, accordingly, while it is in its body is weighted and
constricted by these four. Moreover it is natural it also should be
pleased with some of them and pained with others.

For this cause, then, it doth not reach the height of its prosperity;
still, as it is divine by nature, e’en while \[wrapped up\] in them, it
struggles and it thinks, though not such thoughts as it would think were
it set free from being bound in bodies.

Moreover if these \[frames\] are swept with storm and stress, or of
disease or fear, then is the soul itself tossed on the waves, as
man <span id="fr_357"></span>[1](#fn_357) upon the deep with nothing
steady under him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_349"></span>[126:1](th327.htm#fr_349) MS. A adds “of
daimones.”

<span id="fn_350"></span>[128:1](th327.htm#fr_350) A lacuna,
unfortunately, here occurs in the text, and must be of some extent, for
the way of both of these souls is not given.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[129:1](th327.htm#fr_351) *Cf.* 45 below.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[130:1](th327.htm#fr_352) *Cf.* *P. S. A.*,
xxiv. 1.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[131:1](th327.htm#fr_353) Something has
evidently fallen out here, as the sentence is nowhere completed.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[132:1](th327.htm#fr_354) Reading νεφέλη for
νεφέλῃ. The text is very faulty.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[132:2](th327.htm#fr_355) These ideas of course
spring from the conception of a flat earth and moving sun. The sun was
thus thought to be nearer the earth at its rising and setting, and
consequently those at the extremes of east and west were thought to be
in danger of being burnt up by its heat.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[133:1](th327.htm#fr_356) Some historical
allusion may perhaps be suspected in this term; but I can find nothing
appropriate to suggest.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[134:1](th327.htm#fr_357) For ἄνθρωπος Meineke
reads ἀνθέρικος (“asphodel”), and compares Callimachus, *H. in Del.*,
193: παλιρροίῃ ἐπινήχεται ἀνθέρικος ὤς. But I see no necessity for this
strained “emendation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary](th328)
