[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti11)  [Next](eti13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### CHAPTER V.

#### THE WRITING OF MY CONFESSION.

Having become a member of the Secret Society as directed by the writer
of the letter I have just read, and having obtained the secrets hinted
at in the mystic directions, my next desire was to find a secluded spot
where, without interruption, I could prepare for publication what I had
gathered surreptitiously in the lodges of the fraternity I designed to
betray. This I entitled "My Confession." Alas! why did my evil genius
prompt me to write it? Why did not some kind angel withhold my hand from
the rash and wicked deed? All I can urge in defense or palliation is
that I was infatuated by the fatal words of the letter, "You must act
what men will call the traitor, but humanity will be the gainer."

In a section of the state in which I resided, a certain creek forms the
boundary line between two townships, and also between two counties.
Crossing this creek, a much traveled road stretches east and west,
uniting the extremes of the great state. Two villages on this road,
about four miles apart, situated on opposite sides of the creek, also
present themselves to my memory, and midway between them, on the north
side of the road, was a substantial farm house. In going west from the
easternmost of these villages, the traveler begins to descend from the
very center of the town. In no place is the grade steep, as the road
lies between the spurs of the hill abutting upon the valley that feeds
the creek I have mentioned. Having reached the valley, the road winds a
short distance to the right, then turning to the left, crosses the
stream, and immediately begins to climb the western hill; here the
ascent is more difficult, for the road lies diagonally over the edge of
the hill. A mile of travel, as I recall the scene, sometimes up a steep,
and again among rich, level farm lands, and then on the very height,
close to the road, within a few feet of it, appears

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the square structure which was, at the time I mention, known as the
Stone Tavern. On the opposite side of the road were located extensive
stables, and a grain barn. In the northeast chamber of that stone
building, during a summer in the twenties, I wrote for publication the
description of the mystic work that my oath should have made forever a
secret, a sacred trust. I am the man who wantonly committed the
deplorable act. Under the infatuation of that alchemical manuscript, I
strove to show the world that I could and would do that which might
never benefit me in the least, but might serve humanity. It was fate. I
was not a bad man, neither malignity, avarice, nor ambition forming a
part of my nature. I was a close student, of a rather retiring
disposition, a stone-mason by trade, careless and indifferent to public
honors, and so thriftless that many trifling neighborhood debts had
accumulated against me.

What I have reluctantly told, for I am forbidden to give the names of
the localities, comprises an abstract of part of the record of my early
life, and will introduce the extraordinary narrative which follows. That
I have spoken the truth, and in no manner overdrawn, will be silently
evidenced by hundreds of brethren, both of the occult society and the
fraternal brotherhood, with which I united, who can (if they will)
testify to the accuracy of the narrative. They know the story of my
crime and disgrace; only myself and God know the full retribution that
followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Kidnapped](eti13)
