[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti38)  [Next](eti40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

### CHAPTER XXXII.

#### MATTER IS RETARDED MOTION.

"It is possible—is it not?—for you to imagine a continuous volley of
iron balls passing near you in one line, in a horizontal direction, with
considerable velocity. Suppose that a pane of glass were to be gradually
moved so that a corner of it would be struck by one of the balls; then
the entire sheet of glass would be shivered by the concussion, even
though the bullet struck but a single spot of glass, the point of
contact covering only a small area. Imagine now that the velocity of the
volley of bullets be increased a thousand fold; then a plate of glass
thrust into their track would be smoothly cut, as though with a file
that would gnaw its way without producing a single radiating fracture. A
person standing near the volley would now hear a deep purr or growling
sound, caused by the friction between the bullets and the air. Increase
gradually the rapidity of their motion, and this growl would become more
acute, passing from a deep, low murmur, into one less grave, and as the
velocity increased, the tone would become sharper, and at last
piercingly shrill. Increase now the rapidity of the train of bullets
again, and again the notes would decrease in turn, passing back again
successively through the several keys that had preceded, and finally
would reach the low growl which first struck the ear, and with a further
increase of speed silence would ensue, silence evermore, regardless of
increasing velocity. <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) From these
hundreds of miles in a second at which the volley is now passing, let
the rapidity be augmented a thousand times, reaching in their flight
into millions of miles each second, and to the eye, from the point where
the sound disappeared, as the velocity increased, a dim redness would
appear, a glow just perceptible,

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

indicating to the sense of sight, by a continuous line, the track of the
moving missiles. To all appearance, the line would be as uniform as an
illuminated pencil mark, even though the several integral bullets of the
trail might be separated one from another by miles of space. Let a pane
of glass now be thrust across their track, and from the point of contact
a shower of sparks would fly, and the edges of glass close to either
side of the orifice would be shown, on withdrawing the glass, to have
been fused. Conceive now that the velocity of the bullets be doubled and
trebled, again and again, the line of red light becomes brighter, then
brilliant, and finally as the velocity increases, at a certain point
pure white results, and to man's sense the trail would now be a
continuous something, as solid as a bar of metal if at a white heat, and
(even if the bullets were a thousand miles apart) man could not bring
proof of their separate existence to his senses. That portion of a pane
of glass or other substance, even steel or adamant, which should cross
its track now would simply melt away, the portion excised and carried
out of that pathway neither showing itself as scintillations, nor as
fragments of matter. The solid would instantly liquefy, and would spread
itself as a thin film over the surface of each ball of that white, hot
mass of fleeing metal, now to all essential conditions as uniform as a
bar of iron. Madly increase the velocity to millions upon millions of
miles per second, and the heat will disappear gradually as did the
sound, while the bright light will pass backward successively through
the primary shades of color that are now known to man, beginning with
violet, and ending with red, and as the red fades away the train of
bullets will disappear to the sense of man. Neither light nor sound now
accompanies the volley, neither the human eye nor the human ear can
perceive its presence. Drop a pane of glass or any other object edgewise
through it, and it gives to the sense of man no evidence; the molecules
of the glass separate from in front to close in from behind, and the
moving train passes through it as freely as light, leaving the surface
of the glass unaffected."

"Hold," I interrupted; "that would be as one quality of matter passing
through another quality of matter without disturbance to either, and it
is a law in physics that two substances can not occupy the same space at
the same time."

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

"That law holds good as man understands the subject, but bullets are no
longer matter. Motion of mass was first changed into motion of
molecules, and motion of molecule became finally augmented into motion
of free force entities as the bullets disintegrated into molecular
corpuscles, and then were dissociated, atoms resulting. At this last
point the sense of vision, and of touch, ceased to be affected by that
moving column (neither matter nor force), and at the next jump in
velocity the atoms themselves disappeared, and free intangible motion
resulted—nothing, vacancy.

"This result is the all-pervading spirit of space (the ether of
mankind), as solid as adamant and as mobile as vacuity. If you can
reverse the order of this phenomenon, and imagine an irregular
retardation of the rapidity of such atomic motion, you can read the
story of the formation of the material universe. Follow the chain
backward, and with the decrease of velocity, motion becomes tangible
matter again, and in accordance with conditions governing the change of
motion into matter, from time to time the various elements successively
appear. The planets may grow without and within, and ethereal space can
generate elemental dirt. If you can conceive of an intermediate
condition whereby pure space motion becomes partly tangible, and yet is
not gross enough to be earthy matter, you can imagine how such forces as
man is acquainted with, light, heat, electricity, magnetism, or gravity
even are produced, for these are also disturbances in space motion. It
should be easily understood that, according to the same simple
principle, other elements and unknown forces as well, now imperceptible
to man's limited faculties, could be and are formed outside and inside
his field of perception."

"I fear that I can not comprehend all this," I answered.

"So I feared, and perhaps I have given you this lesson too soon,
although some time ago you asked me to teach you concerning the
assertion that electricity, light, heat, magnetism, and gravity are
disturbances, and you said, 'Disturbances of what?' Think the lesson
over, and you will perceive that it is easy. Let us hope that the time
will come when we will be able to glance beneath the rough, material,
earth surface knowledge that man has acquired, and experience the mind
expansion that leads,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

to the blissful insight possessed by superior beings who do not have to
contend with the rasping elements that encompass all who dwell upon the
surface of the earth."

I pondered over these words, and a vague light, an undefined,
inexpressible something that I could not put into words broke into my
mind; I inferred that we were destined to meet with persons, or
existences, possessed of new senses, of a mind development that man had
not reached, and I was on the point of questioning my pilot when the
motion of the boat was suspended, land appeared ahead, we drew up to it,
and disembarked. Lifting the boat from the water my guide placed it on
land at the edge of the motionless lake, and we resumed our journey. The
scenery seemed but little changed from that of the latter part of our
previous line of travel down the inclined plane of the opposite side of
the lake that we had crossed. The direction was still downward after
leaving the high ridge that bordered the edge of the lake, the floor of
the cavern being usually smooth, although occasionally it was rough and
covered with stony debris. The mysterious light grew perceptibly
brighter as we progressed, the fog-like halo previously mentioned became
less dense, and the ring of obscurity widened rapidly. I could
distinctly perceive objects at a great distance. I turned to my
companion to ask why this was, and he replied:

"Because we are leaving one of the undiscovered conditions of the upper
atmosphere that disturbs the sunlight."

"Do you say that the atmosphere is composed of substances unknown to
man?"

"Yes; several of them are gases, and others are qualities of space
condition, neither gas, liquid, nor solid. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) One particularly interferes with light in
its passage. It is an entity that is not moved by the motion of the air,
and is unequally distributed over the earth's surface. As we ascend
above the earth it decreases, so it does as we descend into it. It is
not vapor of water, is neither smoke, nor a true gas, and is as yet
sensible to

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

man only by its power of modifying the intensity of light. It has no
color, is chemically inactive, and yet modifies the sun's rays so as to
blot objects from view at a comparatively small distance from a person
on the face of the earth. That this fact is known to man is evident from
the knowledge he possesses of the difference in the power of his organs
of vision at different parts of the earth. His sight is especially acute
on the table lands of the Western Territories."

"I have been told," I answered, "that vapor of water causes this
obscuration, or absorption, of light."

"Vapor of water, unless in strata of different densities, is absolutely
transparent, and presents no obstacle to the passage of light," he said.
"When vapor obstructs light it is owing to impurities contained in it,
to currents of varying densities, or wave motions, or to a mechanical
mixture of condensed water and air, whereby multitudes of tiny globular
water surfaces are produced. Pure vapor of water, free from motion, is
passive to the sunlight."

"I can scarcely believe that a substance such as you describe, or that
any constituent of the air, can have escaped the perception of the
chemist," I replied.

In, as I thought, a facetious manner he repeated after me the word
"chemist," and continued:

"Have chemists detected the ether of Aristotle, that you have mentioned,
and I have defined, which scientists nevertheless accept pervades all
space and every description of matter, and that I have told you is
really matter itself changed into ultra atomic motion? Have chemists
explained why one object is transparent, and another of equal weight and
solidity is opaque? Have chemists told you why vermilion is red and
indigo is blue (the statement that they respectively reflect these rays
of light is not an explanation of the cause for such action)? Have
chemists told you why the prism disarranges or distorts sunlight to
produce the abnormal hues that men assume compose elementary rays of
light? Have chemists explained anything concerning the why or wherefore
of the attributes of matter, or force, or even proven that the so-called
primary forms of matter, or elements, are not compounds? Upon the
contrary, does not the evolution that results in the recorded
discoveries of the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

chemist foretell, or at least indicate, the possible future of the art,
and promise that surrounding mysteries are yet to be developed and
expanded into open truths, thus elaborating hidden forces; and that
other form's of matter and unseen force expressions, are destined to
spring into existence as the sciences progress? The chemist of to-day is
groping in darkness; he is a novice as compared with the elaborated
chemist of the near future; the imperfectly seen of the present, the
silent and unsuspected, will become distinctly visible in a time that is
to come, and a brightening of the intellect by these successively upward
steps, up stairs of science, will, if science serves herself best,
broaden the mind and give power to the imagination, resulting finally
in"—

He hesitated.

"Go on," I said.

"The passage of mortal man, with the faculties of man intact, into
communion with the spirit world."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[218:\*](eti39.htm#fr_9) A scientific critic
seems to think that the shrill cry would cease instantly and not
gradually. However, science has been at fault more than once, and I do
not care to take liberties with this statement.—J. U. L.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[221:\*](eti39.htm#fr_10) This has since been
partly supported by the discovery of the element Argon. However, the
statement has been recorded many years. Miss Ella Burbige, stenographer,
Newport, Ky., copied the original in 1887; Mr. S. D. Rouse, attorney,
Covington, Ky., read it in 1889; Mr. Russell Errett, editor of the
Christian Standard, in 1890, and Mr. H. C. Meader, President of the
American Ticket Brokers’ Association, in 1892. It seems proper to make
this explanation in order to absolve the author from any charge of
plagiarism, for each of these persons will recall distinctly this
improbable \[then\] assertion.—J. U. L.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. “A Study of Science Is a Study of God.”—Communing
With Angels](eti40)
