[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eti62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1892062186/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Etidorhpa*, by John Uri Lloyd, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

### ETIDORHPA AS A WORK OF ART.

#### PROFESSOR S. W. WILLIAMS, WYOMING, OHIO.

If a fine statue or a stately cathedral is a poem in marble, a
masterpiece of the printer's art may be called a poem in typography.
Such is Etidorhpa. In its paper, composition, presswork, illustrations,
and binding—it is the perfection of beauty. While there is nothing gaudy
in its. outward appearance, there is throughout a display of good taste.
The simplicity of its neatness, like that of a handsome woman, is its
great charm. Elegance does not consist in show nor wealth in glitter; so
the richest as well as the costliest garb may be rich in its very
plainness. The illustrations were drawn and engraved expressly for this
work, and consist of twenty-one full-page, half-tone cuts, and over
thirty half-page and text cuts, besides two photogravures. The best
artistic skill was employed to produce them, and the printing was
carefully attended to, so as to secure the finest effect. Only enameled
book paper is used; and this, with the wide margins, gilt top, trimmed
edges, and clear impressions of the type, makes the pages restful to the
eyes in reading or looking at them. The jacket, or cover, which protects
the binding, is of heavy paper, and bears the same imprint as the book
itself. Altogether, as an elegant specimen of the bookmakers’ art it is
a credit to the trade. All honor to the compositors who set the type,
the artists who drew and engraved the illustrations, the electrotyper
who put the forms into plate, the pressman who worked off the sheets,
and the binder who gathered and bound them in this volume.

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

#### REVIEWS OF ETIDORHPA.

The present is an age of expectancy, of anticipation, and of prophecy;
and the invention or discovery or production that occupies the attention
of the busy world, as it rushes on its self-observed way, for more than
the passing nine day's

|                                                |
|------------------------------------------------|
| **B. O. Flower, Editor of The Arena, Boston**. |

wonder, must needs be something great indeed. Such a production has now
appeared in the literary world in the form of the volume entitled
"Etidorhpa, or the End of Earth;" the very title of which is so striking
as to arrest the attention at once.

A most remarkable book. . . . Surpasses, in my judgment, any thing that
has been written by the elder Dumas or Jules Verne, while in moral
purpose it is equal to Hugo at his best. . . . It appeals to the
thoughtful scientist no less than to the lover of fascinating romance.

 

In summing, I would say that I have found the book distinctly
stimulating. It is odd, but with the oddity of force. It has passages of
uncanny imagination, but they excellently evade the enormous and
extravagant. It is a book that by its title and by such features

|                                                        |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| **Mr. Herbert Bates, Commercial Gazette, Cincinnati**. |

as strike one at a hurried glance might easily in the  repel. Yet it is
a book that, studied carefully, calls for re-reading and deep
meditation. Its theories are capable of scientific demonstration, its
imaginings, while they may not be fact, are always consistent with it.
The reader who lets the outside repel him errs sadly. Let him read it,
and he will be as changed in his position toward it, as ready to convert
others, as is the reviewer, who picked it up with foreboding and laid it
down with the sense of having read great thoughts.

 

"The End of Earth" is not like any other book. The charm of adventure,
the excitement of romance, the stimulating heat of controversy, the keen
pursuit of scientific truth, the glow of moral enthusiasm, are all found
in its pages. The book may be described

|                        |
|------------------------|
| **Dr. W. H. Venable**. |

as a sort of philosophical fiction, containing much exact scientific
truth, many hold. theories, and much ingenious speculation on the nature
and destiny of man. . . . The occult and esoteric character of the
discussions adds a strange fascination to them. We can hardly classify,
bye ordinary rules, a work so unusual in form and purpose, so discursive
in subject-matter, so unconventional in its appeals to reason, religion
and morality. . . . The direct teaching of the book, in so far as it
aims to influence conduct, is always lofty and pure.

 

"*My Dear Sir:* Let me thank you most heartily for sending me the
special copy of your wonderful book 'Etidorhpa,' which I shall ever
value. I may say that when by chance I found it in

|                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| **Letter from Sir Henry Irving, to the Author**. |

Cincinnati I read it with the greatest interest and  pleasure, and was
so struck by it that I have sent copies to several friends of mine here
and at home. I hope I may have the pleasure of meeting you some day
either here or in London. I remain, sincerely yours,

HENRY IRVING.

  "20th March, 1896."

 

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

If a fine statute or a stately cathedral is a poem in marble, a
masterpiece of the printer's art may be called a poem in typography.
Such is "Etidorhpa." In its paper, composition, presswork,
illustrations, and

|                                                       |
|-------------------------------------------------------|
| **Etidorhpa as a work of art. Prof. S. W. Williams**. |

binding—it is the perfection of beauty. While there is nothing gaudy in
its outward appearance, there is throughout a display of good taste.

The illustrations were drawn and engraved expressly for this work, and
consist of twenty-one full-page, half-tone cuts, and over thirty
half-page and text cuts, besides two photogravures. The best artistic
skill was employed to produce them, and the printing was carefully
attended to, so as to secure the finest effect.

 

No one could have written the chapter on the "Food of Man" but Professor
Lloyd; no one else knows and thinks of these subjects in a similar way.
. . . The "old man's" description of "the spirit of

|                                           |
|-------------------------------------------|
| **Eclectic Medical Journal, Cincinnati**. |

stone," "the spirit of plants," and finally, "the spirit of man," is
very fine, but those who hear Professor Lloyd lecture catch Lloyd's
impulses throughout. The only regret one has in reading this entrancing
work is, that it ends unexpectedly, for the End of Earth comes without a
catastrophe. It should have been a hundred pages longer; the reader
yearns for more, and closes the book wistfully.

 

One of the great charms of the book is the space between the lines,
which only the initiated can thoroughly comprehend. Don't fail to read
and

|                        |
|------------------------|
| **New Idea, Detroit**. |

re-read Etidorhpa. Be sure and read it in the light of contemporaneous
literature, for without doing so, its true beauty will not appear. Aside
from its subject-matter, the excellency of the workmanship displayed by
the printer, and artistic beauty of the illustrations, will make
Etidorhpa an ornament to any library.

 

This book, to use the words of the editor of the Chicago Inter-Ocean, is
"the literary novelty of the year." . . . In a literary

|                         |
|-------------------------|
| **Cincinnati Student**. |

sense, according to all reviewers, it abounds with "word-paintings of
the highest order"—in some chapters being "terrible" in its vividness,
several critics asserting that Dante's Inferno has nothing more
realistic. . . .

 

We have read it with absorbed interest, the vividly-depicted scenes of
each stage in the miraculous journey forming a theme which enthralls

|                                                         |
|---------------------------------------------------------|
| **The British and Colonial Druggist, London, England**. |

the reader till the last page is turned. Many new views of natural laws
are given by the communicator, and argued between him and Drury, into
which, and into the ultimate intent of Etidorhpa, we will not attempt to
enter, but will leave it for each reader to peruse, and draw his own
conclusions. . . . Professor Lloyd's style is quaint and polished, and
perfectly clear. The printing and paper are all that can be desired, and
an abundance of artistic and striking illustrations are admirably
reproduced.

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

Etidorhpa, the End of the Earth, is in all respects the worthiest
presentation of occult teachings under the attractive guise of fiction
that has yet been written. Its author, Mr. John Uri Lloyd, of
Cincinnati, as a scientist and writer on pharmaceutical topics, has
already

|                     |
|---------------------|
| **New York World**. |

a more than national reputation, but only his most intimate friends have
been aware that he was an advanced student of occultism. His book is
charmingly written, some of its passages being really eloquent; as, for
instance, the apostrophe to Aphrodite—whose name is reversed to make the
title of the story. It has as thrilling situations and startling
phenomena as imagination has ever conceived. . .

There is no confusion between experiences and illusions, such as are
common in the works of less instructed and conscientious writers
treating of such matters. He know; where to draw the line and how to
impress perception of it, as in the four awful nightmare chapters
illustrating the curse of drink. Etidorhpa will be best appreciated by
those who have "traveled East in search of light and knowledge." . . .

 

We are disposed to think "Etidorhpa" the most

|                                |
|--------------------------------|
| **John Clark Ridpath, LL. D**. |

unique, original, and suggestive new book that we have seen in this the
last decade of a not unfruitful century.

 

It is as fascinating as the richest romance by Dumas, and mysterious and
awe-inspiring as the wild flights of Verne. Hugo wrote nothing more
impassioned than those terrible chapters where "The-Man-Who-Did-It"
drinks liquor from the mushroom cup. There never

|                             |
|-----------------------------|
| **Times-Star, Cincinnati**. |

was a book like it. It falls partly in many classes, yet lies outside of
all. it will interest all sorts and conditions of men and it has that in
it which may make it popular as the most sensational novel of the day.
Intricate plotting, marvelous mysteries, clear-cut science without
empiricism, speculative reasoning, sermonizing, historical facts, and
bold theorizing make up the tissue of the story, while the spirit of
Etidorhpa, the spirit of love, pervades it all. . . . Happy is the
scientist who can present science in a form so inviting as to charm not
only the scholars of his own profession, but the laymen besides. This,
Professor John Uri Lloyd has done in his Etidorhpa.

 

For eighteen years the writer has been seated at his desk, and all kinds
of books have been passed in review, but has never before met with such
a stumper as Etidorhpa. Its name is a stunner, and its title-page,
head-lines, and [weird](errata.htm#3), artistic pictures send you

|                               |
|-------------------------------|
| **The Inter-Ocean, Chicago**. |

such a ghastly welcome as to make goblins on the walls and fill the
close room with spooks and mystery. The writer has only known of
Professor Lloyd as a scientist and an expert in the most occult art of
the pharmacist, and can scarcely conceive him in the rôle of the mystic
and romancer in the region heretofore sacred to the tread of the
supernatural. . The book is the literary novelty of the year, but those
interested in such lines of thought will forget its novelties in a
profound interest in the themes discussed.

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

The work stands so entirely alone in literature, and possesses such a
marvelous versatility of thought and idea, that, in describing it, we
are at a loss for comparison. In its scope it comprises alchemy,
chemistry,

|                                |
|--------------------------------|
| **The Chicago Medical Times**. |

science in general, philosophy, metaphysics, morals, biology, sociology,
theosophy, materialism, and theism—the natural and supernatural. . . .
It is almost impossible to describe the character of the work. It is
realistic in expression, and weird beyond Hawthorne's utmost flights. It
excels Bulwer-Lytton's Coming Race and Jules Verne's most extreme fancy.
It equals Dante in vividness and eccentricity of plot. . . . The entire
tone of the work is elevating. It encourages thought of all that is
ennobling and pure. It teaches a belief and a faith in God and holy
things, and shows God's supervision over all his works. It is an
allegory of the life of one who desires to separate himself from the
debasing influences of earth, and aspires to a pure and noble existence,
as beautiful and as true to the existing conditions of human life as
Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress. The sorrow; the struggle with self; the
physical burdens; the indescribable temptations with the presence and
assistance of those who would assist in [overcoming](errata.htm#4) them;
the dark hours, Vanity Fair, and the Beulahland, are all there.

 

In every respect the volume bearing the title Etidorhpa, or the End of
the Earth, is a most remarkable book. Typographically, it is both unique
and artistic—as near perfection in conception and execution as

|                           |
|---------------------------|
| **Indianapolis Journal**. |

can be conceived. . . . The author is John Uri Lloyd, of Cincinnati, a
scientific writer whose pharmaceutical treatises are widely known and
highly valued. That a man whose mind and time have been engrossed with
the affairs of a specialist and man of affairs could have found time to
enter the field of speculation, and there display not only the most
extensive knowledge of the exact natural sciences, and refute what is
held to be scientific truth with bold theories and ingenious
speculations on the nature and destiny of man is marvelous. . . .

The Addenda is as original as the book itself, consisting, as it does,
of a list of names, some of whom are not subscribers, but to whom the
author is deeply obliged, or whom he regards as very dear friends, and
those of a few whom he personally admires. . . . If each of them has a
copy of Etidorhpa, or the End of the Earth, he possesses a book which is
not like any other book in the world.

 

It relates to a journey made by the old man under the guidance of a
peculiar being into the interior of the earth. The incidents of this
journey overshadow any thing that Verne ever wrote in his palmiest days.

|                       |
|-----------------------|
| **Cleveland Leader**. |

But perhaps the most singular part of it is that they are  all based on
scientific grounds. Dr. Lloyd, the author of the volume, is one of the
deepest students, and is well known as a profound writer on subjects
pertaining to his profession, as well as one who has taken much pains in
studying the occult sciences. . . . The book is a very pleasant one to
read, a little redundant at times, but full of information. . . .
Readers who succeed in securing it will be very lucky indeed.
