[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ams05)  [Next](ams07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EEP30M/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Miracle in Stone: The Great Pyramid*, by Joesph A. Seiss, \[1877\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">OLD Time, himself so old, is like a child,  
And can't remember when these blocks were piled  
Or caverns scooped; but, with amazed eye,  
He seems to pause, like other standers-by,  
Half thinking how the wonders here made known  
Were born in ages older than his own.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span id="img_10100"></span> ![Lecture Second](img/10100.jpg)

### MODERN DISCOVERIES AND BIBLICAL CONNECTIONS.

<span id="img_10101"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![I](img/10101.jpg) |

T was lately my privilege to present some account of the Great Pyramid,
and of that wonderful scientific knowledge embodied in it which has
induced the belief that a higher wisdom than man's was concerned in its
erection. I now resume the subject to present still other facts tending
to the same conclusion.

A learned and able historical critic and lecturer recently stated to his
audience in this city that what is thus claimed for the Great Pyramid
may be true, and likely is true. And if such is the probability or even
the possibility, the matter is not only worthy of our examination, but
it would seem to be our duty to test it in every possible field of
inquiry.

The theory is somewhat startling, and altogether so new and wonderful
that some will doubtless be disposed to shrink from it as nothing but an
extravagant fancy. It ought, however, to modify such a feeling when we
remember that we live in an age of wonders,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

an age which answers well to the ancient prophecy of a time bordering on
the end, when men would become great travellers and explorers, and as a
consequence the stock of human knowledge be remarkably increased.

MODERN PROGRESS AND DISCOVERIES.

There certainly never was another period of such intense running to and
fro in the earth or of such astounding growth in the range of human
information as this in which we live. Events, inventions, and
discoveries the most momentous crowd upon each other beyond our power to
keep pace with them. Their multiplicity bewilders and confounds us. The
whole life, condition, and dwelling-place of civilized man is being
revolutionized by them. We travel now in palaces with every ease and
luxury, and faster than the winds. We converse by electricity across
oceans and continents. We spin, and knit, and weave, and print, and even
calculate by automatic machinery. We copy nature and record her aspects
by sunbeams. The whole world has become one neighborhood. Men have made
visits to the poles, mapped the currents of the sea, belted the earth in
every direction with lines of railroads and steamers, thrown down

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

the walls which for ages separated between nations, brought all types
and kindreds of men face to face, and rendered a journey around the
globe a mere summer's recreation.

And especially in recoveries from the long-forgotten past, in the
reconstruction of history before the historic periods, and in the
bringing to light of the wisdom and science of primeval ages, our times
have been extraordinarily rich and fruitful. The last quarter of a
century has been a very resurrection time in this regard. Ages of which
we had only the dimmest hints have been marvellously recalled from their
oblivion. With the ability to decipher hieroglyphics and cuneiform
inscriptions, old worlds have newly opened to our contemplation. By the
mastery of languages, the tracing of them to their primal sources and
connections, the searching out and bringing together of the scattered
fragments of antiquity, and the exhumation of ancient remains, the
original migrations of the race have become traceable, and much of their
long-lost history has been reclaimed. Things hitherto referred to the
department of myth, fable, and dream, have suddenly assumed the
character of authentic traditions. A little while ago, "Erech, and
Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar,"

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

and Calah, and Resin of Asshur, and Ellasar, and "Ur of the Chaldees,"
were mere names in Genesis, with scarce another known trace of them; but
the mounds of Mesopotamia have yielded up their bricks and stones to
modern research, and their long-silent tongues have been loosed to tell
where these places . stood and what mighty peoples once inhabited them.
Babylon and Nineveh have thus unbosomed their records to testify how
truly the Bible spoke of them and what wealth, luxury, arrogance, and
power once were theirs. The names and exploits of their kings, their
conquests, their religions, their gods, their sciences, and their styles
of life now stand in many instances revealed before our eyes. Arabia,
till lately thought to be a mere desert waste, and so marked on the
maps, has disclosed grand seats of empire, with civilizations once
existent there superior even to Greece and Rome. Moab's rocks have
become vocal with attestations of the sacred records. Bashan's giant
cities, and houses covered with stone, and gates and doors of hinged
rocks, and walls and bars proportioned to their once giant occupants,
have been visited and their ancient wonders verified. Palestine has been
resurveyed, its old localities identified, and the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

miracles of its history marvellously authenticated. Schliemann is
uncovering Homeric cities and bringing up Homeric heroes and the old
Homeric civilization out of their long-lost tombs. Even the whole way
back through prehistoric ages to Nimrod and Noah is being laid open and
lighted up by modern explorations. And why should it amaze us that from
the land of Egypt also,—that land of oldest and most numerous
monuments,—that land where nothing perishes,—that land so specially
chosen of God as the theatre of his most stupendous miracles,—there
should also be a bursting forth of unsuspected light to mingle some
superior beams with the general illumination?

EGYPT'S PAST.

And if perchance these new disclosures should be of a character more
sacred and imposing than what is being exhumed in other lands, it is
what we might reasonably anticipate from a country so singularly linked
with some of the most marvellous Divine administrations. It is a type of
the world, indeed, but in its milder aspect; the darker type is Babylon.
Even Bunsen tells us that Egypt has ever been the instrument for
furthering

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

the great designs of Providence. It has been at least the principal
background of the most illustrious displays which have marked the career
of God's chosen people. Israel could not become a nation without Egypt.
The first and greatest of Israel's prophets was rescued from a watery
grave, nurtured, schooled, and outwardly fitted for his sublime legation
by the daughter of Egypt's king. Abraham himself, though from quite
another section of the world, was ministered unto by Egypt. Joseph
became the illustrious type of Christ by connection with Egypt. Humanly
speaking, Jacob and his house would have come to a sad end had it not
been for Egypt, which furnished him with bread, welcomed him to its
richest lands, and gave his body a royal burial when he died. To Egypt's
sovereign God sent that double dream of the kine and the ears of corn,
which proved the means of Joseph's exaltation and of the salvation of so
many peoples. Even when the blessed Jesus was born into our world Egypt
was his asylum from the bloody sword of Herod, and once more and most
literally of all were those words of Jehovah fulfilled, "Out of Egypt
have I called my son." It was Egypt that gave to mankind the first
translation of the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hebrew Scriptures.
It was Egypt that proved the stronghold of Christianity after Jerusalem
fell. It is from Egypt that we have the noblest and greatest fathers of
the Christian Church. And however ignoble now may be the land or its
population, we may rest assured that God has something further to
accomplish by means of a country of which he has thus availed himself in
the past, and that out of it will yet. come some of the greatest of
sacred marvels which are to mark the closing periods of time.

THE GREAT PYRAMID'S DISCLOSURES.

Some may doubt with regard to such anticipations; but they are already
being realized in the recent revelations of the Great Pyramid. For forty
centuries enshrouded in the deepest mystery, that mighty pillar has at
length begun to yield up its secrets. As a mere building it stands at
the head of the world, in age, in vastness of dimensions, in perfection
of workmanship, and in the practical mastery of problems too hard for
all our boasted modern art and machinery. There is not an instance in
all the vast structure in which its architects miscalculated or failed.
They built for permanence. They planned their work to survive

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

all the commotions of nature and all the Vandalism of man. Signally,
also, have they succeeded. Not a stone necessary to its ulterior purpose
has come short of its office. A monument has thus come down to us from
beyond the classic ages which exalts and dignifies the land in which it
stands. It is an edifice of stones so wisely chosen, so justly prepared,
so wonderfully handled, so admirably joined, and in the proper places so
exquisitely cut and polished, that it is without an equal in any land.
It is likewise pervaded with the highest intelligence. There is not an
inch of it which does not speak. Even after the lapse of four thousand
years of observation, study, and experience, there is not a nation or
people whose wisdom or every-day affairs it is not capable of improving.
There is reason to think that we have not yet reached the fulness of its
grand symbolizations; but if nothing more should come of the further
study of it, enough has been ascertained to render it the most
interesting problem of our times.

THE PYRAMID AND THE PROPHETS.

It would also seem as if God's inspired prophets knew of this marvellous
pillar and

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

regarded it as a sacred. wonder. The Greeks as early as Alexander's time
placed it at the head of their list of "the seven wonders of the world."
But Jeremiah before them wrote of "signs and wonders in the land of
Egypt," and of the placing of them there by "the Great, the Mighty God,
the Lord of hosts" (Jer. 32: 18-20), which would seem to refer to this
pyramid. He was in Egypt when he made this record. He went there at the
fall of Jerusalem that he might write his prophecies and send them to
his captive countrymen in Babylon. His method was to fortify his
testimony by appealing to all the records and monuments which Jehovah
had made of his power and greatness in the earth. He accordingly refers
to "signs and wonders in the land of Egypt," of which he says that they
still existed when he wrote,—"unto this day." He is commonly thought to
allude to the miracles of the Exodus, which certainly were "signs and
wonders" exactly to his purpose. But those are specifically noted in a
subsequent verse, and in phraseology better suited to them. The language
here suggests something monumental, something locally fixed. It
naturally implies a Divine memorial, continuously abiding, and then
still to be seen in

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egypt. It was
something "set" there. The word is the same in Hebrew and in English,
and with much the same sense in both. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19) It may be metaphorically used with regard
to miracles, but when used of things continuous for hundreds of years
after the placing, the sense is cramped and strained when applied to
miracles like those of the Exodus, which disappeared with the relenting
of Pharaoh and the departure of Israel. So keenly has this been felt
that critics have been forced to speak of a probable substitution of one
word in place of another, and men have cast about for some remaining
physical marks of the Mosaic miracles in order to satisfy the terms of
the record. Hence we read in Trapp's Commentary on the passage, "Orosis
writeth that the tracks of Pharaoh's chariot-wheels are yet to be seen
at the Red Sea!" The Great Pyramid on the new hypothesis would nobly
help such critics and commentators out of the mud, and grandly meet the
exact phraseology of the prophet. Interpreted then by the most cogent
laws of language we here have a Scriptural recognition

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

of some enduring monument in Egypt, built by God's appointment, and
meant to be a witness to him.

Isaiah makes a similar reference of a still more circumstantial and
positive character. In chap. 19: 19, 20, he prophesies, "In that day
shall there be an altar to the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt,
and a pillar at the border thereof to the Lord, and it shall be for a
sign and for a witness unto the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt."

This "altar" and "pillar" are not two things, but one and the same as
sundry expositors have observed. The language is poetical, and has the
common parallelism of Hebrew poetry. Given in the form and sense of the
original, it would read

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"In that day there is an altar to Jehovah  
   In the midst of the land of Egypt;  
Even a pillar at the border thereof to Jehovah,  
And it shall be for a sign and witness to Jehovah of hosts  
    In the land of Egypt."</span>

</div>

Everything in this prophecy seems to look to the Great Pyramid. It
refers to some specific and telling monument, and all its terms most
fully apply to this marvellous pillar. There is nothing else known to
which they do apply in literal accuracy and fulness.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

Note how admirably the *titles* fit. "Altar" in Hebrew means "the lion
of God." The Great Pyramid is pre-eminently the lion among all earthly
buildings, and the new theory claims that it is Divine. The altar as
described by Ezekiel is largely pyramidal in form, and is called "the
mountain of God." And a mountain, surely, is the Great Pyramid, and one
of a very remarkable character. The sacred books of the Hindoos call it
a mountain—*Rucm-adri*—"the golden mountain." It is "a pillar," and
hence not a sacrificial but a memorial altar. It is a mammoth
obelisk,—one great individual shaft,—and now also believed to be sacred.

The *location* likewise corresponds. The Great Pyramid is the hub or
centre of Egypt's curved shoreline, and so is "in the midst of the
land," as nothing else to be thought of ever was. Yet it is also "at the
border thereof." It stands on the extreme southern limit of Lower Egypt,
and on the natural dividing line between the two Egypts. It is thus
doubly "in the midst" and doubly "at the border."

The time also answers. Six times the note is sounded, and in every
instance in the usual Messianic and eschatological formula—"in

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

that day,"—a day which nowhere finally locates this side of the period
of the restitution of all things." Whatever else the prediction may
cover, it cannot therefore be considered exhausted yet, and necessarily
brings us down to the times bordering on the end. By permission of
Ptolemy Philometor, certain Jews built a quasi temple and altar at
Heliopolis, which some take as the subject of the prophecy. But that
erection was against the law and could not be called Divine, though by
man's self-will intended to be so. Besides, that was an altar of
sacrifice and not a memorial pillar as here described. Others think the
reference is to the establishment of churches in Egypt, which were
numerous in the early Christian ages. But these properly had no visible
local altar at all, neither had they any one monumental pillar "to
answer this description. When this altar gives forth its witness to
Jehovah, Egypt, Assyria, and Israel are to become a holy triad of
divinely approved peoples, which has never yet occurred. "A Saviour, and
a great one," is then to come to Egypt, and deliver from all oppressors.
But this is the language designating the glorious Redeemer of the world,
and we degrade and profane it by applying it as some have done to

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the pagan conqueror, Alexander. Christ, indeed, came to Egypt in his
infancy, and afterwards in his Gospel, but never in the character of a
national deliverer. We therefore look in vain for any true and
exhaustive fulfilment of this prophecy in the past. It must refer to the
latter times, and it fits to nothing known but the Great Pyramid. Even
Vitringa, as early as the beginning of the last century, threw out the
idea in his commentary on this place that some one or other of the
existing monuments of Egypt is here involved.

THE PYRAMID AND THE BOOK OF JOB.

There is a still more distinct reference to the Great Pyramid in the
Book of Job, 38: 1-7. We there have one of the grandest descriptions in
the Bible. The speaker is God, and the subject is the creation of the
earth. The picture is the building of an edifice. Elsewhere in the book
the earth is said to be hung upon nothing; so that we must not suppose
ignorance of the real facts when the earth is here likened to a building
resting on foundations. To overwhelm the pride of the human
understanding, the Lord answered Job out of the whirlwind and said, "Who
is this that darkeneth counsel by words without

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

knowledge? Gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee,
and answer thou me. Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the
earth? Declare, if thou hast understanding. Who laid the measures
thereof, if thou knowest? Or who hath stretched the line upon it?
Whereupon are the foundations fastened \[or "made to sink" as a seal
into wax\]? Or who laid the cornerstone thereof, when the morning stars
sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?"

Behold here the architecture of God! The terms are those of the
geometer—the master builder. Here are the bases, the jointings, the
lines, the height, the corner-stone, the measures!" And the style of the
building is unquestionably the Pyramid. That "cornerstone" spoken of in
the singular, its emphatic isolation from "the foundations," and the
singing and shouting of the heavenly hosts over the mighty achievement
at the laying of that particular stone, require the proper pyramidal
edifice. The picture will not interpret of anything else. That
corner-stone could not be at the base, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20) for others were there against

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

which no such marked distinction in truth existed, and its laying would
then have been at the beginning, at which time this celestial
celebration would be out of place. Even Barnes, contrary to the
erroneous imagery by which he tries to interpret the passage, agrees
that "the time referred to is *at the close* of the creation of the
earth." And as this celebration according to God himself is at the
laying of that corner-stone, it must needs be a top stone—a corner-stone
at the summit—whose laying completed the edifice and showed the whole
work in finished perfection. But for such a corner-stone at the summit
there is no place in any then known form of building, save only the
Pyramid, of which it is characteristic.

Nor is it only to the pyramidal form in general that the allusion is,
but to a particular pyramid. By that strange reference to the sunken
feet or planting of the foundations in "sockets," we are conducted
directly to the Great Pyramid of Gizeh. Two socketed "encastrements,"
"socles," shoes, or incised sinkings

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

into the rock were found under two of its base corners by the French
*savants* in 1799, which were again uncovered and described by Colonel
Howard Vyse, in 1837. And as God here speaks of such a fastening down of
the foundations in general, Prof. Smyth was persuaded that there were
corresponding "sockets" at the other two base corners, and when search
was made for them in 1865, they were found by Messrs. Aiton and Inglis,
assisted by Prof. Smyth. Here then are the whole four "sockets" or
fastened foundations. Nothing of the sort exists at any other known
pyramid. They are among the distinctive marks of the Great Pyramid of
Gizeh. They are the enduring tracks of its feet cut into the living
rock, by which Almighty God himself identifies it for us as the original
image from which his own description of the creation is drawn. Men may
treat the matter as they will, but here are the facts showing a Divine
recognition of this particular edifice as the special symbol of the
earth's formation!

And from the same passage we also get some important rays of Divine
light with regard to the builders of this pillar and their estimate of
it.

The singers and shouters at the completion

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

of the earth's creation of course were heavenly intelligences, as most
expositors agree in teaching. But as the laying of the capstone of the
Great Pyramid is divinely given as the symbol of the laying of the
capstone in the fabric of our world, the singers and their rejoicings so
sublimely referred to in the one case must also have bad place in the
other.

It is never to be overlooked that there are earthly "morning stars" and
"sons of God" as well as heavenly ones. "As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." There were such "sons of God"
on earth before the flood. Adam was one of them, and his immediate
descendants in the line of Seth were others. Many of them apostatized,
but some remained faithful. Noah was one of those faithful ones, and he
was brought over the great water bearing with him all the sacred rites,
traditions, and revelations of his holy fathers. By him the newly
baptized world began once more. From his coming out of the ark to the
building of the Great Pyramid, the call of Abraham, and the commission
of Moses, was really the morning time of our present world. Like other
mornings it had its noble "stars" and "sons of God" who shone with
patriarchal faithfulness and glorious testimony

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

in their time. Shem and number of his seed at least were of this class.
Job, and Melchisedec, and Abraham were pre-eminent among them. Jehovah
has always had a people of his own among men, a people who reflected his
mind and will, preserved his revelations, obeyed his commands, and kept
to the pure worship of his name. Even long after the call of Abraham
there was yet a true "priest of the Most High God" in Palestine, and
another in Midian, and inspired Gentile prophets as late as the days of
Moses and Aaron. These were God's "sons" by faith in him and "stars" of
light amid the darkness of those early times—noble harbingers of the
coming day.

Such "morning stars" and "sons of God" were on the earth when the Great
Pyramid was built, corresponding to those in heaven when the earth was
made. And as the one structure is the symbol of the other, even to its
most hidden mysteries and measures, the analogy would be singularly
incomplete in one of the most significant features of the divinely drawn
parallel if the singing and shouting did not occur in one case as in the
other.

But if these early light-bearers and children of God on earth sung and
shouted at the laying

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

of the capstone of the Great Pyramid as the heavenly hosts sung and
shouted when the fabric of the world was completed, they must needs have
understood it and been in deepest sympathy with it. It must have been
identified with their most sacred thoughts and contemplations. It must
have been of a character in full and glorious accord with what
distinguished them from other people and made them "stars" and "sons of
God." It must have been something most profoundly related to Jehovah and
the holy treasures of his ancient revelations and promises, and hence
not a mere obtrusive tomb got up by some proud, oppressive, and
beast-worshipping worldly tyrant.

From the Book of God itself we thus legitimately gather that the Great
Pyramid did not originate with idolatrous Egypt; that it connects with
the most precious things of those "sons of God" who shone as lights in
the dim morning of the world's history; that it was the subject of their
devoutest joy and gratitude; and that in their esteem it was everything
which it is now supposed to be.

THE PYRAMID AND CHRIST.

But then we would expect it also to refer to Christ and redemption. The
great subject of

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

all sacred Revelation is the Christ and his glorious kingdom, and we can
hardly suppose this pillar Divine if it has not something on this point.
Men may well sneer at the idea of a special revelation to old Cheops or
his architects to teach the diameter, density, and temperature of the
earth. Something of mightier moment to mankind must be involved when
Jehovah thus interposes. Such claims need to be tried by the pre-eminent
theme of all inspiration. But even on this high ground the Great Pyramid
sustains itself full as grandly as in the sphere of cosmic facts and
geodetic measures.

When Zerubbabel and Jeshua were engaged rebuilding Jerusalem and the
Temple on the return from the great captivity, they had in hand a work
of extraordinary greatness, difficulty, and discouragements. So
important was it in itself, and so bound up in history and type with
another and greater restoration, that it was made the occasion and
subject of special Divine communication through Zechariah the prophet.
And in those prophecies that work and all that it typified is set forth
under the image of the building of the Pyramid. A "great mountain" of
worldly power and difficulty was in the way, but God said it should

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

become "a plain before Zerubbabel," as the Gizeh hill was levelled to
receive the Great Pyramid. As despite all hindrances the Pyramid was
successfully carried forward to completion, even to the laying of the
peculiar corner-stone of its apex amid the songs of "the morning stars"
and the shouts of "all the sons of God," so was Zerubbabel and he whom
Zerubbabel typified to succeed in their Divine work, even to the
"bringing forth of the headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, 'Grace,
Grace unto it.'" (Zech. 4: 6, 7.) The pyramid idea is absolutely
essential to an intelligible and consistent interpretation of this
imagery. The picture is an exact parallel to the one in Job, only
transferred from nature to grace, from geologic to Messianic territory.

By necessary implications of Holy Scripture then the Great Pyramid is
immutably linked with the building of the Church of which the adorable
Jesus is "the headstone," "the chief corner-stone."

It is also a clear and outstanding fact that the Scriptures continually
make the pyramid capstone the type and symbol of Christ, both in the Old
Testament and in the New. Who heeds to be reminded with what brilliant
diction Moses likens Jehovah to a rock, and how

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

triumphantly he asserts against all the heathen world, that "their rock
is not as our rock, even our enemies themselves being judges!" Out of
the very spirit as well as letter of the Holy Book every Christian
congregation using the English tongue, often lifts up its voice to
Jesus, singing

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Rock of ages, cleft for me,  
Let me hide myself in thee!</span>

</div>

He is not only such a rock as that which yielded thirsty Israel drink,
or as that which gives the weary traveller shelter from the scorching
sunshine or beating storm, or as that which the prudent builder seeks
whereon to found his house securely, but especially such a rock as that
which forms the apex of the Pyramid—a rock which is the head and crown
of all the works of Providence and grace—the unique bond in which the
whole edifice of time is united—the headstone of redemption lifted high
above all other rocks, "that in all things he might have the
preeminence." So David conceived of him when he sung, "The stone which
the builders refused is become the headstone of the corner," or "the
head corner-stone," as the Septuagint renders it. (Ps. 118: 22.) So
Peter being

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "filled with the
Holy Ghost," conceived of him when he said to the Jews who had condemned
and crucified him, "This is the stone which was set at naught by you
builders which is become the head of the corner." (Acts 4: 11.) Hence,
also, he wrote to his scattered brethren in the faith as having come to
Jesus, "as unto a living stone disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of
God, and precious," in whom they also "as lively stones were built up a
spiritual house," according to the saying of God, "Behold I lay in Zion
a chief corner-stone, elect, precious," even "the stone which the
builders disallowed," but which now "is made the head of the corner, and
a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence even to them which stumble at
the word." (1 Pet. 2: 4-8.) So Paul conceived of him when he wrote to
the Ephesians, Ye are built upon the foundation of the apostles and
prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner-stone, in whom all
the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the
Lord, in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God
through the spirit." (Eph. 2: 20-22.) And the same conception Jesus
applied to himself when he said, "Did ye never read in the

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Scriptures, the
stone which the builders rejected the same is become the head of the
corner? And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken, but on
whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder." (Matt. 21:
42-44.)

All these are great central passages of the Divine word, and not one of
them will interpret without the Pyramid, whose light alone brings out
their full significance and beauty. It is absurd enough when men speak
of a river's head at one end of it., and its mouth at the other end; but
it is unbearable to represent the Holy Ghost treating of the head of a
thing as in its toes. Interpreters may put such absurdities in the
Bible, but its author never does. The head is not the foot nor the foot
the head in any consistent or intelligible use of language. So the head
corner-stone cannot be the foot or foundation corner-stone. Where there
are four alike, to regard one as chief is a mere conventionalism without
reality in fact, and such as the Bible never employs. Common
architecture furnishes no one pre-eminent corner or corner-stone. There
is no head corner without the Pyramid. That alone has such a head at the
head, or a cornerstone uniquely and indisputably the chief. It

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

has the usual four at the base, alike in shape, place and office, but it
has a fifth, different from all others and far more exalted. It is at
the top, and properly the head one. It is the last to come into place
and so may be long rejected while the building still goes on. The base
corner-stones must be laid at the beginning. Work cannot proceed while
either of them is disallowed. They are also of such regular shape as
renders them capable of being worked in as well at one place as at
another. They furnish no occasion to be disallowed. Not so the head
corner-stone. The shape of that is altogether peculiar. It is five-sided
and five-pointed. From foundation to summit there is no place at which
it will fit till everything else is finished and its own proper place is
reached. Till then it is naturally enough rejected by the builders. They
have no place for it. To those ignorant of its purpose it is only in the
way—"a rock of offence and a stone of stumbling." With one sharp point
always sticking upwards, any one falling on it would necessarily "be
broken." And when on its way to its position hundreds of feet in the air
were it to fall on any one it would certainly "grind him to powder."

But though rejected to the last, it finally

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

turns out to be the very thing required, and reaches a place to which it
alone fits; a place above all others, where it sublimely finishes out
and binds together everything in one glorious whole. It is itself a
perfect pyramid, the original model of the edifice which it completes
and adorns. It is emphatically the head stone of the head corner. It is
at the head and not at the feet. It has its own peculiar angles and they
are the angles of the entire structure. There is but one stone of that
shape and it is the shape of the pyramid complete. It is the stone which
stands toward Heaven for every other in the building. Every other stone
in all the mighty construction stands in it, and has place with
reference to it, and is touched by its weight and influence, as well as
sheltered under its lines, and honored and perfected by its presence. It
is indeed the "all in all" of the whole edifice. To its angles is "all
the building fitly framed together." And in it every part and particle
that belongs to the structure from foundation to capstone has its bond
of perfectness, its shelter, and its crown.

About such imagery there should be no question. In all the richness of
the Scriptures there is not a more luminous, expressive,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and comprehensive picture of the Christ, in himself, in his experiences,
in his relations to his friends or foes, in his office and place in all
the dispensations of God toward our race, than that which is given in
these texts when studied in the light of the Great Pyramid. These
passages alone consecrate and sanctify it forever. In them the Holy
Ghost takes hold of it, traces in it a sacred significance, and assigns
to it relations and connections, the truth and beauty of which cannot be
disputed. And thus by the highest authority known to man it is rendered
impossible to be thoroughly true to the utterances of inspiration, and
yet regard this venerable monument as nothing but the profane tomb of a
pagan despot.

THE PYRAMID AND THE CHRISTIAN DISPENSATION.

And this sublime testimony to the Great Pyramid from without is also
fully sustained by its own testimony from within. We have seen in a
former lecture how grandly it symbolizes the truths of nature. Let us
glance now at its symbolizations of Grace.

Prof. Smyth relates that in the course of the summer of 1872, Mr.
Charles Casey, of Pollerton Castle, Carlow, wrote him that while he had
followed and adopted all the explanations

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

as to the metrology of the Great Pyramid being of more than human
scientific perfection for the age in which it was produced,—yet to call
it therefore divinely inspired or "sacred" seemed to him to be either
too much or too little. "Now, said Mr. Casey, unless the Great Pyramid
can be shown to be Messianic as well as fraught with superhuman science
and design, its 'sacred' claim is a thing with no blood in it,—nothing
but mere sounding brass." Nor was this an unreasonable test. And it is
one which I am happy to say the Great Pyramid very nobly stands.

The first to break ground in this department was Robert Menzies, a young
shipbuilder and draughtsman, of Leith, Scotland, a Christian Israelite
who never saw the Great Pyramid, but had long been engaged in the devout
study of the works which describe it. In 1865 he wrote to Prof. Smyth
that the immense superiority of the height and finish of the Grand
Gallery over every other passage is owing to the fact that it represents
the Christian dispensation, while the other passages symbolize only
human histories or preparatory dispensations. He also had good reason
for this conclusion, more perhaps than he knew.

The Christian dispensation by common consent

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

dates from the birth of Christ. If the Grand Gallery represents it, then
the mark for the birth of Christ is the commencement of that gallery.
The unit or that which counts one in pyramid measure is the inch, and so
the inch, as in the diagonals of the base, symbolizes the grand unit of
time, a year, at least in the floorlines of the passages taken as
scrolls of history. Measuring thirty-three inches then from the
beginning of the Grand Gallery for the duration of the earthly life of
Christ, we come precisely over against the mouth of that mysterious
"well" with its ramp-stone cover gone, as if violently forced out from
beneath. That "well" extends irregularly down through the masonry and
rock to a wide cavern, and thence to the entrance of the bottomless pit
itself. It is a striking symbol of death, sealing up in the sepulchre,
descent into hell, and triumphant resurrection in irresistible power.
And it comes at a place to fit precisely to the death and resurrection
of our blessed Lord. This certainly is a very strong point with which to
begin.

The Christian dispensation is emphatically the dispensation of new life.
Its pervading spirit is that of resurrection. Basing itself on the
resurrection of Christ as its great sealing

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

fact, it went everywhere in the power of the Holy Ghost awakening men
out of their moral graves and calling them forth in a new birth, "that
like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even
so we also should walk in newness of life." Most intensely also is this
signified throughout the whole length of the Grand Gallery of our
Pyramid. It is lined along its base on both sides with ramp-stones like
"washboards" to a stairway. They are about a foot high and wide, and
they are all cut with miniature symbolic graves every one of which is
open. More than this, right by the side of each of these open graves is
a neatly cut stone set vertically in the wall. It is a symbol of
standing upright, and almost audibly proclaims the tenants of those open
graves risen, as all true Christians are, not only from the death of
sin, but to an heirship of a still completer resurrection through him
who is to come again. There are eight times seven of these open graves.
Eight is the number of new life and resurrection, and seven of
dispensational fulness, so that by their numbers they also signify this
newness of life. We thus have one of the intensest and most spiritual
features of the Gospel as emphatically pronounced as stones can speak
it.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

The Christian dispensation is likewise pictured in the Bible as made up
of seven churches headed by "seven stars" which are "the angels of the
seven churches." So the best and earliest commentators explain that
first vision of the Apocalypse, which allows very little room for
differences of opinion. And a corresponding symbol of the same is
contained in this Grand Gallery. It stares every one in the face the
moment the place is entered. All writers have described it as one of the
peculiar beauties of the singular arrangement. Each side of the wall is
made up of just seven courses of finely fitted polished stones, the one
overlapping the other and extending the whole length from commencement
to termination. It is the gallery of the seven courses just seven times
the height of the other passages. Besides, this gallery has special
relations to the Pleiades. It tells in several ways of those benignant
and exalted stars. In its own way it thus also points to the "seven
stars" as presiding over the seven churches.

As a matter of historic fact the Christian dispensation followed
immediately on the Jewish economy, of which it is the crown and
completion. The law leads the way to Christ. This historical succession
is also carefully preserved

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

in the symbolizations of our Pyramid. The first upward passage which
leads to the Grand Gallery is just the number of inches in length which
the best chronologists give as the number of years from the Exodus to
the birth of Christ. It is the way to the Grand Gallery as the Jewish
dispensation is the way to the Christian.

The Christian dispensation also has a fixed limit. It is to terminate
with the coming again of the Lord Jesus to judge the quick and the dead.
Every commission under which we now act extends only to that time. And
that coming of Christ to end this age is everywhere presented as
impending,—as a thing which might occur any day. All this is likewise
symbolized in the Grand Gallery of the Great Pyramid. Its termination is
as distinctly marked as its beginning, and even the impendingness of the
end is not overlooked. Its south or further wall leans a full degree and
overhangs its base as if it might fall at any moment.

From my studies of the Apocalypse, I was led to publish years ago my
firm belief that the present Church period is to be succeeded by a
dispensation of judgment extending through years before the great
consummation

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

is reached. And here we have it most evidently symbolized next after the
end of the Grand Gallery. There the passage becomes low again, for the
Church as such has ended its career. There the "granite leaf"—a great
frowning double stone—hangs in its grooves, beneath which every one that
passes in must bow, exhibiting a most impressive picture of "the great
tribulation" of the judgment period. There also are the rules and
measures by which the Pyramid was constructed, all graven on the stones,
indicative of the complete righting up of everything according to law
and justice. And then only comes the entrance into the grand and
polished granite chamber of the king.

One of the most exalted steps in the history of the Church is that which
was accomplished during the first quarter of our present century. It was
in the first twenty-five years since 1800 that Christendom throughout
the world formed its great organizations for the dissemination of the
Holy Scriptures, for the publication and general diffusion of religious
literature and Gospel truth, and for the sending out and support of
missionaries to the heathen, to plant the Church of Jesus in all lands
and islands. It was in those years that the Christian world

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

experienced a revival of aggressive evangelization and missionary zeal,
the greatest and the most general since the days of the Apostles, the
effects of which continue with still increasing power. The coming into
activity of these organizations with their results was so marked an
advance on everything of the kind for more than twelve hundred years,
and so universal that we might justly expect it to be noted in any
complete prophetic symbolization of our dispensation. Accordingly
following the floor-line of the Pyramid's Grand Gallery towards its
upper end we come to a grand step three feet high. I long wondered what
it could mean, as it is the only one in the whole length of the glorious
passage after that somewhat corresponding rise not far from the
beginning. But when I came to count the number of inches from the
commencement of the Grand Gallery to this upper step the mystery was
solved. The number of those inches is close about one thousand eight
hundred and fourteen, which at the rate of an inch for a year brings us
to the very centre of those years in which the Church universal made
this mighty, and unexampled stride. Beyond this step there is no further
ascent. The great stone which forms it is also the weakest and most
fractured

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

and dilapidated of all the stones in the whole passage-way of the Grand
Gallery. It shows a marvellous rise, but an equally marvellous absence
of solidity and strength. It is the image of brokenness, feebleness, and
the want of firm texture. It seems as if crumbling away under the feet
of those who stand upon it. And this again most strikingly accords with
the poor, rent, weak, and wasting character of the Christianity of our
times, though they be times of universal evangelization. It is
Christianity, and evinces a great rise in effort and aim; but it is a
very shattered and infirm Christianity, with but little solid substance
left and incapable of enduring long.

Thus there is scarce a feature of our dispensation from the birth of
Christ till now, or that is anywhere foretold of its end, which is not
symbolized in the Grand Gallery of the Great Pyramid. Man in all his
ingenuity is incompetent to devise a simpler and completer chart of it,
were he to labor at it for ages. And yet here it is in all its great
facts, characteristics, and relations, in its beginning and end, in its
constitution and history, in what went before and in what comes after,
built into an edifice of mighty rocks more than three times

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

seven hundred years before Christ was born. All this certainly is very
remarkable.

Is it then within the reason of man to say that there was nothing above
and beyond mere human power and calculation here,—no potent presence of
that MIND which knows the end of all things from the beginning, and
giveth wisdom unto the wise?

THE PYRAMID AND THEOLOGY.

Tested also by the more inward substance and contents of sound
Scriptural doctrine, the facts are equally remarkable and cogent.

The foundation of all sacred doctrines is the existence of a personal
and eternal God, the Almighty Maker of heaven and earth. The Bible
pronounces that man a "fool"—one criminally self-stultified—who can find
it in his heart to say, "there is no God." So also the Great Pyramid
teaches. It symbolizes the earth and all the universe as a contrivance,
a work, a building, shaped to Promethean plan. It must therefore have
had a contriver, an intelligent and potent author, greater than itself.
It thus pronounces at one and the same time against Atheism; against
Sabaism, against Pantheism, and against all idolatry and false worship.
It knows nothing of a world without

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

an architect, of creaturehood without basis or centre, of beauty without
parent or birthplace, of good without a bosom out of which it flows, of
thought without reason, of effect without a cause. It proclaims the
universe a product, and one self-competent God as its author.

It is an essential part of orthodox theology that Jehovah is a three-one
God. "The true Christian faith is this, that we worship one God in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons nor
dividing the substance." And when we ascribe glory to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, we rightfully add "as it was in the
beginning," for so is the representation in this Pyramid before the
Bible was written. On each of its four faces as in its fundamental
figure it presents to every beholder the geometric emblem of the
Trinity, the same that is accepted by the Church and exhibited in nearly
every place of Christian worship. Creation is the reflection of God
himself, and the Pyramid as a symbol of the creation gives impressive
token of His mysterious Tri-unity. Nature reflects Trinity, and this
symbol of nature does the same with a depth and stress which cannot be
disputed. Shaw states that the Deity is typified by the outward form of
this pile, and that

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

form is a triangle whether viewed on either side or from either corner.

The architect of the world this monument likewise proclaims to be the
King of the world, a governing and upholding Providence as well as a
tri-personal Creator. Those measures, motions, interrelations, and vast
revolutions which it symbolizes, all tell that the universe does not
hold God but that thus he holds and manages the universe. They are the
grasp and pressure of an infinite and Almighty hand, whose fingers clasp
the crystal poles of the earth and heavens, and under whose protecting
palm the continents and seas, planets, suns, and systems pass with
unfaltering steadiness from age to age. And the conformation of its
shape, measures, avenues, and openings, to cosmic and celestial facts,
themselves the symbols of an eternal Providence, proclaims the potent
presence of God in the histories as well as in the constitution of the
earth.

But the Bible tells also of an evil power in the universe—an
anti-God—whom it describes as an apostate angelic being who has obtained
a terrible influence over the affairs and destiny of man. He is called
the Dragon, the old Serpent, Satan, the Devil. He is declared to be a
murderer, a tempter, a destroyer, a liar,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

the author of all evil, under whose usurped dominion mankind, unhelped
of God, are hopelessly inthralled. And this too is strikingly expressed
by the Great Pyramid.

From the earliest known times different portions of the heavens have
been designated, and known by certain figures supposed to be outlined by
the stars which they embrace. There are now about eighty of these
constellations. The stars of which they are composed the Bible declares
to be for "signs," as well as for seasons, days, and years. The
probability is that the earlier and most remarkable of these
designations were made by God himself even before the flood. Josephus
attributes the invention of the constellations to the family of Seth,
the son of Adam, and refers to ancient writers as authorities. Origen
affirms that it was asserted in the Book of Enoch that in the time of
that patriarch the constellations were already divided and named. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21) Volney

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

informs us that everywhere in antiquity there was a cherished tradition
of an expected conqueror of the serpent, and asserts that this tradition
is reflected in the constellations as well as in all the heathen
mythologies. Dupuis, also, and others of his school have collected
ancient authorities abundantly proving that in all nations this
tradition always prevailed, and that the same is represented in the
constellations. Indeed, antiquity with one voice declares for their very
early origin, and the results of modern investigations by astronomers
themselves confirm the traditions and reveal internal evidence of their
having been constructed more than five thousand years ago. Cassini
commences his *History of Astronomy* by saying, "It is impossible to
doubt that astronomy was invented from the beginning of the world;
history profane as well as sacred testifies to this truth." Bailly and
others assert that astronomy must have been established when the summer
solstice was in the first degree of Virgo, and that the solar and lunar
zodiacs were of a similar antiquity,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

which would be about four thousand years before the Christian era. They
suppose the originators to have lived in about the fortieth degree of
north latitude, and to have been a highly civilized people. Prof.
Proctor, by calculations based on Hindoo and other astronomies, traces
the authors of this science to some people residing between the rivers
Cyrus and Araxas, not very far from Mount Ararat, at a date perhaps two
thousand two hundred years before Christ. Sir William Drummond says,
"The fact is certain that at some remote period there were
mathematicians and astronomers who knew that the sun is the centre of
our system, and that the earth itself a planet revolves around it." The
constellations were certainly known in the time of Job, and are
familiarly referred to in that very ancient book. Seyffarth says they
are as old as the human race. The author of *Mazzaroth* makes the origin
of the constellations antediluvian, and thinks they were framed by
inspiration for sacred and prophetic purposes. There are actual
astronomical calculations in existence with calendars formed upon them,
which eminent astronomers of England and France admit to be genuine and
true, and which carry back the antiquity of this science together

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

with the constellations to within a few years of the deluge, even on the
longer chronology of the Septuagint. Sir John Herschel finds much fault
with these old constellations as barbarous and unscientific. He would
have these contorted snakes, miscalled bears, lions, fishes, and the
like, banished from our astronomies as too oppressive to the student's
memory. But the author of *Mazzaroth* very well suggests that this
learned astronomer perhaps never carne across the proper meaning of
these grotesque figures or never duly studied them as symbols, or he
would have been less anxious for their obliteration. Nay, the specimens
which modern astronomers have given of their skill at such reforms do
not much recommend the giving of free scope to them in this particular.
The universality of these ancient groupings must ever secure their
retention, however disliked by scientists. And the very inconvenience of
them for naked astronomical purposes is proof not of the barbarism of
their inventors, but that they were meant to serve some further end. The
most important historical, theological, and prophetic truths have been
inscribed on the heavens by means of them, so that they need only to be
stripped of the changes, caricatures, and interpolations of

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the heathen Greeks and modern scientists in order to show us the
outlines of the Bible on the sky, and to prove that in a high,
evangelic, and most impressive sense "the heavens declare the glory of
God." The author of *Mazzaroth* and others have not only said but shown
that we have in these ancient constellations a medium of communication
with the mind, theology, and hopes of primitive man, and that we here
may read the fact that God has spoken to our race, given to it a
Revelation from the beginning, and embodied in it precisely the same
great truths afterwards written and developed in the sacred Scriptures.
Everywhere do we encounter the traditions of Abraham's skill in the
knowledge of the heavens, how he argued from his observations of the
heavenly orbs, and how he occupied himself in Egypt teaching the priests
of Heliopolis in the lore of the skies. Doubtless this was not the naked
science of astronomy as the schools conceive of it, but as respected the
theological and Messianic truths symbolized in these celestial
hieroglyphics, in which, as in the more literal promises, he rejoiced to
see Christ's day, and saw it and was glad. (John 8: 56.) Well,
therefore, has it been that these ancient "signs" have been preserved.
And mankind

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

have reason to pray that no hand of intermeddling science may ever sweep
them down, but that they may continue to stand unto the end in all the
almanacs of time.

One of the oldest and most universal of these ancient constellations is
the Dragon or Great Serpent. The chief star embraced in that group (α
Draconis) is situated in the monster's tail. And to that star the
entrance passage of the Great Pyramid was levelled, so that α Draconis
at its lower culmination then looked right down that inclined tube to
the bottomless pit. Mankind marching down that passage would therefore
be moving under the sign and dominion of the Dragon. Thus in a manner
which startles by its vividness the Great Pyramid answers to the Bible
in saying that there is a Devil, who has somehow obtained an awful
potency over the human race, and that mankind under him are on the way
to the pit of destruction. The picture is that of a tube over which the
Dragon presides, whose incline is fearfully downwards, and which
terminates in hell! Could the story be told in simpler or more graphic
terms?

Some laugh at the idea of a hell. Even whole denominations calling
themselves Christians make it a point of faith to deny the

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

existence of any such thing. But the Bible tells about it as a dark and
mysterious underworld—a bottomless pit—a subterranean region of hopeless
misery,—out of which there is no escape. And here is the symbol of it in
the Great Pyramid—a room far under the centre of the edifice, one
hundred feet down in the solid rock, having neither bottom nor outlet.
It has continuity in a tube on the further side, but it is endless, the
same as the pit is bottomless. With singular significance has this
feature been copied in all other pyramids, to whose hopeless
subterranean chambers the kings of idolatrous and self-justifying Egypt
were consigned. Hence the words of Ezekiel (31: 14-18): "They are all
delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of
the children of men, with them that go down to the pit. . . This is
Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the Lord God." And in the facile
and smooth descent of that main passage-way leading directly down to the
pit we have the symbol of the tendency and hopeless destiny of man since
his fall into Satan's power, except as recovered by some gracious
intervention superior to nature and mightier than the Devil.

But the glad and glorious teaching of the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bible is that God
has interposed, introduced a new and saving economy, calling Abraham,
commissioning and inspiring Moses and the prophets, establishing for
himself a consecrated people, and preparing the way for a sublime
Deliverer in Jesus Christ, who has brought forgiveness and eternal life
into the world, and arranged for a new and eternal dominion of
righteousness and peace, which is to dethrone Satan and bring man back
to original blessedness. This is the very soul and spirit of the
Scriptures—the master theme of both Testaments and of all their
institutes. And the same is the great subject of all the chief parts of
the Great Pyramid's interior—the burden of its noblest passages—the
story of all its upper apartments.

The first ascending passage begins at the point which answers in the
number of its year-inches to the date of the Exodus of Israel. It also
covers by its length the precise number of inches that there were years
from the Exodus to the birth of Christ. We thus identify it as the
Pyramid's symbol of the Mosaic dispensation. That dispensation was an
upward movement in human history founded on direct supernatural
interferences of the Almighty, and so this is an upward passage with the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

same angle heavenward as that of the entrance passage is hellward. It is
a most expressive symbol of a special and effective interposition of God
to raise men up from their decline toward destruction, and thus
furnishes us with a monumental testimony to the whole Scriptural
representation of that economy.

But the Mosaic dispensation was only intermediate and preliminary to
something greater and higher. Hence that upward passage suddenly
enlarges into a far more magnificent ascending opening. The top abruptly
rises to seven times the previous height, and everything is
correspondingly exalted into the Grand Gallery. This is the symbol of
the Christian era, the grandest section in all the scrolls of human
history. It begins at the inch which marks the Saviour's birth.
Thirty-three inches from that beginning bring us to the startling symbol
of death, burial, descent into hell, and resurrection from the dead,—to
that fearful "well" with its heavy stone covering broken out by an
upward force which tore away a part of the wall itself, "for it was not
possible that he should be holden of death." The entire length is
covered with thirty-six overspanning stones, the number of months of
Christ's public ministry. And beyond is

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

the granite King's Chamber in which all consummates. And there the
polished walls, fine materials, grand proportions, and exalted place,
eloquently tell of glories yet to come. It is the chamber of fifties,
which is the grand jubilee number.

Nay, for those Gentiles who never knew of Israel's worship and sacred
books there is also a word of hope inserted. They are not necessarily
all lost. From the lowest depths of Ethnic apostasy the Great Pyramid
still indicates a way up through the atoning death of Christ to the
celestial blessedness. It is a steep, tortuous, difficult, dangerous,
and uncertain way, not likely to be found and safely traversed by many;
but it is there. It is a speaking symbol of what the inspired Apostle
declared so long afterwards, that "in every nation he that feareth God
and worketh righteousness is accepted of him," accepted through the
mediation of Christ.

Here are symbolizations of sacred histories whose warp and woof is
miracle. Here are expressions the soul of which is the same Divine
breath which animates and fills the Testaments of God. Here are
heavenward pointings and indications of the way to eternal life as
distinct and gracious as those which

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

mark the holy Evangely itself. It is the Gospel pronounced in stone. It
is the testimony of "Jesus and the resurrection" put up in imperishable
rock. It is redemption memorialized in marble more than twenty centuries
before the Christ was born! Could it be mere accident? Was it not rather
the dear God above us laying up the sublime things of his grace in
enduring lithic records which man could not alter nor time destroy to
demonstrate to the skeptics of our day how unreasonable and inexcusable
is their unbelief?

THE PYRAMID AND THE DAY OF JUDGMENT.

The Bible moreover tells of a nearing day of judgment—a time when the
Almighty power that made us will reckon with us concerning these earthly
lives of ours, and deal out destiny according to the uses we have made
of them. In all its addresses, whether didactic or prophetic,—whether to
warn the wicked or comfort the pious,—whether for the vindication of God
or the foreshadowing of what is to become of man,—the Bible everywhere
refers us to an approaching crisis, when the principles of eternal
justice must go into full effect, when the trampled law will inexorably
enforce its supremacy, when everything must be righted

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

up, and all that is adverse to truth and good be forever blasted; when
faith and virtue shall be rewarded and enthroned, and all else sink
overwhelmed by a majesty which nothing can withstand. It is described as
a time of sorrow and unexampled distress for the unbelieving world—a
time of fears and plagues and great tribulation to all but God's
watching and ready ones, to whom it shall be a day of glorious
coronation in heaven. Its coming is spoken of as sudden—when men in
general do not expect it—when many are saying, "Peace and safety." Like
the flood upon the old world—like the tempest of hail and fire which
overwhelmed Sodom and Gomorrah—so shall it come upon the nations. When
men think not, the Son of man cometh. And all this too is solemnly
pronounced by the Great Pyramid. That Grand Gallery stops abruptly. It
is suddenly cut off in its continuity. From a splendid passage-way
twenty-eight feet in height it ceases instantly, and the further passage
is less than four feet. The floorline then no longer ascends. A
ponderous double block of frowning granite, hard and invincible, hangs
loose over the low and narrow pass now. In the same antechamber in which
it hangs, the rules, measures, and weights appear engraven

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

in majesty upon the imperishable granite, for every one to pass under.
The tokens are that now judgment is laid to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet, that every cover may be lifted, and every refuge of lies
swept away. Everything here indicates the inexorable adjudications of
eternal righteousness.

And that solemn time is also everywhere represented as now close at
hand. As far as theologians have been able to ascertain, all the
prophetic dates are about run out. The Scriptural signs of the end have
appeared. Every method of computation points to the solemn conclusion
that we are now on the margin of the end of this age and dispensation.
Nor does the Great Pyramid fail to tell us the same thing. Measuring off
one thousand eight hundred and seventy-seven inches from the beginning
of the Grand Gallery for the one thousand eight hundred and
seventy-seven years since the birth of Christ, there remain but a few
inches more to bring us to its end. So likewise when we go forward on
the dial of the precessional cycle to observe the condition of the
heavens when the last of these inches is counted off, the astronomical
indications are correspondingly remarkable. The Pleiades which were on
the meridian when the Pyramid

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

was built are then far to the east, with the vernal equinox at the same
time precisely the same distance from that meridian to the west, whilst
the distance front one to the other measures the exact age of the
Pyramid at that date. At the same time α Draconis will again be on the
meridian below the pole, but then just seven times lower than at the
time of the Pyramid's building. This final downwardness of seven times
is strikingly suggestive of the Dragon's complete dethronement. And what
is still more remarkable, whilst α Draconis is on the meridian at this
low point, Aries, the Ram, appears on the meridian above, with the line
passing exactly through his horns! A more vivid astronomical sign of the
overthrow of Satan under the dominion of the Prince of the flock of God
it is not possible to conceive. It is as if the very heavens were
proclaiming that then the ever-living Lamb takes to him his great power,
and enters upon his glorious reign!

THE PYRAMID AND THE JEW.

It is the opinion of many earnest believers in the Scriptures that God
is not yet done with the Jews as a distinct and peculiar people. As a
nation they rejected Christ and fell from

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

their high pre-eminence, and are now on precisely the same footing with
the Gentiles with regard to the Christian dispensation. There is no way
of salvation nor any special privileges for them now other than the
Gospel offers to all men alike. Through the atonement of Christ and
union with him, there is redemption for their souls the same as others,
but in no other way. But the belief of many is that they are preserved
in their singular distinctness, even in unbelief, as the subject of a
grand restoration and conversion when the times of the Gentiles are
fulfilled, and that blindness in part has happened unto them, in which
as a people they will remain till the time of the revelation of Jesus
Christ at his second coming. And to this belief the Great Pyramid would
also seem to answer in a very marked manner.

A special national token of the Jew is the sabbatic system. It was given
of God, and made to pervade the whole Jewish economy as a thing by which
the chosen people were to be distinguished from all other nations, and
in the observance of which they were to exhibit themselves as God's
people. Disregard of this was held to be treason to their King, and a
forfeiture of all their rights to the promises

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And this sabbatic
system is specially characteristic of the so-called Queen's Chamber and
the horizontal passage leading to it.

They reached their highest point when of them Christ was born. The same
unbelief by which they then were broken off they have ever since
retained. Hence the avenue which I take as a symbol of their history
from Christ's time is horizontal, except that the last seventh (If it
drops lower than any other part. If the latter chapters of Ezekiel (from
the thirty-sixth onward) and many other passages are to be literally
taken, and there is great difficulty in understanding them in any other
way, there is to come for Israel a, grander restoration than that of
their return from Babylon, when they will be re-established in holiness
according to their ancient estate, and all their early institutes again
be righted up and put into full effect. Hence this low horizontal
passage terminates in a grand sabbatic room full of the most important
notations of the measures and proportions of the whole Pyramid.

Those who hold to this restoration of the Jews hold also that they will
be returned in their present unbelief and blindness as regards the true
Messiah, and will only afterwards have the scales removed from their
eyes after

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the manner of Paul, who in this respect was as one born *before the
time*. And this also would seem to be distinctly set forth. Two
ventilating tubes have recently been discovered in the so-called Queen's
Chamber, which the builders left entirely closed over with a thin
unbroken scale, which not only shut them front all observation but
rendered them of no practical effect whatever. The room has therefore
always been noted for its foul air and noisome smell, for the atmosphere
there was left without circulation for four thousand years. These tubes
extended inward through the masonry and into the stones forming the
walls of the room, all nicely cut, but for about one inch they were not
cut through into the room itself. On the hidden sides of the walls these
air-channels were open, but on the visible sides within the room the
surface was smooth, even, and unbroken, the same as any other part. It
was only by something of an accident that these scales were broken and
the channels opened into the room itself. So singular an arrangement
could have none other than a symbolic intent. No architectural reason
for the peculiarity can at all be traced. And most strikingly would it
serve to signify the blindness of the Jew. and his deadness in unbelief,
needing

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

only the breaking away of those scales for the free breath of God to
purify everything again. And if this is the meaning of the symbol, it
accords precisely with the idea of the re-establishment of the Jewish
nationality before the great conversion, and that this breaking away of
the disabling and defiling scales of blindness and unbelief remains to
be accomplished after entrance upon the state symbolized by this room.
And even then it is only removed by a breakage and violence entirely
distinct from the ordinary course of things, which would also be
fulfilled in case the general conversion of the Jews is to be brought
about after the manner of that type of it exhibited in Paul, who was
converted as no other man ever has been by the personal apocalypse of
the Lord Jesus.

It is also fully agreed by those who hold to the belief of a restoration
of the Jews, that they will then be lifted spiritually far above the
dead level which has characterized them as a nation since the fall of
Jerusalem, and that quite a new, higher, and holier spirit than they
ever experienced before will then be breathed into their ancient
ceremonial. And the same would seem to be symbolized in this chamber. It
has no proper floor, and is entered

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

from a very low plane, even lower than the avenue in general. But inside
there is a baseline marked evenly around it at a range with the square
top of the entrance passage, indicating a grand lifting up after having
entered. It is in the relative spaces above this line that the sabbatism
and exalted proportions and commensurations of the apartment appear.

This opens an entirely new field in pyramid interpretations, which calls
for a more enlarged and thorough examination. But what does that
horizontal sabbatic passage, starting from the level of Christ's death
and dropping lower in the last seventh of its floorline, mean, if not
the Jew who has risen no higher since the rejection of his Messiah, but
has fallen lower of late by his rationalism, though still preserving his
distinctness from all other peoples? What can that remarkable, separate,
sabbatic room mean, if not intended to set forth a separate and peculiar
earthly destiny of the Jew? And what can that grand uplifting and the
breaking through of those thin stoppages of the ventilation signify, if
not the re-quickening by the Spirit of God which is promised to the Jew
for the sake of his fathers, when once he shall look upon him whom he
has pierced?

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

THE PYRAMID AND HEAVEN.

The crown of Christian theology and hope is the doctrine concerning
heaven, the residence of God and his glorified people. When the Saviour
left the earth, he said, "I go to prepare a place for you." Abraham
looked for a permanent city. Paul spoke hopefully of "a building of God,
a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." John beheld and
wrote of "that great city, the holy Jerusalem," even "Jerusalem the
golden," of which the Church ever sings with such fondness and delight.
And this too is symbolized in the Great Pyramid. If nothing else, the
granite chamber in which the dispensations of this world terminate may
serve to tell of it. But that chamber seems rather to relate to the
consummated earthly than to the heavenly. There is reason to believe
that another and superior chamber exists in the mighty edifice, more
fully answering to the celestial city. The sabbatic chamber is on the
twenty-fifth course of the masonry, and the granite chamber on the
fiftieth. To make up the complete count there would have to be a third
on the one hundredth course, corresponding to "the third heaven." The
Apocalypse, that book of the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

consummations, seems also to call for such a chamber. As "the seven
churches" under "the seven stars" are found in the Grand Gallery, and
the judgment dispensation in the ante-room leading to the granite
chamber, and "the great tribulation" in the granite blocks which hang
over the passage-way through that ante-room, there would need to be
another and higher apartment to answer to the heavenly Jerusalem, which
the Apocalypse introduces as the crown of all. The piles of ancient
rubbish from the building of this pyramid which cover the breast of the
hill also add their indications of another chamber of grander materials
than the others, and higher up in the edifice. After a rain Prof. Smyth
paced about among the gutters which the wash cut into these piles of
chips and splinters of stone, to see what he could find. "Towards the
top of the heap and just in front of, though at a great distance from,
the Pyramid's entrance portal," he found "frequent splinters and
fragments of green and white *diorite*." This is a compact, very hard,
crypto-crystalline formation, whitish, speckled with black or
greenish-black. It is the material of which the celebrated stone statue
now in the Boolak Museum is cut. It is not native to the pyramid region,

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

and could only have been brought there from far, whilst the number of
these spalls and fragments intermixed with the earth and other chippings
and offal in the process of this pyramid's building would indicate some
extensive use of that excellent material in this structure. Their
occurrence near the top of the furthest distance of these piles from the
Pyramid would show that the use made of this rock was high up in the
edifice and toward its completion. But in none of the present openings
has anything been found made of diorite, or anything like it. Therefore,
Prof. Smyth, in debating over these fragments, says, "I was compelled to
gaze up at the Pyramid with its vast bulk, and believe that there is
another chamber still undiscovered there, and one which will prove to be
the very muniment room of the whole monument." <span
id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22)

And even the way to it may perhaps be found from a suggestion which I
draw from the Apocalypse. The numberless multitude before the throne of
God (chap. 7: 9-17) comes "*out of* the great tribulation," and if those
granite blocks suspended over the way through the ante-room to the
King's Chamber denote the great tribulation, as they so expressively do,

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

the way to a room symbolic of heaven would seem to be directly from
those blocks, just where nobody has ever searched for it. Those blocks
hang in grooves, and have a boss or knob left on the side as if meant to
be slid up for a purpose; and the vision of John would seem to imply
that the lifting of them would uncover the way to the room which would
be the symbol of glory. A light bore . with a rod so directed as to
strike behind those blocks would probably reveal whether or not there is
such a passage from either side at that point. And until the facts are
ascertained by adequate examination, I am inclined to believe, from
general analogy and from the correspondence in all other points with the
Bible, and especially with the Apocalyptic outlines, that behind those
blocks will be found the way to another and superior chamber, situated
in the upper centre of the building on the one hundredth course of the
masonry. I also anticipate that when it is discovered it will present an
exact square, sixteen pyramid cubits every way, with perhaps three
distinct entrances on each side, and answering in its prophetic readings
to the twenty-first chapter of the Book of the Revelation. Of course
this is only a hypothesis, a theoretic persuasion which needs

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

to be tested by further explorations, but it rests on considerations
sufficiently strong to beget in me the belief that it will be verified
in fact. Hence I have had the place and proportions of such a room
indicated on the diagram.

THE PYRAMID AND THE SPIRITUAL UNIVERSE.

But man is not the only rational creature God has made. As the interval
below, between him and nothing, is filled up with uncounted orders and
forms of being, so on rational as well as Scriptural grounds it is part
of our common faith that there are many intellectual and spiritual
orders above, between him and the infinite Creator. These rank in series
over series of angels and archangels, seraphim and cherubim,
principalities and powers. And as the Pyramid is a Scriptural image of
the Church, so it is also of this whole spiritual universe. Galloway, in
his *Egypt's Record of Time*, has noted that "the ascending scale of
natures above man was revealed to Jacob in vision. The collective nature
of man is, as it were, at the basis of a mighty pyramid of spiritual
natures ascending by successive stages to one glorious apex, from which
the whole derives unity, from which the whole has proceeded,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

and on which it depends for existence. This glorious spiritual pyramid
appears to be that which was revealed to Jacob at Bethel, when a
solitary traveller on his way to Padan Aram: a mighty ladder or scale of
being ascending from man to the highest heaven; a sublime idea of the
spiritual universe proceeding from one, and built up into one glorious
head, a world not of gross and dead materials, but of living spirit and
flame, full of the adoring love and active service of God, at the summit
of which the presence of Jehovah was beheld revealed" (pp. 339, 340).
And this grand, striking, and truthful conception of the universe bound
together and headed up in One supreme original of all, we have here in
material form, consolidated in stone, worthy in some measure too of the
eternal vastness and magnificence of the subject.

Thus then the Great Pyramid answers throughout to all history and all
Revelation. The substance of both Testaments and all the dispensations
of God toward man are here traced in unchanging rock, more than five
centuries before Moses. How came these things into this pile, and
nowhere else on earth but in the Bible? Whence came this sublime science
before the days of science,—this knowledge

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

of all history then only in its beginnings,—this understanding of all
sacred doctrines and prophecies before all other existing records of
them? By what marvellous eccentricities of chance originated these
monumental prophecies, this prehistoric picturing of coming ages, these
symbolizations of the mysterious Providence of God toward our world for
four thousand years, this fore-announcement of the end from the
beginning, this sublime petrifaction of the divine word ere ever a
chapter of it was traced in our Scriptures? When we find these things in
the Bible written long afterwards we call them *inspired*. What then
shall we call them when we find them all securely laid up in stone
hundreds and thousands of years anterior to that Holy Book, and now
opened to us with superadded marvels upon which the Bible scarcely
touches? I know not how others may be impressed, but I feel as if I
would be shutting my eyes to truth, suppressing the force of evidence,
and withstanding demonstration, did I not joyfully admit and embrace the
fact that we have here a precious memorial from the same blessed Jehovah
from whom we have our glorious Bible, erected by some chosen people whom
his own Spirit guided, and at the same time a most

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

ancient monumental witness to all the holy truths and histories.

And yet the subject is not exhausted. There are various other
interesting matters to be considered, all tending to the same
conclusion; but I cannot enter upon them now. Reluctantly, I must close
again without reaching the end of what needs to be said in a proper
presentation of the case. Only one little item more, which seems to
belong here, will I yet notice, and with that I conclude this lecture.

THE PYRAMID AND JERUSALEM.

If this Pyramid is what it would thus seem to be, it would be natural to
infer that it ought to have some connection with or reference to
Jerusalem. All the institutes and revelations of God had their chief
centre there for more than a thousand years. God made it his own sacred
metropolis, the only one he ever had localized upon earth. There his
only temple stood. There his holy law was deposited. Thither his people
were required to come for the celebration of their most distinguishing
services. There was the royal seat of his chosen kings. There was the
sacred capitol of his consecrated priests, of his inspired prophets, of
his holy scribes. There the glorious

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Messiah presented
himself to the elect nation. There he died for the sins of the world.
There he rose triumphant from the dead. There he ascended into heaven.
There he poured out the Holy Ghost. There he inaugurated the Christian
Church. There he sent forth his inspired apostles for the conquest of
the world to the religion of the cross. Nay, there he is to appear again
when he comes the second time as he has promised. And if the Great
Pyramid belongs at all to the great system of God's redemptive
interpositions it could hardly be wanting in some reference to that
"city of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel." So at least it
appeared to me, and led me to search for the missing indications. I knew
that the Pyramid's most distinguished cubit answers to the sacred cubit
of Moses; that the capacity measure of the Pyramid's granite Coffer is
the same as that of the Ark of the Covenant; that the sabbatic system of
the Jews is distinctly noted in connection with the Queen's Chamber; and
that the molten sea had proportions of earth-commensuration which also
appear in the size of the Pyramid's main chamber. These are indeed
remarkable and significant coincidences, but they do not give so direct
a reference as I thought ought to exist.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It hence occurred
to me to ascertain the exact direction of Jerusalem from the Great
Pyramid and to try whether it would fit to any of its interior angles.
Having used two different maps to make sure of accuracy, the result
carne out exactly the same in both, namely, that three of the main
inside angles of the Great Pyramid applied to its north side eastward,
point directly to Jerusalem! If a cannon-ball were shot from the Great
Pyramid's north side at the precise angle eastward as that of the
entrance passage computed with the base-line, or that of the main
ascending passage computed with the same line, or that of the Grand
Gallery computed with the passage to the Queen's Chamber, that ball,
could it reach so far, would strike the Holy City!

Of itself this might be passed as of no special significance, but taken
in connection with what has been developed in this lecture, the
unexpected discovery induced a feeling as if the half-smothered pile
with all its burden of centuries suddenly arose out of its sands and
rubbish, lifted up its stony hand, and looking the very image of old
time, pointed its heavy and half pendent finger to the city of
Melchisedek, David, and Solomon, saying as with a voice out of the
bottom ages, "Look over

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

there! Savants of the earth, and all ye that inquire, go yonder! There
observe, listen, and wait, and ye shall know whence I am, and whereof I
witness!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[110:\*](ams06.htm#fr_19) It is again and again
rendered, *to make*, *to put*, *to cause to be*, *to order*, *to
appoint*, *to ordain*, *to place*, *to set up*, *to erect*. Gesenius
gives as its first and main sense, "*to set, to place, to put, referring
to persons or things which stand erect*." Vatablus translates it by
*posuisti*, *placed*, *set up*, *erected*, *built*.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[115:\*](ams06.htm#fr_20) This is also
distinctly expressed in the ancient Coptic version, translated by
Archdeacon Tattam. There in the sixth verse the language is, "Who hath
laid the corner stone upon <span id="page_116">p. 116</span> it?" If a
base corner-stone were in contemplation it would be in place to speak of
the placing of the building upon it; but only a top or summit
corner-stone can be said to be laid "upon" the building, and no building
has such a top cornerstone but the Pyramid.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[140:\*](ams06.htm#fr_21) The Book of Enoch,
translated by Bishop Lawrence, is as a whole, an apocryphal production,
dating somewhere about the beginning of the reign of Herod, before
Christ. It has some ten chapters devoted to the mysteries of astronomy,
the heavenly bodies, and their relations and revolutions. It will at
least serve to show what was the feeling on the part of those whom the
writer represents when he says that all these things were made known to
Enoch by Uriel, the holy angel, who gave "the whole account of them
according to every year of the <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> world
forever, until a new work (or creation) shall be effected which will be
eternal." The twelve signs of the Zodiac are plainly indicated in this
book. See Book of Enoch, chap. 71, *seq*., pp. 84, 85, and 232.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[161:\*](ams06.htm#fr_22) Life and Work, pp.
187, 188.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture Third. Analysis of Traditions, Opinions, and
Results](ams07)
