[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs06)  [Next](mhs08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IV. THE SYMBOL OF THE OPEN HAND

It is worthy of note that the symbol of an open hand with extended
fingers was a favorite talisman in former ages, and was to be seen, for
example, at the entrances of dwellings in ancient Carthage. It is also
found on Lybian and Phoenician tombs, as well as on Celtic monuments in
French Brittany. Dr. H. C. Trumbull quotes evidence from various writers
showing that this symbol is in common use at the present time in several
Eastern lands. In the region of ancient Babylonia the figure of a red
outstretched hand is still displayed on houses and animals; and in
Jerusalem the same token is frequently placed above the door or on the
lintel on account of its reputed virtues in averting evil glances. The
Spanish Jews of Jerusalem draw the figure of a hand in red upon the
doors of their houses; and they also place upon their children's heads
silver handshaped charms, which they believe to be specially obnoxious
to unfriendly individuals desirous of bringing evil either upon the
children themselves, or upon other members of the household.

In different parts of Palestine the open-hand symbol appears alike on
the houses of Christians, Jews, and Moslems, usually painted in blue on
or above the door. Claude Reignier Conder, R. E., in "Heth and Moab,"
remarks on the antiquity of this pagan emblem, which appears on Roman
standards and on the sceptre of Siva in India. He is of the opinion that
the figure of the red hand, whether sculptured on Irish crosses,
displayed in Indian temples, or on Mexican buildings, is always an
example of the same original idea,--that of a protective symbol.

A white hand-print is commonly seen upon the doors and shutters of
Jewish and Moslem houses in Beyrout and other Syrian towns; and even the
Christian residents of these towns sometimes mark windows and
flour-boxes with this emblem, after dipping the hand in whitewash, in
order to "avert chilling February winds from old people and to bring
luck to the bin."

In Germany a rude amulet having the form of an open hand is fashioned
out of the stems of coarse plants, and is deemed an ample safeguard
against divers misfortunes and sorceries. It is called "the hand of
Saint John," or "the hand of Fortune."

The Jewish matrons of Algeria fasten little golden hands to their
chidren's caps, or to their glass-bead necklaces, and they themselves
carry about similar luck tokens.

In northwestern Scotland whoever enters a house where butter is being
made is expected to lay his hand upon the churn, thereby signifying that
he has no evil designs against the butter-maker, and dissipating any
possible effects of an evil eye.

As a charm against malevolent influences, the Arabs of Algeria make use
of rude drawings representing an open hand, placed either above the
entrances of their habitations or within doors,--a symbolical
translation of the well-known Arabic imprecation, " Five fingers in
thine eye!" Oftentimes the same meaning is conveyed by five lines, one
shorter than the others to indicate the thumb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Crescents And Half-moon-shaped Amulets](mhs08.md)
