[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs38)  [Next](mhs40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VIII. SALT AS A MAGICAL SUBSTANCE

The natives of Morocco regard salt as a talisman against evil, and a
common amulet among the Neapolitan poor is a bit of rock-salt suspended
from the neck. The peasants of the Hartz Mountain region in Germany
believe that three grains of salt in a milk-pot will keep witches away
from the milk; and to preserve butter from their uncanny influences, it
was a custom in the county of Aberdeen, Scotland, some years ago, to put
salt on the lid of a churn. In Normandy, also, the peasants are wont to
throw a little salt into a vessel containing milk, in order to protect
the cow who gave the milk from the influences of witchcraft.

Peculiar notions about the magical properties of salt are common among
American negroes. Thus in some regions a new tenant will not move into a
furnished house until all objects therein have been thoroughly salted,
with a view to the destruction of witch-germs. Another example of the
supernatural attributes ascribed to salt is the opinion current among
uneducated people in some communities of its potency in casting a spell
over obnoxious individuals. For this purpose it is sufficient either to
sprinkle salt over the sleeping form of an enemy, or on the grave of one
of his ancestors. Another kind of salt-spell in vogue in the south of
England consists in throwing a little salt into the fire on three
successive Friday nights, while saying these words:

It is not this salt I wish to burn,  
It is my lover's heart to turn;  
That be may neither rest nor happy be,  
Until he comes and speaks to me.

On the third Friday night the disconsolate damsel expects her lover to
appear. Every one is familiar with the old saying, "You can catch a bird
with your hand, if you first put some salt on its tail." This quaint
expression has been thought to imply that, if one can get near enough to
a bird to place salt on its tail, its capture is an easy matter. The
phrase, however, may be more properly attributed to a belief in the
magical properties of salt in casting a spell over the bird. Otherwise
any substance mioht be equally effective for the purpose of catching it.
The writer remembers having read somewhere an old legend about a young
man who playfully threw some salt on the back of a witch sitting next to
him at table, and the witch thereupon acquired such an increase of
avoirdupois that she was unable to move until the young man obligingly
brushed away the salt.

The ancient Teutons believed that the swift flight of birds was caused
by certain powerful spirits of the air. Now salt is a foe to ghostly
might, imparts weight to bodies, and impedes their motion; therefore the
rationale of its operation when placed upon a bird's tail is easily
intelligible.

In the Province of Quebec French Canadians sometimes scatter salt about
the doors of their stables to prevent those mischievous little imps
called lutins from entering and teasing the horses by sticking burrs in
their manes and tails. The lutin or gobelin is akin to the Scandinavian
household spirit, who is fond of children and horses, and who whips and
pinches the former when they are naughty, but caresses them when good.
In Marsala, west Sicily, a horse, mule, or donkey, on entering a new
stall, is thought to be liable to molestation by fairies. As a
precautionary measure, therefore, a little salt is placed on the
animal's back, and this is believed to insure freedom from lameness, or
other evil resulting from fairy spite. Common salt has long enjoyed a
reputation as a means of procuring disenchantment. It was an ingredient
of a salve "against nocturnal goblin visitors" used by the Saxons in
England, and described in one of their ancient leech-books; while in the
annals of folk-medicine are to be found numerous references to its
reputed virtues as a magical therapeutic agent. In Scotland, when a
person is ailing of some affection whose nature is not apparent, as much
salt as can be placed on a sixpence is dissolved in water, and the
solution is then applied three times to the soles of the patient's feet,
to the palms of his hands, and to his forehead. He is then expected to
taste the mixture, a portion of which is thrown over the fire while
saying, "Lord, preserve us frae a' skaith."

The Germans of Buffalo valley in central Pennsylvania believe that a boy
may be cured of homesickness by placing salt in the hems of his trousers
and making him look up the chimney.

In India the natives rub salt and wine on the affected part of the body
as a cure for scorpion bites, believing that the success of this
treatment is due to the supernatural virtue of the salt in searing away
the fiends who caused the pain. An ancient Irish charm of great repute
in cases of suspected "fairy-stroke" consisted in placing on a table
three equal portions of salt in three parallel rows. The would-be
magician then encircles the salt with his arm and repeats the Lord's
Prayer thrice over each row. Then, taking the hand of the fairy-struck
person, he says over it, "By the power of the Father and of the Son and
of the Holy Spirit, let this disease depart and the spell of evil
spirits be broken." Then follows a solemn adjuration and command
addressed to the supposed demon, and the charm is complete.

In Bavaria and the Ukraine, in order to ascertain whether a child has
been the victim of bewitchment, the mother licks its forehead; and if
her sense of taste reveals thereby a marked saline flavor, she is
convinced that her child has been under the influence of an evil eye.

In the Swiss canton of Bern a person is believed to be amply fortified
against all kinds of spiritual enemies by the simple expedient of
carrying a piece of fresh bread and a psalm-book in the right and left
coat pockets respectively, provided one is careful to have some
rock-salt either in each vest pocket, or inside a briarwood cane upon
which three crosses have been cut. In Bohemia a mother seeks to protect
her daughter from evil glances by placing a little bread and salt in her
pocket; and when a young girl goes out for a walk the mother sprinkles
salt on the ground behind her, so that she may not lose her way.

Holy water has been employed in the religious ceremonies of many peoples
as a means of purifying both persons and things, and also to keep away
demons. Sprinkling and washing with it were important features of the
Greek ritual.

The holy water of the Roman Catholic Church is prepared by exorcising
and blessing salt and water separately, after which the salt is
dissolved in the water and a benediction pronounced upon the mixture. In
the Hawaiian ritual, sea-water was sometimes preferred.

A Magyar house-mistress will not give any salt to a woman who may come
to the door and ask for it in the early morning, believing that any such
would-be borrower is surely a witch; but in order to keep away all
witches and hags, she strews salt on the threshold. On St. Lucien's Day
neither salt nor fire must be taken out of the house.

Among the Japanese, the mysterious preservative qualities of salt are
the source of various superstitions. The mistress of a household will
not buy it at night and when purchased in the daytime a small quantity
is thrown into the fire in order to prevent discord in the family, and
to avert misfortune generally.

In Scotland salt was formerly in high repute as a charm, and the
salt-box was the first chattel to be removed to a new dwelling. When
Robert Burns, in the year 1789, was about to occupy a new house at
Ellisland, he was escorted on his route thither along the banks of the
river Nith by a procession of relatives, and in their midst was borne a
bowl of salt resting on the family Bible.

In some places in the north of England the giving away of salt is a
dangerous procedure; for if the salt thus given comes into the
possession of an evil-wisher, it places the donor entirely in the power
of such a person.

In upper Egypt, previous to the setting out of a caravan, it is
customary for the native women to throw salt on burning coals, which are
carried in earthen vessels and set down before the different loads.
While so doing they exclaim, "May you be blessed in going and coming,"
and such incantations they believe render inert all the machinations of
evil spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Miscellaneous Remarks On Salt](mhs40)
