[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs29)  [Next](mhs31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# V. LUCK, ANCIENT AND MODERN

Our English word luck, according to some authorities, is of Scandinavian
origin, while others consider it to be the past tense of an Anglo-Saxon
verb meaning "to catch." Luck signifies, therefore, a good catch, and is
analogous to the German Glück. It has been aptly remarked that very many
so-called strong-minded persons, who would not for a moment admit that
they are superstitious, are yet not insensible to the fascination of
this little monosyllable. As Christian people, we profess to believe
implicitly in Divine Providence; yet often because we cannot understand
its workings, we so far relapse into paganism as to worship secretly the
Goddess Fortune. The fact is, that superstition is an ineradicable
element of human nature. The combined forces of religion, education,
philosophy, and common sense are allied in a perpetual warfare against
it. The thousand and one little credulities which form such an important
part of modern folk-lore may be intrinsically the veriest whimsies and
trifles, but they are evidence of the tenacity of traditional beliefs.

The modern sailor carries in his pocket a bit of sealskin, or an eagle's
beak, to shield him from the lightning; and the Southern negro has his
rabbit's foot, and a host of other outlandish fetiches, all for luck.

The millions of American negroes have, indeed, a deeply-rooted love for
the supernatural, and their character exhibits a peculiar blending of
superstition and religion. Among the mixed colored races in Missouri,
for example, we find a bewildering jumble of African Voodoo credulities,
the traditions of the American Indian, and religious fanaticism. Thus,
in "Voodoo Tales," by Mary A. Owen, we read of an old crone who kept her
medicine-pipe and eagle-bone whistle alongside of her books of devotion,
carried a rosary and rabbit's foot in the same pocket, and wore a
saint's toe dangling on her bosom, and a luck-bar under her right arm.

It has been well said that only those whose minds are predisposed to
entertain idle fancies are wont to regard misfortune as a natural
sequence of the legion of alleged evil omens. Yet we know that in all
ages and countries such notions have prevailed. The ancient Chaldeans
made use of magic formulae to ward off ill-luck, and Tacitus relates
that the most trivial events were regarded as portentous by the Roman
people. What a contrast to the credulity of a superstitious age is
afforded by the often quoted remark of Cato the Censor, who refused to
regard it as ominous when informed that his boots had been gnawed by
rats! "If the boots had gnawed the rats," he said, "it might have
portended evil."

There is a deal of philosophy in the Irish saying, "Every man has bad
luck awaiting him some time or other, but leave the bad luck to the
last; perhaps it may never come."

In attributing the sundry and divers misfortunes of our lives to bad
luck, we surely ignore the fact that these same unwelcome experiences
are often the logical sequences of our own shortcomings, and that the
fickle goddess cannot with fairness be made always to masquerade as our
scapegoat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Folk-lore Of Common Salt](mhs31.md)
