[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs65)  [Next](mhs67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I. EARLY SIGNIFICANCE OF NUMBERS

IN the "Cabala," or ancient mystic philosophy of the Jews, much
importance is attributed to the combination of certain numbers, letters,
and words. According to one tradition, the earliest Cabala was given by
the angel Raziel to Adam, and orally transmitted through generations
until the time of Solomon, by whom it was first embodied in written
form. Another report alleges that the cabalistic secrets of nature were
received from God by Moses in the Mount, and afterwards taught to
Joshua, who communicated them to the seventy elders, and they have since
been treasured by the initiated among the Jews.

According to the doctrine of the Pythagoreans, the unit or monad was
regarded as the father of Numbers, while the duad, or two, was its
mother; and thus is explained one source of the general predilection for
odd numbers, the father being esteemed worthy of greater honor than the
mother, and the odd numbers being masculine, while the even numbers were
feminine. Moreover, the unit, being the origin of all numbers,
represented Divinity, as God was the creator and originator of all
things. It was also the symbol of Harmony and Order, whereas the duad
signified Confusion and Disorder, and represented the Devil.

Plutarch remarks in his "Roman Questions" that the beginning of number,
or unity, is a divine thing; whereas the first of the even numbers, Deuz
or Deuce, is directly opposite in character. As for the even number,
said this writer, it is defective, imperfect, and indefinite; whereas
the uneven or odd number is finite, complete, and absolute.

The belief in the lucky significance of odd numbers is of great
antiquity, and reference to it is made by Virgil in the eighth Eclogue,
and by Pliny, who comments on its prevalence in his time, but offers no
explanation therefor. The Roman king, Numa Pompilius, is said to have
added days to certain months in order to make an odd number.

It is related, moreover, that the Emperor Julius Caesar (B. C. 100-44),
having once been thrown out of his chariot through some mishap, refused
thereafter to set out upon a drive or journey until he had thrice
repeated a magic formula; and this practice appears to have been
commonly in vogue in those days.

The persistency of a traditional belief is exemplified by the modern
association of luck with uneven numbers; and probably the Goddess
Fortune herself preferred a three-legged stool. However this may be, it
is evident that the legions of her worshipers to-day are firmly
convinced of the mystic charm inherent in triplets. The Chinese pagodas,
or sacred towers, built by devout persons with the object of improving
the luck of a neighborhood, have always an odd number of stories, being
from three to thirteen floors high. In Siam, also, this superstition
holds universal sway, and its influence in the construction of buildings
is especially noticeable; for the Siamese religiously adhere to odd
numbers in architecture, and every house must have an uneven number of
rooms, windows, and doors; each staircase must have an uneven number of
steps.

In the early literature and mythology of the Northern nations much
importance was attached to the numbers three and nine, which were held
especially sacred and dear to the gods. This fact is shown in their
religious ceremonies, and more particularly in their sacrifices, which
occurred every ninth month. Each sacrifice, moreover, lasted nine days,
and each day nine victims, whether men or animals, were offered up.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Number Three](mhs67)
