[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Misc Texts](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhs61)  [Next](mhs63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VI. WORDS USED AS CHARMS

The English word "charm" is derived from the Latin carmen, a verse; and
the magical potency of a sentence used as a charm was believed to rest
in the words themselves, and not in the person who uttered them. In the
opinion of the cabalistic magicians of the Middle Ages, the power of a
charm of words depended upon its being unintelligible.

The Latin poet, Varius, wrote in the first century B.C. that old women,
by the sole use of words as charms, were able not only to restrain and
subjugate wild animals and serpents, but also to drive away noxious
creatures and vermin. Few early writers allude to this practice, which
appears, however, to have been much in vogue in different countries
towards the close of the mediaeval period. The Swiss theologian, Felix
Hammerlein (1389-1457), wrote of a peasant living near Zurich who was
able, by repeating a magic formula, to rid infested premises of adders,
vipers, lizards, and other reptiles; and in some parts of Normandy it
was a custom formerly to place small rolls of bay under the fruit trees.
The hay was then set on fire by means of torches carried by young
children, who repeated meanwhile: "Mice, caterpillars, and moles, get
out of my field; I will burn your beard and your bones; trees and
shrubs, give me three bushels of apples." Hampson remarks that this
incantation somewhat resembles one employed by the ancient Grecians
against beetles, whom they held responsible for the destruction of their
corn. These magical lines are thus translated: "Fly, beetles, the
ravenous wolf pursues you."

It was currently reported among the ancients that the famous
philosopher, Pythagoras, not only possessed the faculty of predicting
storms and earthquakes, but that he had by a magical word been enabled
to tame a Daunian bear, and had also prevented an ox from eating beans
by whispering in his ear.

Antoine Mizauld, the French physician and astrologer, affirmed that,
according to Ptolemy, in order to drive away serpents, one should
prepare a talisman by engraving the figure of two serpents upon a square
piece of copper and pronouncing a charm of words as follows: "With this
image I forbid serpents to harm any one, and command them to leave the
place where it shall be buried." In like manner, says the same
authority, to expel rats and mice, one has only to represent an image of
one of these creatures upon a piece of tin or copper, and at the proper
time, as determined by astrology, command them to depart.

In order to expel snakes, insects, and vermin from their dwellings, the
Bulgarian women of Turkey, on the last day of February, endeavor to
frighten the creatures by beating copper vessels all over the house,
while shouting, "Out with you, snakes, scorpions, flies, bugs, and
fleas!" One of the vessels is then taken into the court-yard, the pests
being expected to follow it. And in Serfo, an island of the Grecian
archipelago, at the commencement of the vintage a bunch of grapes is
thrown into each house to expel the vermin, while this formula is
repeated: "The black grape will sicken you; the black grape will poison
you! Out with you, rats and fleas!"

In Albania, when locusts or cockchafers devastate the fields, a number
of women, having caught some of the insects, form a mock funeral
procession, and proceed to drown them in some convenient stream. And
while on their way thither they chant in turn the following dirge, which
all repeat in chorus:--

O locusts, O cockchafers, parents kind,  
Orphaned you have left us all behind.

And this proceeding is thought to be destructive to the whole swarm of
insects.

The following charm against foxes was formerly used in France, and was
to be repeated thrice a week:--

Foxes, both male and female, I conjure you in the name of the Holy
Trinity, that ye neither touch nor carry off any of my fowls, whether
roosters, hens or chickens; nor eat their nests, nor stick their blood,
nor break their eggs, nor do them any barm whatever.

The Roman Catholic Church formerly sanctioned the use of certain
sentences as charms against vipers, and the following may serve as a
specimen:--

I conjure thee, O serpent, in this hour, by the five holy wounds of Our
Lord, that thou remove not out of this place, as certainly as God was
born of a pure Virgine. Otherwise, I conjure thee, serpent, by Our Lady
St. Mary, that thou obey me, as wax obeyeth the fire, and as fire
obeyeth water, that thou neither hurt me nor any other Christian, as
certainly as God was born of an immaculate Virgine, in which respect I
take thee up. In Nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus Sancti. . . .
Otherwise, O vermine, thou must come as God came unto the Jews."

When a Turk chances to encounter a serpent, he is wont to invoke the aid
of Chah-Miran, the serpent-king, and in the name of this deity he bids
the reptile depart. Now Chah-Miran has long been dead, but the astute
Turk reasons that serpents are not aware of this fact, for, if they
were, the human race would be helpless against their attacks.

As preservatives from the stings of insects, and to prevent the croaking
of frogs, the Moslems use scraps of paper containing magical formulae,
or sentences from the Koran engraved on stones or pieces of metal; and a
method formerly in vogue in France, to protect pigeons from the
incursions of scorpions, consisted in writing the word "Adam" on each of
the four walls of the pigeon-house.

The natives of Mirzapur, in cases of scorpion-bite, recite a charm
meaning as follows:--"Black scorpion of the limestone, green thy tail
and black thy mouth, God orders thee to go home. Come out, scorpion, at
the spell. Come out, come out!"

The following charm against insects is in vogue in Lesbos: In the
evening a black-handled knife is stuck in some spot where the insects
congregate, and certain Greek verses are repeated, of which the
following is a translation:--

I got three naughty bairns together,  
One a wasp, one caterpillar,  
And a swarming ant the other.  
Whate'er ye eat, whate'er ye drink,  
Hence, hence avaunt,  
To the hills and mountains flee,  
And unto each fruitless tree.

The knife is to remain in the same spot until the next morning, and is
then to be removed. This completes the charm, and the insects are
expected to depart at once.

In Great Britain there formerly prevailed a belief that rats could be
rhymed to death by anathematizing them in metrical verse, a practice
mentioned by Shakespeare and contemporary poets, and which is even
to-day not wholly obsolete.

In southern Germany, during the campaigns of Napoleon I., mice with
inked feet were placed upon the map of Europe, and their tracks were
held to foretell the routes by which the French soldiers would advance.

The Hindus consider the rat to be a sacred animal, and among the lower
classes of the natives of western India it is thought unlucky to call a
rat by his own name, so they speak of him as the "rat-uncle."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Superstitious Dealings With Wild Animals](mhs63)
