[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Time](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](crt10)  [Next](crt12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486233545/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Christmas in Ritual and Tradition*, by Clement A. Miles, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="Chapter_VII"></span>CHAPTER VII

## ALL HALLOW TIDE TO MARTINMAS

> All Saints’ and All Souls’ Days, their Relation to a New Year
> Festival﻿—All Souls’ Eve and Tendance of the Departed﻿—Soul Cakes in
> England and on the Continent﻿—Pagan Parallels of All
> Souls’﻿—Hallowe'en Charms and Omens﻿—Hallowe'en Fires﻿—Guy Fawkes
> Day﻿—“Old Hob,” the *Schimmelreiter*, and other Animal
> Masks﻿—Martinmas and its Slaughter﻿—Martinmas Drinking﻿—St. Martin's
> Fires in Germany﻿—Winter Visitors in the Low Countries and
> Germany﻿—St. Martin as Gift-bringer﻿—St. Martin's Rod.

### <span class="smcap">All Saints’ and All Souls’ Days.</span>

In the reign of Charles I. the young gentlemen of the Middle Temple were
accustomed to reckon All Hallow Tide (November 1) the beginning of
Christmas.﻿ [8-1](crt22.htm#Note_8-1)<span id="Nanchor_8-1"></span> We
may here do likewise and start our survey of winter festivals with
November, in the earlier half of which, apparently, fell the Celtic and
Teutonic New Year's Days. It is impossible to fix precise dates, but
there is reason for thinking that the Celtic year began about
November 1,﻿ [86](crt24.htm#Footnote_86)<span
id="FNanchor_86"></span>﻿ [8-2](crt22.htm#Note_8-2)<span
id="Nanchor_8-2"></span> and the Teutonic about
November 11.﻿ [8-3](crt22.htm#Note_8-3)<span id="Nanchor_8-3"></span>

On November 1 falls one of the greater festivals of the western Church,
All Saints’﻿—or, to give it its old English name, All Hallows’﻿—and on
the morrow is the solemn commemoration of the departed﻿—All Souls’. In
these two anniversaries the Church has <span id="page_190">p.
190</span> <span id="Page_190"></span>preserved at or near the original
date one part of the old beginning-of-winter festival﻿—the part
concerned with the cult of the dead. Some of the practices belonging to
this side of the feast have been transferred to the season of Christmas
and the Twelve Days, but these have often lost their original meaning,
and it is to All Souls’ Day that we must look for the most conscious
survivals of that care for the departed which is so marked a feature of
primitive religion. Early November, when the leaves are falling, and all
around speaks of mortality, is a fitting time for the commemoration of
the dead.

The first clear testimony to All Souls’ Day is found at the end of the
tenth century, and in France. All Saints’ Day, however, was certainly
observed in England, France, and Germany in the eighth
century,﻿ [8-5](crt22.htm#Note_8-5)<span id="Nanchor_8-5"></span> and
probably represents an attempt on the part of the Church to turn the
minds of the faithful away from the pagan belief in and tendance of
“ghosts” to the contemplation of the saints in the glory of Paradise. It
would seem that this attempt failed, that the people needed a way of
actually doing something for their own dead, and that All Souls’ Day
with its solemn Mass and prayers for the departed was intended to supply
this need and replace the traditional
practices.﻿ [8-6](crt22.htm#Note_8-6)<span id="Nanchor_8-6"></span> Here
again the attempt was only partly successful, for side by side with the
Church's rites there survived a number of usages related not to any
Christian doctrine of the after-life, but to the pagan idea, widespread
among many peoples, that on one day or night of the year the souls of
the dead return to their old homes and must be entertained.

All Souls’ Day then appeals to instincts older than Christianity. How
strong is the hold of ancient custom even upon the sceptical and
irreligious is shown very strikingly in Roman Catholic countries: even
those who never go to church visit the graves of their relations on All
Souls’ Eve to deck them with flowers.

The special liturgical features of the Church's celebration are the
Vespers, Matins, and Lauds of the Dead on the evening of November 1, and
the solemn Requiem Mass on November 2, with the majestic “Dies irae” and
the oft-recurrent versicle, “Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine, et lux
perpetua luceat <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="Page_191"></span>eis,” that most beautiful of prayers. The priest
and altar are vested in black, and a catafalque with burning tapers
round it stands in the body of the church. For the popular customs on
the Eve we may quote Dr. Tylor's general description:﻿—

> “In Italy the day is given to feasting and drinking in honour of the
> dead, while skulls and skeletons in sugar and paste form appropriate
> children's toys. In Tyrol, the poor souls released from purgatory fire
> for the night may come and smear their burns with the melted fat of
> the ‘soul light’ on the hearth, or cakes are left for them on the
> table, and the room is kept warm for their comfort. Even in Paris the
> souls of the departed come to partake of the food of the living. In
> Brittany the crowd pours into the churchyard at evening, to kneel
> barefoot at the grave of dead kinsfolk, to fill the hollow of the
> tombstone with holy water, or to pour libations of milk upon it. All
> night the church bells clang, and sometimes a solemn procession of the
> clergy goes round to bless the graves. In no household that night is
> the cloth removed, for the supper must be left for the souls to come
> and take their part, nor must the fire be put out, where they will
> come to warm themselves. And at last, as the inmates retire to rest,
> there is heard at the door a doleful chant﻿—it is the souls, who,
> borrowing the voices of the parish poor, have come to ask the prayers
> of the living.”﻿ [8-7](crt22.htm#Note_8-7)<span
> id="Nanchor_8-7"></span>

To this may be added some further accounts of All Souls’ Eve as the one
night in the year when the spirits of the departed are thought to
revisit their old homes.

In the Vosges mountains while the bells are ringing in All Souls’ Eve it
is a custom to uncover the beds and open the windows in order that the
poor souls may enter and rest. Prayer is made for the dead until late in
the night, and when the last “De profundis” has been said “the head of
the family gently covers up the beds, sprinkles them with holy water,
and shuts the windows.”﻿ [8-8](crt22.htm#Note_8-8)<span
id="Nanchor_8-8"></span>

The Esthonians on All Souls’ Day provide a meal for the dead and invite
them by name. The souls arrive at the first cock-crow and depart at the
second, being lighted out of the house by the head of the family, who
waves a white cloth after them and bids them come again next
year.﻿ [8-9](crt22.htm#Note_8-9)<span id="Nanchor_8-9"></span>

In Brittany, as we have seen, the dead are thought to return at <span
id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span id="Page_192"></span>this season. It
is believed that on the night between All Saints’ and All Souls’ the
church is lighted up and the departed attend a nocturnal Mass celebrated
by a phantom priest. All through the week, in one district, people are
afraid to go out after nightfall lest they should see some dead
person.﻿ [8-10](crt22.htm#Note_8-10)<span id="Nanchor_8-10"></span> In
Tyrol it is believed that the “poor souls” are present in the howling
winds that often blow at this time.﻿ [8-11](crt22.htm#Note_8-11)<span
id="Nanchor_8-11"></span>

In the Abruzzi on All Souls’ Eve “before people go to sleep they place
on the table a lighted lamp or candle and a frugal meal of bread and
water. The dead issue from their graves and stalk in procession through
every street of the village.... First pass the souls of the good, and
then the souls of the murdered and the
damned.”﻿ [8-12](crt22.htm#Note_8-12)<span id="Nanchor_8-12"></span>

In Sicily a strange belief is connected with All Souls’ Day (*jornu di
li morti*): the family dead are supposed, like Santa Klaus in the North,
to bring presents to children; the dead relations have become the good
fairies of the little ones. On the night between November 1 and 2 little
Sicilians believe that the departed leave their dread abode and come to
town to steal from rich shopkeepers sweets and toys and new clothes.
These they give to their child relations who have been “good” and have
prayed on their behalf. Often they are clothed in white and wear silken
shoes, to elude the vigilance of the shopkeepers. They do not always
enter the houses; sometimes the presents are left in the children's
shoes put outside doors and windows. In the morning the pretty gifts are
attributed by the children to the *morti* in whose coming their parents
have taught them to believe.﻿ [8-13](crt22.htm#Note_8-13)<span
id="Nanchor_8-13"></span>

A very widespread custom at this season is to burn candles, perhaps in
order to lighten the darkness for the poor souls. In Catholic Ireland
candles shine in the windows on the Vigil of All
Souls’,﻿ [8-14](crt22.htm#Note_8-14)<span id="Nanchor_8-14"></span> in
Belgium a holy candle is burnt all night, or people walk in procession
with lighted tapers, while in many Roman Catholic countries, and even in
the Protestant villages of Baden, the graves are decked with lights as
well as flowers.﻿ [8-15](crt22.htm#Note_8-15)<span
id="Nanchor_8-15"></span>

Another practice on All Saints’ and All Souls’ Days, curiously <span
id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span id="Page_193"></span>common formerly
in Protestant England, is that of making and giving “soul-cakes.” These
and the quest of them by children were customary in various English
counties and in Scotland.﻿ [8-16](crt22.htm#Note_8-16)<span
id="Nanchor_8-16"></span> The youngsters would beg not only for the
cakes but also sometimes for such things as “apples and strong beer,”
presumably to make a “wassail-bowl” of “lambswool,” hot spiced ale with
roast apples in it.﻿ [8-17](crt22.htm#Note_8-17)<span
id="Nanchor_8-17"></span> Here is a curious rhyme which they sang in
Shropshire as they went round to their neighbours, collecting
contributions:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Soul! soul! for a soul-cake!</span>  
<span class="i2">I pray, good missis, a soul-cake!</span>  
<span class="i2">An apple or pear, a plum or a cherry,</span>  
<span class="i2">Any good thing to make us merry.</span>  
<span class="i2">One for Peter, two for Paul,</span>  
<span class="i2">Three for Him who made us all.</span>  
<span class="i2">Up with the kettle, and down with the pan,</span>  
<span class="i2">Give us good alms, and we'll be
gone.”﻿ [8-18](crt22.htm#Note_8-18)<span id="Nanchor_8-18"></span>
</span>  

</div>

</div>

Shropshire is a county peculiarly rich in “souling” traditions, and one
old lady had cakes made to give away to the souling-children up to the
time of her death in 1884. At that period the custom of “souling” had
greatly declined in the county, and where it still existed the rewards
were usually apples or money. Grown men, as well as children, sometimes
went round, and the ditties sung often contained verses of good-wishes
for the household practically identical with those sung by wassailers at
Christmas.﻿ [8-19](crt22.htm#Note_8-19)<span id="Nanchor_8-19"></span>

The name “soul-cake” of course suggests that the cakes were in some way
associated with the departed, whether given as a reward for prayers for
souls in Purgatory, or as a charity for the benefit of the “poor souls,”
or baked that the dead might feast upon
them.﻿ [87](crt24.htm#Footnote_87)<span id="FNanchor_87"></span> It
seems most probable that they were relics of a feast once laid out for
the souls. On the other hand it is just possible that they were
originally a sacrament of the corn-spirit. <span id="page_194">p.
194</span> <span id="Page_194"></span>A North Welsh tradition recorded
by Pennant may conceivably have preserved a vague memory of some
agricultural connection: he tells us that on receiving soul-cakes the
poor people used to pray to God to bless the next crop of
wheat.﻿ [8-20](crt22.htm#Note_8-20)<span id="Nanchor_8-20"></span>

Not in Great Britain alone are soul-cakes found; they are met with in
Belgium, southern Germany, and Austria. In western Flanders children set
up on All Souls’ Eve little street altars, putting a crucifix or Madonna
with candles on a chair or stool, and begging passers-by for money “for
cakes for the souls in Purgatory.” On All Souls’ morning it is
customary, all over the Flemish part of Belgium, to bake little cakes of
finest white flour, called “soul-bread.” They are eaten hot, and a
prayer is said at the same time for the souls in Purgatory. It is
believed that a soul is delivered for every cake eaten. At Antwerp the
cakes are coloured yellow with saffron to suggest the Purgatorial
flames. In southern Germany and Austria little white loaves of a special
kind are baked; they are generally oval in form, and are usually called
by some name into which the word “soul” enters. In Tyrol they are given
to children by their godparents; those for the boys have the shape of
horses or hares, those for the girls, of hens. In Tyrol the cakes left
over at supper remain on the table and are said to “belong to the poor
souls.”﻿ [8-21](crt22.htm#Note_8-21)<span id="Nanchor_8-21"></span>

In Friuli in the north-east of Italy there is a custom closely
corresponding to our “soul-cakes.” On All Souls’ Day every family gives
away a quantity of bread. This is not regarded as a charity; all the
people of the village come to receive it and before eating it pray for
the departed of the donor's family. The most prosperous people are not
ashamed to knock at the door and ask for this *pane dei
morti*.﻿ [8-22](crt22.htm#Note_8-22)<span id="Nanchor_8-22"></span>

In Tyrol All Souls’ is a day of licensed begging, which has become a
serious abuse. A noisy rabble of ragged and disorderly folk, with bags
and baskets to receive gifts, wanders from village to village, claiming
as a right the presents of provisions that were originally a freewill
offering for the benefit of the departed, and angrily abusing those who
refuse to give.﻿ [8-23](crt22.htm#Note_8-23)<span
id="Nanchor_8-23"></span>

The New Year is the time for a festival of the dead in many parts of the
world.﻿ [8-24](crt22.htm#Note_8-24)<span id="Nanchor_8-24"></span> I may
quote Dr. Frazer's account of what <span id="page_195">p.
195</span> <span id="Page_195"></span>goes on in Tonquin; it shows a
remarkable likeness to some European
customs﻿ [88](crt24.htm#Footnote_88)<span id="FNanchor_88"></span>:﻿—

> “In Tonquin, as in Sumba, the dead revisit their kinsfolk and their
> old homes at the New Year. From the hour of midnight, when the New
> Year begins, no one dares to shut the door of his house for fear of
> excluding the ghosts, who begin to arrive at that time. Preparations
> have been made to welcome and refresh them after their long journey.
> Beds and mats are ready for their weary bodies to repose upon, water
> to wash their dusty feet, slippers to comfort them, and canes to
> support their feeble steps.”﻿ [8-25](crt22.htm#Note_8-25)<span
> id="Nanchor_8-25"></span>

In Lithuania, the last country in Europe to be converted to
Christianity, heathen traditions lingered long, and sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century travellers give accounts of a pagan New Year's feast
which has great interest. In October, according to one account, on
November 2, according to another, the whole family met together, strewed
the tables with straw and put sacks on the straw. Bread and two jugs of
beer were then placed on the table, and one of every kind of domestic
animal was roasted before the fire after a prayer to the god Zimiennik
(possibly an ancestral spirit), asking for protection through the year
and offering the animals. Portions were thrown to the corners of the
room with the words “Accept our burnt sacrifice, O Zimiennik, and kindly
partake thereof.” Then followed a great feast. Further, the spirits of
the dead were invited to leave their graves and visit the bath-house,
where platters of food were spread out and left for three days. At the
end of this time the remains of the repast were set out over the graves
and libations poured.﻿ [8-26](crt22.htm#Note_8-26)<span
id="Nanchor_8-26"></span>

The beginning of November is not solely a time of memory of the dead;
customs of other sorts linger, or until lately used to linger, about it,
especially in Scotland, northern England, Ireland, Cornwall, Wales, and
the West Midlands. One may conjecture that these are survivals from the
Celtic New Year's Day, for most of them are of the nature of omens or
charms. Apples and nuts are prominent on Hallowe'en, the Eve of All
<span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="Page_196"></span>Saints;﻿ [89](crt24.htm#Footnote_89)<span
id="FNanchor_89"></span> they may be regarded either as a kind of
sacrament of the vegetation-spirit, or as simply intended by
homoeopathic magic to bring fulness and fruitfulness to their
recipients. A custom once common in the north of
England﻿ [8-27](crt22.htm#Note_8-27)<span id="Nanchor_8-27"></span> and
in Wales﻿ [8-28](crt22.htm#Note_8-28)<span id="Nanchor_8-28"></span> was
to catch at apples with the mouth, the fruit being suspended on a
string, or on one end of a large transverse beam with a lighted candle
at the other end. In the north apples and nuts were the feature of the
evening feast, hence the name “Nutcrack
night.”﻿ [8-29](crt22.htm#Note_8-29)<span id="Nanchor_8-29"></span>

Again, at St. Ives in Cornwall every child is given a big apple on
Allhallows’ Eve﻿—“Allan Day” as it is
called.﻿ [8-30](crt22.htm#Note_8-30)<span id="Nanchor_8-30"></span> Nuts
and apples were also used as means of forecasting the future. In
Scotland for instance nuts were put into the fire and named after
particular lads and lasses. “As they burn quietly together or start from
beside one another, the course and issue of the courtship will
be.”﻿ [8-31](crt22.htm#Note_8-31)<span id="Nanchor_8-31"></span> On
Hallowe'en in Nottinghamshire if a girl had two lovers and wanted to
know which would be the more constant, she took two apple-pips, stuck
one on each cheek (naming them after her lovers) and waited for one to
fall off. The poet Gay alludes to this custom:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“See from the core two kernels now I take,</span>  
<span class="i2">This on my cheek for Lubberkin is worn,</span>  
<span class="i2">And Booby Clod on t'other side is borne;</span>  
<span class="i2">But Booby Clod soon falls upon the ground,</span>  
<span class="i2">A certain token that his love's unsound;</span>  
<span class="i2">While Lubberkin sticks firmly to the last;</span>  
<span class="i2">Oh! were his lips to mine but joined so
fast.”﻿ [8-32](crt22.htm#Note_8-32)<span id="Nanchor_8-32"></span>
</span>  

</div>

</div>

In Nottinghamshire apples are roasted and the parings thrown over the
left shoulder. “Notice is taken of the shapes which the parings assume
when they fall to the ground. Whatever letter a paring resembles will be
the initial letter of the Christian name of the man or woman whom you
will marry.”﻿ [8-33](crt22.htm#Note_8-33)<span id="Nanchor_8-33"></span>

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span id="Page_197"></span>Hallowe'en
is indeed in the British Isles the favourite time for forecasting the
future, and various methods are employed for this purpose.

A girl may cross her shoes upon her bedroom floor in the shape of a T
and say these lines:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“I cross my shoes in the shape of a T,</span>  
<span class="i2">Hoping this night my true love to see,</span>  
<span class="i2">Not in his best or worst array,</span>  
<span class="i2">But in the clothes of every day.”</span>  

</div>

</div>

Then let her get into bed backwards without speaking any more that
night, and she will see her future husband in her
dreams.﻿ [8-34](crt22.htm#Note_8-34)<span id="Nanchor_8-34"></span>

“On All Hallowe'en or New Year's Eve,” says Mr. W. Henderson, “a Border
maiden may wash her sark, and hang it over a chair to dry, taking care
to tell no one what she is about. If she lie awake long enough, she will
see the form of her future spouse enter the room and turn the sark. We
are told of one young girl who, after fulfilling this rite, looked out
of bed and saw a coffin behind the sark; it remained visible for some
time and then disappeared. The girl rose up in agony and told her family
what had occurred, and the next morning she heard of her lover's
death.”﻿ [8-35](crt22.htm#Note_8-35)<span id="Nanchor_8-35"></span>

In Scotland﻿ [8-36](crt22.htm#Note_8-36)<span id="Nanchor_8-36"></span>
and Ireland﻿ [8-37](crt22.htm#Note_8-37)<span id="Nanchor_8-37"></span>
other methods of foreseeing the future are practised on Hallowe'en; we
need not consider them here, for we shall have quite enough of such
auguries later on. (Some Scottish customs are introduced by Burns into
his poem “Hallowe'en.”) I may, however, allude to the custom formerly
prevalent in Wales for women to congregate in the church on this “Night
of the Winter Kalends,” in order to discover who of the parishioners
would die during the year.﻿ [8-38](crt22.htm#Note_8-38)<span
id="Nanchor_8-38"></span> East of the Welsh border, at Dorstone in
Herefordshire, there was a belief that on All Hallows’ Eve at midnight
those who were bold enough to look through the windows would see the
church lighted with an unearthly glow, and Satan in monk's habit
fulminating anathemas from the pulpit and calling out the names of those
who were to render up their souls.﻿ [8-39](crt22.htm#Note_8-39)<span
id="Nanchor_8-39"></span>

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span id="Page_198"></span>Again,
there are numerous Hallowe'en fire customs, probably sun-charms for the
New Year, a kind of homoeopathic magic intended to assist the sun in his
struggle with the powers of darkness. To this day great bonfires are
kindled in the Highlands, and formerly brands were carried about and the
new fire was lit in each house.﻿ [8-40](crt22.htm#Note_8-40)<span
id="Nanchor_8-40"></span> It would seem that the Yule log customs (see
 [X](crt14.htm#Chapter_X)) are connected with this new lighting of the
house-fire, transferred to Christmas.

In Ireland fire was lighted at this time at a place called Tlachtga,
from which all the hearths in Ireland are said to have been annually
supplied.﻿ [8-41](crt22.htm#Note_8-41)<span id="Nanchor_8-41"></span> In
Wales the habit of lighting bonfires on the hills is perhaps not yet
extinct.﻿ [8-42](crt22.htm#Note_8-42)<span id="Nanchor_8-42"></span>
Within living memory when the flames were out somebody would raise the
cry, “May the tailless black sow seize the hindmost,” and everyone
present would run for his life.﻿ [8-43](crt22.htm#Note_8-43)<span
id="Nanchor_8-43"></span> This may point to a former human sacrifice,
possibly of a victim laden with the accumulated evils of the past
year.﻿ [8-44](crt22.htm#Note_8-44)<span id="Nanchor_8-44"></span>

In North Wales, according to another account, each family used to make a
great bonfire in a conspicuous place near the house. Every person threw
into the ashes a white stone, marked; the stones were searched for in
the morning, and if any one were missing the person who had thrown it in
would die, it was believed, during the
year.﻿ [8-45](crt22.htm#Note_8-45)<span id="Nanchor_8-45"></span> The
same belief and practice were found at Callander in
Perthshire.﻿ [8-46](crt22.htm#Note_8-46)<span id="Nanchor_8-46"></span>

Though, probably, the Hallowe'en fire rites had originally some
connection with the sun, the conscious intention of those who practised
them in modern times was often to ward off witchcraft. With this object
in one place the master of the family used to carry a bunch of burning
straw about the corn, in Scotland the red end of a fiery stick was waved
in the air, in Lancashire a lighted candle was borne about the fells,
and in the Isle of Man fires were
kindled.﻿ [8-47](crt22.htm#Note_8-47)<span id="Nanchor_8-47"></span>

### <span class="smcap">Guy Fawkes Day.</span>

Probably the burning of Guy Fawkes on November 5 is a survival of a New
Year bonfire. There is every reason to think that the commemoration of
the deliverance from “gunpowder <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="Page_199"></span>treason and plot” is but a modern meaning attached
to an ancient traditional practice, for the burning of the effigy has
many parallels in folk-custom. Dr.
Frazer﻿ [8-48](crt22.htm#Note_8-48)<span id="Nanchor_8-48"></span>
regards such effigies as representatives of the spirit of vegetation﻿—by
burning them in a fire that represented the sun men thought they secured
sunshine for trees and crops. Later, when the ideas on which the custom
was based had faded away, people came to identify these images with
persons whom they regarded with aversion, such as Judas Iscariot, Luther
(in Catholic Tyrol), and, apparently, Guy Fawkes in England. At Ludlow
in Shropshire, it is interesting to note, if any well-known local man
had aroused the enmity of the populace his effigy was substituted for,
or added to, that of Guy Fawkes. Bonfire Day at Ludlow is marked by a
torchlight procession and a huge
conflagration.﻿ [8-49](crt22.htm#Note_8-49)<span
id="Nanchor_8-49"></span> At Hampstead the Guy Fawkes fire and
procession are still in great force. The thing has become a regular
carnival, and on a foggy November night the procession along the steep
curving Heath Street, with the glare of the torches lighting up the
faces of dense crowds, is a strangely picturesque
spectacle.﻿ [90](crt24.htm#Footnote_90)<span id="FNanchor_90"></span>

### <span class="smcap">Animal Masks.</span>

On All Souls’ Day in Cheshire there began to be carried about a curious
construction called “Old Hob,” a horse's head enveloped in a sheet; it
was taken from door to door, and accompanied by the singing of begging
rhymes.﻿ [8-50](crt22.htm#Note_8-50)<span id="Nanchor_8-50"></span> Old
Hob, who continued to appear until Christmas, is an English parallel to
the German *Schimmel* or white horse. We have here to do with one of
those strange animal forms which are apparently relics of sacrificial
customs. They come on various days in the winter festival season, and
also at other times, and may as well be considered at this point. In
some cases they are definitely imitations of animals, and may have
replaced real sacrificial beasts taken about in procession, in others
they are simply men wearing the head, horn, hide, or tail of a beast,
like the worshippers at many <span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span
id="Page_200"></span>a heathen sacrifice to-day. (Of the *rationale* of
masking something has already been said in  [VI](crt10.htm#Chapter_VI))

The mingling of Roman and non-Roman customs makes it very hard to
separate the different elements in the winter festivals. In regard
particularly to animal masks it is difficult to pronounce in favour of
one racial origin rather than another; we may, however, infer with some
probability that when a custom is attached not to Christmas or the
January Kalends but to one of the November or early December feasts, it
is not of Roman origin. For, as the centuries have passed, Christmas and
the Kalends﻿—the Roman festivals ecclesiastical and secular﻿—have
increasingly tended to supplant the old northern festal times, and a
transference of, for instance, a Teutonic custom from Martinmas to
Christmas or January 1, is far more conceivable than the attraction of a
Roman practice to one of the earlier and waning festivals.

Let us take first the horse-forms, seemingly connected with that
sacrificial use of the horse among the Teutons to which Tacitus and
other writers testify.﻿ [8-51](crt22.htm#Note_8-51)<span
id="Nanchor_8-51"></span> “Old Hob” is doubtless one form of the hobby
horse, so familiar in old English festival customs. His German parallel,
the *Schimmel*, is mostly formed thus in the north: a sieve with a long
pole to whose end a horse's head is fastened, is tied beneath the chest
of a young man, who goes on all fours, and some white cloths are thrown
over the whole. In Silesia the *Schimmel* is formed by three or four
youths. The rider is generally veiled, and often wears on his head a pot
with glowing coals shining forth through openings that represent eyes
and a mouth.﻿ [8-52](crt22.htm#Note_8-52)<span id="Nanchor_8-52"></span>
In Pomerania the thing is called simply
*Schimmel*,﻿ [8-53](crt22.htm#Note_8-53)<span id="Nanchor_8-53"></span>
in other parts emphasis is laid upon the rider, and the name
*Schimmelreiter* is given. Some mythologists have seen in this rider on
a white horse an impersonation of Woden on his great charger; but it is
more likely that the practice simply originated in the taking round of a
real sacrificial horse.﻿ [8-54](crt22.htm#Note_8-54)<span
id="Nanchor_8-54"></span> The *Schimmelreiter* is often accompanied by a
“bear,” a youth dressed in straw who plays the part of a bear tied to a
pole.﻿ [8-55](crt22.htm#Note_8-55)<span id="Nanchor_8-55"></span> He may
be connected with some such veneration of the animal as is suggested by
the custom still surviving at Berne, of keeping bears at the public
expense.

To return to Great Britain, here is an account of a so-called <span
id="page_201">p. 201</span> <span id="Page_201"></span>“hodening”
ceremony once performed at Christmas-time at Ramsgate: “A party of young
people procure the head of a dead horse, which is affixed to a pole
about four feet in length, a string is tied to the lower jaw, a
horse-cloth is then attached to the whole, under which one of the party
gets, and by frequently pulling the string keeps up a loud snapping
noise and is accompanied by the rest of the party grotesquely habited
and ringing hand-bells. They thus proceed from house to house, sounding
their bells and singing carols and
songs.”﻿ [8-56](crt22.htm#Note_8-56)<span id="Nanchor_8-56"></span>

Again, in Wales a creature called “the Mari Llwyd” was known at
Christmas. A horse's skull is “dressed up with ribbons, and supported on
a pole by a man who is concealed under a large white cloth. There is a
contrivance for opening and shutting the jaws, and the figure pursues
and bites everybody it can lay hold of, and does not release them except
on payment of a fine.”﻿ [8-57](crt22.htm#Note_8-57)<span
id="Nanchor_8-57"></span> The movable jaws here give the thing a
likeness to certain Continental figures representing other kinds of
animals and probably witnessing to their former sacrificial use. On the
island of Usedom appears the *Klapperbock*, a youth who carries a pole
with the hide of a buck thrown over it and a wooden head at the end. The
lower jaw moves up and down and clatters, and he charges at children who
do not know their prayers by heart.﻿ [8-58](crt22.htm#Note_8-58)<span
id="Nanchor_8-58"></span> In Upper Styria we meet the *Habergaiss*. Four
men hold on to one another and are covered with white blankets. The
foremost one holds up a wooden goat's head with a movable lower jaw that
rattles, and he butts children.﻿ [8-59](crt22.htm#Note_8-59)<span
id="Nanchor_8-59"></span> At Ilsenburg in the Harz is found the
*Habersack*, formed by a person taking a pole ending in a fork, and
putting a broom between the prongs so that the appearance of a head with
horns is obtained. The carrier is concealed by a
sheet.﻿ [8-60](crt22.htm#Note_8-60)<span id="Nanchor_8-60"></span>

In connection with horns we must not forget the “horn-dance” at Abbots
Bromley in Staffordshire, held now in September, but formerly at
Christmas. Six of the performers wear sets of horns kept from year to
year in the church.﻿ [8-61](crt22.htm#Note_8-61)<span
id="Nanchor_8-61"></span> Plot, in his “Natural History of
Staffordshire” (1686, p. 434) calls it a “*Hobby-horse Dance* from a
person who carried the image of a horse between his legs, made of thin
boards.”﻿ [8-62](crt22.htm#Note_8-62)<span id="Nanchor_8-62"></span>

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span id="Page_202"></span>In Denmark,
Sweden, and Norway creatures resembling both the *Schimmelreiter* and
the *Klapperbock* are or were to be met with at Christmas. The name
*Julebuk* (yule buck) is used for various objects: sometimes for a
person dressed up in hide and horns, or with a buck's head, who “goes
for” little boys and girls; sometimes for a straw puppet set up or
tossed about from hand to hand; sometimes for a cake in the form of a
buck. People seem to have had a bad conscience about these things, for
there are stories connecting them with the Devil. A girl, for instance,
who danced at midnight with a straw *Julebuk*, found that her partner
was no puppet but the Evil One himself. Again, a fellow who had dressed
himself in black and put horns on his head, claws on his hands, and
fiery tow in his mouth, was carried off by the Prince of Darkness whose
form he had mimicked.﻿ [8-63](crt22.htm#Note_8-63)<span
id="Nanchor_8-63"></span> The association of animal maskings with the
infernal powers is doubtless the work of the Church. To the zealous
missionary the old heathen ritual was no mere foolish superstition but a
service of intensely real and awful beings, the very devils of hell, and
one may even conjecture that the traditional Christian devil-type, half
animal half human, was indirectly derived from skin-clad worshippers at
pagan festivals.

### <span class="smcap">Martinmas.</span>

Between All Souls’ Day and Martinmas (November 11) there are no
folk-festivals of great importance, though on St. Hubert's Day,
November 3, in Flemish Belgium special little cakes are made, adorned
with the horn of the saint, the patron of hunting, and are eaten not
only by human beings but by dogs, cats, and other domestic
animals.﻿ [8-64](crt22.htm#Note_8-64)<span id="Nanchor_8-64"></span> The
English Guy Fawkes Day has already been considered, while November 9,
Lord Mayor's Day, the beginning of the municipal year, may remind us of
the old Teutonic New Year.

Round Martinmas popular customs cluster thickly, as might be expected,
since it marks as nearly as possible the date of the old
beginning-of-winter festival, the feast perhaps at which Germanicus
surprised the Marsi in <span class="smcap">A.D.</span>
14.﻿ [8-65](crt22.htm#Note_8-65)<span id="Nanchor_8-65"></span>

The most obvious feature of Martinmas is its physical feasting. <span
id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span id="Page_203"></span>Economic causes,
as we saw in  [VI](crt10.htm#Chapter_VI), must have made the middle of
November a great killing season among the old Germans, for the snow
which then began rendered it impossible longer to pasture the beasts,
and there was not fodder enough to keep the whole herd through the
winter. Thus it was a time of feasting on flesh, and of animal
sacrifices, as is suggested by the Anglo-Saxon name given to November by
Bede, *Blot-monath*, sacrifice-month.﻿ [8-66](crt22.htm#Note_8-66)<span
id="Nanchor_8-66"></span>

Christmas does not seem to have quickly superseded the middle of
November as a popular feast in Teutonic countries; rather one finds an
outcome of the conciliatory policy pursued by Gregory the Great (see
 [VI](crt10.htm#Chapter_VI)) in the development of Martinmas. Founded in
the fifth century, it was made a great Church festival by Pope Martin I.
(649-654),﻿ [8-67](crt22.htm#Note_8-67)<span id="Nanchor_8-67"></span>
and it may well have been intended to absorb and Christianize the New
Year festivities of the Teutonic peoples. The veneration of St. Martin
spread rapidly in the churches of northern Europe, and he came to be
regarded as one of the very chief of the
saints.﻿ [8-68](crt22.htm#Note_8-68)<span id="Nanchor_8-68"></span> His
day is no longer a Church feast of high rank, but its importance as a
folk festival is great.

The tradition of slaughter is preserved in the British custom of killing
cattle on St. Martin's Day﻿—“Martlemas
beef”﻿ [8-69](crt22.htm#Note_8-69)<span id="Nanchor_8-69"></span> ﻿—and
in the German eating of St. Martin's geese and
swine.﻿ [8-70](crt22.htm#Note_8-70)<span id="Nanchor_8-70"></span> The
St. Martin's goose, indeed, is in Germany as much a feature of the
festival as the English Michaelmas goose is of the September feast of
the angels.

In Denmark too a goose is eaten at Martinmas, and from its breast-bone
the character of the coming winter can be foreseen. The white in it is a
sign of snow, the brown of very great cold. Similar ideas can be traced
in Germany, though there is not always agreement as to what the white
and the brown betoken.﻿ [8-71](crt22.htm#Note_8-71)<span
id="Nanchor_8-71"></span>

At St. Peter's, Athlone, Ireland, a very obviously sacrificial custom
lasted on into the nineteenth century. Every household would kill an
animal of some kind, and sprinkle the threshold with its blood. A cow or
sheep, a goose or turkey, or merely a cock or hen, was used according to
the means of the family.﻿ [8-72](crt22.htm#Note_8-72)<span
id="Nanchor_8-72"></span> It seems that the animal was actually offered
to St. Martin, apparently as <span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="Page_204"></span>the successor of some god, and bad luck came if the
custom were not observed. Probably these rites were transferred to
Martinmas from the old Celtic festival of *Samhain*. Again, in a strange
Irish legend the saint himself is said to have been cut up and eaten in
the form of an ox.﻿ [8-73](crt22.htm#Note_8-73)<span
id="Nanchor_8-73"></span>

In the wine-producing regions of Germany Martinmas was the day for the
first drinking of the new wine, and the feasting in general on his day
gave the saint the reputation of a guzzler and a glutton; it even became
customary to speak of a person who had squandered his substance in
riotous living as a *Martinsmann*.﻿ [8-74](crt22.htm#Note_8-74)<span
id="Nanchor_8-74"></span> As we have seen survivals of sacrifice in the
Martinmas slaughter, so we may regard the *Martinsminne* or toast as
originating in a sacrifice of liquor.﻿ [8-75](crt22.htm#Note_8-75)<span
id="Nanchor_8-75"></span> In the Böhmerwald it is believed that wine
taken at Martinmas brings strength and beauty, and the lads and girls
gather in the inns to drink, while a common German proverb runs:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Heb an Martini,</span>  
<span class="i2">Trink Wein per circulum
anni.”﻿ [91](crt24.htm#Footnote_91)<span
id="FNanchor_91"></span>﻿ [8-76](crt22.htm#Note_8-76)<span
id="Nanchor_8-76"></span> </span>  

</div>

</div>

Here, by the way, is a faint suggestion that Martinmas is regarded as
the beginning of the year; as such it certainly appears in a number of
legal customs, English, French, and German, which existed in the Middle
Ages and in some cases in quite recent times. It was often at Martinmas
that leases ended, rents had to be paid, and farm-servants changed their
places.﻿ [8-77](crt22.htm#Note_8-77)<span id="Nanchor_8-77"></span>

There is a survival, perhaps, of a cereal sacrifice or sacrament in the
so-called “Martin's horns,” horseshoe pastries given at Martinmas in
many parts of Germany.﻿ [8-78](crt22.htm#Note_8-78)<span
id="Nanchor_8-78"></span> Another kind of sacrifice is suggested by a
Dutch custom of throwing baskets of fruit into Martinmas bonfires, and
by a German custom of casting in empty
fruit-baskets.﻿ [8-79](crt22.htm#Note_8-79)<span
id="Nanchor_8-79"></span> In Venetia the peasants keep over from the
vintage a few grapes to form part of their Martinmas supper, and as far
south as Sicily it is considered essential to taste the new wine at this
festival.﻿ [8-80](crt22.htm#Note_8-80)<span id="Nanchor_8-80"></span>

Bonfires appear at Martinmas in Germany, as at All Hallows tide in the
British Isles. On St. Martin's Eve in the Rhine <span id="page_205">p.
205</span> <span id="Page_205"></span>Valley between Cologne and
Coblentz, numbers of little fires burn on the heights and by the
river-bank,﻿ [8-81](crt22.htm#Note_8-81)<span id="Nanchor_8-81"></span>
the young people leap through the flames and dance about them, and the
ashes are strewn on the fields to make them
fertile.﻿ [8-82](crt22.htm#Note_8-82)<span id="Nanchor_8-82"></span>
Survivals of fire-customs are found also in other regions. In Belgium,
Holland, and north-west Germany processions of children with paper or
turnip lanterns take place on St. Martin's Eve. In the Eichsfeld
district the little river Geislede glows with the light of candles
placed in floating nutshells. Even the practice of leaping through the
fire survives in a modified form, for in northern Germany it is not
uncommon for people on St. Martin's Day or Eve to jump over lighted
candles set on the parlour floor.﻿ [8-83](crt22.htm#Note_8-83)<span
id="Nanchor_8-83"></span> In the fifteenth century the Martinmas fires
were so many that the festival actually got the name of *Funkentag*
(Spark Day).﻿ [8-84](crt22.htm#Note_8-84)<span id="Nanchor_8-84"></span>

On St. Martin's Eve in Germany and the Low Countries we begin to meet
those winter visitors, bright saints and angels on the one hand,
mock-terrible bogeys and monsters on the other, who add so much to the
romance and mystery of the children's Christmas. Such visitors are to be
found in many countries, but it is in the lands of German speech that
they take on the most vivid and picturesque forms. St. Martin, St.
Nicholas, Christkind, Knecht Ruprecht, and the rest are very real and
personal beings to the children, and are awaited with pleasant
expectation or mild dread. Often they are beheld not merely with the
imagination but with the bodily eye, when father or friend is wondrously
transformed into a supernatural figure.

What are the origins of these holy or monstrous beings? It is hard to
say with certainty, for many elements, pagan and Christian, seem here to
be closely blended. It is pretty clear, however, that the grotesque
half-animal shapes are direct relics of heathendom, and it is highly
probable that the forms of saints or angels﻿—even, perhaps, of the
Christ Child Himself﻿—represent attempts of the Church to transform and
sanctify alien things which she could not suppress. What some of these
may have been we shall tentatively guess as we go along. Though no
grown-up person would take the mimic Martin or Nicholas <span
id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span id="Page_206"></span>seriously
nowadays, there seem to be at the root of them things once regarded as
of vital moment. Just as fairy-tales, originally serious attempts to
explain natural facts, have now become reading for children, so ritual
practices which our ancestors deemed of vast importance for human
welfare have become mere games to amuse the young.

On St. Martin's Eve, to come back from speculation to the facts of
popular custom, the saint appears in the nurseries of Antwerp and other
Flemish towns. He is a man dressed up as a bishop, with a pastoral staff
in his hand. His business is to ask if the children have been “good,”
and if the result of his inquiries is satisfactory he throws down
apples, nuts, and cakes. If not, it is rods that he leaves behind. At
Ypres he does not visibly appear, but children hang up stockings filled
with hay, and next morning find presents in them, left by the saint in
gratitude for the fodder provided for his horse. He is there imagined as
a rider on a white horse, and the same conception prevails in Austrian
Silesia, where he brings the “Martin's horns” already
mentioned.﻿ [8-85](crt22.htm#Note_8-85)<span id="Nanchor_8-85"></span>
In Silesia when it snows at Martinmas people say that the saint is
coming on his white horse, and there, it may be noted, the
*Schimmelreiter* appears at the same
season.﻿ [8-86](crt22.htm#Note_8-86)<span id="Nanchor_8-86"></span> In
certain respects, it has been suggested, St. Martin may have taken the
place of Woden.﻿ [8-87](crt22.htm#Note_8-87)<span
id="Nanchor_8-87"></span> It is perhaps not without significance that,
like the god, he is a military hero, and conceived as a rider on
horseback. At Düsseldorf he used to be represented in his festival
procession by a man riding on another fellow's
back.﻿ [8-88](crt22.htm#Note_8-88)<span id="Nanchor_8-88"></span>

At Mechlin and other places children go round from house to house,
singing and collecting gifts. Often four boys with paper caps on their
heads, dressed as Turks, carry a sort of litter whereon St. Martin sits.
He has a long white beard of flax and a paper mitre and stole, and holds
a large wooden spoon to receive apples and other eatables that are given
to the children, as well as a leather purse for offerings of
money.﻿ [8-89](crt22.htm#Note_8-89)<span id="Nanchor_8-89"></span>

In the Ansbach region a different type of being used to
appear﻿—Pelzmärten (Skin Martin) by name; he ran about and frightened
the children, before he threw them their apples and nuts. In several
places in Swabia, too, Pelzmärte was known; <span id="page_207">p.
207</span> <span id="Page_207"></span>he had a black face, a cow-bell
hung on his person, and he distributed blows as well as nuts and
apples.﻿ [8-90](crt22.htm#Note_8-90)<span id="Nanchor_8-90"></span> In
him there is obviously more of the pagan mummer than the Christian
bishop.

In Belgium St. Martin is chiefly known as the bringer of apples and nuts
for children; in Bavaria and Austria he has a different aspect: a
*gerte* or rod, supposed to promote fruitfulness among cattle and
prosperity in general, is connected with his day. The rods are taken
round by the neatherds to the farmers, and one is given to each﻿—two to
rich proprietors; they are to be used, when spring comes, to drive out
the cattle for the first time. In Bavaria they are formed by a
birch-bough with all the leaves and twigs stripped off﻿—except at the
top, to which oak-leaves and juniper-twigs are fastened. At Etzendorf a
curious old rhyme shows that the herdsman with the rod is regarded as
the representative of St. Martin.﻿ [8-91](crt22.htm#Note_8-91)<span
id="Nanchor_8-91"></span>

Can we connect this custom with the saint who brings presents to
youngsters?﻿ [92](crt24.htm#Footnote_92)<span id="FNanchor_92"></span>
There seems to be a point of contact when we note that at Antwerp St.
Martin throws down rods for naughty children as well as nuts and apples
for good ones, and that Pelzmärte in Swabia has blows to bestow as well
as gifts. St. Martin's main functions﻿—and, as we shall see, St.
Nicholas has the same﻿—are to beat the bad children and reward the good
with apples, nuts, and cakes. Can it be that the ethical distinction is
of comparatively recent origin, an invention perhaps for children when
the customs came to be performed solely for their benefit, and that the
beating and the gifts were originally shared by all alike and were of a
sacramental character? We shall meet with more whipping customs later
on, they are common enough in folk-ritual, and are not punishments, but
kindly services; their purpose is to drive away evil influences, and to
bring to the flogged one the life-giving virtues of the tree from which
the twigs or boughs are taken.﻿ [8-92](crt22.htm#Note_8-92)<span
id="Nanchor_8-92"></span> Both the flogging and the eating of fruit may,
indeed, be means of contact with the vegetation-spirit, the one in <span
id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span id="Page_208"></span>an external, the
other in a more internal way. Or possibly the rod and the fruit may once
have been conjoined, the beating being performed with fruit-laden boughs
in order to produce prosperity. It is noteworthy that at Etzendorf so
many head of cattle and loads of hay are augured for the farmer as there
are juniper-*berries* and twigs on St. Martin's
*gerte*.﻿ [8-94](crt22.htm#Note_8-94)<span id="Nanchor_8-94"></span>

Attempts to account for the figures of SS. Martin and Nicholas in
northern folk-customs have been made along various lines. Some scholars
regard them as Christianizations of the pagan god Woden; but they might
also be taken as akin to the “first-foots” whom we shall meet on
January 1﻿—visitors who bring good luck﻿—or as maskers connected with
animal sacrifices (Pelzmärte suggests this), or again as related to the
Boy Bishop, the Lord of Misrule and the Twelfth Night King. May I
suggest that some at least of their aspects could be explained on the
supposition that they represent administrants of primitive vegetation
sacraments, and that these administrants, once ordinary human beings,
have taken on the name and attributes of the saint who under the
Christian dispensation presides over the festival? In any case it is a
strange irony of history that around the festival of Martin of Tours,
the zealous soldier of Christ and deadly foe of heathenism, should have
gathered so much that is unmistakably pagan.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span id="Page_209"></span><span
id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span id="Page_210"></span><span
id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span id="Page_211"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. St. Clement to St. Thomas](crt12)
