[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Time](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](crt18)  [Next](crt20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486233545/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Christmas in Ritual and Tradition*, by Clement A. Miles, \[1912\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## <span id="Chapter_XV"></span>CHAPTER XV

## NEW YEAR'S DAY

> Principle of New Year Customs﻿—The New Year in France, Germany, the
> United States, and Eastern Europe﻿—“First-footing” in Great
> Britain﻿—Scottish New Year Practices﻿—Highland Fumigation and
> “Breast-strip” Customs﻿—Hogmanay and Aguillanneuf﻿—New Year
> Processions in Macedonia, Roumania, Greece, and Rome﻿—Methods of
> Augury﻿—Sundry New Year Charms.

Coming to January 1, the modern and the Roman New Year's Day, we shall
find that most of its customs have been anticipated at earlier
festivals; the Roman Kalends practices have often been shifted to
Christmas, while old Celtic and Teutonic New Year practices have
frequently been transferred to the Roman
date.﻿ [113](crt24.htm#Footnote_113)<span id="FNanchor_113"></span>

The observances of New Year's Day mainly rest, as was said in
 [VI](crt10.htm#Chapter_VI), on the principle that “a good beginning
makes a good ending,” that as the first day is so will the rest be. If
you would have plenty to eat during the year, dine lavishly on New
Year's Day, if you would be rich see that your pockets are not empty at
this critical season, if you would be lucky avoid like poison at this of
all times everything of ill omen.

“On the Borders,” says Mr. W. Henderson, “care is taken that no one
enters a house empty-handed on New Year's Day. A visitor must bring in
his hand some eatable; he will be doubly welcome if he carries in a hot
stoup or ‘plotie.’ Everybody <span id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span
id="Page_322"></span>should wear a new dress on New Year's Day, and if
its pockets contain money of every description they will be certain not
to be empty throughout the year.”﻿ [16-2](crt22.htm#Note_16-2)<span
id="Nanchor_16-2"></span>

The laying of stress on what happens on New Year's Day is by no means
peculiarly European. Hindus, for instance, as Mr. Edgar Thurston tells
us, “are very particular about catching sight of some auspicious object
on the morning of New Year's Day, as the effects of omens seen on that
occasion are believed to last throughout the year.” It is thought that a
man's whole prosperity depends upon the things that he then happens to
fix his eyes upon.﻿ [16-3](crt22.htm#Note_16-3)<span
id="Nanchor_16-3"></span>

Charms, omens, and good wishes are naturally the most prominent customs
of January 1 and its Eve. The New Year in England can hardly be called a
popular festival; there is no public holiday and the occasion is more
associated with penitential Watch Night services and good resolutions
than with rejoicing. But let the reader, if he be in London, pay a visit
to Soho at this time, and he will get some idea of what the New Year
means to the foreigner. The little restaurants are decorated with gay
festoons of all colours and thronged with merrymakers, the shop-windows
are crowded with all manner of *recherché* delicacies; it is the gala
season of the year.

In France January 1 is a far more festal day than Christmas; it is then
that presents are given, family gatherings held, and calls paid. In the
morning children find their stockings filled with gifts, and then rush
off to offer good wishes to their parents. In the afternoon the younger
people call upon their older relations, and in the evening all meet for
dinner at the home of the head of the
family.﻿ [16-4](crt22.htm#Note_16-4)<span id="Nanchor_16-4"></span>

In Germany the New Year is a time of great importance. Cards are far
more numerous than at Christmas, and “New Year boxes” are given to the
tradespeople, while on the Eve (*Sylvesterabend*) there are dances or
parties, the custom of forecasting the future by lead-pouring is
practised, and at the stroke of midnight there is a general cry of
“Prosit Neu Jahr!”, a drinking of healths, and a shaking of
hands.﻿ [16-5](crt22.htm#Note_16-5)<span id="Nanchor_16-5"></span>

New Year wishes and “compliments of the season” are <span
id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span id="Page_323"></span>familiar to us
all, but in England we have not that custom of paying formal calls which
in France is so characteristic of January 1, when not only relations and
personal friends, but people whose connection is purely official are
expected to visit one another. In devout Brittany the wish exchanged
takes a beautiful religious form﻿—“I wish you a good year and Paradise
at the end of your days.”﻿ [16-6](crt22.htm#Note_16-6)<span
id="Nanchor_16-6"></span>

New Year calling is by no means confined to France. In the United States
it is one of the few traces left by the early Dutch settlers on American
manners. The custom is now rapidly falling into
disuse,﻿ [16-7](crt22.htm#Note_16-7)<span id="Nanchor_16-7"></span> but
in New York up to the middle of the nineteenth century “New Year's Day
was devoted to the universal interchange of visits. Every door was
thrown wide open. It was a breach of etiquette to omit any acquaintance
in these annual calls, when old friendships were renewed and family
differences amicably settled. A hearty welcome was extended even to
strangers of presentable appearance.” At that time the day was marked by
tremendous eating and drinking, and its visiting customs sometimes
developed into wild riot. Young men in barouches would rattle from one
house to another all day long. “The ceremony of calling was a burlesque.
There was a noisy and hilarious greeting, a glass of wine was swallowed
hurriedly, everybody shook hands all round, and the callers dashed out
and rushed into the carriage and were driven rapidly to the next
house.”﻿ [16-8](crt22.htm#Note_16-8)<span id="Nanchor_16-8"></span>

The New Year calling to offer good wishes resembles in some respects the
widespread custom of “first-footing,” based on the belief that the
character of the first visitor on New Year's Day affects the welfare of
the household during the year. We have already met with a “first-foot”
in the *polaznik* of the southern Slavs on Christmas Day. It is to be
borne in mind that for them, or at all events for the Crivoscian
highlanders whose customs are described by Sir Arthur Evans, Christmas
is essentially the festival of the New Year: New Year's Day is not
spoken of at all, its name and ceremonies being completely absorbed by
the feasts of “Great” and “Little”
Christmas.﻿ [16-9](crt22.htm#Note_16-9)<span id="Nanchor_16-9"></span>

The “first-foot” superstition is found in countries as far apart as
<span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span id="Page_324"></span>Scotland
and Macedonia. Let us begin with some English examples of it. In
Shropshire the most important principle is that if luck is to rest on a
house the “first-foot” must not be a woman. To provide against such an
unlucky accident as that a woman should call first, people often engage
a friendly man or boy to pay them an early visit. It is particularly
interesting to find a Shropshire parallel to the *polaznik's* action in
going straight to the hearth and striking sparks from the Christmas
log,﻿ [114](crt24.htm#Footnote_114)<span id="FNanchor_114"></span> when
Miss Burne tells us that one old man who used to “let the New Year in”
“always entered without knocking or speaking, and silently stirred the
fire before he offered any greeting to the
family.”﻿ [16-10](crt22.htm#Note_16-10)<span id="Nanchor_16-10"></span>

In the villages of the Teme valley, Worcestershire and Herefordshire,
“in the old climbing-boy days, chimneys used to be swept on New Year's
morning, that one of the right sex should be the first to enter; and the
young urchins of the neighbourhood went the round of the houses before
daylight singing songs, when one of their number would be admitted into
the kitchen ‘for good luck all the year.’” In 1875 this custom was still
practised; and at some of the farmhouses, if washing-day chanced to fall
on the first day of the year, it was either put off, or to make sure,
before the women could come, the waggoner's lad was called up early that
he might be let out and let in
again.﻿ [16-11](crt22.htm#Note_16-11)<span id="Nanchor_16-11"></span>

The idea of the unluckiness of a woman's being the “first-foot” is
extraordinarily widespread; the present writer has met with it in an
ordinary London restaurant, where great stress was laid upon a man's
opening the place on New Year's morning before the waitresses arrived. A
similar belief is found even in far-away China: it is there unlucky on
New Year's Day to meet a woman on first going
out.﻿ [16-12](crt22.htm#Note_16-12)<span id="Nanchor_16-12"></span> Can
the belief be connected with such ideas about dangerous influences
proceeding from women as have been described by Dr. Frazer in Vol. III.
of “The Golden Bough,”﻿ [16-13](crt22.htm#Note_16-13)<span
id="Nanchor_16-13"></span> or does it rest merely on a view of woman as
the inferior sex? The unluckiness of first meeting a woman is, we may
note, not confined to, but merely intensified on New Year's Day; in
Shropshire﻿ [16-14](crt22.htm#Note_16-14)<span
id="Nanchor_16-14"></span> and in
Germany﻿ [16-15](crt22.htm#Note_16-15)<span id="Nanchor_16-15"></span>
it belongs to any ordinary day.

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span id="Page_325"></span>As to the
general attitude towards woman suggested by these superstitions I may
quote a striking passage from Miss Jane Harrison's “Themis.” “Woman to
primitive man is a thing at once weak and magical, to be oppressed, yet
feared. She is charged with powers of child-bearing denied to man,
powers only half understood, forces of attraction, but also of danger
and repulsion, forces that all over the world seem to fill him with dim
terror. The attitude of man to woman, and, though perhaps in a less
degree, of woman to man, is still to-day essentially
magical.”﻿ [16-16](crt22.htm#Note_16-16)<span id="Nanchor_16-16"></span>

“First-foot” superstitions flourish in the north of England and in
Scotland. In the northern counties a man is often specially retained as
“first-foot” or “lucky bird”; in some parts he must be a bachelor, and
he is often expected to bring a present with him﻿—a shovelful of coals,
or some eatable, or whisky.﻿ [16-17](crt22.htm#Note_16-17)<span
id="Nanchor_16-17"></span> In the East Riding of Yorkshire a boy called
the “lucky bird” used to come at dawn on Christmas morning as well as on
New Year's Day, and bring a sprig of
evergreens﻿ [16-18](crt22.htm#Note_16-18)<span
id="Nanchor_16-18"></span> ﻿—an offering by now thoroughly familiar to
us. In Scotland, especially in Edinburgh, it is customary for domestic
servants to invite their sweethearts to be their “first-foots.” The old
Scotch families who preserve ancient customs encourage their servants to
“first-foot” them, and grandparents like their grandchildren to perform
for them the same service.﻿ [16-19](crt22.htm#Note_16-19)<span
id="Nanchor_16-19"></span> In Aberdeenshire it is considered most
important that the “first-foot” should not come empty-handed. Formerly
he carried spiced ale; now he brings a whisky-bottle. Shortbread,
oat-cakes, “sweeties,” or sowens, were also sometimes brought by the
“first-foot,” and occasionally the sowens were sprinkled on the doors
and windows of the houses visited﻿—a custom strongly suggesting a
sacramental significance of some
sort.﻿ [16-20](crt22.htm#Note_16-20)<span id="Nanchor_16-20"></span>

Before we leave the subject of British “first-footing” we may notice one
or two things that have possibly a racial significance. Not only must
the “first-foot” be a man or boy, he is often required to be
dark-haired; it is unlucky for a fair- or red-haired person to “let in”
the New Year.﻿ [16-21](crt22.htm#Note_16-21)<span
id="Nanchor_16-21"></span> It has been suggested by Sir John Rhys that
this idea rested in the first instance upon <span id="page_326">p.
326</span> <span id="Page_326"></span>racial antipathy﻿—the natural
antagonism of an indigenous dark-haired people to a race of blonde
invaders.﻿ [16-22](crt22.htm#Note_16-22)<span id="Nanchor_16-22"></span>
Another curious requirement﻿—in the Isle of Man and Northumberland﻿—is
that the “first-foot” shall not be flat-footed: he should be a person
with a high-arched instep, a foot that “water runs under.” Sir John Rhys
is inclined to connect this also with some racial contrast. He remarks,
by way of illustration, that English shoes do not as a rule fit Welsh
feet, being made too low in the
instep.﻿ [16-23](crt22.htm#Note_16-23)<span id="Nanchor_16-23"></span>

Some reference has already been made to Scottish New Year customs. In
Scotland, the most Protestant region of Europe, the country in which
Puritanism abolished altogether the celebration of Christmas, New Year's
Day is a great occasion, and is marked by various interesting usages,
its importance being no doubt largely due to the fact that it has not to
compete with the Church feast of the Nativity. Nowadays, indeed, the
example of Anglicanism is affecting the country to a considerable
extent, and Christmas Day is becoming observed in the churches. The New
Year, however, is still the national holiday, and January 1 a great day
for visiting and feasting, the chief, in fact, of all
festivals.﻿ [16-24](crt22.htm#Note_16-24)<span
id="Nanchor_16-24"></span> New Year's Day and its Eve are often called
the “Daft Days”; cakes and pastry of all kinds are eaten, healths are
drunk, and calls are paid.﻿ [16-25](crt22.htm#Note_16-25)<span
id="Nanchor_16-25"></span>

In Edinburgh there are striking scenes on New Year's Eve. “Towards
evening,” writes an observer, “the thoroughfares become thronged with
the youth of the city.... As the midnight hour approaches, drinking of
healths becomes frequent, and some are already intoxicated.... The eyes
of the immense crowd are ever being turned towards the lighted
clock-face of ‘Auld and Faithful’’ Tron \[Church\], the hour approaches,
the hands seem to stand still, but in one second more the hurrahing, the
cheering, the hand-shaking, the health-drinking, is all kept up as long
as the clock continues to ring out the much-longed-for midnight hour....
The crowds slowly disperse, the much-intoxicated and helpless ones being
hustled about a good deal, the police urging them on out of harm's way.
The first-footers are off and away, flying in every direction through
the city, singing, cheering, and shaking hands with all and
sundry.”﻿ [16-26](crt22.htm#Note_16-26)<span id="Nanchor_16-26"></span>

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span id="Page_327"></span>One need
hardly allude to the gathering of London Scots around St. Paul's to hear
the midnight chime and welcome the New Year with the strains of “Auld
Lang Syne,” except to say that times have changed and Scotsmen are now
lost in the swelling multitude of roysterers of all nationalities.

Drinking is and was a great feature of the Scottish New Year's Eve. “On
the approach of twelve o'clock, a *hot pint* was prepared﻿—that is, a
kettle or flagon full of warm, spiced, and sweetened ale, with an
infusion of spirits. When the clock had struck the knell of the departed
year, each member of the family drank of this mixture ‘A good health and
a happy New Year and many of them’ to all the rest, with a general
hand-shaking.” The elders of the family would then sally out to visit
their neighbours, and exchange
greetings.﻿ [16-27](crt22.htm#Note_16-27)<span
id="Nanchor_16-27"></span>

At Biggar in Lanarkshire it was customary to “burn out the old year”
with bonfires, while at Burghead in Morayshire a tar-barrel called the
“Clavie” was set on fire and carried about the village and the fishing
boats. Its embers were scrambled for by the people and carefully kept as
charms against witchcraft.﻿ [16-28](crt22.htm#Note_16-28)<span
id="Nanchor_16-28"></span> These fire-customs may be compared with those
on Hallowe'en, which, as we have seen, is probably an old New Year's
Eve.

Stewart in his “Popular Superstitions of the Highlands of Scotland”
tells how on the last night of the year the Strathdown Highlanders used
to bring home great loads of juniper, which on New Year's Day was
kindled in the different rooms, all apertures being closed so that the
smoke might produce a thorough fumigation. Not only human beings had to
stand this, but horses and other animals were treated in the same way to
preserve them from harm throughout the year. Moreover, first thing on
New Year's morning, everybody, while still in bed, was asperged with a
large brush.﻿ [16-29](crt22.htm#Note_16-29)<span
id="Nanchor_16-29"></span> There is a great resemblance here to the
Catholic use of incense and holy water in southern Germany and Austria
on the *Rauchnächte* (see also  [VIII](crt12.htm#Chapter_VIII)). In
Tyrol these nights are Christmas, New Year's, and Epiphany Eves. When
night falls the Tyrolese peasant goes with all his household through
each room and outhouse, his wife bearing the holy water vessel and the
censer. Every corner of the buildings, every animal, <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="Page_328"></span>every human being
is purified with the sacred smoke and the holy sprinkling, and even the
Christmas pie must be hallowed in this way. In Orthodox Greek countries
something of the same kind takes place, as we shall see, at the
Epiphany. To drive away evil spirits is no doubt the object of all these
rites.﻿ [16-30](crt22.htm#Note_16-30)<span id="Nanchor_16-30"></span>

The most interesting of Scottish New Year customs, considered as
religious survivals, is a practice found in the Highlands on New Year's
Eve, and evidently of sacrificial origin. It has been described by
several writers, and has various forms. According to one account the
hide of the mart or winter cow was wrapped round the head of one of a
company of men, who all made off belabouring the hide with switches. The
disorderly procession went three times *deiseal* (according to the
course of the sun) round each house in the village, striking the walls
and shouting on coming to a door a rhyme demanding admission. On
entering, each member of the party was offered refreshments, and their
leader gave to the goodman of the house the “breast-stripe” of a sheep,
deer, or goat, wrapped round the point of a shinty
stick.﻿ [16-31](crt22.htm#Note_16-31)<span id="Nanchor_16-31"></span>

We have here another survival of that oft-noted custom of skin-wearing,
which, as has been seen, originated apparently in a desire for contact
with the sanctity of the sacrificed victim. Further, the “breast-stripe”
given to the goodman of each house is evidently meant to convey the
hallowed influences to each family. It is an oval strip, and no knife
may be used in removing it from the flesh. The head of the house sets
fire to it, and it is given to each person in turn to smell. The
inhaling of its fumes is a talisman against fairies, witches, and
demons. In the island of South Uist, according to a quite recent
account, each person seizes hold of it as it burns, making the sign of
the cross, if he be a Catholic, in the name of the Trinity, and it is
put thrice sun-wise about the heads of those present. If it should be
extinguished it is a bad omen for the New
Year.﻿ [16-32](crt22.htm#Note_16-32)<span id="Nanchor_16-32"></span>

The writer of the last account speaks of the “breast-strip” as the
“Hogmanay,” and it is just possible that the well-known Hogmanay
processions of children on New Year's Eve (in Scotland and elsewhere)
may have some connection with the ritual above described. It is
customary for the poorer children to <span id="page_329">p.
329</span> <span id="Page_329"></span>swaddle themselves in a great
sheet, doubled up in front so as to form a vast pocket, and then go
along the streets in little bands, calling out “Hogmanay” at the doors
of the wealthier classes, and expecting a dole of oaten bread. Each
child gets a quadrant of oat-cake (sometimes with cheese), and this is
called the “Hogmanay.” Here is one of the rhymes they sing:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Get up, goodwife, and shake your feathers,</span>  
<span class="i2">And dinna think that we are beggars;</span>  
<span class="i2">For we are bairns come out to play,</span>  
<span class="i2">Get up and gie's our
hogmanay!”﻿ [16-33](crt22.htm#Note_16-33)<span
id="Nanchor_16-33"></span> </span>  

</div>

</div>

The word *Hogmanay*﻿—it is found in various forms in the northern
English counties as well as in Scotland﻿—has been a puzzle to
etymologists. It is used both for the last day of the year and for the
gift of the oaten cake or the like; and, as we have seen, it is shouted
by the children in their quest. Exactly corresponding to it in sense and
use is the French word *aguillanneuf*, from which it appears to be
derived. Although the phonetic difference between this and the Scottish
word is great, the Norman form *hoguinané* is much closer. There is,
moreover, a Spanish word *aguinaldo* (formerly *aguilando*) =
Christmas-box. The popular explanation of the French term as
*au-guy-l'an-neuf* (to the mistletoe the New Year) is now rejected by
scholars, and it seems likely that the word is a corruption of the Latin
*Kalendae*.﻿ [16-34](crt22.htm#Note_16-34)<span
id="Nanchor_16-34"></span>

A few instances of *aguillanneuf* customs may be given. Here are
specimens of rhymes sung by the New Year *quêteurs*:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Si vous veniez à la dépense,</span>  
<span class="i2">À la dépense de chez nous,</span>  
<span class="i2">Vous mangeriez de bons choux,</span>  
<span class="i2">On vous servirait du rost.</span>  
<span class="i6">Hoguinano.</span>  

</div>

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i2">Donnez-moi mes hoguignettes</span>  
<span class="i2">Dans un panier que voicy.</span>  
<span class="i2">Je l'achetai samedy</span>  
<span class="i2">D'un bon homme de dehors;</span>  
<span class="i2">Mais il est encore à payer.</span>  
<span class="i6">Hoguinano.”﻿ [16-35](crt22.htm#Note_16-35)<span
id="Nanchor_16-35"></span> </span>  

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span id="Page_330"></span>Formerly at
Matignon and Ploubalay in Brittany on Christmas Eve the boys used to get
together, carry big sticks and wallets, and knock at farmhouse doors.
When the inmates called out, “Who's there?” they would answer, “The
*hoguihanneu*,” and after singing something they were given a piece of
lard. This was put on a pointed stick carried by one of the boys, and
was kept for a feast called the
*bouriho*.﻿ [16-36](crt22.htm#Note_16-36)<span
id="Nanchor_16-36"></span> Elsewhere in Brittany poor children went
round crying “*au guyané*,” and were given pieces of lard or salt beef,
which they stuck on a long spit.﻿ [16-37](crt22.htm#Note_16-37)<span
id="Nanchor_16-37"></span> In Guernsey the children's quest at the New
Year was called *oguinane*. They chanted the following rhyme:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Oguinâni! Oguinâno!</span>  
<span class="i2">Ouvre ta pouque, et pis la
recclios.”﻿ [115](crt24.htm#Footnote_115)<span
id="FNanchor_115"></span>﻿ [16-38](crt22.htm#Note_16-38)<span
id="Nanchor_16-38"></span> </span>  

</div>

</div>

Similar processions are common in eastern Europe at the New Year. In
some parts of Macedonia on New Year's Eve men or boys go about making a
noise with bells. In other districts, early on New Year's morning, lads
run about with sticks or clubs, knock people up, cry out good wishes,
and expect to be rewarded with something to eat. Elsewhere again they
carry green olive- or cornel-boughs, and touch with them everyone they
meet.﻿ [16-39](crt22.htm#Note_16-39)<span id="Nanchor_16-39"></span> We
have already considered various similar customs, the noise and knocking
being apparently intended to drive away evil spirits, and the green
boughs to bring folks into contact with the spirit of growth therein
immanent.

In Roumania on New Year's Eve there is a custom known as the “little
plough.” Boys and men go about after dark from house to house, with long
greetings, ringing of bells, and cracking of whips. On New Year's
morning Roumanians throw handfuls of corn at one another with some
appropriate greeting, such as:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“May you live,</span>  
<span class="i2">May you flourish</span>  
<span class="i2">Like apple-trees,<span id="page_331">p.
331</span> <span id="Page_331"></span></span>  
<span class="i2">Like pear-trees</span>  
<span class="i2">In springtime,</span>  
<span class="i2">Like wealthy autumn,</span>  
<span class="i2">Of all things plentiful.”</span>  

</div>

</div>

Generally this greeting is from the young to the old or from the poor to
the rich, and a present in return is
expected.﻿ [16-40](crt22.htm#Note_16-40)<span id="Nanchor_16-40"></span>

In Athens models of war-ships are carried round by waits, who make a
collection of money in them. “St. Basil's ships” they are called, and
they are supposed to represent the vessel on which St. Basil, whose
feast is kept on January 1, sailed from
Caesarea.﻿ [16-41](crt22.htm#Note_16-41)<span id="Nanchor_16-41"></span>
It is probable that this is but a Christian gloss on a pagan custom.
Possibly there may be here a survival of an old Greek practice of
bearing a ship in procession in honour of
Dionysus,﻿ [16-42](crt22.htm#Note_16-42)<span id="Nanchor_16-42"></span>
but it is to be noted that similar observances are found at various
seasons in countries like Germany and Belgium where no Greek influence
can be traced. The custom is widespread, and it has been suggested by
Mannhardt that it was originally intended either to promote the success
of navigation or to carry evil spirits out to
sea.﻿ [16-43](crt22.htm#Note_16-43)<span id="Nanchor_16-43"></span>

It is interesting, lastly, to read a mediaeval account of a New Year
*quête* in Rome. “The following,” says the writer, “are common Roman
sports at the Kalends of January. On the Eve of the Kalends at a late
hour boys arise and carry a shield. One of them wears a mask; they
whistle and beat a drum, they go round to the houses, they surround the
shield, the drum sounds, and the masked figure whistles. This playing
ended, they receive a present from the master of the house, whatever he
thinks fit to give. So they do at every house. On that day they eat all
kinds of vegetables. And in the morning two of the boys arise, take
olive-branches and salt, enter into the houses, and salute the master
with the words, ‘Joy and gladness be in the house, so many sons, so many
little pigs, so many lambs,’ and they wish him all good things. And
before the sun rises they eat either a piece of honeycomb or something
sweet, that the whole year may pass sweetly, without strife and great
trouble.”﻿ [16-44](crt22.htm#Note_16-44)<span id="Nanchor_16-44"></span>

Various methods of peering into the future, more or less like <span
id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span id="Page_332"></span>those described
at earlier festivals, are practised at the New Year. Especially popular
at German New Year's Eve parties is the custom of *bleigiessen*. “This
ceremony consists of boiling specially prepared pieces of lead in a
spoon over a candle; each guest takes his spoonful and throws it quickly
into the basin of water which is held ready. According to the form which
the lead takes so will his future be in the coming year ... ships (which
indicate a journey), or hearts (which have, of course, only one
meaning), or some other equally significant shape is usually
discerned.”﻿ [16-45](crt22.htm#Note_16-45)<span
id="Nanchor_16-45"></span>

In Macedonia St. Basil's Eve (December 31) is a common time for
divination: a favourite method is to lay on the hot cinders a pair of
wild-olive-leaves to represent a youth and a maid. If the leaves crumple
up and draw near each other, it is concluded that the young people love
one another dearly, but if they recoil apart the opposite is the case.
If they flare up and burn, it is a sign of excessive
passion.﻿ [16-46](crt22.htm#Note_16-46)<span id="Nanchor_16-46"></span>

In Lithuania on New Year's Eve nine sorts of things﻿—money, cradle,
bread, ring, death's head, old man, old woman, ladder, and key﻿—are
baked of dough, and laid under nine plates, and every one has three
grabs at them. What he gets will fall to his lot during the
year.﻿ [16-47](crt22.htm#Note_16-47)<span id="Nanchor_16-47"></span>

Lastly, in Brittany it is supposed that the wind which prevails on the
first twelve days of the year will blow during each of the twelve
months, the first day corresponding to January, the second to February,
and so on.﻿ [16-48](crt22.htm#Note_16-48)<span
id="Nanchor_16-48"></span> Similar ideas of the prophetic character of
Christmastide weather are common in our own and other countries.

Practically all the customs discussed in this chapter have been of the
nature of charms; one or two more, practised on New Year's Day or Eve,
may be mentioned in conclusion.

There are curious superstitions about New Year water. At Bromyard in
Herefordshire it was the custom, at midnight on New Year's Eve, to rush
to the nearest spring to snatch the “cream of the well”﻿—the first
pitcherful of water﻿—and with it the prospect of the best
luck.﻿ [16-49](crt22.htm#Note_16-49)<span id="Nanchor_16-49"></span> A
Highland practice was to send <span id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span
id="Page_333"></span>some one on the last night of the year to draw a
pitcherful of water in silence, and without the vessel touching the
ground. The water was drunk on New Year's morning as a charm against
witchcraft and the evil eye.﻿ [16-50](crt22.htm#Note_16-50)<span
id="Nanchor_16-50"></span> A similar belief about the luckiness of “new
water” exists at Canzano Peligno in the Abruzzi. “On New Year's Eve, the
fountain is decked with leaves and bits of coloured stuff, and fires are
kindled round it. As soon as it is light, the girls come as usual with
their copper pots on their head; but the youths are on this morning
guardians of the well, and sell the ‘new water’ for nuts and fruits﻿—and
other sweet things.”﻿ [16-51](crt22.htm#Note_16-51)<span
id="Nanchor_16-51"></span>

In some of the Aegean islands when the family return from church on New
Year's Day, the father picks up a stone and leaves it in the yard, with
the wish that the New Year may bring with it “as much gold as is the
weight of the stone.”﻿ [16-52](crt22.htm#Note_16-52)<span
id="Nanchor_16-52"></span> Finally, in Little Russia “corn sheaves are
piled upon a table, and in the midst of them is set a large pie. The
father of the family takes his seat behind them, and asks his children
if they can see him. ‘We cannot see you,’ they reply. On which he
proceeds to express what seems to be a hope that the corn will grow so
high in his fields that he may be invisible to his children when he
walks there at harvest-time.”﻿ [16-53](crt22.htm#Note_16-53)<span
id="Nanchor_16-53"></span>

With a curious and beautiful old carol from South Wales I must bring
this chapter to a close. It was formerly sung before dawn on New Year's
Day by poor children who carried about a jug of water drawn that morning
from the well. With a sprig of box or other evergreen they would
sprinkle those they met, wishing them the compliments of the season. To
pay their respects to those not abroad at so early an hour, they would
serenade them with the following lines, which, while connected with the
“new water” tradition, contain much that is of doubtful interpretation,
and are a fascinating puzzle for folk-lorists:﻿—

<div class="poem">

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i15">“Here we bring new water</span>  
<span class="i3">From the well so clear,</span>  
<span class="i2">For to worship God with,</span>  
<span class="i3">This happy New Year.<span id="page_334">p.
334</span> <span id="Page_334"></span></span>  
<span class="i2">Sing levy-dew, sing levy-dew,</span>  
<span class="i3">The water and the wine;</span>  
<span class="i2">The seven bright gold wires</span>  
<span class="i3">And the bugles they do shine.</span>  

</div>

<div class="stanza">

<span class="i2">Sing reign of Fair Maid,</span>  
<span class="i3">With gold upon her toe,﻿—</span>  
<span class="i2">Open you the West Door,</span>  
<span class="i3">And turn the Old Year go:</span>  
<span class="i2">Sing reign of Fair Maid,</span>  
<span class="i3">With gold upon her chin,﻿—</span>  
<span class="i2">Open you the East Door,</span>  
<span class="i3">And let the New Year
in.”﻿ [16-54](crt22.htm#Note_16-54)<span id="Nanchor_16-54"></span>
</span>  

</div>

</div>

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span> <span id="Page_335"></span><span
id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span id="Page_336"></span><span
id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span id="Page_337"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Epiphany to Candlemas](crt20)
