[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Section 1:*

**Exit Statements**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## *1995 - 1996*

What is the saying? "The last shall be first"? In order that the reader
might have some idea as to where our current thinking is, we have chosen
to put our most recent materials, which we refer to as our "Exit
Statements," at the beginning of this anthology. The remaining sections
then pick up chronologically, starting with 1975. Section 2, entitled
Early Classroom Materials, begins this fairly complete history of how
our classroom developed over the years and how the many changes that we
were taken through, carefully prepared us for this time.

Although we had presented our information to the public previously, in
1995 we received instructions to up the voltage of what we stated
publicly, in other words, to express ourselves more boldly than we ever
had before. And so, two extremely powerful and revealing papers were
drafted by Do, both of which contained information that before this time
we had been reluctant to express quite so clearly.

Since the Internet, particularly the World Wide Web, had become the
"fastest growing, information sharing network in the world," we chose to
go public by way of "the NET." Although we left our materials on it only
briefly, it was quite an educational experience for us in many respects.

In the first of these two statements, ***Undercover "Jesus" Surfaces
Before Departure***, posted on September 25-26, 1995, we felt like we
had instruction to address the religious world, primarily the
Christians, in relationship to their expectation of Jesus' return. One
of the greatest struggles we've had from the beginning is the
terminology - if we try to correct the vision of the Christians and talk
their language, we're seen as a religious cult on an ego trip - if we
try to state our information in language more relevant to our actual
situation, the masses see us as attempting to make the "Trekkie"
vernacular into religion.

Nevertheless, two weeks later, on October 11, we "gave it another shot."
Having retranslated the same basic material from ***Undercover
"Jesus"*** into what we would consider more clinical and objective
terminology, we posted ***'95 Statement by an E.T. Presently
Incarnate.*** However, after posting them for only a few days, we felt
to take these statements off the Internet. It was clear to us that their
being introduced to the public at that time was premature.

As we experienced time and again, and as you will witness throughout
this anthology, it is nearly impossible to take advanced, non-human
concepts and force them into comprehensible human language - the
available "word processing" options of contemporary language are so
extremely limiting. But it is part of our task that we try. And so it is
our hope that the reader will look beyond the awkwardness of the words
we choose, that is, we hope you get to the intended meaning of the
thought that lies behind them.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** Undercover "Jesus" Surfaces
Before Departure **\|**](1-2.md)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec1.md)
