[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Section 2:*

**Early Classroom Materials**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## *1975-1988*

With the distribution of ***Statement One*** in March of 1975 (the first
document featured in this section), the public phase of Ti and Do's
mission was begun. From a hotel room in Ojai, California, where Ti and
Do stayed for less than a week, the statement was sent out to ministers,
evangelists, and awareness centers far and wide. Within two or three
days, a man who headed an awareness group in Los Angeles came out to
Ojai with one of his students to meet with **the two**. After deciding
Ti and Do were seemingly sane, he invited them to speak to a gathering
of some of his students and their guests at one of their houses. They
accepted and were taken quite by surprise to see that the house was
packed. Unbeknownst to Ti and Do, this was adding up to the "not too
welcome" idea of *followers*. And so it all began.

The **poster** featured on page 3 of this section was designed several
months later to announce free public meetings, some of the earliest
being held by these newly proclaimed followers. Then, on August 24,
1975, using the names Bo and Peep, **the two** made *their* first
appearance at a public meeting given at Cañada College, located in the
San Francisco Bay Area of California. If our recollection is correct,
the crowd was so large at the appointed time that the auditorium was
filled to capacity twice - that is, for two back- to-back meetings. Then
three weeks later, on September 14, 1975, Ti and Do (still using the
names Bo and Peep) held a meeting in Waldport, Oregon. It was at this
point that the press picked up on the story and the onslaught had begun.
Their interest was largely stimulated by reports of individuals giving
away both children and property to join the group. Although such actions
were certainly not according to Ti and Do's instructions, nevertheless,
bedlam had broken out by then. We had become a national media item.
Their unrelenting spotlight glared upon us for over half a year. And by
and large, almost every report either written or aired about us was
either riddled with inaccuracies or outright lies, that is, with one
noteworthy exception. On Sunday, February 29, 1976, the *New York Times*
published the best researched article to date. As the cover story of
*The New York Times Magazine*, free-lance writer James S. Phelan, who
actually had a lenghty interview with Ti and Do, wrote a generally quite
objective article (though certainly not the way we would have written
it) despite the "journalistic tide" against his doing so.

Over 130 public meetings held throughout the U.S., as well as in Canada,
continued until the Spring of 1976, when on April 21, Ti announced that
"the 'Harvest' is closed." In late June of 1976, the students were
called together in the Medicine Bow National Forest, Wyoming, to begin a
"classroom" in earnest. Close to 100 followers showed up. The classroom
reduced to about 40 to 50 pretty quickly. Over the period of time from
then until the spring of 1992, we lost a few more students, some of whom
have since returned, but no *new* students had entered the class.
(Excerpts taken from ***'88 Update***.)

The ***17 Steps*** and ***Major Offenses*** are documents that were
never intended for public release - that is, until now. Rather, they
were "in-house" guidelines for appropriate Next Level behavior and
conduct.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  
For the next topic in this section: [**\|** First Statement of Ti and Do
**\|**](2-2)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec2)
