[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

|                                |                    |     |
|--------------------------------|-------------------:|-----|
| ***"USA TODAY" Ad/Statement*** | ***May 27, 1993*** |     |

**

"UFO CULT" RESURFACES WITH FINAL OFFER

*The following statements could sound very presumptuous. However, these
facts **do** come into focus or "prove" themselves if they are seriously
explored a step at a time. They could also sound very "doomsdayish."
Though, in truth, they will be the most joyous "sound of music" to the
ears and eyes of those who have been waiting for them.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   The Earth's <span id="lnk2"></span>present "civilization" is about
    to be recycled **-** "spaded under." Its inhabitants are refusing to
    evolve. The "weeds" have taken over the garden and disturbed its
    usefulness beyond repair.

-   The human kingdom was created as a *stepping stone* between the
    animal kingdom and the *true* Kingdom of God (the Evolutionary
    Kingdom Level Above Human).

-   It is the soul that progresses from one kingdom level to another
    **-** each kingdom level has its own unique physical containers
    (bodies) for the souls that reside in that kingdom level.

-   As the human goes out to find servants within the animal kingdom,
    from beasts of burden to seeing-eye dogs **-** if that animal grows
    to find pleasure only in serving its master, no longer identifies as
    an animal, but sees itself as a family member in that human family,
    and its behavior is pleasing to that human **-** the two become
    *bound* together. The human family then provides the body (a human
    infant) for that soul to enter, allowing it to move up into the
    human evolutionary kingdom. (This is not to suggest that all human
    infants are containers for souls moving up from the animal kingdom,
    for most human infants are containers for human kingdom returnees
    still bound to that family unit.)

-   Likewise, when a member of the *true* Kingdom of God receives
    instruction to incarnate among humans in order to seek out the souls
    that might want to "separate from the pack" and are desirous of
    becoming only servants in the Evolutionary Level Above Human, He
    then offers them the knowledge and behavior that can open that door
    to them. If that human changes to the degree that he no longer
    desires any human behavior and he pleases that member of the Kingdom
    Level Above Human, a *bond* is formed and a body belonging to that
    new Kingdom is provided for that soul to move up into.

-   Both Kingdom Levels are physical and biological. However, the human
    kingdom is made up of mammalian **-** "seed-bearing" **-** plants or
    containers, while the Kingdom of God is made up of non-mammalian,
    non-seed-bearing "containers" for souls, and their young or
    "children" are those who have risen above **-** overcome **-** all
    human-mammalian characteristics and behavior through the tutorship
    (midwifing) of a member of the Kingdom of God who has been through
    that transition and bonded to His Father at a previous time.

-   Just as an animal sees his human tutor as the *one and only*
    "master," likewise a human, as he becomes aware of a Member of the
    Kingdom Level Above Human, sees Him as the *one and only* "God."
    However, the individual that that human related to as God sees
    Himself as a "child" in that higher, many-membered Kingdom and knows
    that only through His "Father" (an Older Member in that Kingdom) can
    He become a better member in that Kingdom.

-   A "student" or prospective "child" of a member of the *true* Kingdom
    of God can, with the help of an Older Member, overcome or rise out
    of *all* human mammalian behavior **-** sexuality and gender
    consciousness **-** and all other addictions and ties of the human
    kingdom. He must complete this change to the point of abhorring
    human behavior before his soul can become a "match" with a
    biological body of the *true* Kingdom of God **-** for that new body
    is genderless and incapable of functioning at a human level.

-   The *true* Kingdom of God, the "Headquarters" of all that is, is a
    many-membered Kingdom which physically exists in the *highest*, most
    *distant* Heaven **-** a *non-temporal* place (*outside of time*,
    and with *eternal* life). It is the only place from which souls,
    life, and all ***creating*** originates. Being non-temporal, it
    *was*, *is*, and *forever will be* **-** a concept that we, as
    temporal creatures, are not designed to comprehend. That Kingdom
    designed the "temporal" world outside its "borders" and designed its
    temporal creatures to have a progression of bodies or "vehicles"
    (through kingdom levels, such as animal and human) for souls to
    evolve through. If the soul survives and moves forward through all
    its tests along the way **-** it can, with the help of a member of
    the *true* Kingdom of God, lose its temporal characteristics and
    become a part of their non-perishable, non-corruptible world.
    However, *all other souls* who reach a certain degree of corruption
    (having of their own free will chosen to become totally separate
    from their Creator) will engage a "self-destruct" mechanism at the
    Age's end, manifested when opposing camps, be they human or
    "Luciferian," come together and destroy each other **-** thus
    assisting in the plowing under of the "garden" *for* the Creator.

-   The reason the term "TRUE" Kingdom of God is used repeatedly is
    because there are *many* space alien races that through the
    centuries of this civilization (and in civilizations prior) have
    represented themselves to humans as "Gods." We refer to them
    collectively as "Luciferians," for their ancestors fell away from
    the keeping of the *true* Kingdom of God many thousands of years
    ago. They are not genderless **-** they still need to reproduce.
    <span id="lnk1"></span>They are nothing more than technically
    advanced humans who have retained some of what they learned while in
    the early training of members of the *true* Kingdom of God, e.g.,
    limited space-time travel, telepathic communication, advanced travel
    hardware (spacecrafts, etc.), increased longevity, advanced genetic
    engineering, and such things as suspended holograms (as used in some
    religious "miracles").

-   These "Luciferian" space races are the humans' GREATEST ENEMY. They
    hold humans in unknown slavery only to fulfill their own needs. They
    cannot "create," though they develop races and biological containers
    through genetic manipulation and hybridization. <span
    id="lnk3"></span>They even try to "make deals" with human
    governments to permit them (the Luciferians) to engage in biological
    experimentation (through abductions) in exchange for technically
    advanced modes of travel **-** though they seldom follow through,
    for they don't want the humans of this civilization to grow to be
    another element of competition. They war among themselves over the
    spoils of this planet and use religion and increased sexual behavior
    to keep humans "drugged" and ignorant (in darkness) while thinking
    they are in God's keeping. These Luciferians see to it, through the
    "social norm" (the largest Luciferian "cult" there is) that man
    continues to **not** avail himself of the possibility of advancing
    *beyond* human. Many things have become the accepted "norm," but
    that doesn't make them right!

-   Just as the biological body is the "container" for the soul, the
    soul is the "container" for *Mind* (Spirit). *Mind* translates into
    the brain as *information* (knowledge). Information is available to
    humans from only two sources **-** the *mind* of the Luciferians
    **-** or the *Mind* of the Kingdom of God. The *mind* of the
    Luciferians yields misinformation (promoting the behavior and
    concepts of this world). The *Mind* from the *true* Kingdom of God
    yields ***true*** information (though the Luciferians and their
    servants would reverse this interpretation). As we ***change***, in
    the progression of overcoming humanness **-** the percentages change
    **-** of which *mind* occupies our soul **-** Truth *increases* as
    misinformation *decreases*. If we revert back to humanness, the
    process reverses **-** the Truth is aborted as the soul becomes more
    filled with mammalian *mind*. That Truth can even be taken from us
    if we abuse it. When our "eye becomes single" or our soul is filled
    only with *Mind* or Spirit from the *true* Kingdom of God, it
    becomes pure or *Holy Mind* (Spirit).

-   The *true* Kingdom of God's design permits the presence of a
    "Luciferian" element, during a human civilization, as a catalyst for
    growth. Without it, we would have no choices **-** our **free will**
    could not be exercised. Our *right* choices find us in alignment to
    recognize the Truth when it is offered.

    ------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Two thousand years ago, the *true* Kingdom of God appointed an Older
    Member to send His "Son," along with some of their beginning
    students, to incarnate on this garden. While on Earth as an "away
    team" with their "Captain," they were to work on their overcoming of
    humanness and tell the civilization they were visiting how the
    *true* Kingdom of God can be entered. The humans under the control
    of the Luciferians killed the "Captain" and his crew, because of the
    "blasphemous" position they held, and quickly turned the teachings
    of the "Captain" **-** the Older Member's "Son" **-** into watered
    down *Country Club* religion **-** obscuring the remnants of the
    Truth.

-   That same "away team" incarnated again in the 1970's in the mature
    (adult) bodies that had been picked and prepped for this current
    mission. This time the "Admiral" (the Older Member, or Father,
    incarnate in a female vehicle) came with the Son **-** "Captain"
    **-** and his crew. As the two Older Members put out a "statement"
    and held public meetings over about a 9-month period in 1975-76 to
    bring their crew together, the media tagged them the "UFO cult"
    because of their expectation of leaving aboard a spacecraft (UFO) at
    the completion of their "overcoming." The two Older Members then
    went into seclusion with their crew (students), "lifting them out"
    of the world for almost 17 years (not accepting any new students),
    making Earth's surface their classroom. This isolation was
    absolutely necessary. The *degree* of their *overcoming* of
    sexuality, addictions, and ties to the human environment had to be
    taken to the point of *matching* the behavior and consciousness of
    the Evolutionary Kingdom Above Human. Only then would their *new*
    "Next Level" bodies be *functional*. They resurfaced briefly for
    about a 3½-month period in 1992, allowing some of their "dropouts"
    to rejoin them.

-   ***This changeover*** (sufficient "overcoming" to inherit Next Level
    bodies) ***has been completed***, and before they return, they are
    instructed to share this statement with you.

-   The Luciferians are about to be "recycled" (annihilated) at the same
    time as this human civilization is "spaded." They know that "rumor
    has it" that their days are numbered. They refuse to believe it and
    are desperate to recruit souls from the human kingdom into their
    "Heavenly Kingdom." There are many "counterfeit" heavens, and each
    "heaven" is at this time collecting "names in their book," forcing a
    stand of allegiance, polarizing each individual's commitment to his
    chosen "God."

-   When members of the Level Above Human are physically present, the
    opposing forces work the hardest against them in order to support
    their own position. They do almost anything to keep humans from
    following the path toward the *true* Kingdom of God. They "turn up
    the heat" at this time in the area of mammalian behavior, primarily
    sexuality. This has become such an overwhelming presence in the
    Earth's atmosphere that even some of the crew that came with us were
    lost to its temptation. Don't forget that when the Luciferians were
    expelled, in order to support their own desires, they had to condemn
    the *true* Kingdom of God and see it simply as another path **-**
    inhumane and radically uncompromising.

-   The religious "cults" who have ***separated from the world*** have
    "picked up on" one major aspect of what is "in the air" at this time
    when the information of how to move from one kingdom level to
    another is available. What they may have failed to recognize is that
    experienced "clinicians" are necessary to take souls through that
    "weaning" **-** that difficult "withdrawal" from human addictions
    and binding "misinformation" concepts. If it weren't *necessary* to
    have clinicians present who have *previously been taken through*
    that transition, we wouldn't need to be here. Some religious "cults"
    might have children, participate in physical or mental abuse, hold
    members against their will, have weapons, or break laws in general
    **-** while we have long been aware that that type of behavior is
    inappropriate, especially for a transitional "classroom."

-   When the present "away team" leaves (which will be very soon), the
    Truth will go with them. You cannot *preserve* the Truth in your
    religions. It is with you only as long as a *Truth bearer* is with
    you. Only those from the *Land of Truth* can bear it. It can only be
    your future if you "reach out and grab it" while it is offered. The
    Truth can be retained only as one is physically connected with the
    Next Level, through an Older Member, and that relationship requires
    that non-mammalian thinking and behavior be sustained.

-   Humans were, from the beginning, given a "prime directive" NOT TO
    KILL OTHER HUMANS. "In defense" or for "rightness" are no
    exceptions. Righteousness is what most frequently causes conflict.
    "I'm right, you're wrong." "You're causing me trouble, I'll wipe you
    out" (in the best interest of all, of course). The world's systems
    continue to make laws permitting the breakage of higher laws **-**
    God's laws. Weapons designed for killing humans are inexcusable.
    There are numerous methods of controlling a violent person without
    the necessity of murder. The *irony* is, each killer sends its
    victims to *exactly* where they want to go (to their chosen heaven).
    Humans *fight* for their *desires* **-** what they choose to *not
    overcome* **-** what they cling to. Our *desires* and *attachments*
    (or lack of them) ***determine*** which heaven we're going to.

-   A soul cannot end its own existence. Though it may incarnate many
    times and the body or vehicle it is wearing may be terminated, only
    the *true* Kingdom of God **-** the Evolutionary Level Above **-**
    Human can terminate the soul. This termination of the soul is the
    only proper application of the term *DEATH*.

-   When a soul "awakens" in a particular "season" or incarnation
    (usually sometime between college age and mid-life), it is *picking
    up* where it *left off* at the end of its previous incarnation. What
    an individual participates in prior to that "awakening" is of no
    real significance. If a soul had previously overcome such human
    characteristics as family ties and relationships, at his "awakening"
    he is seen by those around him as suddenly becoming unstable, for he
    is compelled to once again separate from those imposing ties and
    seek to connect with what he had previously sought or connected
    with. What he primarily *learns* is what *is **not*** for him as he
    seeks for the Highest *Truth* or *Reality*.

-   The media seems *devoted* to "saving" the public from radical
    ideologies or "cults," particularly of seeming "religious" types.
    Also a news "scoop" requires haste. These two elements together
    predetermine that they search for any and all negative quotes that
    will discredit the groups' leaders and the groups' behavior. The
    fact still remains that negative reporting far outsells positive
    reporting **-** and after all, positive reporting of radical
    material can end or ruin a reporter's career. Well, it won't be hard
    to discredit this group from its leaders down, for prior to and
    during their "awakening" and subsequent coming together, they all
    made many mistakes and learned from them. Plus **-** you don't give
    up the ways of the world without the condemnation of those who still
    advocate what you have overcome.

-   When we came before (2000 years ago) the world "cleansed" or "saved"
    *their* world from our "blasphemy" and merely got us our boarding
    passes back to the *true* Kingdom of God on the *true* "Enterprise"
    (spaceship or "cloud of light"). If you seek to cleanse the world of
    our "blasphemy" this time, you would simply be the instrument of
    *our* "days being shortened" while destroying *your* "last chance"
    in this civilization to *advance*.

-   Now at the close of an Age **-** every significant soul of this
    civilization has returned (and is in or attached to a physical body)
    to reap their reward. Most who *think* they are *for* the Kingdom of
    God are in fact working for the opposing side **-** the counterfeit
    "Gods" **-** and will want to condemn us. Your actions, even your
    thoughts of condemnation toward us, out of allegiance to your "God,"
    will cause *our* part of the Heavens to look upon *your* "god" with
    the same rejection.

    ------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Many say they live only for the "Harvest Time" **-** the "Last Days"
    **-** the "Second Coming." Those are all finally here! **-** Will
    you accept *us as them*? You cannot *bypass* us even in your prayers
    **-** you cannot *insult* your Creator by refusing to go through the
    ones He has sent to you. There are souls here now for the express
    purpose of connecting **-** and eventually bonding **-** with the
    Next Level through us. Those souls will be protected **-** out of
    harm's way **-** and "saved" from the approaching sorting out,
    recycling, and "spading under" of the Luciferians and their human
    servants. If you can get your name in our "book," on our
    spacecraft's computer (and only there), making your actions reflect
    that desire **-** then you will go with us.

    ------------------------------------------------------------------------

    ***SUMMARY:*** Our surfacing is in reality a test of the public's
    "civility." Can a society that is still dealing with bigotry and
    prejudices against races, religions, and sexual preference extend
    the *right of existence* to some who see *humanity* as a *stepping
    stone* toward the Kingdom of God, and desire to take that step and
    briefly offer it to others? Or is Earth's present civilization still
    as primitive as it was 2000 years ago? We'll see!

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |     |     |     |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:----|:----|:----|
| **CAUTION: If the above information is *consumed* or *assimilated*, you may experience such side effects as loss of marriage, family, friends, career, respectability, and credibility. Continued use could even result in the loss of your membership in the human kingdom.** |     |     |     |

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** Extraterrestrials Return
with Final Warning **\|**](5-3.md)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec5.md)
