[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Poster - November 28, 1993***

THE *ONLY* WAY OUT

OF THIS *CORRUPT* WORLD

*(If you don't want **out** of the human kingdom, you don't want
**into** the Kingdom of Heaven.  
You **can't** have **both.**)*

<!-- -->

-   How the *true* Kingdom of God is a many-membered Kingdom **-** a
    ***physical*** Kingdom Level Above the human kingdom (with souls,
    minds, and bodies **-** not just "spirit"). This Kingdom Level, what
    we refer to as the "Next Level," makes its "Headquarters" in the
    *highest*, most *distant* segment of the Heavens **-** outside of
    "time."
-   How membership in the *true* Kingdom of God is attained **-** by
    overcoming all human-mammalian characteristics and behavior under
    the direct personal tutorship of a member of that Kingdom.
-   How **-** *now* at the close of this Age **-** the door to that
    Kingdom is briefly open.
-   How ***life***, from the Kingdom of God's point of view, begins when
    a soul receives *from* that Kingdom "the gift of recognition" of the
    ***Truth*** and recognition of a *Truth **bearer*** as one who is
    from the **true** Kingdom Level Above Human. The soul can choose to
    accept further ***life***, or "nourishment," from members of that
    Kingdom indefinitely, or reject it at any point and fall back into
    "darkness," or "death."
-   How these representatives from the *true* Kingdom of God incarnated
    (took adult human bodies) in the mid-1970's and have been "lifted
    out" **-** separated from the world **-** for the past 18 years.
-   How many who *say* they honor God or Jesus have, in fact,
    **unknowingly** become victims of slavery to Luciferian forces **-**
    "space races" who represent themselves to humans as "gods," but who
    are nothing more than technically advanced humans (clinging to human
    behavior) from previous civilizations, who rule over the discarnate
    (spirit) world and who travel in primitive "UFO's." (The Next Level
    **-** the *true* Kingdom of God **-** has the only truly advanced
    space-time travel vehicles, or spacecrafts.)
-   How human physical bodies are only *containers* (suits of clothes)
    for souls**;** how the *soul* is the *true identity***;** and how
    invasive influences and discarnate spirits can be recognized, dealt
    with, and aborted.
-   How the **real** question is, now that "test time" is here, are the
    souls who have received the "gift of recognition" willing to accept
    this Truth and these Representatives from that Kingdom?

***Meeting Time and Place***  
  
  
  

*Reading material will be available. Come EARLY if you want to know more
about us.*

**FREE ADMISSION - PUBLIC INVITED**

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** Last Chance To Advance
Beyond Human (Statement) **\|**](6-4.md)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec6.md)
