[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

***Last Chance Statement***

***January 16, 1994***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ***Crew from the Evolutionary Level Above Human Offers* -**

***LAST CHANCE TO ADVANCE BEYOND HUMAN***

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### *The following statements could sound very presumptuous. However, these facts **can** come into focus or "prove" themselves if they are seriously explored a step at a time. They could also sound very "doomsdayish." Though, in truth, they may be the most joyous "sound of music" to the ears and eyes of those who have been waiting for them.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Earth's present "civilization" is about to be recycled **-** "spaded
under" **-** in order that the planet might be refurbished. The human
"weeds" have taken over the garden and disturbed its usefulness beyond
repair.

The human kingdom was designed (created) as a *stepping stone* between
the animal kingdom and the Evolutionary Kingdom Level Above Human (the
*true* Kingdom of God).

It is the *soul* that can progress from the human kingdom to the Kingdom
Level Above Human. Both kingdom levels have their own unique physical
"containers" (bodies) for the souls that reside in that kingdom level.

As the human goes out to "choose" servants from within the animal
kingdom, from beasts of burden to seeing-eye dogs **-** if that animal
grows to find pleasure only in serving its master, no longer identifies
as an animal, but sees itself as a family member in that human family,
and its behavior is pleasing to that human **-** the two become *bound*
together. The human family then provides the body (a human infant) for
that soul to enter, allowing it to move up into the human evolutionary
kingdom. (This is not to suggest that all humans are containers for
souls moving up from the animal kingdom, for most humans are containers
for human kingdom *returnees* still bound to that family unit.)

In a more realistic way, periodically a Member of the Kingdom Level
Above Human receives instruction to incarnate among humans to seek out
the souls that have been "tagged" or given a "deposit" (an "implant") of
knowledge concerning the TRUTH about the Evolutionary Level Above Human.
That knowledge finds each *recipient* wanting to "separate from the
pack," and prepares him to recognize the Teacher or Representatives sent
from the Kingdom Level Above Human. When he/she connects with that
Teacher **-** an "Older Member" in that Kingdom **-** he is then offered
further instruction in knowledge and behavior that can open the door of
service to him. If that human changes to the degree that he no longer
desires any human behavior and he pleases that Member of the Kingdom
Level Above Human, a *bond* is formed between them and a body belonging
to that new Kingdom is provided for that soul to move up into.

Both the human kingdom and the Kingdom Level Above Human **-** the
*true* Kingdom of God **-** are physical and biological. However, the
human kingdom is made up of mammalian bodies **-** "seed-bearing" plants
or "containers" **-** while the Kingdom Level Above Human is made up of
*non*-mammalian, *non*-seed-bearing bodies or containers for souls. The
Kingdom Level Above Human's "children," or young, are those who have
graduated from the human kingdom under the tutorship (midwifing) of a
Member of the *true* Kingdom of God who has been through that transition
**-** bonded to *His* Father **-** at a previous time.

A "student" or prospective "child" of a Member of the Level Above Human
can, with the help of his Older Member(s) from that Kingdom Level,
overcome or rise out of *all* human-mammalian behavior **-** sexuality
and gender consciousness **-** and all other addictions and ties of the
human kingdom. Older Members, as experienced "clinicians," are necessary
to take souls through this "weaning" **-** this difficult "withdrawal"
from humanness and binding "misinformation" concepts. The student must
complete this change to the point of abhorring human behavior before his
soul can become a "match" with a biological body of the *true* Kingdom
of God **-** for that new, genderless body is designed to function at a
far more refined level.

The Evolutionary Level Above Human, the *true* Kingdom of God, the
"Headquarters" of all that is, is a many-membered Kingdom which
physically exists in the *highest*, most *distant* Heaven **-**
*non-temporal* place (*outside of time*, and therefore with *eternal*
life). It is the only place from which ***souls, life,*** and all
***creating*** originates. Being non-temporal, it *was, is,* and
*forever will be* **-** a concept that temporal creatures are not
designed to comprehend. This "Next Level" Kingdom designed the
"temporal" world outside its "borders" and designed temporal creatures
for souls to inhabit while in the human "classroom." If the soul
survives and moves forward through all its tests along the way **-** it
can, with the help of a Member of the Level Above Human, lose its
temporal characteristics and become a part of their non-perishable,
non-corruptible world. However, *all other souls* who reach a certain
degree of corruption (having of their own free will chosen to become
totally separate from their Creator, whether knowingly or not) will
engage a "self-destruct" mechanism at the Age's end.

The term "TRUE" Kingdom of God is used repeatedly because there are
*many* space alien races that through the centuries of this civilization
(and in civilizations prior) have represented themselves to humans as
"Gods." We refer to them collectively as "Luciferians," for their
ancestors fell into disfavor with the Kingdom Level Above Human many
thousands of years ago. They are not genderless **-** they still need to
reproduce. They have become nothing more than technically advanced
humans (clinging to human behavior) who retained some of what they
learned while in the early training of Members of the Level Above Human,
e.g., having limited: space-time travel, telepathic communication,
advanced travel hardware (spacecrafts, etc.), increased longevity,
advanced genetic engineering, and such skills as suspending holograms
(as used in some so-called "religious miracles"). The Next Level **-**
the *true* Kingdom of God **-** has the only truly advanced space-time
travel vehicles, or spacecrafts, and is not interested in creating
phenomena (signs) or impressive trickery.

These "Luciferian" space races are the humans' GREATEST ENEMY. They hold
humans in unknown slavery only to fulfill their own desires. They cannot
"create," though they develop races and biological containers through
genetic manipulation and hybridization. They even try to "make deals"
with human governments to permit them (the Luciferians) to engage in
biological experimentation (through abductions) in exchange for such
things as technically advanced modes of travel **-** though they seldom
follow through, for they don't want the humans of this civilization to
become another element of competition. They war among themselves over
the spoils of this planet and use religion and increased sexual behavior
to keep humans "drugged" and ignorant (in darkness) while thinking they
are in "God's" keeping. They use the discarnate (spirit) world to keep
humans preoccupied with their addictions. These Luciferians see to it,
through the human "social norm" (the largest Luciferian "cult" there
is), that man continues to **not** avail himself of the possibility of
advancing *beyond* human.

Just as the biological body is the "container" for the soul, the soul is
the "container" for *Mind* ("Spirit"). *Mind* translates into the brain
as *information* (knowledge). Information is available to humans from
only two sources **-** the *mind* of the Luciferians **-** or the *Mind*
of the Kingdom Level Above Human. The *mind* of the Luciferians yields
misinformation (promoting the behavior and concepts of this corrupt
world). The *Mind* from the *true* Kingdom of God yields ***true***
information (though the Luciferians and their servants would reverse
this interpretation). As we ***change***, in the progression of
overcoming humanness **-** the percentages change **-** of which *mind*
occupies our soul **-** Truth *increases* as misinformation *decreases*.
If one chooses to revert back to humanness, the process reverses **-**
the Truth is aborted as the soul becomes more filled with mammalian
*mind*. \[The word "True" or "Truth" is defined as the most accurate
perception available at any given level of understanding, changing at
the level of the eye of the beholder.\] That Next Level Truth can even
be taken from us if we abuse it. When our "eye becomes single" or our
soul is *filled* **only** with the *Mind* or "Spirit" from the *true*
Kingdom of God, it becomes pure or "Holy" *Mind* ("Spirit").

The design of the *true* Kingdom of God permits the presence of a
"Luciferian" element during a human civilization as the primary catalyst
for growth. Without it, we would have no choices **-** our **free will**
could not be exercised. Our *right* choices are what find us in
alignment to receive a *"deposit" of recognition* when the Truth is
offered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Two thousand years ago, the Kingdom Level Above Human appointed an Older
Member to send His "Son," along with some of their beginning students,
to incarnate on this garden. (These students had brief periods of
association with and guidance from Members of the Kingdom Level Above
Human during the early generations of this civilization.) While on Earth
as an "away team" with their "Captain," they were to work on their
overcoming of humanness and tell the civilization they were visiting how
the *true* Kingdom of Heaven can be entered. The humans under the
control of the Luciferians killed the "Captain" and His crew, because of
the "blasphemous" position they held, and quickly turned the teachings
of the "Captain" (the Older Member's "Son") into watered-down *Country
Club* religion **-** obscuring the remnants of the Truth.

Again an "away team" from the Level Above Human incarnated in the 1970's
in the mature (adult) bodies that had been picked and prepped for this
current mission. This time the "Admiral" (the Older Member, or "Father,"
incarnate in a female vehicle) came with the "Captain" and his crew. As
the two Older Members put out a "statement" and held public meetings
over about a 9-month period in 1975-76 to bring their crew together, the
media tagged them the "UFO cult" because of their expectation of leaving
aboard a spacecraft ("cloud of light") at the completion of their
"overcoming." The two Older Members then went into seclusion with their
crew (students), "lifting them out" of the world for almost 17 years
(not accepting any new students), making Earth's surface their
classroom. This isolation was absolutely necessary, for the *degree* of
their *overcoming* of sexuality, addictions, and ties to the human
environment has to be taken to the point of *matching* the minimum
behavior and consciousness requirements of the Kingdom Level Above
Human. Only then would their *new* "Next Level" bodies be *functional*.
They resurfaced briefly for about a 3-1/2-month period in 1992, allowing
some of their "dropouts" to rejoin them.

***This changeover*** (sufficient "overcoming" to inherit Next Level
bodies) ***is nearing completion***, and before this "away team"
returns, representatives of the "Class" are instructed to put this
information before the public. The Next Level will determine the future
of *each individual soul* according to its response to this information
and the Next Level's Representatives.

The Luciferians, for the most part, are about to be "recycled" as this
human civilization is "spaded." They know that "rumor has it" that their
days are numbered. They refuse to believe it and are desperate to
recruit souls from the human kingdom into *their* "heavenly kingdom."
There are many "counterfeit" heavens, and each "heaven" is at this time
collecting "names in their book," forcing a stand of allegiance,
polarizing each individual's commitment to his chosen "God."

When Members of the Level Above Human are physically present, the
opposing forces work the hardest against them in order to support their
own position. They do almost anything to keep humans from following the
path toward the Evolutionary Level Above Human. They "turn up the heat"
at this time in the area of mammalian behavior, primarily *sexuality*
and *the family*. This has become such an overwhelming presence in the
Earth's atmosphere that even some of the crew that came with us were
lost to its temptation. Don't forget that when the Luciferians were
expelled, they had to condemn the *true* Kingdom of God in order to
support their own desires, and see it simply as another path **-**
inhumane and radically uncompromising.

<span id="lnk3"></span>When this present "away team" leaves (which will
be very soon), the Truth will go with them. You cannot *preserve* the
Truth in your religions. It is present only as long as a *Truth bearer*
(Older Member from the *true* Kingdom of God) is present. It can only be
your future if you have received the *gift of recognition* and you
"reach out and grab" *further nourishment* while it is offered. The
Truth can be retained (without significant dilution) only as one is
physically connected with the Next Level, through an Older Member, and
that relationship requires sustained, constantly upgraded perception and
behavior.

Humans of this civilization have periodically been given laws by the
Next Level to upgrade their behavior. The laws given to Moses were
elementary "commandments" designed to make order and to raise the
standards of a very "young" (primitive, barbaric) society. Some 2000
years later, the Level Above Human, through Jesus' teachings, brought
the first major updates (far more demanding): the greatest commandment
is to *"Love the Lord thy God with **all** thy heart, with **all** thy
soul, and with **all** thy mind"* (Matthew 22:37) **-** *"If anyone
comes to Me and does not hate his father and mother and his wife and
children and brothers and sisters **-** and even his own life also **-**
he cannot be My disciple"* (Luke 14:26). Those wanting to go with Him
had to *do* as He did. His teachings clearly spelled out the
requirements (the actual *formula*) for making the literal and difficult
transition from the human kingdom into the Kingdom Level Above Human.

When a soul which has previously received the *gift of life* is awakened
by its Older Member(s) in a particular incarnation or "season" (well
after adolescence), it is *picking up* in its lessons where it *left
off* at the end of its previous time with an Older Member. What any
individual participates in prior to that "awakening" is of no real
significance. If a soul had previously overcome such human
characteristics as family ties and relationships, then just prior to its
*awakening*, or rejoining with its Older Member, he is seen by those
around him as suddenly becoming unstable, for he is compelled to once
again separate from those imposing ties and seek to connect with what he
had previously sought or connected with.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Now, at the close of this Age, every significant soul of this
civilization has returned (and is to some degree *in* or *attached to* a
physical body) to reap its reward. Its *desires* and *attachments
**determine*** which heaven it is going to (by what it chooses to *not
overcome* or what it clings to, and which "**God**" it looks to **-**
one that *increases* its humanness or one that offers a *way out* of its
humanness). Most who *think* they are *for* the *true* Kingdom of God
are in fact working for the opposing side **-** the counterfeit "gods"
**-** and will want to condemn us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Today's leaders in the "industrialized world," though claiming to be
democratic, self-righteously *dictate* to the rest of the world their
own ideas of what are acceptable practices and behavior.  
**--** Money RULES! The monetary systems, through *indebtedness,
ownership*, and *insurance* (all against God's ethic for man), bind man
to servitude. The powers behind the money have discovered man's most
tempting addictions, and through advertisement, movies, television,
radio, and publications, feed these addictions with the excitement of
*sex, drugs* (legal and illegal), and all manner of *violence*, to
ensure their continued monetary power. Under the guise of "the social
norm," this same world also imposes its distorted religious concepts and
values. Their selfish pursuits corrupt and pollute the physical
environment of all their "subjects" as well.  
**--** <span id="lnk1"></span>The true "Jews" **-** God's chosen people
(*the overcomers*) **-** can no longer be found in a genetic strain
**-** a race **-** or a religion.  
**--** The true "Israel" **-** where God's chosen people (*the
overcomers*) reside **-** cannot be found in a geographical location.  
**--** The true "Christians" cannot be found among the religious who put
human *family values* on the ultimate pedestal. They claim to know Jesus
(Yeshua) as their "Messiah" or "Savior" **-** even though He never had a
wife or children, nor would He accept as His disciple any who would not
leave all attachments and ties to this world in order to learn from Him.
Any truly committed to ***His*** family or God's ways, are today seen as
"cults" and a threat to all of the above social norms and systems.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

When the Next Level sent a crew 2000 years ago, the world "cleansed" or
"saved" *their* world from its "blasphemy" and merely got the crew their
boarding passes back to the *true* Kingdom of God on the *true*
"Enterprise" (spaceship or "cloud of light"). If you seek to cleanse the
world of our "blasphemy" this time, you will simply be the instrument of
*our* "days being shortened" while destroying *your* "last chance" in
this civilization to *advance*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="lnk2"></span>Many say they live only for the "Harvest Time"
**-** the "Last Days" **-** the "Second Coming." These have all arrived!
There are souls **-** some of you, here now **-** who have received a
*deposit of recognition*, and that knowledge finds you desirous of
connecting and bonding with the Next Level. Those who have that deposit
of ***Life*** will *believe* what we say, and *know* who we are. If they
*continue* in that belief **-** sustain that ***Life*** (though Lucifer
will do anything to prevent them from nurturing that *gift*) they will
be protected and "saved" from the approaching recycling and "spading
under" of the civilization. They will have nothing to fear, nor will
they know DEATH **-** even if they lose their human body. That continued
***belief*** will one day find them a member in the Level Above Human,
in a physical body belonging to the *true* Kingdom of God **-** the
Evolutionary Level Above Human **-** leaving behind this temporal and
perishable world for one that is everlasting and non-corruptible.

**-** *Today's Next Level Crew*

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** Last Chance To Advance
Beyond Human (Poster) **\|**](6-5.md)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec6.md)
