[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div align="right">

***Poster - March 21, 1994***

</div>

# **UFOs,**

# **SPACE ALIENS,**

## **AND THEIR FINAL FIGHT FOR EARTH'S SPOILS**

-   All <span id="dlink1">reproducing</span> space aliens - including
    mammalian and reptilian - use Earth's humans simply for their own
    interests (and have been for thousands of years).
    --They intentionally keep humans falsely "programmed" or "in the
    dark"
    -- primarily through religious concepts.
    -- secondarily through reproductive and "humanitarian" concerns.
    -- They support these preoccupations by transmitting images and
    thoughts into Earth's atmosphere around the clock.
    -- These "Luciferians" <span id="lnk2"></span>abduct humans for
    genetic experimentation, "rob" healthy human specimens for their own
    next "suit of clothes," and induct humans into *their* service.

<span id="lnk1"></span>

In spite of these facts, there is a true Kingdom of God - a truly
Evolutionary Kingdom Level Above Human, above all mammalian, reptilian,
or any other reproductive species. It is a many-membered Kingdom that
exists in the literal Heavens, with its own unique biological
"containers" or bodies, and modes of travel - spacecrafts or "UFOs." It
is, in fact, more physically real than the world of the space aliens or
humans. This Kingdom Level created the physical universe, as we know it,
as a "holographic classroom," and the human-mammalian kingdom as a
stepping stone. That hologram is about to be "rebooted" - canceled and
restarted - for its usefulness and serviceabililty as a classroom has
come to an end.

Two thousand years ago, an Older Member in the real "Kingdom of Heaven,"
left behind His Next Level - non-mammalian - body and incarnated into a
"picked" and "prepped" human body at approx. its 29th year. He brought
with Him the souls or "spirits" that His Father's Kingdom had nurtured
in the past, in order that He might help them incarnate and change over
their bodies. That *formula* for being *born* into the Evolutionary
Level Above Human requires: the shedding of all human- mammalian
behavior, such as sexuality (all forms); ties (to family, human
relationships, possessions, and responsibilities); addictions (of all
types); habits; and self-concerns.

That formula was offered a second time, in 1975/76 by two Older Members
from that same Kingdom (who incarnated when the bodies, that were
"picked" and "prepped" for them, were in their early 40's). They put out
a "call" for the crew - the souls who came with them - and helped them
incarnate (take over their bodies), while in virtual isolation for
approx. 18 years.

<span id="lnk3"></span>That "birthing" or incarnating procedure requires
"midwifing" - personal tutoring - by an Older Member from that Kingdom
while incarnate in the human kingdom. When a soul - one brought here by
the Next Level - incarnates, it must take control of a body (that was
"picked" and "prepped" for it) to the degree that it ceases to perform
as a human-mammalian, sufficiently to establish and sustain a
well-founded loyalty to the Next Level through that Older Member. It is
that loyalty and personal relationship with that Older Member that
motivates those behavioral changes and makes that "newborn" viable.

A very accelerated "classroom" (for "birthing" - incarnating), is now
being offered for the third and last time in this civilization, by those
representatives from the 1975/76 "yield" to the remainder of the souls
that have been saved from a previous time by the Next Level.

The Representative 2000 years ago, the two Representatives who came in
the early 1970's, and their students from that "yield" and the present
one, all came and will leave in spacecrafts or "clouds of light."

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THAT "NEXT LEVEL" WILL SPEAK AT:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Reading material will be available. Come EARLY if you want to know more
about us.*

<table data-border="0" width="96%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
<col style="width: 25%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><h5 id="free-admission">FREE ADMISSION</h5></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><h5 id="we-are-not-funded">WE ARE NOT FUNDED</h5></td>
<td style="text-align: right;"><h5 id="your-assistance-is-welcome">YOUR ASSISTANCE IS WELCOME</h5></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** He's Back, We're Back, Where
Will You Stand? **\|**](6-9.md)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec6b.md)
