[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div align="right">

***Poster - July 30, 1994***

</div>

#### **Some desire to advance beyond racial consciousness**

### **Some beyond gender and sexual consciousness**

## **Some beyond religious consciousness**

# **Some Desire to Advance Even**

BEYOND all HUMAN behavior

for the sake of the Evolutionary Level Above Human - "the Kingdom of
God"

##### *SOME WHO ARE DEVOTING THEIR ENTIRE LIVES TO THIS ENDEAVOR WILL SPEAK ON:*

-   How this Evolutionary Level Above Human is a many-membered Kingdom -
    a physical level of existence - above the human kingdom (with souls,
    minds, and bodies - not just "spirit"). This Kingdom Level makes its
    "Headquarters" in the most *distant* segment of the Heavens -
    outside of "time" - from whence all Creation originates, both
    terrestrial and extraterrestrial.
-   How membership in the Kingdom Level Above Human is attained - by
    outgrowing or rising above (overcoming) all human-mammalian
    characteristics and behavior, including all forms of sexuality,
    human family ties, addictions, and human self-serving ways. This
    *overcoming* can be done only under the direct personal tutorship of
    a member or members of that Kingdom while they are incarnate in
    human bodies.
-   How the door to that Kingdom is briefly open, for a second time,
    *now* at the close of this Age.
-   <span id="lnk1"></span>How *life*, from the Kingdom of God's point
    of view, begins when a soul receives *from* that Kingdom a
    "*deposit* of recognition" of the information regarding that Kingdom
    Level's existence, and recognition of a Representative from that
    Level Above Human. <span id="lnk2"></span>The soul can choose to
    accept further *life*, or "nourishment," from members of that Level
    indefinitely, or reject it at any point and fall back into
    "darkness" (ignorance), or "death."
-   How these Representatives from the Evolutionary Level Above Human
    incarnated into (took over adult human bodies) in the mid-1970's and
    have been separate from the world - practicing non-sexual,
    non-mammalian behavior - for the past 18 years.
-   <span id="lnk3"></span>How religions have, in fact, **unknowingly**
    become victims of slavery to "Luciferian" forces - "space races" -
    who represent themselves to humans as "gods," but who are nothing
    more than technically advanced humans (clinging to human behavior)
    from previous civilizations, who use the discarnate (spirit) world
    to keep humans preoccupied with their addictions, and who travel in
    primitive "UFOs." The Next Level - the *true* Kingdom of God - has
    truly advanced space-time travel vehicles, or spacecrafts, and live
    in a non-temporal, non-perishable "world."
-   How human physical bodies are only *containers* (suits of clothes)
    for souls**;** how the *soul* is the *true identity***;** and how
    invasive influences - discarnate "spirits" - can be recognized and
    aborted.
-   How *this* information is the ***same*** information that the Next
    Level sent with its Representative 2000 years ago.
-   How the crucial question of the moment is**:** who of those who have
    received a "deposit of recognition" will be able to choose to take
    this "giant step"?

MEETING TIME AND PLACE ARE AS FOLLOWS:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Reading material will be available. Come EARLY if you want to know more
about us.* FREE ADMISSION

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** The Shedding of Our Human
Bodies May Be Required To Take Up New Bodies in the Next World
**\|**](611)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#sec6b)
