[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong></strong>
<h3 id="ingredients-of-a-deposit----becoming-a-new-creature">Ingredients of a Deposit -- Becoming a New Creature</h3></td>
<td style="text-align: right;" data-valign="top"><em>By Lvvody</em></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

As the world becomes more aware of our presence and the information we
are leaving behind, we know we have to anticipate being confronted with
the typical "anti-cult" accusations and condemnations that will be made
about us - particularly those aimed at our Teachers, Ti and Do. The
majority of the media (whose degree of commentary and biased judgment
has gotten completely corrupted and out of control), plus the righteous
religious, the government and law-enforcement agencies, and
cult-awareness groups, will most likely quickly jump to defend the
"accepted (Luciferian) norm" by trying to convince the masses to believe
that the students of Ti and Do must be "weak-minded" individuals who had
nothing going for them in this world, or that they were duped or
brainwashed by two mesmerizing, charismatic cult leaders. For, surely,
no one in their right mind would willingly join a "cult" in the first
place, let alone stay in one for over twenty years - throwing away the
precious opportunity for participating in family, career, and all the
other "normal" pursuits in the human kingdom.

Nothing could be further from the truth. I *know*, beyond any shadow of
a doubt, that Ti and Do are two Older Members, two Representatives from
the Next Level - the Evolutionary Kingdom Level Above Human, the Kingdom
of God. I *know* that all the ways and behavior, all the procedures and
instructions, and all the knowledge and wisdom taught to us by Ti and Do
are not available or taught anywhere else on the planet. It is clearly
*beyond human*. I *know* beyond a shadow of a doubt that I have had a
previous relationship with them before - that I (the soul that has taken
over and now occupies this human body I am wearing) have had previous
nurturing by Ti and Do during prior visitations to this "garden,"
including the Next Level's presence in this civilization approximately
2000 years ago (just two days ago Next Level time).

How do I know this? It's not only because Ti and Do have told me so.
It's also because of *proof* from personal experience. I recognize this
information. It's as though I was already familiar with it. For example,
part of Ti and Do's task during this mission was to *restore the truth*
of how a soul may literally make the transition from the human kingdom
into the true Heavenly Kingdom, after having overcome humanness - and
how this *metamorphic* process can *only* be done under the direct
supervision of Representatives of the Kingdom of Heaven and only *while*
these Reps or Teachers are *incarnate* in a human "vehicle" or body.
They alone possess the hidden knowledge of "how Members of the Next
Level are born," and that it requires breaking all ties with the human
kingdom, and shedding all human-mammalian behavior and thinking.

This is the *same formula* taught by the Representative who was here
approximately 2000 years ago, the one religions refer to as Jesus. He
told His disciples to go and preach, saying, "*The Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand*." "*I am the way and the truth and the life*. *No one comes to
the Father except by me*." What this meant was, "I'm here. I am the one
who was sent by my Father to offer you the way out of the human kingdom.
Only I have the formula of how to get to heaven - how you have to leave
*everything* behind, including your own life in this world, and come and
follow me and be my disciple." He made it very clear that separating
from the world and having a "*personal relationship*" with Him, while He
was incarnate in a human body, was a requirement and the only way to
prepare for entering the next Kingdom. "*My sheep know my voice and they
follow me*."

Before His departure, He knew that His disciples hadn't overcome the
world sufficiently to go with Him, so He told them that He would come
back for them again at the end of the Age. That time is now. It is the
end of the Age. The same mind, the same knowledge of the Next Level that
was present 2000 years ago *is here again*, as was promised - in the Two
Older Members of the Next Level who were sent - Ti and Do. And many of
those students/disciples who were present with the Representative 2000
years ago are back now, with Ti and Do, to pick up where they left off
during their last mission to this civilization.

How does this Recognition work? Where does it come from? In Do's most
recent written statements, *Undercover Jesus Surfaces Before Departure*
and *'95 Statement by an ET Presently Incarnate*, he goes into a lot of
detail describing deposits. What is a deposit? It is potentially the
"*gift*" of life into the real physical Evolutionary Level Above Human.
A deposit can be described as an "*implant*," or a "*chip*," or a tiny
fragment or "*seed*" of Next Level mind that is deposited into a human
plant by members of the Next Level. The nature of any deposit - the
"program" it contains - will vary depending on who the recipient is.

A *first-time* deposit contains the beginning of a "soul" - which is the
new "container" or receptacle for Next Level mind, and is the beginning
of a new creature. In other words, if the Next Level determines that an
individual has a potential for goodness and deserves the opportunity to
be given a chance to be nourished by them, and if they choose to offer
it the choice to become a future member of the Next Evolutionary Level,
they make a "deposit" that contains a soul with a very small amount of
Next Level information - it's like a tiny Next Level fetus. The program
in that deposit contains a "*chip*" *of recognition of a Rep* who is
presently incarnate, and the *capacity to believe* that what that Rep or
Teacher says is true. If that new soul chooses to *believe* that Rep and
to *bond* to him, is thirsty, and exerts all his effort to take in the
mind that is being offered to him, then at the end of that visitation,
that soul will be "saved" or "put on ice" for a future time, when it can
be brought back into a garden such as Earth when a Rep will be incarnate
again, and continue where it left off in its previous time of growth or
nourishment until it is sufficiently weaned or separated from the human
kingdom.

When a soul is a "*returnee*," that is, it is brought back (to continue
in its overcoming and nurturing that it had begun previously) at a time
when Reps will be present again, the *program* in the deposit it
receives will be more advanced. The deposit will be a match for the
degree of advancement of that soul as well as a match for the handicaps
of the particular human vehicle (body) it will be occupying - for these
handicaps offer it the opportunity for the additional lessons it needs.
This *deposit* would most likely contain**:**

-   a "chip" of *recognition of the Reps* of the Level Above Human that
    would be sent,
-   the *capability to recognize the information* regarding the
    *existence* of the true Kingdom of God,
-   a fragment of Next Level mind that finds its recipient wanting to
    break ties with the world and *seek out the Teachers or
    Representatives* that are presently incarnate,
-   the *wisdom to discern what isn't true* as the recipient is lead
    through experiences prior to connecting with the Rep,
-   the early stages *of loss of respect* for the world and its
    systems - family, government, religion, money, etc.,
-   a feeling like, "I don't fit here," "I hate this corrupt world," or
    "I just want to go home to God."

\[Jesus was referring to the *deposit* when He said, "*No one comes to
Me unless the Father Who sent Me attracts and draws him and gives him
the desire to come to Me, and I will raise him up at the last day*."
John 6:44.\]

If "I" - the identity - am the soul - containing Next Level mind, then
this borrowed human body I am wearing is not me. It was "tagged" with a
deposit by Members of the Next Level and set aside for my use for this
task, and "I" probably had a very off-and-on relationship with the body,
according to the instructions given to me and my invisible Next Level
helpers - at a briefing aboard a spacecraft prior to coming into this
atmosphere. Most of the soul (containing Next Level mind), was outside
the vehicle, and the *deposit wasn't really activated* until the
time-capsule program was set in motion - *to make contact with the two
incarnate Representatives* from the Kingdom of Heaven, Ti and Do.

Humans, for the most part, *identify* as being the *body* they are
wearing. Most of their entire life is preoccupied with the physical body
- because they assume *that is who they are* (out of ignorance - due to
the distorted truths and misinformation imposed on them by society -
unknowingly under the guidance of the "Luciferian" space aliens). They
dwell on the appearance of the body, its physical condition, its
consuming, its relationships, its ties and responsibilities to others,
and many get their greatest satisfaction from the end results of
reproduction. But we are not the body we are wearing. It is simply a
*plant*, a "container" for our spirit (or mind). If you think of the
body as the hardware, the spirit is like the software. The *spirit* in
the human plant is made up of a combination of**:** a) the *genetic
emanations* of the vehicle, resulting from the many experiences of that
genetic strain**;** b) *the summation of its experiences* and effects
from its environment during the present lifetime**;** c) and the
influence of discarnates (out of body spirits) that like to time-share
the use of our body with us. Most humans in this civilization are simply
a *plant* containing a *spirit* that really has no "*life*" in it, for
without any Next Level mind there is no *life* information. Only a
"*soul*" contains pure Next Level mind - knowledge of the true Kingdom
of God and the potential of having a future, and no human has a "*soul*"
which contains *life* unless it has been *deposited in them* by Members
of the Next Level. Only the Next Level can deposit "souls" in the human
kingdom, and this only occurs during the "seasons" that the Next Level
comes in close - around the time of their visitations.

Thus, when the Next Level picks the human bodies (containing spirits)
that we (Ti, Do, and crew) must enter into as we begin this task of
"incarnating," the body that we will be borrowing (and eventually taking
over) has in a sense *a mind of its own* - made up of all the desires
and awarenesses of its genetic background. It has its own likes and
dislikes, its desires to indulge in addictions and pleasures, lots of
misinformation concepts, strong ties and responsibilities to other human
plants it's related to, and even seemingly positive desires, like
wanting to be a good humanitarian or "be a good human." When the Next
Level "tags" a human vehicle for a returning soul to use - which means
the deposit is "implanted" - then confusion and conflict set in between
the desires of the vehicle (and the spirits that associate with it) and
the desires of the Next Level mind contained in the deposit, that says
(mostly in the subconscious), "It's time to sever all those ties, it's
time to stop indulging in that human-mammalian behavior, wake up,
there's a task you have to do, the truth is *simple*, you've got to find
your teachers"!

To illustrate how real this deposit is, I'd like to briefly illustrate
how it worked for me. The vehicle that I was about to take over began
showing obvious symptoms of having a "deposit" in the early to mid-70's.
First it was mainly feeling a "presence" and having strong thoughts of
wondering, "What am I supposed to do? What do you want me to do"? while
feeling very close to and wanting to talk to God in my silence. Usually,
without warning, the vehicle would suddenly have thoughts like, "I'm not
one of these. Who are these primitive people"? For a few years it went
through wanting to become a nun (assuming religion was where the truth
should be found), to later giving up traditional religion and searching
out other religions and philosophies - but nothing seemed right. The
vehicle hitch-hiked through other nations to explore other cultures, and
across the U.S., losing interest in the traditional medical career and
investigating alternative health care, new-age, and on and on. Still
wondering, "What on Earth am I doing here"? and begging God to "Please
show me, what am I supposed to do"? Sometimes the vehicle's impulses
were very strong in regard to all the typical indulgences of the 70's,
and at times another voice would speak up and it would seem so clear
that celibacy was the right thing, drugs had to go, and the idea of
marriage and kids seemed totally out of the question. There was an
increasing sense of urgency to leave the East coast and get to Oregon.
Every deposit has a different program, but looking back, I can see
clearly how this vehicle was so carefully led through a series of
experiences that eventually led it to show up at a meeting by *the Two*
in Waldport, Oregon on September 14, 1975.

The day before the Waldport meeting was when I had my first contact with
anything connected to Ti and Do. A friend and I thought we were going to
a musical event a few hours away in Eugene, but it was canceled. Instead
we ended up walking around town and went into a bookstore. That moment
changed my life. I was looking at a poster announcing a public meeting.
It was titled "UFO's," which hadn't really meant that much to me
previously. But then I read on**:** "*Two individuals say they are about
to leave the human level and literally (physically) enter the next
evolutionary level. Followers of 'The Two' will discuss how the
transition from the human level to the Next Level is accomplished and
when this may be done.*" Wow! It felt like a bolt of electricity went
right through me. An alarm went off in my head - like a sudden
unconscious recognition of something very familiar, and it was already
seeming clear that I'd found what I was looking for. It was as though
that combination of words used on the poster was a key that unlocked
something inside me. When that mind deposit is activated, the little
program in there that is identifying as "you" - that was started some
time ago - starts identifying as "you" again - because it *is* you. We
drove toward Waldport that night.

A statement written by Ti and Do was passed out to everyone as we
arrived at the meeting in Waldport. As I read it, and as I listened to
Ti and Do speak, I (the deposit - containing my soul made up of Next
Level mind) immediately *recognized* the information and my Teachers.
Something inside me knew, "This is it! This is what I'm here for. The
truth *is* simple." *The Two* had it all summed up on one typed page -
the whole truth. I couldn't believe it. All the pieces of the puzzle fit
together. A part of that one page statement read**:**

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| *...a human who seeks only to become a member of his next evolutionary kingdom may become a member of that kingdom if he completely overcomes all the aspects and influences of the human level providing he has found favor with a member of that next level who will direct him through his metamorphosis...the human can complete this changeover only before his death as a human...* |
| *...There are two individuals here now who have also come from that kingdom, incarnate as humans, awakened...They are sent from the same kingdom by the "Father" to bear the same truth that was Jesus'...restore its accurate meaning...Those who believe this process and **do** it will be "lifted up" individually and "saved" from death - literally...*                             |

There was quite a crowd at a follow-up meeting in Eugene a day or two
later, and amidst an atmosphere of chaos, fear, and confusion - I looked
up to the heavens and said to whoever was guiding and watching over me -
"I'm incapable of judging this - I'm in your hands - Please show me what
to do - If this is right, you make it happen." Within a few minutes, a
couple of followers of the Two motioned to me to come over to them and
asked some questions. I guess they could sense my sincerity, because
they gave me a piece of paper with a destination written on it of where
to meet them next.

Several hundred miles away, and a few days later, after having "walked
out the door of the vehicle's life," I rendezvoused with the group and
spoke to Ti and Do for the first time. I remember the moment as clear as
a bell. We were at a campground on a high mesa in Colorado, and Ti and
Do were sitting in a couple of lawn chairs, meeting individually with
the new prospective students who came out of the Waldport meeting. As I
approached them, Ti asked, "How can we help you"? This vehicle was
speechless at first, and I remember so clearly that the impulse I had
was to want to drop to my knees and cover my eyes. The only way I can
describe it is the way it interpreted through this vehicle's computer,
colored by its old religious programming - because it felt like I was
standing before my Lord, my God. They seemed so familiar, but the
thought I had was, "It seems so strange to see you in these human
bodies." (Like normally, where we come from, where they occupy heavenly
bodies, I wouldn't be able to gaze upon them.) All this was going
through my head while I was trying to think of something to say. We
talked a few moments. The point is, it was pretty clear that I had known
them previously, but not in these *human* bodies or "suits of clothes,"
and that their minds were much older and wiser than I could even begin
to comprehend. That night we all camped together and I slept outside
watching the stars. I was so thankful, so elated, so *relieved*, that I
was home, with my true family - my soul family. Now that I was connected
with my Teachers, I knew I was safe - in their hands and the Next
Level's safe-keeping. There was no more fear. The best way I know to
describe how I felt was, "*My joy no man can take away*."

For those who may be quick to judge that Ti and Do are two con-artists
who deceived these innocent students into following them, whether for
personal ego or for monetary gain, or any other reason you might conjure
up, you're gravely mistaken. I am not an innocent victim. It is beyond
any doubt to me that **we students and our Teachers are not from this
world, but from the *Level Above Human***. We had a task to come to this
garden and *incarnate into* these borrowed adult human bodies that were
"tagged" with a deposit and set aside for us, and *abort* all human
mind, while replacing it by filling the soul with the mind of the Next
Level as taught to us by our Teachers. Then as the Next Level mind
increases - and the soul begins to grow larger - the soul becomes a new
"physical body" (invisible to humans because it's of a higher vibration)
- a newborn - in a new species. This is being "born again" in the truest
sense. If the soul has grown sufficiently that the mind it contains is a
match for the conduct and ways of that Next Kingdom, the true Kingdom of
God, then that soul - new creature - will be issued a new "outer shell"
or more advanced suit of clothes ("glorified body") upon physically
entering the Next Level, when we *shed this human container* at the
conclusion of our task here. The Level Above Human is a genderless
Kingdom, and it is through this "metamorphic process" that it
"reproduces" or adds to its Kingdom membership. To complete this
metamorphosis usually requires more than one period of visitation from
the Level Above Human. For example, we feel that probably all the
students of Ti and Do were given their initial deposit some time ago,
during prior visitations from Next Level Representatives. As long as
those souls continued to look to their source of nourishment and remain
loyal and faithful, then they were "put on ice," so to speak, in the
keeping of the Next Level, between visitations, to be re-deposited and
again connect with and seek the nurturing from a Rep during the next
visitation.

Now, at the close of the Age, all souls who have ever been given a
deposit by the Next Level during any part of this present civilization,
are back - incarnate again. Even those who may have "fallen away" at one
time, have a new opportunity to be restored. Those human plants who do
not have a deposit will not even be capable of comprehending what we
say, but there may be many human plants out there who have been given a
deposit by Members of the Next Level for the first time, and will be
able to recognize that what we are saying is true and the only thing
that makes any sense to them. How an individual responds to us and our
information will determine whether they will have a *future*, and a
further relationship with the Next Level. In other words, coming in
contact with this information will force a decision for *all* with
*souls* (whether new deposits or returnees) and the stand they
individually take will judge or determine their future.

For several months in late '75 and early '76 while still holding
meetings, searching for the rest of the crew who came with Ti and Do
from the Next Level, many of us only saw Ti and Do a couple of times.
Quite a few new followers dropped out during that time, and we now
understand why. It was because some were simply curiosity seekers, some
were humans (without a deposit) just looking for an adventure, and some
were part of the crew who came to be with Ti and Do on this mission and
had a deposit, but found the disciplines to be too difficult - because
they weren't successful in overriding the desires of the vehicle they
were wearing. However, many followers did survive this early weeding-out
process. These are those who *had deposits* - who had a strong sense of
*knowing* that they were sent here at this time to do a task, and had a
strong *recognition* of Ti and Do and the information they brought.

It was in late June/early July of 1976 that Ti and Do gathered all their
surviving new students/disciples together in Medicine Bow National
Forest in Wyoming. Here is where the intensive "classroom" for learning
Next Level ways and behavior began. This is when Ti and Do really began
taking us through the process of "incarnating" - what Ti and Do must
have told us a million times before we finally began to grasp it - how
to "get your mind into your vehicle."

March 16, 1996

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** The Truth Is...
**\|**](a-8)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#appndxa)
