[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index.md) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<table data-border="0" width="100%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong></strong>
<h3 id="a-matter-of-life-or-death-you-decide">A Matter of Life or Death? YOU Decide</h3></td>
<td style="text-align: right;" data-valign="top"><em>By Wknody</em></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Before I begin to share my position, I feel compelled to "set the record
straight" on the *true* meaning of life and death from our point of
view. When *we* speak of life, we are referring to the mind, and in our
case, the soul, for that is what we identify as. Those of us in this
classroom have been given a very precious "gift." We call it the "gift
of Life" because we have been given a "soul deposit," a "chip" of sorts,
and **contained** within this "deposit" is a tiny beginning of something
very special to us. We call it *Next Level mind*. This is *true*
knowledge from the Next Level, the Level Above Human, or perhaps the
term most familiar to you, the Kingdom of Heaven. In reality, this is
the only knowledge that is of any *value* to anyone, that is of course,
for those who want **life**. You see, death to us, has *nothing to do
with the body and* **everything** *to do with the mind, and* in *our*
case, the **soul**. What we know to be true is that the body is no more
than a **container** that will inevitably deteriorate, whether it be by
disease, accident, or old age - in spite of the body's demise, it is the
**mind** that survives. We also know from our Teachers that a mind
**without a soul** contains no Next Level Knowledge, no TRUTH, and
consequently, no LIFE. It is nothing more than a spirit, and when its
container is discarded, it simply goes into the spirit world, the
discarnate world. It goes there "stuck," so to speak, at the same level
of consciousness that it had when it lost its container, or body.
Because it had no Next Level knowledge/truth (synonymous) in it, it
cannot *go* anywhere, it cannot *grow* or *develop*, so essentially, it
is **dead**, for it stays among those who can do nothing but cyclically
and repeatedly die. But in our case, since we have been given this
"gift," this soul "deposit," and we have chosen to *pursue* this
knowledge, this truth, this *reality*, then and *only* then does our
mind/soul have life in it, because it now has the potential to *grow*
and *develop*, *as long as we continue to accept the nourishment given
to us*, for the Next Level offers us life indefinitely as long as we are
faithful servants and pleasing. But, on the other hand, if we *reject*
or *deny* this truth - this nourishment - we literally **die**, for we
have no life in us if we separate from this knowledge that comes through
our Teachers, our Older Members. They are, quite *literally*, our
lifeline. You see, our Older Members **represent** the Next Level,
wherein resides the Chief of Chiefs, the Creator of all there is, the
most High God. *Realistically* speaking, *They are* the "way, the truth,
and the light."

So, as I try to relate to you throughout this writing, try to understand
that when I speak of **I**, I am only referring to the mind/soul. I am
not referring to the body or, as we refer to it, the "**vehicle**" that
I am wearing. As I said earlier, this vehicle is just a **container**.
In fact, to lose this vehicle means absolutely *nothing* to me, and most
of the time it is an *encumbrance* to me. But to lose my Next Level
mind, this "gift," because of denying this knowledge and, subsequently,
my Teachers, who bear the only *real* truth, is **suicide** in the
truest sense of the word.

In reality, **I** was born somewhere long ago and far away. **I** have
returned to this civilization to finish my lessons because **I** was
lucky enough to be literally saved - "put on ice" for further nurturing
by the Next Level, the Level Above Human. That's right, They actually
*save* souls that They deem worthy of a chance to become new members in
Their world, a very *real* many-membered Kingdom, above and beyond this
one, located in deep space. The first and foremost requirement for
salvation is simple enough - for it is merely wanting to separate from
this world and go with God. This is enough to be *put in the keeping* of
the Next Level. They will save you for further nurturing, at which time
you will learn more of the other requirements for *actual* membership.
What I know to be true is that They will care for you like no one ever
has, and as long you keep *looking* to Them, They will help you to grow
into a new creature with *life* in it.

I am here because I have more lessons to learn in order to meet the
requirements needed to graduate from this human kingdom to the Next
Level. In order to learn these lessons, I must have a vehicle - a body
to work through - a "tool" - and I do. It was "picked and prepped" *just
for me* by the Next Level. It is a vehicle whose programming and
experiences could offer me the most **growth** while overcoming its ties
and addictions of *this* world, because to us, it's not what one gets
**into** in this world, but rather, what one gets **out of** in this
world. What vehicles they choose for us is a *carefully* thought out
selection made by the Next Level, because each one of us in this
classroom is at a different level of growth, different grades, if you
will. Most likely, the vehicles (human containers) that They chose for
those of us in this graduating class are ones with genetic packages and
worldly experiences that are a *match* for what we need to overcome.

Now, in order to accomplish this task we must have a teacher, and we do.
In fact, we have two. We refer to Them as our **Older Members**/our
**Fathers**, because Their minds/souls are much older and much wiser
than we. They came from the Next Level to nurture us and wean us through
this process of **overcoming** the human kingdom. They act as "midwives"
of sorts. They go by the names of Ti and Do, and it is only through
them, as Representatives of the Kingdom of God, *while they are here at
this time*, that I can come even *close* to graduating. I simply cannot
do it alone - ***no one can!*** It is *only* from Members of the Next
Level that I can learn Next Level thinking and behavior. It is the real
truth - pure and simple - and what's more, it is what is *required* to
become a newborn in the Next Level. It is from the Next Level that we
learn restraint and dignity, with the wisdom to see our own flaws, and
acknowledge what is needed to change. We learn to have no thoughts of
self, no human ways. We learn to *always* take the higher side - the
highest interpretation of what we see and hear, especially with our
classmates. We learn from our Older Members to think well of each other,
to always be eager to help, and not to criticize or judge. We have been
taught to realize that we have no *idea* what someone else might be
dealing with, and beyond that, we have not even been given the task to
try. We learn to be objective. We want to be **of the vine**, a spoke in
the wheel, crew-minded, and ready *always* to be of service in whatever
task might be asked of us. In short, my Older Members, and the Next
Level are my lifeline and the ones who mean *everything to me*. I work
like crazy every day *rejecting* the human desires and programming of
this vehicle that I am wearing in order to keep my "eye single" and
focused on the Next Level through the example of my Teachers. I stay in
a constant mode of *asking* how and what I need to *change* in order to
be given membership as a *child* in Their world, Their Fathers' world,
Their Fathers' Fathers' world and so on up the vine to the Chief of
Chiefs - the Creator of All that is. It is a chain of minds so powerful
that They are indeed a source with which to be reckoned. Believe it or
not, it takes a whole lot more than going to church on Sunday (or any
other day for that matter), raising a nice family, and paying your
bills, to get to the Next Level. The truth is that it takes plain hard
work, every minute of every day, just ridding ourselves of **all** human
thoughts and ways - "washing our robes" and becoming pure and clean as a
whistle in thought, word, and deed - and doing it cheerfully, with a
healthy Next Level sense of humor (another **very** important aspect of
this classroom). Then maybe, just *maybe*, we will be accepted as a
newborn in Their world.

Mind you, this is a very *real* experience where the stakes are high if
you turn away, but the reward is a hundred-fold if you give your trust
and loyalty to the Next Level, the *only real truth* that exists. But
the fact remains, that if for *any* reason someone is not happy in doing
this, Ti and Do will *encourage* them to go back into the world, and
find what they need to make them happy. We call it **free will.** The
Next Level *designed* it that way. Our option to choose will *never* be
taken away. You know, the Level Above Human doesn't really *need*
anybody, and as is written, "Many are picked, but few are chosen." The
bottom line is, that **I** have to do my homework of *aborting*
humanness and *applying* the lessons that I have received from Members
of the Next Level about Next Level behavior and conduct. I have a
**future** if I act accordingly.

Now, all this talk of the Second Coming? Guess what? It's really here!
We are at the **End of the Age**, where it is our understanding that
*all* minds/souls are back for another chance to choose what path they
wish to pursue. And what I know from my Teachers is that the time has
come for this Next Level classroom to close, and for us to make the
transition from this world to Our Father's World. What I also know, in
my heart, is that my Older Members bear the *only truth* there is. They
are what we've all been waiting for, and for anyone to doubt their worth
is literally *playing with fire*, and, to use my Older Members' words,
"that's the Gospel!" Personally, I simply cannot imagine anyone not
jumping for JOY and lapping this information up, but then I am actually
*living* this truth, so my perspective, as well as my expectations, are
more real and exciting. It's much like Jonah and the Whale, for one has
to actually *do* this to *know* it. And you can, that is, if you have a
*mind* to.

Because I find no knowledge, and therefore no truth here on Earth, I
have made *my choice* to "lay down my life in **this world**" and go
with my Father, Do, and His Father, Ti, to **Our world**, the only
*true* Kingdom of God, that is, if They will have me. Hopefully, They
will give me a passing grade and a new vehicle (body) that will
certainly be more efficient and refined than the one I am wearing in
*this* world, and will be an appropriate *Next Level* "suit of clothes"
necessary for the task I am given in *that* world. Remember, my mind -
my soul - is all that matters, and I must forever continue to be thirsty
for Their knowledge and drink it, so I can grow closer to my Older
Members. I want to become more and more grafted to the vine - *be of the
same mind* as my Older Members, *always* ready to be of service - which
would be an honor, to say the least.

A lot of people say I'm lucky, and they're right. And if there is but
one mind out there who *recognizes* this priceless information, all that
we have said and written will not be in vain. Because if you *do*
recognize my Older Members as Representatives of the Kingdom of God, and
if you recognize the truth that they bear, you can be pretty sure that
the Next Level has found you worthy of this "gift." More importantly, if
you *act* upon this simply because this world holds *nothing* for you
and you want *out of here*, **you** will be saved for further nurturing
and service at another level and another time, like **I** was.

The bottom line is that Representatives from the Next Level are the
*only* ones who can offer you a *real* future. If **you** exert the
effort, the Next Level will give you a chance to grow above and beyond
this human kingdom and *realize* everlasting life in its *truest* form.
So, if this information "strikes a chord," ask for help from the highest
source that you can reach, even calling on the names of Ti and Do, if
you desire. They will assist you, if They feel that your asking is
sincere.

The truth of the matter is that the Kingdom of Heaven is, indeed, at
Hand, and whether you accept this information as truth or reject it is a
decision only **you** can make. For your sake, I hope that your decision
is not made hastily. What do you think? Is this a matter of *life* or
**death**?

> Written from my heart, as a student of Ti and Do.  
> Thank-you, my Older Members, for this "Gift of Life."  
> I am *forever* grateful and *always* honored to be of service.

|     |               |
|-----|--------------:|
|     | April 6, 1996 |

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** T.E.L.A.H. -- The
Evolutionary Level Above Human **\|**](a12.md)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#appndxa.md)
