[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [UFOs](../../index) 
[Heaven's Gate](../index)  [Contents](book)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Be Fruitful and Multiply

*By Jmmody*

Many times we hear the Christians and Jews defending the Lord's
instruction to "Be fruitful and multiply" (Genesis, from the Old
Testament). We are puzzled by this. Is it not true that the Lord gave
those instructions at the beginning of that segment of this civilization
when it was in its early stage of development? Could it be that the
reason the Lord gave this instruction was because the people at that
time were very primitive in their behavior, and it was clear to the Lord
the direction that these humans were choosing?

Even in the beginning, Adam's loneliness showed he was not satisfied
with looking only to the Lord. Adam had been an androgynous virgin, but
when the Lord realized he was lonely, He separated Adam into two
individuals. The Lord then made it clear He was warning Adam and Eve
about partaking of the forbidden fruit (Genesis 2:17), which led to
their union. By this action, they made it clear that they wanted more
than what a relationship with only the Lord could offer.

Is it possible that from the beginning the Lord had something more
significant than multiplying in mind for Adam, something that would set
him apart from other mammals and mammalian behavior? Is it not true that
even then the Lord gave Adam the opportunity of seeing up front that he
could make the Lord happy by resisting mammalian behavior and desiring
to look only to Him? Although the Lord knew that Lucifer was going to
come into the garden and use the forbidden fruit game to tempt Adam and
Eve's resistance, didn't Adam have the opportunity to actually listen to
the Lord as He gave those instructions, and not listen to other
influences that came along (Luciferian)?

Could it be that what the Lord had in mind from the beginning was to see
if Adam was strong enough to follow only His instructions and not be
tempted by others? Is it possible that the Lord suspected that the
creature He created called Adam was not strong enough to make the right
decisions?

Would it not be correct to assume that when the Lord created Adam, He
gave him free will and the choice to listen to only Him as well as the
option to drift away from Him? If this is so, could the Lord then have
seen to it that the human kingdom would serve as a catalyst for humans
to get out of what they shouldn't have gotten into in the first place?
Wouldn't this be especially true for those in whom the Lord takes an
interest?

Is it possible, at this point in time, that the Lord is offering us the
opportunity to regain our "virginity," to become what the Lord had
originally intended for Adam? Adam may have fallen short of some of the
Lord's expectations, but didn't the Lord also see to it that He gave
humans step-by-step instructions on how to become new creatures that
could reside in the Literal Heavens - and be a part of advanced
activities that could never exist in this "temporary classroom" (Earth's
civilization)? If one continues to read in a chronological progression
the scriptures in the Bible, is there not evidence that would show this?
When the Lord took an interest in someone, He would let them know that
what He required of them was a puritanical life (for example, priests in
the temple were not to have families). He let them know that they didn't
have to drop to participating in mammalian behavior, if only they had
put more effort into adhering to the more significant instructions the
Lord gave.

What did the Lord give Jesus to pass on to those who were ready for
their "next instructions"? Was it to be fruitful and multiply - raise a
family? Or, was it the following instructions (and these quotes were
taken from the same Bible that "Be fruitful and multiply" was
taken)**:**

-   **Luke 14:26-27** - "If anyone comes to Me and does not hate his
    father and mother and his wife and children and brothers and sisters
    and even his own life also - he cannot be My disciple. Whoever does
    not persevere *and* carry his own cross and come after (follow) Me
    cannot be my disciple."

Didn't Jesus mean by this that those who follow Him would have to suffer
and bear the pangs of separating from the world and live as He did -
looking to Him and learning from Him if they would expect to get into
His Father's house?

-   **Luke 17:26-30** - "And as it was in the days of Noah, so will it
    be in the time of the Son of Man**:** They ate, they drank, they
    married, they were given in marriage, right up to the day when Noah
    went into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all. So
    also as it was in the days of Lot. They ate, they drank, they
    bought, they sold, they planted, they built**;** But on the day that
    Lot went out of Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone from heaven and
    destroyed them all. That is the way it will be on the day that the
    Son of Man is revealed."

Is Jesus not implying that there comes a time when all these human ways
have to be dropped when a Son is present?

-   **Matthew 19:11-12** - "But he said to them, Not all men can accept
    this saying, but it is for those to whom it has been given**:** For
    there are eunuchs who have been born incapable of marriage**;** and
    there are eunuchs who have been made so by men**;** and there are
    eunuchs who have made themselves incapable of marriage for the sake
    of the Kingdom of Heaven. Let him who is able to accept this accept
    it."
-   **Luke 20:34-35** - "And Jesus said to them, the people of this
    world *and* present age marry and are given in marriage**; But those
    who are considered worthy to gain that other world *and* that future
    age and to attain to the resurrection from the dead neither marry
    nor are given in marriage.**"
-   **Matthew 19:29** - "And anyone and everyone who has left houses or
    brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands for My
    name's sake will receive many times more and will inherit eternal
    life."
-   **Luke 9:59-62** - "And He said to another, become my disciple, side
    with My party, and accompany me! But he replied, *Lord*, permit me
    first to go and bury (await the death of) my father. But Jesus said
    to him, Allow the dead to bury their own dead**;** but as for you,
    go *and* publish abroad throughout all regions the Kingdom of God.
    Another also said, I will follow You, Lord, *and* become Your
    disciple *and* side with Your party**;** but let me first say
    good-bye to those at my home. Jesus said to him, No one who puts his
    hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the Kingdom of God."
-   **John 14:23-24** - "Jesus answered, If a person loves Me, he will
    keep My word and My Father will love him, and We will come to him
    and make Our home (abode, special dwelling place) with him. Anyone
    who does not love Me does not observe and obey My teachings. And the
    teaching which you hear and heed is not Mine, but from the Father
    Who sent Me."

If these were the instructions spoken by Jesus approximately 2000 years
ago, do you understand why we are so puzzled by the Christians and Jews
who still quote instructions that were applicable to "diaper lessons"?
Why do they still think they have instructions to not take their
"diapers" off even when they are past the diaper age? The ones defending
their position by using those quotes are not primitives. Is it in order
to justify their preoccupation with reproduction (human/mammalian
behavior)? Hasn't it been generations since the Lord gave this
instruction, and hasn't He even given instructions that updated and
replaced it?

In Jesus' teachings we can see a whole new set of instructions spelling
out the formula for what it takes to get out of the human kingdom - to
connect with somebody who comes from that Kingdom and who can show us
how to get out of the human kingdom and become students of getting into
the Next Kingdom Level.

Anytime the Kingdom of Heaven relates to a civilization to offer stages
of that process of overcoming humanism and entering that Kingdom Level,
the theme is *renunciation* of all human ways, growing to despise the
world and human/mammalian behavior. This includes procreation.

If God is the Creator, did He really need and want Adam and Eve to
populate this planet? Were Adam and Eve the only creation in His bag of
creations, and therefore did He need them to create for Him? If Adam had
looked only to his Creator for all his nourishment as the Lord
originally intended, would Adam have felt the need for another
companion? Could it be that because Adam and Eve chose to look to each
other and away from their Creator for their needs that they both found
that the Lord gave them what they desired instead of what the Lord would
have chosen for them? We thought that the Lord was angry with Adam and
Eve for engaging in fornication**:**

-   **Genesis 3:16-17** - "To the woman He said, I will greatly multiply
    your grief *and* your suffering in pregnancy *and* the pangs of
    childbearing**;** with spasms of distress you will bring forth
    children. And to Adam He said, Because you have listened and given
    heed to the voice of your wife and have eaten of the tree of which I
    commanded you, saying, You shall not eat of it, the ground is under
    a curse because of you**;** in sorrow and toil shall you eat of it
    all the days of your life. So God drove out the man**;** and He
    placed at the East of the Garden of Eden the cherubim and a flaming
    sword which turned every way, to keep and guard the way to the tree
    of life."

For us it seems that the evidence is undeniable that "Be fruitful and
multiply" was an instruction that the Lord gave regretfully and only for
a specific time in our civilization. Are the Christians and Jews who
still practice and defend the instruction of "Be fruitful and multiply"
doing so because it requires less of them and it gives them an excuse to
participate in sensual gratification? Why are they still choosing to
wear the "diapers" that they should have long outgrown?

April 16, 1996

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the next topic in this section: [**\|** Up the Chain **\|**](a32)  
To return to: [**\|** Table of Contents **\|**](book.htm#appndxa2)
