[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](khw04)  [Next](khw06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE508/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its Attainment*, by Rudolf Steiner,
\[1947\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### I

### *HOW IS KNOWLEDGE OF THE HIGHER WORLDS ATTAINED?*

#### *Conditions*

THERE slumber in every human being faculties by means of which he can
acquire for himself a knowledge of higher worlds. Mystics, Gnostics,
Theosophists—all speak of a world of soul and spirit which for them is
just as real as the world we see with our physical eyes and touch with
our physical hands. At every moment the listener may say to himself:
that, of which they speak, I too can learn, if I develop within myself
certain powers which today still slumber within me. There remains only
one question—how to set to work to develop such faculties. For this
purpose, they only can give advice who already possess such powers. As
long as the human race has existed there has always been a method of
training, in the course of which individuals

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

possessing these higher faculties gave instruction to others who were in
search of them. Such a training is called occult (esoteric) training,
and the instruction received therefrom is called occult (esoteric)
teaching, or spiritual science. This designation naturally awakens
misunderstanding. The one who hears it may very easily be misled into
the belief that this training is the concern of a special, privileged
class, withholding its knowledge arbitrarily from its fellow-creatures.
He may even think that nothing of real importance lies behind such
knowledge, for if it were a true knowledge—he is tempted to think—there
would be no need of making a secret of it; it might be publicly imparted
and its advantages made accessible to all. Those who have been initiated
into the nature of this higher knowledge are not in the least surprised
that the uninitiated should so think, for the secret of initiation can
only be understood by those who have to a certain degree experienced
this initiation into the higher knowledge of existence. The question may
be raised: how, then, under these circumstances, are the uninitiated to
develop any human interest in this so-called esoteric knowledge?

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> How and why are
they to seek for something of whose nature they can form no idea? Such a
question is based upon an entirely erroneous conception of the real
nature of esoteric knowledge. There is, in truth, no difference between
esoteric knowledge and all the rest of man's knowledge and proficiency.
This esoteric knowledge is no more of a secret for the average human
being than writing is a secret for those who have never learned it. And
just as all can learn to write who choose the correct method, so, too,
can all who seek the right way become esoteric students and even
teachers. In one respect only do the conditions here differ from those
that apply to external knowledge and proficiency. The possibility of
acquiring the art of writing may be withheld from someone through
poverty, or through the conditions of civilization into which he is
born; but for the attainment of knowledge and proficiency in the higher
worlds, there is no obstacle for those who earnestly seek them.

Many believe that they must seek, at one place or another, the masters
of higher knowledge in order to receive enlightenment. Now in the first
place, whoever strives earnestly after higher

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

knowledge will shun no exertion and fear no obstacle in his search for
an initiate who can lead him to the higher knowledge of the world. On
the other hand, everyone may be certain that initiation will find him
under all circumstances if he gives proof of an earnest and worthy
endeavor to attain this knowledge. It is a natural law among all
initiates to withhold from no man the knowledge that is due him but
there is an equally natural law which lays down that no word of esoteric
knowledge shall be imparted to anyone not qualified to receive it. And
the more strictly he observes these laws, the more perfect is an
initiate. The bond of union embracing all initiates is spiritual and not
external, but the two laws here mentioned form, as it were, strong
clasps by which the component parts of this bond are held together. You
may live in intimate friendship with an initiate, and yet a gap severs
you from his essential self, so long as you have not become an initiate
yourself. You may enjoy in the fullest sense the heart, the love of an
initiate, yet he will only confide his knowledge to you when you are
ripe for it. You may flatter him; you may torture him; nothing can
induce him to betray anything

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

to you as long as you, at the present stage of your evolution, are not
competent to receive it into your soul in the right way.

The methods by which a student is prepared for the reception of higher
knowledge are minutely prescribed. The direction he is to take is traced
with unfading, everlasting letters in the worlds of the spirit where the
initiates guard the higher secrets. In ancient times, anterior to our
history, the temples of the spirit were also outwardly visible; today,
because our life has become so unspiritual, they are not to be found in
the world visible to external sight; yet they are present spiritually
everywhere, and all who seek may find them.

Only within his own soul can a man find the means to unseal the lips of
an initiate. He must develop within himself certain faculties to a
definite degree, and then the highest treasures of the spirit can become
his own.

He must begin with a certain fundamental attitude of soul. In spiritual
science this fundamental attitude is called the *path of veneration*, of
devotion to truth and knowledge. Without this attitude no one can become
a student. The disposition

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

shown in their childhood by subsequent students of higher knowledge is
well known to the experienced in these matters. There are children who
look up with religious awe to those whom they venerate. For such people
they have a respect which forbids them, even in the deepest recess of
their heart, to harbor any thought of criticism or opposition. Such
children grow up into young men and women who feel happy when they are
able to look up to anything that fills them with veneration. From the
ranks of such children are recruited many students of higher knowledge.
Have you ever paused outside the door of some venerated person, and have
you, on this your first visit, felt a religious awe as you pressed on
the handle to enter the room which for you is a holy place? If so, a
feeling has been manifested within you which may be the germ of your
future adherence to the path of knowledge. It is a blessing for every
human being in process of development to have such feelings upon which
to build. Only it must not be thought that this disposition leads to
submissiveness and slavery. What was once a childlike veneration for
persons becomes, later, a veneration for truth and knowledge.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Experience teaches
that they can best hold their heads erect who have learnt to venerate
where veneration is due; and veneration is always fitting when it flows
from the depths of the heart.

If we do not develop within ourselves this deeply rooted feeling that
there is something higher than ourselves, we shall never find the
strength to evolve to something higher. The initiate has only acquired
the strength to lift his head to the heights of knowledge by guiding his
heart to the depths of veneration and devotion. The heights of the
spirit can only be climbed by passing through the portals of humility.
You can only acquire right knowledge when you have learnt to esteem it.
Man has certainly the right to turn his eyes to the light, but he must
first acquire this right. There are laws in the spiritual life, as in
the physical life. Rub a glass rod with an appropriate material and it
will become electric, that is, it will receive the power of attracting
small bodies. This is in keeping with a law of nature. It is known to
all who have learnt a little physics. Similarly, acquaintance with the
first principles of spiritual science shows that every

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

feeling of true devotion harbored in the soul develops a power which
may, sooner or later, lead further on the path of knowledge.

The student who is gifted with this feeling, or who is fortunate enough
to have had it inculcated in a suitable education, brings a great deal
along with him when, later in life, he seeks admittance to higher
knowledge. Failing such preparation, he will encounter difficulties at
the very first step, unless he undertakes, by rigorous self-education,
to create within himself this inner life of devotion. In our time it is
especially important that full attention be paid to this point. Our
civilization tends more toward critical judgment and condemnation than
toward devotion and selfless veneration. Our children already criticize
far more than they worship. But every criticism, every adverse judgment
passed, disperses the powers of the soul for the attainment of higher
knowledge in the same measure that all veneration and reverence develops
them. In this we do not wish to say anything against our civilization.
There is no question here of leveling criticism against it. To this
critical faculty, this self-conscious human judgment, this “test all
things and

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

hold fast what is best,” we owe the greatness of our civilization. Man
could never have attained to the science, the industry, the commerce,
the rights relationships of our time, had he not applied to all things
the standard of his critical judgment. But what we have thereby gained
in external culture we have had to pay for with a corresponding loss of
higher knowledge of spiritual life. It must be emphasized that higher
knowledge is not concerned with the veneration of persons but the
veneration of truth and knowledge.

Now, the one thing that everyone must acknowledge is the difficulty for
those involved in the external civilization of our time to advance to
the knowledge of the higher worlds. They can only do so if they work
energetically at themselves. At a time when the conditions of material
life were simpler, the attainment of spiritual knowledge was also
easier. Objects of veneration and worship stood out in clearer relief
from the ordinary things of the world. In an epoch of criticism ideals
are lowered; other feelings take the place of veneration, respect,
adoration, and wonder. Our own age thrusts these feelings further

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

and further into the background, so that they can only be conveyed to
man through his every-day life in a very small degree. Whoever seeks
higher knowledge must create it for himself. He must instill it into his
soul. It cannot be done by study; it can only be done through life.
Whoever, therefore, wishes to become a student of higher knowledge must
assiduously cultivate this inner life of devotion. Everywhere in his
environment and his experiences he must seek motives of admiration and
homage. If I meet a man and blame him for his shortcomings, I rob myself
of power to attain higher knowledge; but if I try to enter lovingly into
his merits, I gather such power. The student must continually be intent
upon following this advice. The spiritually experienced know how much
they owe to the circumstance that in face of all things they ever again
turn to the good, and withhold adverse judgment. But this must not
remain an external rule of life; rather it must take possession of our
innermost soul. Man has it in his power to perfect himself and, in time,
completely to transform himself. But this transformation must take place
in his innermost self, in his thought-life.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is not enough
that I show respect only in my outward bearing; I must have this respect
in my thoughts. The student must begin by absorbing this devotion into
this thought-life. He must be wary of thoughts of disrespect, of adverse
criticism, existing in his consciousness, and he must endeavor
straightaway to cultivate thoughts of devotion.

Every moment that we set ourselves to discover in our consciousness
whatever there remains in it of adverse, disparaging and critical
judgement of the world and of life; every such moment brings us nearer
to higher knowledge. And we rise rapidly when we fill our consciousness
in such moments with thoughts evoking in us admiration, respect and
veneration for the world and for life. It is well known to those
experienced in these matters that in every such moment powers are
awakened which otherwise remain dormant. In this way the spiritual eyes
of man are opened. He begins to see things around him which he could not
have seen before. He begins to understand that hitherto he had only seen
a part of the world around him. A human being standing before him now
presents a new and

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

different aspect. Of course, this rule of life alone will not yet enable
him to see, for instance, what is described as the human aura, because
for this still higher training is necessary. But he can rise to this
higher training if he has previously undergone a rigorous training in
devotion. (In the last chapter of his book *Theosophy*, the author
describes fully the *Path of Knowledge*; here it is intended to give
some practical details.)

Noiseless and unnoticed by the outer world is the treading of the *Path
of Knowledge*. No change need be noticed in the student. He performs his
duties as hitherto; he attends to his business as before. The
transformation goes on only in the inner part of the soul hidden from
outward sight. At first his entire inner life is flooded by this basic
feeling of devotion for everything which is truly venerable. His entire
soul-life finds in this fundamental feeling its pivot. Just as the sun's
rays vivify everything living, so does reverence in the student vivify
all feelings of the soul.

It is not easy, at first, to believe that feelings like reverence and
respect have anything to do

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

with cognition. This is due to the fact that we are inclined to set
cognition aside as a faculty by itself—one that stands in no relation to
what otherwise occurs in the soul. In so thinking we do not bear in mind
that it is the soul which exercises the faculty of cognition; and
feelings are for the soul what food is for the body. If we give the body
stones in place of bread, its activity will cease. It is the same with
the soul. Veneration, homage, devotion are like nutriment making it
healthy and strong, especially strong for the activity of cognition.
Disrespect, antipathy, underestimation of what deserves recognition, all
exert a paralyzing and withering effect on this faculty of cognition.
For the spiritually experienced this fact is visible in the aura. A soul
which harbors feelings of reverence and devotion produces a change in
its aura. Certain spiritual colorings, as they may be called, yellow-red
and brown-red in tone, vanish and are replaced by blue-red tints.
Thereby the cognitional faculty is ripened; it receives intelligence of
facts in its environment of which it had hitherto no idea. Reverence
awakens in the soul a sympathetic

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

power through which we attract qualities in the beings around us, which
would otherwise remain concealed.

The power obtained through devotion can be rendered still more effective
when the life of feeling is enriched by yet another quality. This
consists in giving oneself up less and less to impressions of the outer
world, and to develop instead a vivid inner life. A person who darts
from one impression of the outer world to another, who constantly seeks
distraction, cannot find the way to higher knowledge. The student must
not blunt himself to the outer world, but while lending himself to its
impressions, he should be directed by his rich inner life. When passing
through a beautiful mountain district, the traveler with depth of soul
and wealth of feeling has different experiences from one who is poor in
feeling. Only what we experience within ourselves unlocks for us the
beauties of the outer world. One person sails across the ocean, and only
a few inward experiences pass through his soul; another will hear the
eternal language of the cosmic spirit; for him are unveiled the
mysterious riddles of existence. We must learn to remain in

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

touch with our own feelings and ideas if we wish to develop any intimate
relationship with the outer world. The outer world with all its
phenomena is filled with splendor, but we must have experienced the
divine within ourselves before we can hope to discover it in our
environment.

The student is told to set apart moments in his daily life in which to
withdraw into himself, quietly and alone. He is not to occupy himself at
such moments with the affairs of his own ego. This would result in the
contrary of what is intended. He should rather let his experiences and
the messages from the outer world re-echo within his own completely
silent self. At such silent moments every flower, every animal, every
action will unveil to him secrets undreamt of. And thus he will prepare
himself to receive quite new impressions of the outer world through
quite different eyes. The desire to enjoy impression after impression
merely blunts the faculty of cognition; the latter, however, is nurtured
and cultivated if the enjoyment once experienced is allowed to reveal
its message. Thus the student must accustom himself not merely to let
the enjoyment

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

reverberate, as it were, but rather to renounce any further enjoyment,
and work upon the past experience. The peril here is very great. Instead
of working inwardly, it is very easy to fall into the opposite habit of
trying to exploit the enjoyment. Let no one underestimate the fact that
immense sources of error here confront the student. He must pass through
a host of tempters of his soul. They would all harden his ego and
imprison it within itself. He should rather open it wide to all the
world. It is necessary that he should seek enjoyment, for only through
enjoyment can the outer world reach him. If he blunts himself to
enjoyment he is like a plant which cannot any longer draw nourishment
from its environment. Yet if he stops short at the enjoyment he shuts
himself up within himself. He will only be something to himself and
nothing to the world. However much he may live within himself, however
intensely he may cultivate his ego—the world will reject him. To the
world he is dead. The student of higher knowledge considers enjoyment
only as a means of ennobling himself for the world. Enjoyment is to him
like a scout informing him about the world; but once instructed

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

by enjoyment, he passes on to work. He does not learn in order to
accumulate learning as his own treasure, but in order that he may devote
his learning to the service of the world.

In all spiritual science there is a fundamental principle which cannot
be transgressed without sacrificing success, and it should be impressed
on the student in every form of esoteric training. It runs as follows:
*All knowledge pursued merely for the enrichment of personal learning
and the accumulation of personal treasure leads you away from the path;
but all knowledge pursued for growth to ripeness within the process of
human ennoblement and cosmic development brings you a step forward.*
This law must be strictly observed, and no student is genuine until he
has adopted it as a guide for his whole life. This truth can be
expressed in the following short sentence: *Every idea which does not
become your ideal slays a force in your soul; every idea which becomes
your ideal creates within you life-forces.*

#### *Inner Tranquility*

At the very beginning of his course, the student is directed to the path
of veneration and the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

development of the inner life. Spiritual science now also gives him
practical rules by observing which he may tread that path and develop
that inner life. These practical rules have no arbitrary origin. They
rest upon ancient experience and ancient wisdom, and are given out in
the same manner, wheresoever the ways to higher knowledge are indicated.
All true teachers of the spiritual life are in agreement as to the
substance of these rules, even though they do not always clothe them in
the same words. This difference, which is of a minor character and is
more apparent than real, is due to circumstances which need not be dwelt
upon here.

No teacher of the spiritual life wishes to establish a mastery over
other persons by means of such rules. He would not tamper with anyone's
independence. Indeed, none respect and cherish human independence more
than the spiritually experienced. It was stated in the preceding pages
that the bond of union embracing all initiates is spiritual, and that
two laws form, as it were, clasps by which the component parts of this
bond are held together. Whenever the initiate leaves

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

his enclosed spiritual sphere and steps forth before the world, he must
immediately take a third law into account. It is this: Adapt each one of
your actions, and frame each one of your words in such a way that you
infringe upon no one's free-will.

The recognition that all true teachers of the spiritual life are
permeated through and through with this principle will convince all who
follow the practical rules proffered to them that they need sacrifice
none of their independence.

One of the first of these rules can be expressed somewhat in the
following words of our language: *Provide for yourself moments of inner
tranquility, and in these moments learn to distinguish between the
essential and the non-essential.* It is said advisedly: “expressed in
the words of our language.” Originally all rules and teachings of
spiritual science were expressed in a symbolical sign-language, some
understanding of which must be acquired before its whole meaning and
scope can be realized. This understanding is dependent on the first
steps toward higher knowledge, and these steps result from the exact

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

observation of such rules as are here given. For all who earnestly will,
the path stands open to tread.

Simple, in truth, is the above rule concerning moments of inner
tranquility; equally simple is its observation. But it only achieves its
purpose when it is observed in as earnest and strict a manner as it is,
in itself, simple. How this rule is to be observed will, therefore, be
explained without digression.

The student must set aside a small part of his daily life in which to
concern himself with something quite different from the objects of his
daily occupation. The way, also, in which he occupies himself at such a
time must differ entirely from the way in which he performs the rest of
his daily duties. But this does not mean that what he does in the time
thus set apart has no connection with his daily work. On the contrary,
he will soon find that just these secluded moments, when sought in the
right way, give him full power to perform his daily task. Nor must it be
supposed that the observance of this rule will really encroach upon the
time needed for the performance of his duties. Should anyone really have

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

no more time at his disposal, five minutes a day will suffice. It all
depends on the manner in which these five minutes are spent.

During these periods the student should wrest himself entirely free from
his work-a-day life. His thoughts and feelings should take on a
different coloring. His joys and sorrows, his cares, experiences and
actions must pass in review before his soul; and he must adopt such a
position that he may regard all his sundry experiences from a higher
point of view.

We need only bear in mind how, in ordinary life, we regard the
experiences and actions of others quite differently from our own. This
cannot be otherwise, for we are interwoven with our own actions and
experiences, whereas those of others we only contemplate. Our aim in
these moments of seclusion must be so to contemplate and judge our own
actions and experiences as though they applied not to ourselves but to
some other person. Suppose, for example, a heavy misfortune befalls us.
How different would be our attitude toward a similar misfortune had it
befallen our neighbor. This attitude cannot be blamed as unjustifiable;
it is part of human nature,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and applies equally to exceptional circumstances and to the daily
affairs of life. The student must seek the power of confronting himself,
at certain times, as a stranger. He must stand before himself with the
inner tranquility of a judge. When this is attained, our own experiences
present themselves in a new light. As long as we are interwoven with
them and stand, as it were, within them, we cling to the non-essential
just as much as to the essential. If we attain the calm inner survey,
the essential is severed from the non-essential. Sorrow and joy, every
thought, every resolve, appear different when we confront ourselves in
this way. It is as though we had spent the whole day in a place where we
beheld the smallest objects at the same close range as the largest, and
in the evening climbed a neighboring hill and surveyed the whole scene
at a glance. Then the various parts appear related to each other in
different proportions from those they bore when seen from within. This
exercise will not and need not succeed with present occurrences of
destiny, but it should be attempted by the student in connection with
the events of destiny already experienced in the past. The value of

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

such inner tranquil self-contemplation depends far less on what is
actually contemplated than on our finding within ourselves the power
which such inner tranquility develops.

For every human being bears a higher man within himself besides what we
may call the work-a-day man. This higher man remains hidden until he is
awakened. And each human being can himself alone awaken this higher
being within himself. As long as this higher being is not awakened, the
higher faculties slumbering in every human being, and leading to
supersensible knowledge, will remain concealed. The student must resolve
to persevere in the strict and earnest observation of the rule here
given, so long as he does not feel within himself the fruits of this
inner tranquility. To all who thus persevere the day will come when
spiritual light will envelop them, and a new world will be revealed to
an organ of sight of whose presence within them they were never aware.

And no change need take place in the outward life of the student in
consequence of this new rule. He performs his duties and, at first,
feels the same joys, sorrows, and experiences as before.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In no way can it
estrange him from life; he can rather devote himself the more thoroughly
to this life for the remainder of the day, having gained a higher life
in the moments set apart. Little by little this higher life will make
its influence felt on his ordinary life. The tranquility of the moments
set apart will also affect everyday existence. In his whole being he
will grow calmer; he will attain firm assurance in all his actions, and
cease to be put out of countenance by all manner of incidents. By thus
advancing he will gradually become more and more his own guide, and
allow himself less and less to be led by circumstances and external
influences. He will soon discover how great a source of strength is
available to him in these moments thus set apart. He will begin no
longer to get angry at things which formerly annoyed him; countless
things he formerly feared cease to alarm him. He acquires a new outlook
on life. Formerly he may have approached some occupation in a
fainthearted way. He would say: “Oh, I lack the power to do this as well
as I could wish.” Now this thought does not occur to him, but rather a
quite different thought. Henceforth he says

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

to himself: “I will summon all my strength to do my work as well as I
possibly can.” And he suppresses the thought which makes him
faint-hearted; for he knows that this very thought might be the cause of
a worse performance on his part, and that in any case it cannot
contribute to the improvement of his work. And thus thought after
thought, each fraught with advantage to his whole life, flows into the
student's outlook. They take the place of those that had a hampering,
weakening effect. He begins to steer his own ship on a secure course
through the waves of life, whereas it was formerly battered to and fro
by these waves.

This calm and serenity react on the whole being. They assist the growth
of the inner man, and, with the inner man, those faculties also grow
which lead to higher knowledge. For it is by his progress in this
direction that the student gradually reaches the point where he himself
determines the manner in which the impressions of the outer world shall
affect him. Thus he may hear a word spoken with the object of wounding
or vexing him. Formerly it would indeed have wounded or vexed him, but
now that he treads

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

the path to higher knowledge, he is able—before the word has found its
way to his inner self—to take from it the sting which gives it the power
to wound or vex. Take another example. We easily become impatient when
we are kept waiting, but—if we tread the path to higher knowledge—we so
steep ourselves in our moments of calm with the feeling of the
uselessness of impatience that henceforth, on every occasion of
impatience, this feeling is immediately present within us. The
impatience that was about to make itself felt vanishes, and an interval
which would otherwise have been wasted in expressions of impatience will
be filled by useful observations, which can be made while waiting.

Now, the scope and significance of these facts must be realized. We must
bear in mind that the higher man within us is in constant development.
But only the state of calm and serenity here described renders an
orderly development possible. The waves of outward life constrain the
inner man from all sides if, instead of mastering this outward life, it
masters him. Such a man is like a plant which tries to expand in a cleft
in the rock and is stunted in growth until new

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

space is given it. No outward forces can supply space to the inner man.
It can only be supplied by the inner calm which man himself gives to his
soul. Outward circumstances can only alter the course of his outward
life; they can never awaken the inner spiritual man. The student must
himself give birth to a new and higher man within himself.

This higher man now becomes the inner ruler who directs the
circumstances of the outer man with sure guidance. As long as the outer
man has the upper hand and control, this inner man is his slave and
therefore cannot unfold his powers. If it depends on something other
than myself whether I should get angry or not, I am not master of
myself, or, to put it better, I have not yet found the ruler within
myself. I must develop the faculty of letting the impressions of the
outer world approach me only in the way in which I myself determine;
then only do I become in the real sense a student. And only in as far as
the student earnestly seeks this power can he reach the goal. It is of
no importance how far anyone can go in a given time; the point is that
he should earnestly seek. Many have striven for years without noticing

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

any appreciable progress; but many of those who did not despair, but
remained unshaken, have then quite suddenly achieved the inner victory.

No doubt a great effort is required in many stations of life to provide
these moments of inner calm; but the greater the effort needed, the more
important is the achievement. In spiritual science everything depends
upon energy, inward truthfulness, and uncompromising sincerity with
which we confront our own selves, with all our deeds and actions, as a
complete stranger.

But only one side of the student's inner activity is characterized by
this birth of his own higher being. Something else is needed in
addition. Even if he confronts himself as a stranger it is only himself
that he contemplates; he looks on those experiences and actions with
which he is connected through his particular station of life. He must
now disengage himself from it and rise beyond to a purely human level,
which no longer has anything to do with his own special situation. He
must pass on to the contemplation of those things which would concern
him as a human being, even if he lived under quite different
circumstances

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

and in quite a different situation. In this way something begins to live
within him which ranges above the purely personal. His gaze is directed
to worlds higher than those with which every-day life connects him. And
thus he begins to feel and realize, as an inner experience, that he
belongs to those higher worlds. These are worlds concerning which his
senses and his daily occupation can tell him nothing. Thus he now shifts
the central point of his being to the inner part of his nature. He
listens to the voices within him which speak to him in his moments of
tranquility; he cultivates an intercourse with the spiritual world. He
is removed from the every-day world. Its noise is silenced. All around
him there is silence. He puts away everything that reminds him of such
impressions from without. Calm inward contemplation and converse with
the purely spiritual world fill his soul.—Such tranquil contemplation
must become a natural necessity in the life of the student. He is now
plunged in a world of thought. He must develop a living feeling for this
silent thought-activity. He must learn to love what the spirit pours
into him. He will soon cease to feel that this thought-world is

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

less real than the every-day things which surround him. He begins to
deal with his thoughts as with things in space, and the moment
approaches when he begins to feel that which reveals itself in the
silent inward thought-work to be much higher, much more real, than the
things in space. He discovers that something living expresses itself in
this thought-world. He sees that his thoughts do not merely harbor
shadow-pictures, but that through them hidden beings speak to him. Out
of the silence, speech becomes audible to him. Formerly sound only
reached him through his ear; now it resounds through his soul. An inner
language, an inner word is revealed to him. This moment, when first
experienced, is one of greatest rapture for the student. An inner light
is shed over the whole external world, and a second life begins for him.
Through his being there pours a divine stream from a world of divine
rapture.

This life of the soul in thought, which gradually widens into a life in
spiritual being, is called by Gnosis, and by Spiritual Science,
*Meditation* (contemplative reflection). This meditation is the means to
supersensible knowledge. But the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

student in such moments must not merely indulge in feelings; he must not
have indefinite sensations in his soul. That would only hinder him from
reaching true spiritual knowledge. His thoughts must be clear, sharp and
definite, and he will be helped in this if he does not cling blindly to
the thoughts that rise within him. Rather must he permeate himself with
the lofty thoughts by which men already advanced and possessed of the
spirit were inspired at such moments. He should start with the writings
which themselves had their origin in just such revelation during
meditation. In the mystic, gnostic and spiritual scientific literature
of today the student will find such writings, and in them the material
for his meditation. The seekers of the spirit have themselves set down
in such writings the thoughts of the divine science which the Spirit has
directed his messengers to proclaim to the world.

Through such meditation a complete transformation takes place in the
student. He begins to form quite new conceptions of reality. All things
acquire a fresh value for him. It cannot be repeated too often that this
transformation

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

does not alienate him from the world. He will in no way be estranged
from his daily tasks and duties, for he comes to realize that the most
insignificant action he has to accomplish, the most insignificant
experience which offers itself to him, stands in connection with cosmic
beings and cosmic events. When once this connection is revealed to him
in his moments of contemplation, he comes to his daily activities with a
new, fuller power. For now he knows that his labor and his suffering are
given and endured for the sake of a great, spiritual, cosmic whole. Not
weariness, but strength to live springs from meditation.

With firm step the student passes through life. No matter what it may
bring him, he goes forward erect. In the past he knew not why he labored
and suffered, but now he knows. It is obvious that such meditation leads
more surely to the goal if conducted under the direction of experienced
persons who know of themselves how everything may best be done; and
their advice and guidance should be sought. Truly, no one loses his
freedom thereby. What would otherwise be mere uncertain groping in the
dark becomes under this direction purposeful work. All who

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

apply to those possessing knowledge and experience in these matters will
never apply in vain, only they must realize that what they seek is the
advice of a friend, not the domination of a would-be ruler. It will
always be found that they who really know are the most modest of men,
and that nothing is further from their nature than what is called the
lust for power.

When, by means of meditation, a man rises to union with the spirit, he
brings to life the eternal in him, which is limited by neither birth nor
death. The existence of this eternal being can only be doubted by those
who have not themselves experienced it. Thus meditation is the way which
also leads man to the knowledge, to the contemplation of his eternal,
indestructible, essential being; and it is only through meditation that
man can attain to such knowledge. Gnosis and Spiritual Science tell of
the eternal nature of this being and of its reincarnation. The question
is often asked: Why does a man know nothing of his experiences beyond
the borders of life and death? Not thus should we ask, but rather: How
can we attain such knowledge? In right meditation the path is opened.
This alone can

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

revive the memory of experiences beyond the border of life and death.
Everyone can attain this knowledge; in each one of us lies the faculty
of recognizing and contemplating for ourselves what genuine Mysticism,
Spiritual Science, Anthroposophy, and Gnosis teach. Only the right means
must be chosen. Only a being with ears and eyes can apprehend sounds and
colors; nor can the eye perceive if the light which makes things visible
is wanting. Spiritual Science gives the means of developing the
spiritual ears and eyes, and of kindling the spiritual light; and this
method of spiritual training: (1) *Preparation*; this develops the
spiritual senses. (2) *Enlightenment*; this kindles the spiritual light.
(3) *Initiation*; this establishes intercourse with the higher spiritual
beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Stages of Initiation](khw06)
