[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](khw06)  [Next](khw08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE508/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its Attainment*, by Rudolf Steiner,
\[1947\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

### III

### *SOME PRACTICAL ASPECTS*

THE training of thoughts and feelings, pursued in the way described in
the chapters on *Preparation, Enlightenment, and Initiation*, introduces
into the soul and spirit the same organic symmetry with which nature has
constructed the physical body. Before this development, soul and spirit
are undifferentiated masses. The clairvoyant perceives them as
interlacing, rotating, cloud-like spirals, dully glimmering in reddish,
reddish-brown, or reddish-yellow tones. After this training they begin
to assume a brilliant yellowish-green, or greenish-blue color, and show
a regular structure. This inner regularity leading to higher knowledge,
is attained when the student introduces into his thoughts and feelings
the same orderly system with which nature

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

has endowed his bodily organs that enable him to see, hear, digest,
breath, speak. Gradually he learns to breath and see with this soul, to
speak and hear with the spirit.

In the following pages some practical aspects of the higher education of
soul and spirit will be treated in greater detail. They are such that
anyone can put them into practice regardless of other rules, and thereby
be led some distance further into spiritual science.

A particular effort must be made to cultivate the quality of patience.
Every symptom of impatience produces a paralyzing, even a destructive
effect on the higher faculties that slumber in us. We must not expect an
immeasurable view into the higher worlds from one day to the next, for
we should assuredly be disappointed. Contentment with the smallest
fragment attained, repose and tranquility, must more and more take
possession of the soul. It is quite understandable that the student
should await results with impatience; but he will achieve nothing so
long as he fails to master this impatience. Nor is it of any use to
combat this impatience merely in the ordinary sense, for it will become
only that much stronger. We overlook

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

it in self-deception while it plants itself all the more firmly in the
depths of the soul. It is only when we ever and again surrender
ourselves to a certain definite thought, making it absolutely our own,
that any results can be attained. This thought is as follows: *I must
certainly do everything I can for the training and development of my
soul and spirit; but I shall wait patiently until higher powers shall
have found me worthy of definite enlightenment.* If this thought becomes
so powerful in the student that it grows into an actual feature of his
character, he is treading the right path. This feature soon sets its
mark on his exterior. The gaze of his eye becomes steady, the movement
of his body becomes sure, his decisions definite, and all that goes
under the name of nervousness gradually disappears. Rules that appear
trifling and insignificant must be taken into account. For example,
supposing someone affronts us. Before our training we should have
directed our resentment against the offender; a wave of anger would have
surged up within us. In a similar case, however, the thought is
immediately present in the mind of the student that such an affront
makes no difference

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

to his intrinsic worth. And he does whatever must be done to meet the
affront with calm and composure, and not in a spirit of anger. Of course
it is not a case of simply accepting every affront, but of acting with
the same calm composure when dealing with an affront against our own
person as we would if the affront were directed against another person,
in whose favor we had the right to intervene. It must always be
remembered that this training is not carried out in crude outward
processes, but in subtle, silent alterations in the life of thought and
feeling.

Patience has the effect of attraction, impatience the effect of
repulsion on the treasures of higher knowledge. In the higher regions of
existence nothing can be attained by haste and unrest. Above all things,
desire and craving must be silenced, for these are qualities of the soul
before which all higher knowledge shyly withdraws. However precious this
knowledge is accounted, the student must not crave it if he wishes to
attain it. If he wishes to have it for his own sake, he will never
attain it. This requires him to be honest with himself in his innermost
soul. He must in no case be under any illusion concerning

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

his own self. With a feeling of inner truth he must look his own faults,
weaknesses, and unfitness full in the face. The moment he tries to
excuse to himself any of his weaknesses, he has placed a stone in his
way on the path which is to lead him upward. Such obstacles can only be
removed by self-enlightenment. There is only one way to get rid of
faults and failings, and that is by a clear recognition of them.
Everything slumbers in the human soul and can be awakened. A person can
even improve his intellect and reason, if he quietly and calmly makes it
clear to himself why he is weak in this respect. Such self- knowledge
is, of course, difficult, for the temptation to self-deception is
immeasurably great. Anyone making a habit of being truthful with himself
opens the portal leading to a deeper insight.

All curiosity must fall away from the student. He must rid himself as
much as possible of the habit of asking questions merely for the sake of
gratifying a selfish thirst for knowledge. He must only ask when
knowledge can serve to perfect his own being in the service of
evolution. Nevertheless, his delight in knowledge and his devotion to it
should in no way be hampered. He should listen

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

devoutly to all that contributes to such an end, and should seek every
opportunity for such devotional attention.

Special attention must be paid in esoteric training to the education of
the life of desires. This does not mean that we are to become free of
desire, for if we are to attain something we must also desire it, and
desire will always tend to fulfillment if backed by a particular force.
This force is derived from a right knowledge. *Do not desire at all
until you know what is right in any one sphere.* That is one of the
golden rules for the student. The wise man first ascertains the laws of
the world, and then his desires become powers which realize themselves.
The following example brings this out clearly. There are certainly many
people who would like to learn from their own observation something
about their life before birth. Such a desire is altogether useless and
leads to no result so long as the person in question has not acquired a
knowledge of the laws that govern the nature of the eternal, a knowledge
of these laws in their subtlest and most intimate character, through the
study of spiritual science. But if, having really acquired this
knowledge,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

he wishes to proceed further, his desire, now ennobled and purified,
will enable him to do so.

It is also no use saying: I particularly wish to examine my previous
life, and shall study only for this purpose. We must rather be capable
of abandoning this desire, of eliminating it altogether, and of
studying, at first, with no such intention. We should cultivate a
feeling of joy and devotion for what we learn, with no thought of the
above end in view. We should learn to cherish and foster a particular
desire in such a way that it brings with it its own fulfillment.

If we become angered, vexed or annoyed, we erect a wall around ourselves
in the soul-world, and the forces which are to develop the eyes of the
soul cannot approach. For instance, if a person angers me he sends forth
a psychic current into the soul-world. I cannot see this current as long
as I am myself capable of anger. My own anger conceals it from me. We
must not, however, suppose that when we are free from anger we shall
immediately have a psychic (astral) vision. For this purpose an organ of
vision must have been developed in the soul. The beginnings

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

of such an organ are latent in every human being, but remain ineffective
as long as he is capable of anger. Yet this organ is not immediately
present the moment anger has been combated to a small extent. We must
rather persevere in this combating of anger and proceed patiently on our
way; then some day we shall find that this eye of the soul has become
developed. Of course, anger is not the only failing to be combated for
the attainment of this end. Many grow impatient or skeptical, because
they have for years combated certain qualities, and yet clairvoyance has
not ensued. In that case they have just trained some qualities and
allowed others to run riot. The gift of clairvoyance only manifests
itself when all those qualities which stunt the growth of the latent
faculties are suppressed. Undoubtedly, the beginnings of such seeing and
hearing may appear at an earlier period, but these are only young and
tender shoots which are subjected to all possible error, and which, if
not carefully tended and guarded, may quickly die.

Other qualities which, like anger and vexation, have to be combated, are
timidity, superstition, prejudice, vanity and ambition, curiosity, the

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

mania for imparting information, and the making of distinctions in human
beings according to the outward characteristics of rank, sex, race, and
so forth. In our time it is difficult for people to understand how the
combating of such qualities can have anything to do with the heightening
of the faculty of cognition. But every spiritual scientist knows that
much more depends upon such matters than upon the increase of
intelligence and employment of artificial exercises. Especially can
misunderstanding arise if we believe that we must become foolhardy in
order to be fearless; that we must close our eyes to the differences
between people, because we must combat the prejudices of rank, race, and
so forth. Rather is it true that a correct estimate of all things is to
be attained only when we are no longer entangled in prejudice. Even in
the ordinary sense it is true that the fear of some phenomenon prevents
us from estimating it rightly; that a racial prejudice prevents us from
seeing into a man's soul. It is this ordinary sense that the student
must develop in all its delicacy and subtlety.

*Every word spoken without having been thoroughly purged in thought is a
stone thrown in *

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

*the way of esoteric training*. And here something must be considered
which can only be explained by giving an example. If anything be said to
which we must reply, we must be careful to consider the speaker's
opinion, feeling, and even his prejudice, rather than what we ourselves
have to say at the moment on the subject under discussion. In this
example a refined quality of tact is indicated, to the cultivation of
which the student must devote his care. He must learn to judge what
importance it may have for the other person if he opposes the latter's
opinion with his own. This does not mean that he must withhold his
opinion. There can be no question of that. But he must listen to the
speaker as carefully and as attentively as he possibly can and let his
reply derive its form from what he has just heard. In such cases one
particular thought recurs ever and again to the student, and he is
treading the right path if this thought lives with him to the extent of
becoming a trait of his character. This thought is as follows*: The
importance lies not in the difference of our opinions but in his
discovering through his own effort what is right if I contribute
something toward it*. Thoughts of this

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

and of a similar nature cause the character and the behavior of the
student to be permeated with a quality of gentleness, which is one of
the chief means used in all esoteric training. Harshness scares away the
soul-pictures that should open the eye of the soul; gentleness clears
the obstacles away and unseals the inner organs.

Along with gentleness, another quality will presently be developed in
the soul of the student: that of quietly paying attention to all the
subtleties in the soul-life of his environment, while reducing to
absolute silence any activity within his own soul. The soul-life of his
environment will impress itself on him in such a way that his own soul
will grow, and as it grows, become regular in its structure, as a plant
expanding in the sunlight. Gentleness and patient reserve open the soul
to the soul-world and the spirit to the spirit-world. Persevere in
silent inner seclusion; close the senses to all that they brought you
before your training; reduce to absolute immobility all the thoughts
which, according to your previous habits, surged within you; become
quite still and silent within, wait in patience, and then the higher
worlds will begin to fashion and perfect the organs

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

of sights and hearing in your soul and spirit. Do not expect immediately
to see and hear in the world of soul and spirit, for all that you are
doing does but contribute to the development of your higher senses, and
you will only be able to hear with soul and spirit when you possess
these higher senses. Having persevered for a time in silent inner
seclusion, go about your customary daily affairs, imprinting deeply upon
your mind this thought: “*Some day, when I have grown sufficiently, I
shall attain that which I am destined to attain*,” and make no attempt
to attract forcefully any of these higher powers to yourself. Every
student receives these instructions at the outset. By observing them he
perfects himself. If he neglects them, all his labor is in vain. But
they are only difficult of achievement for the impatient and the
unpersevering. No other obstacles exist save those which we ourselves
place in our own path, and which can be avoided by all who really will.
This point must be continually emphasized, because many people form an
altogether wrong conception of the difficulties that beset the path to
higher knowledge. It is easier, in a certain sense, to accomplish the
first steps along this path than

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

to get the better of the commonest every-day difficulties without this
training. Apart from this, only such things are here imparted as are
attended by no danger whatsoever to the health of soul and body. There
are other ways which lead more quickly to the goal, but what is here
explained has nothing to do with them, because they have certain effects
which no experienced spiritual scientist considers desirable. Since
fragmentary information concerning these ways is continually finding its
way into publicity, express warning must be given against entering upon
them. For reasons which only the initiated can understand, these ways
can never be made public in their true form. The fragments appearing
here and there can never lead to profitable results, but may easily
undermine health, happiness, and peace of mind. It would be far better
for people to avoid having anything to do with such things than to risk
entrusting themselves to wholly dark forces, of whose nature and origin
they can know nothing.

Something may here be said concerning the environment in which this
training should be undertaken, for this is not without some importance.
And yet the case differs for almost every person.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Anyone practicing
in an environment filled only with self-seeking interests, as for
example, the modern struggle for existence, must be conscious of the
fact that these interests are not without their effect on the
development of his spiritual organs. It is true that the inner laws of
these organs are so powerful that this influence cannot be fatally
injurious. Just as a lily can never grow into a thistle, however
inappropriate its environment, so, too, the eye of the soul can never
grow to anything but its destined shape even though it be subjected to
the self-seeking interests of modern cities. But under all circumstances
it is well if the student seeks, now and again, his environment in the
restful peace, the inner dignity and sweetness of nature. Especially
fortunate is the student who can carry out his esoteric training
surrounded by the green world of plants, or among the sunny hills, where
nature weaves her web of sweet simplicity. This environment develops the
inner organs in a harmony which can never ensue in a modern city. More
favorably situated than the townsman is the person who, during his
childhood at least, had been able to breathe the fragrance of pines, to
gaze on snowy peaks, and observe

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the silent activity of woodland creatures and insects. Yet no
city-dweller should fail to give to the organs of his soul and spirit,
as they develop, the nurture that comes from the inspired teachings of
spiritual research. If our eyes cannot follow the woods in their mantel
of green every spring, day by day, we should instead open our soul to
the glorious teachings of the Bhagavad Gita, or of St. John's Gospel, or
of St. Thomas à Kempis, and to the descriptions resulting from spiritual
science. There are many ways to the summit of insight, but much depends
on the right choice. The spiritually experienced could say much
concerning these paths, much that might seem strange to the uninitiated.
Someone, for instance, might be very far advanced on the path; he might
be standing, so to speak, at the very entrance of sight and hearing with
soul and spirit; he is then fortunate enough to make a journey over the
calm or maybe tempestuous ocean, and a veil falls away from the eyes of
his soul; suddenly he becomes a seer. Another is also so far advanced
that this veil only needs to be loosened; this occurs through some
stroke of destiny. On another this stroke might well have had the effect

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

of paralyzing his powers and undermining his energy; for the esoteric
student it becomes the occasion of his *enlightenment*. A third
perseveres patiently for years without any marked result. Suddenly,
while silently seated in his quiet chamber, spiritual light envelops
him; the walls disappear, become transparent for his soul, and a new
world expands before his eyes that have become seeing, or resounds in
his ears that have become spiritually hearing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Conditions of Esoteric Training](khw08.md)
