[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](khw02)  [Next](khw04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE508/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its Attainment*, by Rudolf Steiner,
\[1947\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### *Preface to the Sixth Edition*

In preparing this new edition of *Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its
Attainment* I have gone over every detail of the subject as I had
presented it over ten years ago. The urge to make such a review is
natural in the case of disclosures concerning soul experiences and paths
such as are indicated in this book. There can be no portion of what is
imparted which does not remain intimately a part of the one who
communicates it, or which does not contain something that perpetually
works upon his soul. And it is inevitable that this work of the soul
should be joined by an endeavor to enhance the clarity and lucidity of
the presentation as given years before. This engendered what I have
endeavored to accomplish in this new edition. All the essential elements
of

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

the expositions, all the principal points, have remained as they were;
yet important changes have been made. In many passages I have been able
to increase the accuracy of characterization in detail, and this seemed
to me important. If anyone wishes to apply what is imparted in this book
to his own spiritual life, it is important that he should be able to
contemplate the paths in question by means of a characterization as
exact as possible. Misconceptions can arise in far greater measure in
connection with the description of inner spiritual processes than with
that of facts in the physical world. The mobility of the soul life, the
danger of losing sight of how different it is from all life in the
physical world—this and much else renders such misunderstandings
possible. In preparing this new edition I have directed my attention to
finding passages in which misconceptions might arise, and I have
endeavored to forestall them.

At the time I wrote the essays that constitute this book, much had to be
discussed in a different way from today, because at that time I had to
allude in a different manner to the substance of what had been published
since then concerning facts of cognition of the spiritual worlds. In my
*Occult* 

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Science*, in *The
Spiritual Guidance of Mankind*, in *A Road to Self-Knowledge and the
Threshold of the Spiritual World*, as well as in other writings,
spiritual processes are described whose existence, to be sure, was
already inevitably indicated in this book ten years ago, but in words
differing from those that seem right today. In connection with a great
deal not described in this book I had to explain at that time that it
could be learned by oral communication. Much of what this referred to
has since been published. But these allusions perhaps did not wholly
exclude the possibility of erroneous ideas in the reader's mind. It
might be possible, for instance, to imagine that something much more
vital in the personal relations between the seeker for spiritual
schooling and this or that teacher than is intended. I trust I have here
succeeded, by presenting details in a certain way, in emphasizing more
strongly that for one seeking spiritual schooling in accord with present
spiritual conditions an absolutely direct relation to the objective
spiritual world is of far greater importance than a relation to the
personality of a teacher. The latter will gradually become merely the
helper; he will assume the same position in spiritual

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

schooling as a teacher occupies, in conformity with modern views, in any
other field of knowledge. I believe I have sufficiently stressed the
fact that the teacher's authority and the pupil's faith in him should
play no greater part in spiritual schooling than in any other branch of
knowledge or life. A great deal depends, its seems to me, upon an
increasingly true estimate of this relation between the one who carries
on spiritual research and those who develop an interest in the results
of his research. Thus I believe I have improved the book wherever I was
in a position, after ten years, to find what needs improving.

A second part is to be added to this first part, bringing further
explanations of the frame of mind that can lead a man to the experience
of the higher worlds.

The new edition of the book, the printing completed, lay before me when
the great war now being experienced by mankind broke out. I must write
these prefatory remarks while my soul is deeply moved by the
destiny-laden event.

*Rudolph Steiner*

Berlin, September 7, 1914.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Third Edition](khw04.md)
