[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](khw07)  [Next](khw09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE508/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its Attainment*, by Rudolf Steiner,
\[1947\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### IV

### *THE CONDITIONS OF ESOTERIC TRAINING*

THE conditions attached to esoteric training are not arbitrary. They are
the natural outcome of esoteric knowledge. Just as no one can become a
painter who refuses to handle a paint-brush, so, too, no one can receive
esoteric training who is unwilling to meet the demands considered
necessary by the teacher. In the main, the latter can give nothing but
advice, and everything he says should be accepted in this sense. He has
already passed through the preparatory stages leading to a knowledge of
the higher worlds, and knows from experience what is necessary. It
depends entirely upon the free-will of each individual human being
whether or not he choose to tread the same path. To insist on being
admitted to esoteric training without fulfilling

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

the conditions would be equivalent to saying: “Teach me how to paint,
but do not ask me to handle a paint-brush.” The teacher can never offer
anything unless the recipient comes forward to meet him of his own
free-will. But it must be emphasized that a general desire for higher
knowledge is not sufficient. This desire will, of course, be felt by
many, but nothing can be achieved by it alone so long as the special
conditions attached to esoteric training are not accepted. This point
should be considered by those who complain that the training is
difficult. Failure or unwillingness to fulfill these strict conditions
must entail the abandonment of esoteric training, for the time being. It
is true, the conditions are strict, yet they are not harsh, since their
fulfillment not only should be, but indeed must be a voluntary action.

If this fact be overlooked, esoteric training can easily appear in the
light of a coercion of the soul or the conscience; for the training is
based on the development of the inner life, and the teacher must
necessarily give advice concerning this inner life. But there is no
question of compulsion when a demand is met out of free choice. To ask

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

of the teacher: “Give me your higher knowledge, but leave me my
customary emotions, feelings, and thoughts,” would be an impossible
demand. In this case the gratification of curiosity and desire for
knowledge would be the only motive. When pursued in such a spirit,
however, higher knowledge can never be attained.

Let us now consider in turn the conditions imposed on the student. It
should be emphasized that the complete fulfillment of any one of these
conditions is not insisted upon, but only the corresponding effort. No
one can wholly fulfill them, but everyone can start on the path toward
them. It is the effort of will that matters, and the ready disposition
to enter upon this path.

1\. *The first condition is that the student should pay heed to the
advancement of bodily and spiritual health.* Of course, health does not
depend, in the first instance, upon the individual; but the effort to
improve in this respect lies within the scope of all. Sound knowledge
can alone proceed from sound human beings. The unhealthy are not
rejected, but it is demanded of the student that he should have the will
to lead a healthy life. In this respect he must attain the greatest
possible independence.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The good counsels
of others, freely bestowed though generally unsought, are as a rule
superfluous. Each must endeavor to take care of himself. From the
physical aspect it will be more a question of warding off harmful
influences than of anything else. In fulfilling our duties we must often
do things that are detrimental to our health. We must decide at the
right moment to place duty higher than the care of our health. But just
think how much can be avoided with a little good will. Duty must in many
cases stand higher than health, often, even, than life itself; but
pleasure must never stand higher, as far as the student is concerned.
For him pleasure can only be a means to health and to life, and in this
connection we must, above all, be honest and truthful with ourselves.
There is no use in leading an ascetic life when the underlying motive is
the same in this case as in other enjoyments. Some may derive
satisfaction from asceticism just as others can from wine-bibbing, but
they must not imagine that this sort of asceticism will assist them in
attaining higher knowledge. Many ascribe to their circumstances
everything which apparently prevents them from making progress. They say
they

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

cannot develop themselves under their conditions of life. Now, many may
find it desirable for other reasons to change their conditions of life,
but no one need do so for the purpose of esoteric training. For the
latter, a person need only do as much as possible, whatever his
position, to further the health of body and soul. Every kind of work can
serve the whole of humanity; and it is a surer sign of greatness of soul
to perceive clearly how necessary for this whole is a petty, perhaps
even an offensive employment than to think: “This work is not good
enough for me; I am destined for something better.” Of special
importance for the student is the striving for complete health of mind.
An unhealthy life of thought and feeling will not fail to obstruct the
path to higher knowledge. Clear, calm thinking, with stability of
feeling and emotion, form here the basis of all work. Nothing should be
further removed from the student than an inclination toward a
fantastical, excitable life, toward nervousness, exaggeration, and
fanaticism. He should acquire a healthy outlook on all circumstances of
life; he should meet the demands of lie with steady assurance, quietly
letting all things make their impression on him

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

and reveal their message. He should be at pains to do justice to life on
every occasion. All one-sided and extravagant tendencies in his
sentiments and criticisms should be avoided. Failing this, he would find
his way merely into worlds of his own imagination, instead of higher
worlds; in place of truth, his own pet opinions would assert themselves.
It is better for the student to be matter-of-fact, than excitable and
fantastic.

2\. *The second condition is that the student should feel himself
co-ordinated as a link in the whole of life*. Much is included in the
fulfillment of this condition, but each can only fulfill it in his own
manner. If I am a teacher, and my pupil does not fulfill my
expectations, I must not divert my resentment against him but against
myself. I must feel myself as one with my pupil, to the extent of asking
myself: “Is my pupil's deficiency not the result of my own action?”
Instead of directing my feelings against him I shall rather reflect on
my own attitude, so that the pupil may in the future be better able to
satisfy my demands. Proceeding from such an attitude, a change will come
over the student's whole way of thinking. This holds good in all things,
great or small. Such

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

an attitude of mind, for instance, alters the way I regard a criminal. I
suspend my judgment and say to myself: “I am, like him, only a human
being. Through favorable circumstances I received an education which
perhaps alone saved me from a similar fate.” I may then also come to the
conclusion that this human brother of mine would have become a different
man had my teachers taken the same pains with him they took with me. I
shall reflect on the fact that something was given to me which was
withheld from him, that I enjoy my fortune precisely because it was
denied him. And then I shall naturally come to think of myself as a link
in the whole of humanity and a sharer in the responsibility for
everything that occurs. This does not imply that such a thought should
be immediately translated into external acts of agitation. It should be
cherished in stillness within the soul. Then quite gradually it will set
its mark on the outward demeanor of the student. In such matters each
can only begin by reforming himself. It is of no avail, in the sense of
the foregoing thoughts, to make general demands on the whole of
humanity. It is easy to decide what men ought to be; but the student

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

works in the depths, not on the surface. If would therefore be quite
wrong to relate the demand here indicated with an external, least of all
political, demands; with such matters this training can have nothing to
do. Political agitators know, as a rule, what to demand of other people;
but they say little of demands on themselves.

3\. This brings us to *the third condition. The student must work his
way upward to the realization that his thoughts and feelings are as
important for the world as his actions. It must be realized that it is
equally injurious to hate a fellow-being as to strike him.* The
realization will then follow that by perfecting ourselves we accomplish
something not only for ourselves, but for the whole world. The world
derives equal benefit from our untainted feelings and thoughts as from
our good demeanor, and as long as we cannot believe in this cosmic
importance of our inner life, we are unfit for the path that is here
described. We are only filled with the right faith in the significance
of our inner self, of our soul, when we work at it s though it were at
least as real as all external things. We must admit that

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

our every feeling produces an effect, just as does every action of our
hand.

4\. These words already express *the fourth condition: to acquire the
conviction that the real being of man does not lie in his exterior but
in his interior*. Anyone regarding himself as a product of the outer
world, as a result of the physical world, cannot succeed in this
esoteric training, for the feeling that we are beings of soul and spirit
forms its very basis. The acquisition of this feeling renders the
student fit to distinguish between inner duty and outward success. He
learns that the one cannot be directly measured by the other. He must
find the proper mean between what is indicated by external conditions
and what he recognizes as the right conduct for himself. He should not
force upon his environment anything for which it can have no
understanding, but also he must be quite free from the desire to do only
what can be appreciated by those around him. The voice of his own soul
struggling honestly toward knowledge must bring him the one and only
recognition of the truths for which he stands. But he must learn as much
as he possibly can from his environment so

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

as to discover what those around him need, and what is good for them. In
this way he will develop within himself what is known in spiritual
science as the “spiritual balance.” An open heart for the needs of the
outer world lies on one of the scales, and inner fortitude and
unfaltering endurance on the other.

5\. This brings us to *the fifth condition: steadfastness in carrying
out a resolution.* Nothing should induce the student to deviate from a
resolution he may have taken, save only the perception that he was in
error. Every resolution is a force, and if this force does not produce
an immediate effect at the point to which it was applied, it works
nevertheless on in its own way. Success is only decisive when an action
arises from desire. But all actions arising from desire are worthless in
relation to the higher worlds. There, love for an action is alone the
decisive factor. In this love, every impulse that impels the student to
action should fulfill itself. Undismayed by failure, he will never grow
weary of endeavoring repeatedly to translate some resolution into
action. And in this way he reaches the stage of not waiting to see the
outward effect of his actions, but of contenting

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

himself with performing them. He will learn to sacrifice his actions,
even his whole being, to the world, however the world may receive his
sacrifice. Readiness for a sacrifice, for an offering such as this, must
be shown by all who would pursue the path of esoteric training.

6\. *A sixth condition is the development of a feeling of thankfulness
for everything with which man is favored*. We must realize that our
existence is a gift from the entire universe. How much is needed to
enable each one of us to receive and maintain his existence! How much to
we not owe to nature and to our fellow human beings! Thoughts such as
these must come naturally to all who seek esoteric training, for if the
latter do not feel inclined to entertain them, they will be incapable of
developing within themselves that all-embracing love which is necessary
for the attainment of higher knowledge. Nothing can reveal itself to us
which we do not love. And every revelation must fill us with
thankfulness, for we ourselves are the richer for it.

7\. *All these conditions must be united in a seventh: to regard life
unceasingly in the manner demanded by these conditions*. The student

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

thus makes it possible to give his life the stamp of uniformity. All his
modes of expression will, in this way, be brought into harmony, and no
longer contradict each other. And thus he will prepare himself for the
inner tranquillity he must attain during the preliminary steps of his
training.

Anyone sincerely showing the good will to fulfill these conditions may
decide to seek esoteric training. He will then be ready to follow the
advice given above. Much of his advice may appear to be merely on the
surface, and many will perhaps say that they did not expect the training
to proceed in such strict forms. But everything interior must manifest
itself in an exterior way, and just as a picture is not evident when it
exists only in the mind of the painter, so, too, there can be no
esoteric training without outward expression. Disregard for strict forms
is only shown by those who do not know that the exterior is the avenue
of expression for the interior. No doubt it is the spirit that really
matters, and not the form; but just as form without spirit is null and
void, so also would spirit remain inactive if it did not create for
itself a form.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

The above conditions are calculated to render the student strong enough
to fulfill the further demands made on him during this training. If he
fail in these conditions he will hesitate before each new demand, and
without them he will lack that faith in man which he must possess. For
all striving for truth must be founded on faith in and true love for
man. But though this is the foundation it is not the source of all
striving for truth, for such striving can only flow from the soul's own
fountain-head of strength. And the love of man must gradually widen to a
love for all living creatures, yes, for all existence. Through failure
to fulfill the condition here given, the student will lack the perfect
love for everything that fashions and creates, and the inclination to
refrain from all destruction as such. He must so train himself that not
only in his actions but also in his words, feelings, and thoughts he
will never destroy anything for the sake of destruction. His joy must be
in growth and life, and he must only lend his hand to destruction, when
he is also able, through and by means of destruction, to promote new
life. This does not mean that the student must simply look on while evil
runs riot, but rather

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

that he must seek even in evil that side through which he may transform
it into good. He will then see more and more clearly that evil and
imperfection may best be combated by the creation of the good and the
perfect. The student knows that out of nothing, nothing can be created,
but also that the imperfect can be transformed into the perfect. Anyone
developing within himself the disposition to create, will soon find
himself capable of facing evil in the right way.

It must be clearly realized that the purpose of this training is to
build and not to destroy. The student should therefore bring with him
the good will for sincere and devoted work, and not the intention to
criticize and destroy. He should be capable of devotion, for he must
learn what he does not yet know; he should look reverently on that which
discloses itself. Work and devotion, these are the fundamental qualities
which must be demanded of the student. Some come to realize that they
are making no progress, though in their own opinion they are untiringly
active. The reason is that they have not grasped the meaning of work and
devotion in the right way. Work done for the sake of success will be the
least successful,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and learning pursued without devotion will be the least conducive to
progress. Only the love of work, and not of success, leads to progress.
And if in learning the student seeks straight thinking and sound
judgment, he need not stunt his devotion by doubts and suspicions.

We are not reduced to service subjection in listening to some
information with quiet devotion and because we do not at once oppose it
with our own opinion. Anyone having advanced some way in the attainment
of higher knowledge knows that he owes everything to quiet attention and
active reflection, and not to willful personal judgment. We should
always bear in mind that we do not need to learn what we are already
able to judge. Therefore if our sole intention is to judge, we can learn
nothing more. Esoteric training, however, center in learning; we must
have absolutely the good will to be learners. If we cannot understand
something, it is far better not to judge than to judge adversely. We can
wait until later for a true understanding. The higher we climb the
ladder of knowledge, the more do we require the faculty of listening
with quiet devotion. All perception of truth, all life and activity

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

in the world of the spirit, become subtle and delicate in comparison
with the processes of the ordinary intellect and of life in the physical
world. The more the sphere of our activity widens out before us, the
more delicate are the processes in which we are engaged. It is for this
reason that men arrive at such different opinions and points of view
regarding the higher regions. But there is one and only one opinion
regarding higher truths and this one opinion is within reach of all who,
through work and devotion, have so risen that they can really behold
truth and contemplate it. Opinions differing from the one true opinion
can only be arrived at when people, insufficiently prepared, judge in
accordance with their pet theories, their habitual ways of thought, and
so forth. Just as there is only one correct opinion concerning a
mathematical problem, so also is this true with regard to the higher
worlds. But before such an opinion can be reached, due preparation must
first be undergone. If this were only considered, the conditions
attached to esoteric training would be surprising to none. It is indeed
true that truth and the higher life abide in every soul, and that each
can and must find them

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

for himself But they lie deeply buried, and can only be brought up from
their deep shafts after all obstacles have been cleared away. Only the
experienced can advise how this may be done. Such advice is found in
spiritual science. No truth is forced on anyone; no dogma is proclaimed;
a way only is pointed out. It is true that everyone could find this way
unaided, but only perhaps after many incarnations. By esoteric training
this way is shortened. We thus reach more quickly a point from which we
can cooperate in those worlds where the salvation and evolution of man
are furthered by spiritual work.

This brings to an end the indications to be given in connection with the
attainment of knowledge of higher worlds. In the following chapter, and
in further connection with the above, it will be shown how this
development affects the higher elements of the human organism (the
soul-organism or astral body, and the spirit or thought-body.) In this
way the indications here given will be placed in a new light, and it
will be possible to penetrate them in a deeper sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Some Results of Initiation](khw09)
