[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](khw13)  [Next](khw15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE508/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Knowledge of the Higher Worlds and Its Attainment*, by Rudolf Steiner,
\[1947\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

### X

### *LIFE AND DEATH: THE GREATER GUARDIAN OF THE THRESHOLD*

IT HAS been described in the foregoing chapter how significant for the
human being is his meeting with the so-called lesser Guardian of the
Threshold by virtue of the fact that he becomes aware of confronting a
supersensible being whom he has himself brought into existence, and
whose body consists of the hitherto invisible results of the student's
own actions, feelings, and thoughts. These unseen forces have become the
cause of his destiny and his character, and he realizes how he himself
founded the present in the past. He can understand why his inner self,
now standing to a certain extent revealed before him, includes
particular inclinations and habits, and he can also recognize the origin
of certain blows of fate that have befallen him. He perceives why he

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

loves one thing and hates another; why one thing makes him happy and
another unhappy. Visible life is explained by the invisible causes. The
essential facts of life, too—health and illness, birth and death—unveil
themselves before his gaze. He observes how before his birth he wove the
causes which necessarily led to his return into life. Henceforth he
knows that being within himself which is fashioned with all its
imperfections in the visible world, and which can only be brought to its
final perfection in this same visible world. For in no other world is an
opportunity given to build up and complete this being. Moreover, he
recognizes that death cannot sever him forever from this world; for he
says to himself: “Once I came into this world because, being what I was,
I needed the life it provided to acquire qualities unattainable in any
other world. And I must remain bound to this world until I have
developed within myself everything that can here be gained. I shall some
day become a useful collaborator in another world only by acquiring all
the requisite faculties in this physical world.”

Thanks to his insight into the supersensible world, the initiate gains a
better knowledge and

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

appreciation of the true value of visible nature than was possible
before his higher training; and this may be counted among his most
important experiences. Anyone not possessing this insight and perhaps
therefore imagining the supersensible regions to be infinitely more
valuable, is likely to underestimate the physical world. Yet the
possessor of this insight knows that without experience in visible
reality he would be totally powerless in that other invisible reality.
Before he can live in the latter he must have the requisite faculties
and instruments which can only be acquired in the visible world.
Consciousness in the invisible world is not possible without spiritual
sight, but this power of vision in the higher world is gradually
developed through experience in the lower. No one can be born in the
spiritual world with spiritual eyes without having first developed them
in the physical world, any more than a child could be born with physical
eyes, had they not already been formed within the mother's womb.

From this standpoint it will also be readily understood why the
Threshold to the supersensible world is watched over by a Guardian. In
no case may real insight into those regions be permitted

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

to anyone lacking the requisite faculties; therefore, when at the hour
of death anyone enters the other world while still incompetent to work
in it, the higher experiences are shrouded from him until he is fit to
behold them.

When the student enters the supersensible world, life acquires quite a
new meaning for him; he discerns in the physical world the seed-ground
of a higher world, so that in a certain sense the higher will appear
defective without the lower. Two outlooks are opened before him; the
first into the past and the second into the future. His vision extends
to a past in which this physical world was not yet existent; for he has
long since discarded the prejudice that the supersensible world was
developed out of the sense-world. He knows that the former existed
first, and that out of it everything physical was evolved. He sees that
he himself belonged to a supersensible world before coming for the first
time into this sense-world. But this pristine supersensible world needed
to pass through the sense-world, for without this passage its further
evolution would not have been possible. It can only pursue its course
when certain things will have developed requisite

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

faculties within the realm of the senses. These beings are none other
than human beings. They owe their present life to an imperfect stage of
spiritual existence and are being led, even within this stage, to that
perfection which will make them fit for further work in the higher
world. At this point the outlook is directed into the future. A higher
stage of the supersensible world is discerned which will contain the
fruits matured in the sense-world. The sense-world as such will be
overcome, but its results will be embodied in a higher world.

The existence of disease and death in the sense-world is thus explained.
Death merely expresses the fact that the original supersensible world
reached a point beyond which it could not progress by itself. Universal
death must needs have overtaken it, had it not received a fresh
life-impulse. Thus this new life has evolved into a battle with
universal death. From the remnants of a dying, rigid world there
sprouted the seeds of a new one. That is why we have death and life in
the world. The decaying portion of the old world adheres to the new life
blossoming from it, and the process of evolution moves slowly. This
comes to

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

expression most clearly in man himself. The sheath he bears is gathered
from the preserved remnants of the old world, and within this sheath the
germ of that being is matured which will live in the future.

Thus man is twofold: mortal and immortal. The mortal is in its last, the
immortal in its first stage. But it is only within this twofold world,
which finds its expression in the sense-world, that he can acquire the
requisite faculties to lead the world to immortality. Indeed, this task
is precisely to gather the fruits of the mortal for the immortal. And as
he glances at himself as the result of his own work in the past he
cannot but say: “I have in me the elements of a decaying world. They are
at work in me, and I can only break their power little by little, thanks
to the new immortal elements coming to life within me.” This is the path
leading man from death to life. Could he but speak to himself with full
consciousness at the hour of his death, he would say: “The perishing
world was my task-master. I am now dying as the result of the entire
past in which I am enmeshed. Yet the soil of mortal life has matured the
seeds of immortal life. I carry them with me into another world.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> If it had merely
depended on the past, I could never have been born. The life of the past
came to an end with birth. Life in the sense-world is wrested from
universal death by the newly formed life-germ. The time between birth
and death is merely an expression for the sum of values wrested from the
dying past by the new life; and illness is nothing but the continued
effect of the dying portions of the past.”

In the above the answer will be found to the question why man works his
way only gradually through error and imperfection to the good and true.
His actions, feelings, and thoughts are at first dominated by the
perishing and the mortal. The latter gave rise to his sense-organs. For
this reason, these organs and all things activating them are doomed to
perish The imperishable will not be found in the instincts, impulses,
and passions, or in the organs belonging to them, but only in the work
produced by these organs. Man must extract from the perishable
everything that can be extracted, and this work alone will enable him to
discard the background out of which he has grown, and which finds its
expression in the physical sense-world.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

Thus the first Guardian confronts man as the counterpart of his two-fold
nature in which perishable and imperishable are blended; and it stands
clearly proved how far removed he still is from attaining that sublime
luminous figure which may again dwell in the pure, spiritual world. The
extent to which he is entangled in the physical sense-world is exposed
to the student's view. The presence of instincts, impulses, desires,
egotistical wishes and all forms of selfishness, and so forth, expresses
itself in this entanglement, as it does further in his membership in a
race, a nation, and so forth; for peoples and races are but steps
leading to pure humanity. A race or a nation stands so much the higher,
the more perfectly its members express the pure, ideal human type, the
further they have worked their way from the physical and perishable to
the supersensible and imperishable. The evolution of man through the
incarnations in ever higher national and racial forms is thus a process
of liberation. Man must finally appear in harmonious perfection. In a
similar way, the pilgrimage through ever purer forms of morality and
religion is a perfecting process;

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

for every moral stage retains the passion for the perishable beside the
seeds of an ideal future.

Now in the Guardian of the Threshold as described above, the product of
the past is manifest, containing only so many seeds of the future as
could be planted in the course of time. Yet everything that can be
extracted from the sense-world must be carried into the supersensible
world. Were man to bring with him only what had been woven into his
counterpart out of the past, his earthly task would remain but partially
accomplished. For this reason the lesser Guardian of the Threshold is
joined, after a time, by the greater Guardian. The meeting with the
second Guardian will again be described in narrative form.

When the student has recognized all the elements from which he must
liberate himself, his way is barred by a sublime luminous being whose
beauty is difficult to describe in the words of human language. This
encounter takes place when the sundering of the organs of thinking,
feeling, and willing extends to the physical body, so that their
reciprocal connection is no longer regulated by themselves but by the
higher consciousness, which

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

has now entirely liberated itself from physical conditions. The organs
of thinking, feeling and willing will then be controlled from
supersensible regions as instruments in the power of the human soul. The
latter, thus liberated from all physical bonds, is now confronted by the
second Guardian of the Threshold who speaks as follows:

“Thou hast released thyself from the world of the senses. Thou hast won
the right to become a citizen of the supersensible world, whence thine
activity can now be directed. For thine own sake, thou dost no longer
require thy physical body in its present form. If thine intention were
merely to acquire the faculties necessary for life in the supersensible
world, thou needest no longer return to the sense-world. But now behold
me. See how sublimely I tower above all that thou hast made of thyself
thus far. Thou hast attained thy present degree of perfection thanks to
the faculties thou wert able to develop in the sense-world as long as
thou wert still confined to it. But now a new era is to begin, in which
thy liberated powers must be applied to further work in the world of the
senses. Hitherto thou hast sought only thine own release, but now,
having thyself become free, thou canst go

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

forth as a liberator of thy fellows. Until today thou hast striven as an
individual, but now seek to coordinate thyself with the whole, so that
thou mayst bring into the supersensible world not thyself alone, but all
things else existing in the world of the senses. Thou wilt some day be
able to unite with me, but I cannot be blessed so long as others remain
unredeemed. As a separate freed being, thou wouldst fain enter at once
the kingdom of the supersensible; yet thou wouldst be forced to look
down on the still unredeemed beings in the physical world, having
sundered thy destiny from theirs, although thou and they are inseparably
united. Ye all did perforce descend into the sense-world to gather
powers needed for a higher world. To separate thyself from thy fellows
would mean to abuse those very powers which thou couldst not have
developed save in their company. Thou couldst not have descended had
they not done so; and without them the powers needed for supersensible
existence would fail thee. Thou must now share with thy fellows the
powers which, together with them, thou didst acquire. I shall therefore
bar thine entry into the higher regions of the supersensible world so
long as thou hast not applied

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

all the powers thou hast acquired to the liberation of thy companions.
With the powers already at thy disposal thou mayst sojourn in the lower
regions of the supersensible world; but I stand before the portal of the
higher regions as the Cherub with the fiery sword before Paradise, and I
bar thine entrance as long as powers unused in the sense-world still
remain in thee. And if thou dost refuse to apply thy powers in this
world, others will come who will not refuse; and a higher supersensible
world will receive all the fruits of the sense-world, while thou wilt
lose from under thy feet the very ground in which thou wert rooted. The
purified world will develop above and beyond thee, and thou shalt be
excluded from it. Thus thou wouldst tread the *black path*, while the
others from whom thou didst sever thyself tread the *white path*.”

With these words the greater Guardian makes his presence known soon
after the meeting with the first Guardian has taken place. The initiate
knows full well what is in store for him if he yields to the temptation
of a premature abode in the supersensible world. An indescribable
splendor shines forth from the second Guardian of the

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Threshold; union
with him looms as a far distant ideal before the soul's vision. Yet
there is also the certitude that this union will not be possible until
all the powers afforded by this world are applied to the task of its
liberation and redemption. By fulfilling the demands of the higher
light-being the initiate will contribute to the liberation of the human
race. He lays his gifts on the sacrificial altar of humanity. Should he
prefer his own premature elevation into the supersensible world, the
stream of human evolution will flow over and past him. After his
liberation he can gain no new powers from the world of the senses; and
if he places his work at the world's disposal it will entail his
renouncement of any further benefit for himself.

It does not follow that, when called upon to decide, anyone will
naturally follow the white path. That depends entirely upon whether he
is so far purified at the time of his decision that no trace of
self-seeking makes this prospect of felicity appear desirable. For the
allurements here are the strongest possible; whereas on the other side
no special allurements are evident. Here nothing appeals to his egotism.
The gift he receives in the higher regions of the supersensible world is

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

nothing that comes to him, but only something that flows from him, that
is, love for the world and for his fellows. Nothing that egotism desires
is denied upon the black path, for the latter provides, on the contrary,
for the complete gratification of egotism, and will not fail to attract
those desiring merely their own felicity, for it is indeed the
appropriate path for them. No one therefore should expect the occultists
of the white path to give him instruction for the development of his own
egotistical self. They do not take the slightest interest in the
felicity of the individual man. Each can attain that for himself, and it
is not the task of the white occultists to shorten the way; for they are
only concerned with the development and liberation of all human beings
and all creatures. Their instructions therefore deal only with the
development of powers for collaboration in this work. Thus they place
selfless devotion and self-sacrifice before all other qualities. They
never actually refuse anyone, for even the greatest egotist can purify
himself; but no one merely seeking an advantage for himself will ever
obtain assistance from the white occultists. Even when they do not
refuse their help, he, the seeker, deprives himself on the advantage

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

resulting from their assistance. Anyone, therefore, really following the
instructions of the good occultists will, upon crossing the Threshold,
understand the demands of the greater Guardian; anyone, however, not
following their instructions can never hope to reach the Threshold.
Their instructions, if followed, produce good results or no results; for
it is no part of their task to lead to egotistical felicity and a mere
existence in the supersensible worlds. In fact, it becomes their duty to
keep the student away from the supersensible world until he can enter it
with the will for selfless collaboration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](khw15)
