[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm12)  [Next](bcm14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

# CHAPTER III

## Composite Rituals

### § 1. The Key of Solomon the King.

BY far the most important class of Magical Rituals is that which
incorporates elements both of Black and White procedure-so called. For
convenience of treatment these are here termed composite. At the head of
all, and, within certain limits, the inspiration and the source of all,
stands the *Key of Solomon*, with its complement, in many respects more
important than itself, the *Lemegeton, or Lesser Key*, sometimes
attributed to Solomon Rabbi; the Rabbi and the monarch are, however, one
and the same-at least in respect of their office, which is the
pseudonymous production of impostures. The other Rituals which will be
treated in this class are the so-called *Fourth Book* of Cornelius
Agrippa and the *Magical Elements* ascribed to Peter of Abano. The
occult student--who is commonly led by fools, when not by impostors--has
been taught to regard these works as dealing exclusively with White
Magic, and it is part of the present design to indicate for the first
time the mixed character of their proceedings, even on the surface
thereof. The innumerable Rituals of Magic which remain in MS. and are
never likely to be printed, belong also, with few exceptions, to the
composite class, but, setting the *Lemegeton* aside, to which every
prominence should be given, they have had little influence, and being,
therefore, of no moment to the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

history of the occult sciences, will not demand further consideration
than has already been accorded some of them in the slight sketch at the
close of the first chapter.

Mr. Mathers' presentation of the *Key of Solomon*, <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) which is still in print, though the work
of an uncritical hand, must be held to remove the necessity for entering
into a detailed account of the Contents of that curious work. So far as
it has been incorporated by the later makers of Grimoires, it will be
found, with its Goëtic variations, in the Second Part. We have here only
to consider the question of its antiquity and to establish its true
character.

The *Key of Solomon* proper is familiar to scholars in Latin, French,
Italian and one or two German MSS. The oldest codex used by the English
editor is in contracted Latin, and belongs to the sixteenth century. It
is preserved in the British Museum. It is possible that older MSS. may
exist in Continental libraries, but those of the Bibliothèque Nationale
and of the Arsénal at Paris are of later date. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[2](#fn_30) The majority of known MSS. are in the
French language. It is, however, claimed that the work was written
originally in Hebrew. In this claim there is nothing essentially
improbable, but it has the disadvantage of being championed by the last
class of persons who hold titles for the expression of an opinion.
Assuming that it is well founded, it is not unlikely that the original
may

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

still exist. The large Hebrew literature of the Middle Ages has been
only imperfectly explored, especially in that part which connects with
practical Magic. The knavish methods which have ruled in the manufacture
of most magical books largely discount the probability with which I am
dealing, and the mere affirmation in a manuscript cannot, under these
circumstances, be regarded as evidence. No Hebrew scholar is acquainted
at the present day with such an original, and three hundred years back
the matter, according to P. Christian, was involved in precisely the
same uncertainty, for at the end of the sixteenth century the learned
Jesuit, Gretser, states that it was unknown, but that there was a Greek
translation in the library of the Duke of Bavaria. The present
whereabouts of this highly important MS. I have failed to trace, though
I must not presume that I have taken especial pains concerning it. In a
literature of this class, whether that is best which lies the nearest or
not, it is serviceable enough for the practical purpose. I do not
propose to be the historian of Magic, whether Black or White, or the
classifier of its MSS. All occultism is part of the path of descent, and
that which is especially Black may be in one sense the least harmful, as
we know where we are in its presence. I will therefore only add in
termination of this question that in the eighteenth century the Abbé
d'Artigny mentions various examples of the Key of Solomon in Latin, and
also an edition printed in 1655, which is not only unknown to Mr.
Mathers, but seemingly to all modern bibliographers. <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

Leaving the language of the original an open question, it is clear that,
in either case, there is no ground for attributing to the *Key of
Solomon* in its present form a higher antiquity than the fourteenth or
fifteenth century, at which time Hebrew literature was developing at a
rapid rate. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) If it were first written
in Latin, it is, at any rate, permeated with late Jewish ideas, and the
corrupt state of the Hebrew in the conjurations and talismans--which is
much the same, and that as bad as it can be, in all existing
copies--could scarcely have been attained in less than two centuries of
careless and ignorant transcription. We may therefore fix the date of
its manufacture, or otherwise of its translation, about the period which
has been mentioned.

The attribution of the work to Solomon is obvious enough; it could not
fail to have suggested itself to a compiler with Kabalistic leanings and
with a knowledge of Jewish tradition from the days of the Talmud onward.
Further, it is quite

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

consistent with a literature which has done nothing but ascribe falsely.
That it should be taken seriously by any well-equipped person at the
present day must, of course, be quite inscrutable, and in respect of the
English editor, those who feel concerned in the question may account for
it in one of two ways:--by a predisposition to accept statements on the
faith of occult tradition following upon a conviction as to the reality
of occult science, or, alternatively, by a knowledge derived from the
traditions of initiation. The first is regrettable because it is open to
abuse, which is stating the case in terms of unstrained mercy; the
second is not likely to exist, because it is injurious to the
intelligence of the King of Israel to suppose that he wrote the
Clavicle. I do not feel clear, however, that it would be beneath certain
storehouses of occult tradition to ratify the ascription or to make
archives to support it. In sum, it would be quite in accordance with the
mind of occult initiation to transmit a false tradition or to
manufacture it.

So far concerning the antiquity of the work and the sovereign
mystification of its authorship. It remains now to say something of its
character. The *Key of Solomon* can scarcely be judged accurately in the
light of its English version, for the translator, preternaturally
regarding it as a highly honourable memorial of lawful magic, has
excised as much as possible the Goëtic portions, on the ground that they
are later interpolations, which is of course arbitrary. He still
retains, however, what is generally stigmatised as one of the
distinctive marks of Black Magic; the ritual is permeated with the
bloody sacrifice, which Mr. Mathers rightly condemns, but has not seen
his way to reject. His version further includes various references to
the performance of works of hatred and destruction--that is, works
betraying an evil purpose, or a purpose directly connecting with Black
Magic. The chapter detailing

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the method of effecting such objects is omitted, but it is found in five
out of the seven codices upon which the version is based. Furthermore,
where the intention is not evil, it is frivolous, hyperbolical or
paramountly foolish. It is (*a*.) frivolous in such experiments as the
detection of stolen goods, by which it is placed on the same level as
the pedlar's literature of fortune-telling; it is (*b*.) hyperbolical
and fantastic in the experiment of invisibility, in the composition of
the Magic Garters and the Magic Staff; it is (*c*.) foolish in such
chapters as that on preventing a sportsman from killing any game.
Perhaps, however, these distinctions may be held to merge into one
another. M. Papus, the mouthpiece of the French occultists,
distinguishes between the Keys of Solomon and the impostures of
*colportage*; but in what respect, it may be asked, are these processes
superior to the chapbooks of *colporteurs*?

The highest ambition of the Clavicles is identical with that of the
Grimoires--to become master of a treasure possessed by spirits. It
should also be observed that experiments which have for their object an
interference with the freewill of another person, such as that of
seeking favour and love, are essentially evil experiments.

I have now enumerated all the processes which are set forth in this
"fountainhead and storehouse of Kabalistical Magic"; it is for such
trumpery purposes that the Magus is directed to undertake his laborious
preparation, and for such also to put in motion the powers believed to
be inherent in Divine Names, in long pages of pretentious prayers and in
"stronger and more powerful" conjurations. However much the justice of
the critic may be tempered by the mercy of the familiar explorer towards
a memorial of occult science which has been unduly honoured--that is,
honoured otherwise than as a literary curiosity--it must be concluded
that the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Key of Solomon* is a grotesque combination of
the pompous and ridiculous; it is, in fact, the old story of the
mountain and the mouse, but so great is the travail that, in this case,
the mouse is brought forth dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[59:1](bcm13.htm#fr_29) "The Key of Solomon the
King (*Clavicula Salomonis*), now first translated. and edited from
ancient MSS. in the British Museum." By S. Liddell Macgregor Mathers.
With plates. George Redway. 1889. It has been reprinted of recent years.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[59:2](bcm13.htm#fr_30) As regards the Arsénal,
they are all of the eighteenth century. *Les Clavicules de Rabbi
Salomon*, 2346 (72 S.A.F.), claims to be literally translated from the
Hebrew text into French. 2348 (75 S.A.F.) is entitled *Livre de la
Clavicule de Salomon, Roy des Hébreux*; it is said to have been
translated from the Hebrew into Italian by Abraham Colorno, and thence
into French. 2349 (77 S.A.F.) reads, *Les Vraies Clavicules du Roy
Salomon*, traduitte (*sic*) de l'Hébreux par Armadel. 2350 (78 S.A.F.)
is entitled *Le Secret des Secrets, autrement La Clavicule de Salomon,
ou le véritable Grimoire*. Finally, there is the *Livre Second de la
Clavicule de Salomon*, 2791 (76 S.A.F.).

<span id="fn_31"></span>[60:1](bcm13.htm#fr_31) Christian's reference
is, however, a mere travesty of some information found in the Nouveaux
Mémoires d'Histoire, do Critique, et de Littérature, par M. l'Abbé
d'Artigny, 7 vols., Paris, 1749-1756. The fourth article in the first
volume is entitled, "Concerning some pretended Books of Magic, with an
Extract from the Clavicles of Solomon." It enumerates three works which,
under this title, were current at the time in the French language, and a
fourth in Latin, *Clavicula Salomonis ad Filium Roboam*. A *Liber
Pentaculorum* is also mentioned in a way which leaves it to he inferred
that it is the Key of Solomon under another title, but it <span
id="page_61">p. 61</span> is probably the Latin version of the *Sepher
Rasiel*. Whether any of these works were printed does not explicitly
appear, and the Abbé, like Christian himself, knew very little of his
subject. It is he, however, who supplies the information concerning
Gretser, but it reads very differently. "Perhaps this (*Liber
Pentaculorum*) is the same as the treatise D*e Necromantia ad Filium
Roboam*, which Father Gretser, a learned German Jesuit, had seen written
in Greek in the library of the Duke of Bavaria." The collected works of
Gretser are in seventeen folio Volumes, and there are limits to
research. It may be affirmed, however, that the *Catalogus Codicum
Manuscriptorum Bibliothecæ Regiæ Bavariæ, auctore Ignatio Hardt, ejusdem
bibliothecæ supræfecto*, 5 vols., Monarchii, 1806, does not mention such
a work. The reference to the printed edition of the Clavicle occurs at
pp. 36, 37 of D'Artigny's article, and describes it as consisting of 125
pp. in quarto, without name of place or printer. The frontispiece (?
title) reads "Clavicle of Solomon," with a cross within a circle
beneath, and below this symbol is the date 1655. The whole work is
divided into twelve paragraphs, of which D'Artigny transcribes part of
No. 9, an Exorcism of the Spirits of the Air, which most certainly does
not occur in any known edition of the *Grand Clavicle*, and is
apparently adapted from the *Lemegeton*.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[61:1](bcm13.htm#fr_32) A bibliography of Papus
appended to his *Methodical Summary of the Kabalah* enumerates
forty-seven separate Kabalistic treatises which appeared in Hebrew
between the middle of the thirteenth and the close of the sixteenth
century. These are only the most noted, and extra Kabalistic literature
was far larger. I mention this source of reference for the benefit of
the occult student, as it may be ready to his hand. The *Magna
Bibliotheca Rabbinica* of Bartolocci, forming--with its supplement by
another hand--five volumes in folio, is the great and monumental
catalogue of literature in Jewry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2: The Lesser Key of Solomon](bcm14)
