[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm21)  [Next](bcm23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 3. The Grand Grimoire

The *Grand Grimoire* is the most fantastic of the cycle and is
introduced with great pomp by its pretended editor, Antonio Venitiana
del Rabina, a personage whose name indicates the Italian origin of the
work. By reason of its rarity and the great request in which it is, we
are informed that it must be regarded as the veritable *Magnum Opus*--a
view which may appear inconsequential, but for which the authority of
Rabbinical writers is cited. It is to these authors that we owe the
priceless treasure which innumerable charlatans have endeavoured to
counterfeit, but have never succeeded in discovering. The copy made use
of by Antonio in preparing his edition was transcribed from the genuine
writings of the mighty King Solomon, which were obtained by pure chance.
"Of

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

a truth, what other man, save this invincible genius, would have had the
hardihood to reveal the withering words which God makes use of to strike
terror into the rebellious angels and compel them into obedience? Having
soared into the celestial altitudes that he might master the secrets and
learn the omnipotent words which constitute all the power of a terrible
and venerable Deity, the essence of those innermost arcana, made use of
by an infinite Divinity, was extracted by this grand king, who passed
all the days of his life in the most laborious researches, and in
pursuit of the most obscure and hopeless secrets. He succeeded
ultimately in all his undertakings, penetrating into the most remote
haunts of spirits, whom he bound, one and all, and forced them to obey
him by the power of his Talisman or Clavicle. Therein he has discovered
unto us the stellar influences, the constellation of the planets and the
method for the evocation of all hierarchies of spirits by the recitation
of certain sublime Appellations, as they are hereafter set down for you
in this book, as well as the true composition and effects of the
dreadful Blasting Rod, which causes the spirits to tremble; which God
also used to arm his Angel when Adam and Eve were driven out of the
Earthly Paradise; wherewith, finally, he smote the rebellious Angels,
precipitating their ambitions into the most appalling gulfs by the power
of this very Rod-of this Rod which collects the clouds, disperses
tempests, averts the lightning, or precipitates each and all upon any
portion of the earth at the pleasure of its director."

Such is the preamble of the *Grand Grimoire*. The work is divided into
two parts, the first containing the evocation of Lucifuge <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) Rofocale by means of the Blasting Rod, the
second

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

being that which Antonio inscrutably regards as the *Sanctum Regnum*,
namely, the Rite of making Pacts; but one of the most notable
characteristics of all the Grimoires is not their diabolical malice, but
their unconscious ingenuousness, while the devout, almost laudable,
character of all the operations seems to have been held quite sincerely.

The *Grand Grimoire* is, however, regarded as one of the most atrocious
of its class; it has a process in Necromancy which is possible, say some
occult writers--in the geniality of a lucid interval--only to a
dangerous maniac or an irreclaimable criminal. It must be admitted that
the Rite is highly unreasonable, but in dealing with such literature it
seems unsafe to advance the objection, for it applies much too widely.
As to its criminality, this centres in the creation of a disturbance at
midnight Mass on Christmas Eve. There is further an account of a poison
entitled "The Composition of Death, or Philosophical Stone," which is
supposed to indicate an advanced degree of diabolism. Éliphas Lévi says
that it pretends to confer the Powder of Projection, the great Mystery
of the Sages, but it gives really the Powder of Consecution--as to the
significance of which a vague image can alone be invoked. It may, in any
case, be added that it cannot well be either, seeing that the
composition is a liquid. For the rest, it is simply a stupid recipe, and
as no unlawful application is suggested, it is not diabolical at all,
unless toxicology, as such, is Satanic, simply because it does not deal
in anodynes.

There is, of course, no question that the *Grand Grimoire* is a book of
Black Magic, and it is contrary to the nature of things that a book of
Black Magic should be otherwise than diabolical. The most objectionable
works are not those which openly announce that they are evil, but those
which teach evil under the pretence of excellence. The noticeable point,
as

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

regards the *Grand Grimoire*, the other works of its class and the White
Rituals, is that the diabolism of the confessedly diabolical is often so
exceedingly thin, while the angelical element in processes assumed to be
angelical borders so often and so perilously on the Satanic side. The
first part of the *Grand Grimoire*, like the *Grimorium Verum*, is
simply a process for the evocation of evil spirits to obtain the
enforced surrender of hidden treasure. In the second part the magician
is certainly expected to give himself, body and soul, to the demon who
serves him meanwhile, and there can be no hesitation in admitting that
this creates a sharp distinction, not only between the *Grand Grimoire*
and all the Composite Rituals, but also between the *Grand Grimoire* and
the other Liturgies of Black Magic. It is only a palliation to say that
the compact is worded as a subterfuge, and in reality gives nothing to
the demon, who here, as so frequently in folklore, is bamboozled,
receiving the shadow in place of the substance. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[101:1](bcm22.htm#fr_51) This alteration of the
fallen Light-Bearer into Fly-the-Light does not seem to occur in magical
literature preceding the *Grand Grimoire*. It was afterwards adopted by
Lévi, by whom it has been made popular among occultists, who are, for
the most part, quite unaware of its source, as they usually are in such
cases.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[103:1](bcm22.htm#fr_52) Compare the droll
history of the Devil and his Dam, and that concerning the course of
Black Magic delivered by the Prince of Darkness at the University of
Salamanca.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4: The Grimoire of Honorius](bcm23)
