[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm38)  [Next](bcm40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 3. Concerning Continence and Abstinence

The *Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy*, referred to Cornelius Agrippa,
but composite in character and spurious in attribution, as already seen,
gives an exceedingly curious explanation of the rule of sanctity
prescribed by all forms of Ceremonial Magic. The instruments used in the
Art are ineffective without consecration. The act of consecration is the
act by which virtue is imparted to them, and this virtue derives from
two sources, the power of sanctification residing in Divine Names and in
the prayers which incorporate them, and the power of sanctification
residing in the holiness of the person consecrating. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) An indispensable part of this holiness was
the preservation of chastity for a defined-but, it should be observed, a
limited-period preceding operation, and it was to be combined with a
fast of graduated severity. In their directions concerning these points
the Rituals of Black Magic differ little from their prototypes, the
earlier Keys of Solomon, the work of pseudo-Agrippa, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77) or *The Magical Elements* of Peter de
Abano. Here is the direction of the Neophyte which occurs in the

Grand

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Grimoire*: "You must abstain during an entire
quarter of the moon from the society of females, so as to protect
yourself from the possibility of impurity. You must commence your
magical quarter at the same moment with that of the luminary itself, by
a pledge to the Grand Adonai, who is the Master of all Spirits, to make
no more than two collations daily, that is to say, in every twenty-four
hours of the said quarter of the Moon, which collations should be taken
at noon and midnight, or, if it better please you, at seven o'clock in
the morning and at the corresponding hour in the evening, using the
following prayer previously to each repast during the whole of the said
quarter:--

PRAYER

I implore Thee, O Thou Grand and Powerful ADONAY*, Master of all
Spirits! I beseech Thee, O* ELOIM*! I implore Thee, O* JEHOVAH*! O
Grand* ADONAY*, I give unto Thee my soul, my heart, my inward parts, my
hands, my feet, my desires, my entire being! O Grand* ADONAY*, deign to
be favourable unto me! So be it. Amen*.

Then take your repast, disrobe as seldom and sleep as little as possible
during the whole of the said period, but meditate continually on your
undertaking, and centre all your hopes in the infinite goodness of the
Great Adonay. <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78)

The *Grimoire of Honorius*, which is intended exclusively for persons in
Holy Orders, restricts the period of fasting to three

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

days, as will be seen later on, and makes no condition of continence in
those who are devoted to celibacy. The *Grimorium Verum* prescribes a
similar period and adds that the fast should be most austere, that human
society and human communications must be avoided as much as possible,
but those of women especially. The *Book of True Black Magic* varies the
instruction as follows: <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) If the
Priest-Exorcist would succeed in operation, he must, when all things
else are prepared, abstain from every labour of soul and body, from much
eating and drinking, from all luxury, from all vice, and he must
meditate on those things which he is about to put in practice for nine
complete days before undertaking the work; his assistants--if any--must
do in like manner, so that all may be truly fulfilled. Let them begin by
the following prayer, which should be recited twice in the night and
once in the day.

PRAYER

O Lord God Almighty, be Thou favourable unto us, though unworthy to lift
our eyes to Heaven by reason of the multitude of our offences! O God
all-merciful, Who wiliest not the death of a sinner, but rather his true
conversion, bestow Thy grace on us! O Lord, O God, full of compassion,
aid us in this work which we are about to perform, that Thy Name may be
blessed for ever! Amen. <span id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80)

The concluding days of the fast should be additionally

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

strict, the meals being limited to bread and water, with abstinence from
all sin and repetition of the above prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[144:1](bcm39.htm#fr_76) Here the Fourth Book of
Occult Philosophy merely reproduces the instruction of the genuine work.
"Consecration is a lifting up of experiments, by which a spiritual soul,
being drawn by proportion and conformity, is infused into the matter of
out works according to the tradition of Magical Art rightly and lawfully
prepared, and our work is vivified by the spirit of understanding. The
efficacy of consecration is perfected by two things especially, viz.,
the virtue of the person himself consecrating and the virtue of the
prayer itself. In the person are required holiness of life and a power
to consecrate. The former, nature and desert perform, the latter is
acquired by imitation and dignification." Book III. c. 62. The virtue of
prayer derives from its institution by God, the ordinance of the Church,
or the commemoration which it may make of sacred things.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[144:2](bcm39.htm#fr_77) So also in the Third
Book *De Occulta Philosophia*, which is especially devoted to Ceremonial
Magic, the student is directed to abstain "from all those things which
infect either mind or spirit," and above all from idleness and luxury,
"for the soul being suffocated by the <span id="page_145">p. 145</span>
body and the lust thereof, can discern nothing that is celestial," c.
55. The fourth book merely says: "Let the man who would receive an
oracle from the good spirits be chaste, pure and confessed." Compare
Peter de Abano: "The operator should be clean and purified for the space
of nine days before beginning the work; he should be confessed also, and
should receive the Holy Communion."

<span id="fn_78"></span>[145:1](bcm39.htm#fr_78) *Grand Grimoire*, Book
I. c. 2.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[146:1](bcm39.htm#fr_79) An adaptation of the
*Key of Solomon*, Book II. c. 4.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[146:2](bcm39.htm#fr_80) The following is added
in the Clavicle, *loc. cit.*: O Lord God, Father Eternal! O Thou Who art
seated upon Cherubim and Seraphim, Who beholdest the earth and the sea!
Unto Thee do I lift up my hands, and beseech Thine aid alone--Thou Who
art the fulfilment of good works, Who givest rest unto those who toil,
Who humblest the proud, Who art Author of all life and Destroyer of
death. Our rest art Thou, Protector of those who call upon Thee; do Thou
guard and defend me in this undertaking, O Thou who livest and reignest
for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 4: Concerning the External Preparation of the Operator,
and firstly Concerning Ablution](bcm40)
