[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm42)  [Next](bcm44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

### § 2. A General Instruction concerning the Instruments required for the Art

Most Goëtic rituals specify with considerable minuteness the instruments
which are required for the operations, and in these respects, but with
variations peculiar to themselves, and distinguishing them also from one
another, they follow the authority of the *Key of Solomon*. Peter de
Abano tells us nothing concerning them, nor yet pseudo-Agrippa, with the
one exception of the sword, which, following a physical analogy, seems
to be universal in practical magic. In the Grimoires, however, though
sometimes the first weapon to be mentioned, its position is
comparatively insignificant, as the knife is a readier instrument.
Speaking generally, there is little in the literature to justify the
complex modern elaborations of Éliphas Lévi and of Christian.

Among the necessary properties mentioned by the Book of *True Black
Magic* are the sword, the staff, the rod, the lancet, the arctrave or
hook, the bolline or sickle, the needle, the poniard, a white-handled
knife and another knife, with a black handle, used to describe the
circle. The most important to make is that called the bolline; it must
be forged on the day and in the hour of Jupiter, selecting a small piece
of unused steel. Set it thrice in the fire and extinguish it in the
blood of a mole mixed with the juice of the pimpernel. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) Let this be done when the Moon is in her
full light and course. On the same day and in the hour of Jupiter, fit a
horn handle <span id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97) to the steel,

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

shaping it with a new sword forged thrice as above in the fire. When
made and perfected, recite over it this

PRAYER OR CONJURATION

I conjure thee, O form of this instrument, by the authority of God the
Father Almighty, by the virtue of Heaven and the stars, by the virtue of
the Angels, by that of the elements, by that of stones and herbs, and in
like manner by the virtue of snowstorms, thunder and winds, that thou
receive all power unto the performance of those things in the perfection
of which we are concerned, the whole without trickery, falsehood or
deception, by the command of God, Creator of the ages and Emperor of the
Angels. Amen.

The ensuing salutations must then be pronounced over the instrument:
*Domine, Deus meus, in te speravi; Confitebor tibi, Domine, in toto
corde meo: Quemadmodum desiderat cervus ad fontes aquarum*, <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) &c., adding the following words: DAMAHII,
LUMECH, GADAL, PANCIA, VELOAS, MEOROD, LAMIDOCH, BALDACH, ANERETHON,
MITATRON, *most holy angels, be ye wardens of this instrument, because I
shall make use of it for several necessary works*.

Place it in a new wrapper of red silk, making suffumigation with
odoriferous perfumes, as will be hereinafter set forth. Take care not to
perfect the instrument otherwise than on the day of Venus, and in the
hour thereof, when also the needle and other like instruments may be
prepared.

Subsequently, on the day of Venus, the Moon being in the sign of
Capricorn, or otherwise of the Virgin, <span
id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99) if the same be

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

possible, thou shalt make the first knife and shalt steep it in the
blood of the mole <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) and the juice of
the pimpernel. Let the Moon be in an acute time of course and light, the
operation beginning in the first hour of Venus and ending at the ninth
hour of the same day. Fit the knife with a handle of white wood cut at a
single stroke with a new sword or knife, and on this handle engrave the
following characters:--

 

<span id="img_15600"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15600.jpg)

 

Fumigate as before, and with this knife do all things needful to the
Art, the circle excepted. But if such a knife be too difficult to
manufacture, procure one of the same form ready made; steep it in the
blood and juice as above; fit thereto the same handle bearing the same
characters, and upon the blade, proceeding from point to handle, write
with a male goose-quill the words: AHARARAT, TÔ. Perfume as before,
sprinkle with exorcised water, and place in the silken wrapper already
mentioned. <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101)

That with the black handle, destined to describe the circle and
intimidate the spirits, and for performing other similar things, must be
made in every respect like the first, except as regards the day and
hour, which should be those of Saturn. The steel should be extinguished
in the blood of a cat <span id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102) and the
juice of hemlock, while the handle should be of sheep's horn. The

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span id="img_15700"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15700.jpg)  
PLATE VII: INSTRUMENTS OF BLACK MAGIC

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

poniard or stiletto and the lancet should be made after the same manner
on the day and in the hour of Mercury, and the steel extinguished in the
blood of a mole and the juice of the herb Mercury. They should be fitted
with horn handles, <span id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103) shaped with a
new sword in the day and hour of Mercury, and should bear these
characters upon the said handles.--

 

<span id="img_15900"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/15900.jpg)

 

Fumigate as before, and use in their proper place as required.

The *Grimorium Verum*, which makes for simplicity, reduces the steel
instruments to three--namely, knife, graver and lancet. The two first
should be made on the day and in the hour of Jupiter, with the waxing
Moon in the ascendant, which is at issue with the previous authority.
When finished, the following Prayer or Conjuration must, in each case,
be recited over them. The knife should be large enough to sever the neck
of a kid at one blow; it should be fitted with a haft of wood, made on
the same day and in the same hour, and graven with magical characters.
The instrument should then be sprinkled, fumigated and preserved for use
as required.

CONJURATION

I conjure thee, form of the instrument, N., by God the Father Almighty;
by the virtue of Heaven and by all the stars Which rule; by the virtue
of the four elements; by that of all stones, all plants and all animals
whatsoever; by the virtue of hailstorms and winds; to receive such
virtue herein that we may

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

obtain by thee the perfect issue of all our desires, which also we seek
to perform without evil, without deception, by God, the Creator of the
Sun and the Angels. Amen.

Recite the Seven \[Penitential\] Psalms, and add these words: DALMALEY,
LAMECK, CADAT, PANCIA, VELOUS, MERROE, LAMIDECK, CALDULECH, ANERETON,
MITRATON, *most pure Angels, be ye guardians of these instruments, which
are needful for many things*.

The lancet, which is mentioned but not described in the Book of *True
Black Magic*, should, according to the *Grimorium Verum*, be made in the
day and hour of Mercury, the Moon waxing, and should be conjured after
the same manner as the knife and graver. If assistants accompany the
operator, each must be provided with his knife, and the like rule
obtains concerning the Sword of the Art, which should be polished on the
day of Mercury, from the first to the third hour of the night. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) That designed for the Master or chief
operator should bear the words ELOHIM JITOR, <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) proceeding from point to hilt. For that
of the first disciple, write the name CARDIEL upon the handle, and upon
the blade REGION, proceeding from point to hilt. It should appear on
both sides transversely, but add on the one PANORAIM ✠, and on the other
HEOMESIM ✠. On the sword of the second disciple write URIEL, SARAION,
GAMERIN ✠, DEBALIIN, in the manner before described. On that of the
third disciple write DANIEL, IMETON, LAMEDIIN ✠, ERADIN, and fit the
same with a handle of white bone. <span id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106)

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

The following Conjuration must be recited secretly over the swords:--*I
conjure you, O sword, by the three Holy Names,* ALBROT, ABRACADABRA,
JEOVA! *Be thou my fortress and defence against all enemies, visible and
invisible, in every magical work. By the Holy Name* SADAY*, which is
great in power, and by these other names,* CADOS, CADOS, CADOS, ADONAY,
ELOY, ZENA, OTH, OCHIMANUEL*, the First and the Last, Wisdom, Way, Life,
Virtue, Chief, Mouth, Speech, Splendour, Light, Sun, Fountain, Glory,
Mountain, Vine, Gate, Stone, Staff, Priest, Immortal,* MESSIAH*, Sword,
do thou rule in all my affairs and prevail in those things which oppose
me. Amen*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[154:1](bcm43.htm#fr_96) Or, according to the
*Key of Solomon*, in the day and hour of Mercury, and substituting the
blood of the magpie and the juice of the herb Mercury, the French
*Foirole*, from which a so-called Elixir of Long Life was formerly made.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[154:2](bcm43.htm#fr_97) The Key of Salomon
substitutes white boxwood; it omits the planetary influence, leaving it
to be inferred that it should be done in the hour that the steel is;
forged, which must also be sunrise.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[155:1](bcm43.htm#fr_98) Psalms vii., cx., and
xli., according to the computation of the Vulgate.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[155:2](bcm43.htm#fr_99) According to the *Key
of Solomon*, it should be on the day and in the hour of Mercury, when
Mars is in Aries or Scorpio.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[156:1](bcm43.htm#fr_100) Of a gosling, says
the Clavicle.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[156:2](bcm43.htm#fr_101) It should be
understood that wherever the use of animal blood is prescribed I have
made an alteration at some hypothetically essential point, and now give
notice, generally and especially, to this effect. The course taken does
not mean that I believe in the efficacy of these foolish processes, but
that knavish persons may be dissuaded from trying them. It is out of
respect to the animals and not consideration to them.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[156:3](bcm43.htm#fr_102) Of a black cat, says
the Clavicle, and the weapon when finished should be wrapped in a cloth
of black silk, which, however, contradicts Book ii. c. 20, of the same
work.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[159:1](bcm43.htm#fr_103) White boxwood is
prescribed by the *Key of Solomon*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[160:1](bcm43.htm#fr_104) The first or the
fifteenth hour is the reading of the *Key*, but there is more reason in
the longer period, having regard to the nature of the operation.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[160:2](bcm43.htm#fr_105) *i.e.*, *Elohim
Gibor*. The *Key of Solomon* prescribes other Divine Names for the Sword
of the Master.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[160:3](bcm43.htm#fr_106) These instructions
are terribly confused. Compare the English version of the *Key of
Solomon*, wherein the passage is thus amended:--"The first sword should
have on the pommel the name *Cardiel* or *Gabriel*; on the Lamen of the
Guard, *Region*; on the Blade, *Panoraim Heamesin*. The second should
have on the pommel the name *Auriel*; on the Lamen of the <span
id="page_161">p. 161</span> Guard, *Sarion*; on the Blade, *Gamorin
Debalin*. The third sword should have on the pommel the name *Damiel* or
*Raphael*; on the Lamen of the Guard, *Yemeton*; on the Blade, *Lamedin
Eradim*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3: Concerning the Rod and Staff of the Art](bcm44)
