[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm62)  [Next](bcm64) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

# CHAPTER VI

## The Mysteries of Infernal Evocation according to the Grand Grimoire

### § 1. The Rite of Lucifuge

THE *Grand Grimoire* divides with the *Grimoire of Honorius* the
darksome honour of an intelligible and unmutilated Ritual of Black
Magic. Each after its own kind is indeed an exceedingly curious work. In
the first is contained what is probably the only printed method of
making pacts; the second is remarkable, firstly, on account of its
pretended origin and the elaboration with which it is set forth,
secondly, for the ecclesiastical complexion of its process, which can
scarcely have failed to impose upon some credulous and priestly
sorcerers of the illiterate kind, and assuming their willingness to
disgrace the vows of ordination. Both require, in a study of the present
kind, to be printed almost in extenso, and, setting aside their
preliminary portions, already adequately dealt with, they are given
practically verbatim in the chapters which here follow.

It will be remembered that the operator, or Karcist, as he is termed in
the *Grand Grimoire*, is recommended continence, fasting and similar
privations for an entire quarter of the moon, such quarter coinciding
with that of the luminary. On the morning which succeeds the first night
of the quarter, he must repair to a druggist's, and purchase a
blood-stone, called

Ematille

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (*id est, Hæmatites*), which must be carried
continually about him for fear of accident, and in expectation that the
spirit whom it is proposed to compel and bind will henceforth do all in
his power to overwhelm the operator with terror, so as to incite him to
abandon the enterprise, hoping in this manner to escape from the wiles
which are beginning, to be woven about him.

The next operation is the purchase of a virgin kid, which must be
decapitated on the third day of the moon. Previously to the sacrifice, a
garland of vervain must be wound about the neck of the animal,
immediately below the head, and secured by means of a green ribbon. The
sacrifice must be offered on the scene of the coming evocation, a
forlorn and isolated spot free from all interruption. There, with the
right arm bared to the shoulder, having armed himself with a blade of
fine steel, and having kindled a fire of white wood, the Karcist shall
recite the following words in a hopeful and animated manner:--

INITIAL OFFERING

I immolate this victim to Thee., O grand ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL *and*
JEHOVAM*, to the honour, glory and Power of Thy Name, which is superior
to all Spirits. O grand* ADONAY *I Vouchsafe to receive it as an
acceptable offering. Amen*.

Here he must cut the throat of the kid, skin it, set the body on the
fire and reduce it to ashes, which must be collected and cast towards
the rising of the sun, at the same time repeating the following
words:--*It is to the honour, glory and dominion of Thy Name, O grand*
ADONAY, ELOIM. ARIEL, JEHOVAM*, that I spill the blood of this victim!
Vouchsafe, O Thou grand* ADONAY*, to receive its ashes as an acceptable
sacrifice*.

While the victim is being consumed by the flames, the

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

operator shall rejoice in the honour and glory of the grand ADONAY,
ELOIM, ARIEL and JEHOVAM, taking care to preserve the skin of the virgin
kid to form the round or grand Kabalistic circle, in which he must
himself stand on the day of the supreme enterprise.

The sacrifice of the victim is followed by the selection and composition
of the Blasting Rod, of which a description has been given. From the
purpose for which it is intended, and from the silence of the Grimoire,
it may be inferred that the preparation of the goatskin is exceedingly
simple and does not involve the removal of the hair.

When the night of action has arrived, the operator shall gather up his
rod, goatskin, the stone called *Ematille*, and shall further provide
himself with two vervain crowns, two candlesticks and two candles of
virgin wax, made by a virgin girl and duly blessed. Let him take also a
new steel and two new flints, with sufficient tinder to kindle a fire,
likewise half a bottle of brandy, some blessed incense and camphor, and
four nails from the coffin of a dead child. All these must be carried to
the place chosen for the great work, where everything hereinafter laid
down must be scrupulously performed and the dread Kabalistic circle must
be described in an accurate manner. Lastly, it must be carefully borne
in mind that there should be either one or three taking part in the
ceremony, the Karcist included, who is the person appointed to address
the spirit, holding the Destroying Rod in his hand. The evoking process
may be given in the actual words of the Grimoire.

CONCERNING A TRUE REPRESENTATION OF THE GRAND KABALISTIC CIRCLE

You must begin by forming a circle with strips of kid's skin, fastened
to the ground by means of your four nails. Then with

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

the stone called *Ematille* you must trace the triangle within the
circle, beginning at the eastern point. A large A, a small E, a small A,
and a small J, must be drawn in like manner, as also the sacred name of
Jesus between two crosses. By this means the spirits will have no power
to harm you from behind The Karcist and his assistants may then
fearlessly proceed to

 

<span id="img_24400"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/24400.jpg)  
THE GRAND KABALISTIC CIRCLE

 

their places within the triangle, and, regardless of any noises, may set
the two candlesticks and the two vervain crowns on the right and left
sides of the triangle within the circle. This being done, the two
candles may be lighted, taking care that there is a new brazier in front
of the Karcist, piled with newly consecrated charcoal. This must be
kindled by the Karcist casting a small quantity of the brandy therein
and a part of the camphor, the rest being reserved to feed the fire
periodically, in proportion to the length of the business. Having
punctually performed all that is mentioned above, the chief operator may

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

repeat the following prayer:--*I Present Thee, O great* ADONAY*, this
incense as the purest I can obtain; in like manner, I present Thee this
charcoal prepared from the most ethereal of woods. I offer them, O grand
and omnipotent* ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL *and* JEHOVAM*, With my whole soul
and my whole heart. Vouchsafe, O great* ADONAY*, to receive them as an
acceptable holocaust. Amen*.

 

<span id="img_24500"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/24500.jpg)  
THE GREAT CIRCLE OF WHITE MAGIC

 

You should also be careful, says the Grimoire, to have no alloyed metal
about your person, except a gold or silver coin wrapped in paper, which
you must fling to the spirit when he appears outside the circle, so as
to prevent him from harming you. While he is picking up the coin, begin
promptly the following prayer, fortifying yourself with courage, energy
and prudence. Be, also, especially careful that the Karcist is the sole
speaker; the assistants must preserve a determined silence, even if they
are questioned or menaced by the spirit.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

FIRST PRAYER

O great and living God, subsisting in one and the same person, the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost; I adore Thee with the deepest
veneration., and I submit with the liveliest confidence to Thy holy and
sufficient Protection. I believe with the most sincere faith that Thou
art my Creator, my Benefactor, my Preserver and my Lord, and I testify
to Thy sovereign Majesty that my sole desire is to belong to Thee
through the whole of eternity. So be it. Amen.

SECOND PRAYER

O great and living God, Who hast created man to enjoy felicity in this
life, Who hast adapted all things for his necessities, and didst declare
that everything should be made subject to his will, be favourable to
this my design, and permit not the rebellious spirits to be in
Possession of those treasures which were formed by Thine own hands for
our temporal requirements. Grant me, O great God, the power to dispose
of them by the potent and terrific names in Thy Clavicle: ADONAY, ELOIM,
ARIEL, JEHOVAM, TAGLA, MATHON*, be ye propitious unto me. So be it.
Amen*.

OFFERTORY

I offer Thee this incense as the purest which I have been able to
obtain, O sublime ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL *and* JEHOVAM*; vouchsafe to
receive it as an acceptable holocaust. Incline to me in Thy Power, and
enable me to succeed in this great enterprise. So be it. Amen*.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

FIRST CONJURATION

Addressed to the Emperor Lucifer

Emperor Lucifer, Master and Prince of Rebellious Spirits, I adjure thee
to leave thine abode, in whatsoever quarter of the world it may be
situated, and come hither to communicate with me. I command and I
conjure thee in the Name of the Mighty living God, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, to appear without noise and without any evil smell, to respond in
a clear and intelligible voice, point by Point, to all that I shall ask
thee, failing which, thou shall be most surely compelled to obedience by
the Power of the divine ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL, JEHOVAM, TAGLA, MATHON*,
and by the whole hierarchy of superior intelligences, who shall
constrain thee against thy will.* Venité, Venité! Submiritillor
Lucifuge*, or eternal torment shall overwhelm thee, by the great Power
of this Blasting Rod.* In subito.

SECOND CONJURATION

I command and I adjure thee, Emperor Lucifer, as the representative of
the mighty living God, and by the power of Emanuel, His only Son, Who is
thy master and mine, and by the virtue of His precious blood, which He
shed to redeem mankind from thy chains, I command thee to quit thine
abode, wheresoever it may be, swearing that I will give thee one quarter
of an hour alone, if thou dost not straightway come hither and
communicate with me in an audible and intelligible voice, or, if thy
Personal presence be impossible, despatch me thy Messenger Astarôt in a
human form, without either noise or evil smell, failing which I will
smite thee and thy whole race with the terrible Blasting Rod into the
depth of the bottomless abysses, and that by the Power of those great
words in the Clavicle--By ADONAY,

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

ELOIM, ARIEL, JEHOVAM, TAGLA, MATHON, ALMOUZIN, ARIOS, PITHONA, MAGOTS,
SYLPHÆ, TABOTS, SALAMANDRÆ, GNOMUS, TERRÆ, CŒLIS, GODENS, AQUA. *In
subito*.

Notice.--Before uttering the third Conjuration, should the spirit refuse
to comply, read what follows in the Clavicle, and smite all the spirits
by plunging both the forked extremities of your rod into the flames. Be
not alarmed in so doing at the frightful howls which you may hear, for
at this extreme moment all the spirits will manifest. Then, before
reading the Clavicle, and in the midst of the commotion, recite the
third Conjuration.

THIRD CONJURATION

I adjure thee, Emperor Lucifer, as the agent of the strong living God,
of His beloved Son and of the Holy Ghost, and by the Power of the Great
ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL *and* JEHOVAM*, to appear instantly, or to send thy
Messenger Astarôt, forcing thee to forsake thy hiding-place, wheresoever
it may be, and warning thee that if thou dost not manifest this moment,
I will straightway smite thee and all thy race with the Blasting Rod of
the great* ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL *and* JEHOVAM

, &c.

At this point, should the spirit still fail to appear, plunge the two
ends of your rod a second time into the flames, and recite the following
potent words from the grand Clavicle of Solomon:--

GRAND CONJURATION

Extracted from the Veritable Clavicle

I adjure thee, O Spirit! by the Power of the grand ADONAY*, to appear
instanter, and by* ELOIM*, by* ARIEL*, by* JEHOVAM, *by* AQUA, TAGLA,
MATHON, OARIOS, ALMOAZIN, ARIOS, MEMBROT,

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

VARIOS, PITHONA, MAJODS, SULPHÆ, GABOTS, SALAMANDRÆ, TABOTS, GINGUA,
JANNA, ETITNAMUS, ZARIATNATMIX, &C. A. E. A. J. A. T. M. O. A. A. M. V.
P. M. S. C. S. J. C. G. A. J. F. Z. &c.

 

<span id="img_24900"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/24900.jpg)  
LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE

 

After a second repetition of these sublime and powerful words, you may
be sure--as the deposition affirms--that the spirit will respond after
the ensuing manner.

Of the Manifestation of the Spirit

Lo, I am here! What dost thou seek of me? Why dost thou disturb my
repose? Smite me no more with that dread rod!

LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

Reply to the Spirit

Hadst thou appeared when I first invoked thee, I had by no means smitten
thee; remember, if the request which I make thee be refused, I am
determined to torment thee eternally.

SOLOMON

The Spirit's Answer

Torment me no further. Say, rather, what thou dost require at my hands.

LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE

The Requisition

I require that thou shalt communicate two several times on each night of
the week, either with myself or with those who are entrusted with my
present Book, the which thou shalt approve and sign; I permit thee the
choice of those hours which may suit thee, if thou approvest not those
which I now enumerate. To wit:

On Monday at nine o'clock and at midnight.

On Tuesday at ten o'clock and at one in the morning.

On Wednesday at eleven o'clock and at two in the morning.

On Thursday at eight and ten o'clock.

On Friday at seven in the evening and at midnight.

On Saturday at nine in the evening and at eleven at night.

Further, I command thee to surrender me the nearest treasure, and I
promise thee as a reward the first Piece of gold or silver which I touch
with my hands on the first day of every month. Such is my demand.

SOLOMON

The Spirit's Reply

I cannot comply with thy request on such terms, nor on any

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

others, unless thou shalt give thyself over to me in fifty years, to do
with thy body and soul as I please.

LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE

Rejoinder to the Spirit

Lo, will I smite thee and thy whole race, by the might of great Adonay,
if, on the contrary, thou dost not comply with my request.

Notice.--Here plunge the points of the Blasting Rod into the fire and
repeat the Grand Conjuration of the Clavicle till the spirit surrenders
himself to your will.

Answer and Compliance of the Spirit

Smite me no further; I Pledge myself to do what thou desirest two
several times on every night of the week. To wit:

On Monday at ten o'clock and at midnight.

On Tuesday at eleven o'clock and at one in the morning.

On Wednesday at midnight and at two in the morning.

On Thursday at eight and at eleven o'clock.

On Friday at mine o'clock and at midnight.

On Saturday at ten o'clock and at one in the morning.

I also approve thy Book, and I give thee my true signature on parchment,
which thou shalt affix at its end, to make use of at thy need. Further,
I place myself at thy disposition, to appear before thee at thy call
when, being purified, and holding the dreadful Blasting Rod, thou shalt
open the Book, having described the Kabalistic circle and pronounced the
word Rofocale. I promise thee to have friendly commerce with those who
are fortified by the Possession of the said Book, where my true
signature stands, provided that they invoke me according to rule, on the
first occasion that they require me. I also engage to

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

deliver thee the treasure which thou seekest, on condition that thou
keepest the secret for ever inviolable, art charitable to the Poor and
dost give me a gold or silver coin on the first day of every month. If
thou failest, thou art mine everlastingly.

LUCIFUGE ROFOCALE

IMPRIMATUR

Reply to the Spirit

I agree to, thy conditions.

SOLOMON

INVITATION OF THE SPIRIT

Follow me, and come lay thy hands on the treasure.

Thereupon the Karcist, armed with the Blasting Rod and the stone called
*Ematille*, shall issue from the circle at that point where the door of
mighty Adonay is figured, and shall follow the spirit; the assistants,
however, shall not stir one step from the circle, but shall remain firm
and immovable within it, whatever reports they hear, whatever visions
they behold. The spirit shall then conduct the Karcist to the vicinity
of the treasure, when it may befall that the Karcist shall behold the
apparition of a large and fierce dog, with a collar as resplendent as
the sun. This will be a Gnome, which he can drive off by the point of
his rod, when the apparition will make off towards the treasure. The
Karcist must follow, and, on reaching the treasure, will be astonished
to discover the person who has hidden it, who also will endeavour to
grapple with him, but will be unable so much as to approach him. The
Karcist must be provided with a sheet of virgin parchment inscribed with
the grand conjuration of the Clavicle. This he must cast upon the
treasure, grasping one of its coins at the same

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

moment as a pledge and a surety, and previously flinging down a piece of
his own money bitten by his own teeth, after which he may retire,
walking backwards and carrying away what he can of the treasure. The
rest cannot escape him after the above precautions. He must, however,
take heed not to turn round, whatever noise he may hear, for at this
critical moment it will truly seem as if all the mountains in the world
were being precipitated upon him. He must for this cause be fortified
with special intrepidity, must take fright at nothing but keep perfectly
firm. So acting, he will be led back by the Spirit to the entrance of
the circle. Then shall the Karcist recite the following discharge of the
Spirit.

CONJURATION AND DISCHARGE OF THE SPIRIT

O Prince Lucifer, I am, for the time, contented with thee. I now leave
thee in peace, and permit thee to retire wheresoever it may seem good to
thee, so it be without noise and without leaving any evil smell behind
thee. Be mindful, however, of our engagement, for shouldst thou fail in
it, even for a moment, be assured that I shall eternally smite thee with
the Blasting Rod of the great ADONAY, ELOIM, ARIEL *and* JEHOVAM*.
Amen*.

ACT OF THANKSGIVING

O Omnipotent God, Who hast created all things for the service and
convenience of men, we return Thee most humble thanks for the benefits
which, in Thy great bounty, Thou hast poured out on us during this night
of Thine inestimable favours, wherein Thou hast granted us according to
our desires. Now, O Almighty God, have we realised all the scope of Thy
great promises, when Thou didst say to as. Seek and ye shall find, knock
and

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

it shall be opened unto you. And as Thou hast commanded and warned us to
succour the poor, we promise Thee, in the Presence of the great ADONAY,
ELM, ARIEL *and* JEHOVAM*, to be charitable and to pour out on them the
beneficent beams of the Sun with which those four Potent divinities have
enriched us. So be it. Amen*.

VALE

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2: Concerning the Genuine Sanctum Regnum, or the True
Method of Making Pacts](bcm64)
