[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm61)  [Next](bcm63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

# CHAPTER V

### Concerning the Mystery of the Sanctum Regnum, or the Government of Evil Spirits; being the Rite of Conjuration according to the Grimorium Verum

TH E preparations of the operator prescribed by the Grimorium Verum are
fully represented in the earlier chapters, but they may be summed here
as follows: 1. An austere fast of three days; 2. Retreat or isolation
from human society; 3. Abstinence from sexual intercourse; 4. The
recitation of certain prayers and the performance of certain ablutions;
5. The composition of the required instruments. He must further devote
himself to the invocations, lest memory fail him at the moment set apart
for the work, and to insure mastery of the practice. He should also
recite the following prayer daily <span
id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_247)--at Prime once, at Tierce twice, at Sext
three times, at Nones four times, at Vespers five times, and six times
before going to rest. It is explained that these hours are planetary and
unequal. <span id="fr_249"></span>[2](#fn_248) Prime is reckoned at the
rising of the sun, Tierce at three hours after, Sext at mid-day, Nones
at three in the afternoon and Vespers at sunset.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

PRAYER <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_249)

ASTRACHIOS, ASACH, ASARCA, ABEDUMABAL, SILAT, ANABOTAS, JESUBILIN,
SCIGIN, GENEON, DOMOL, Lord God, *Who dwellest above the heavens, Whose
glance searchest the abyss,. grant me, I pray Thee, the power to
conceive in my mind and to execute that which I desire to do, the end of
which I would attain by Thy help, O God Almighty, Who livest and
reignest for ever and ever. Amen*.

These things being done, says the Grimoire, it remains only to follow
the invocations and to compose the characters, to which end the operator
shall proceed as follows:--On the day and in the hour of Mars, the Moon
waxing, and at the first hour of the day, which begins automatically
fifteen minutes before the rising of the Sun, a piece of virgin
parchment must be prepared, containing all the characters and
invocations of the spirits on whom it is desired to call. On the day and
in the hour aforesaid let the operator bind the little finger of the
(left) hand, which is the finger of Mercury, with a thread woven by a
virgin girl; let him pierce that finger with the lancet of the Art, so
as to draw blood, and form therewith the character of *Scirlin*, from
whom all other spirits depend, since he is their messenger and can
compel them to appear despite themselves, because he has the power of
the Emperor to him deputed. His invocation, which must be written, is as
follows:--

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

THE INVOCATION OF SCIRLIN

HELON ✠, TAUL ✠, VARF ✠, PAN ✠, HEON ✠, HOMONOREUM ✠, CLEMIALH ✠,
SERUGEATH ✠, AGLA ✠, TETRAGRAMMATON ✠, CASOLY ✠.

With the confusion so common in the Grimoires, the character of
*Scirlin* is not given, whence the operator who followed the
instructions of this Ritual must have had recourse to one of the
superior spirits. The instructions, however, are not described *ad
clerum*, and it is scarcely possible to extract from them an
intelligible method of procedure. The name and surname of the operator
must apparently be written below the character of the spirit, following
a prescribed manner, which is also omitted; the conjuration of the
spirit must be added and incense burnt in his honour.

CONJURATION TO LUCIFER

LUCIFER ✠, OUYAR ✠, CHAMERON ✠, ALISEON ✠, MANDOUSIN ✠, PREMY ✠, ORIET
✠, NAYDRUS ✠, ESMONY ✠, EPARINESONT ✠, ESTIOT ✠, DUMOSSON ✠, DANOCHAR ✠,
CASMIEL ✠, HAYRAS ✠, FABELLERONTHON ✠, SODIRNO ✠, PEATHAM ✠, *Come* ✠,
LUCIFER ✠. AMEN.

CONJURATION FOR BEELZEBUTH

BEELZEBUTH ✠, LUCIFER ✠, MADILON ✠, SOLYMO ✠, SAROY ✠, THEU ✠, AMECLO ✠,
SEGRAEL ✠, PRAREDUN ✠, ADRICANOROM ✠, MARTIRO ✠, TIMO ✠, CAMERON ✠,
PHORSY ✠, METOSITE ✠, PRUMOSY ✠, DUMASO ✠, ELIVISA ✠, ALPHROIS ✠,
FUBENTRONTY ✠, *Come*, BEELZEBUTH ✠. AMEN.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

CONJURATION FOR ASTAROTH

ASTAROTH ✠, ADOR ✠, CAMESO ✠, VALUERITUF ✠, MARESO ✠, LODIR ✠, CADOMIR
✠, ALUIEL ✠, CALNISO ✠, TELY ✠, PLEORIM ✠, VIORDY ✠, CUREVIORBAS ✠,
CAMERON ✠, VESTURIEL ✠, VULNAVII ✠, BENEZ ✠, MEUS CALMIRON ✠, NOARD ✠,
NISA CHENIBRANBO CALEVODIUM ✠, BRAZO ✠, TABRASOL ✠, *Come* ✠, ASTAROTH
✠. AMEN.

Having repeated seven times the conjuration addressed to one of these
superior spirits, the same will forthwith manifest to perform whatsoever
shall be desired. NOTE.--Such conjuration must have been written on
virgin paper or parchment before invoking the spirits. These, having
been satisfied, may be dismissed by using the following

DISCHARGE

Go in peace unto your places; may peace be with you, and be ye ready to
come whensoever I shall call upon you, In the Name of the Father ✠ and
of the Son ✠ and of the Holy Ghost ✠. Amen.

CONJURATION FOR INFERIOR SPIRITS

O SURMY ✠, DELMUSAN ✠, ATALSLOYM ✠, CHARUSIHOA ✠, MELANY ✠, LIAMINTHO ✠,
COLEHON ✠, PARON ✠, MADOIN ✠, MERLOY ✠, BULERATOR ✠, DONMEO ✠, HONE ✠,
PELOYM ✠, IBASIL ✠, MEON ✠, ALYMDRICTELS ✠, PERSON ✠, CRISOLSAY ✠, LEMON
SEFLE NIDAR HORIEL PEUNT ✠, HALMON ✠, ASOPHIEL ✠, ILNOSTREON ✠, BANIEL
✠, VERMIAS ✠, ESLEVOR ✠, NOELMA ✠, DORSAMOT ✠, LHAVALA ✠, OMOT ✠,
FRANGAM ✠, BELDOR ✠, DRAGIN ✠, *Come* ✠.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

The name of the required spirit must here be added on the parchment,
when he will duly appear-the ordinary accidents excepted--and will grant
what is desired of him--that is to say, if it so happen--after which he
may be dismissed by the previous Discharge.

The characters should be burnt in each case, as they avail once only.

ANOTHER CONJURATION

I conjure thee, N., by the great living God, the Sovereign Creator of
all things, to appear under a comely human form, without noise and
without terror, to answer truly unto all questions that I shall ask
thee. Hereunto I conjure thee by the virtue of these Holy and Sacred
Names.

 

<span id="img_24000"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/24000.jpg)  
THE IMP STATUE. LINCOLN.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_247"></span>[236:1](bcm62.htm#fr_248) This portion of the
process offers some analogy with the Key of Solomon, Book ii. c. 2.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[236:2](bcm62.htm#fr_249) *i.e.*, they are
governed by the times of sunrise and sunset. Sext and Nones would not,
however, be variable.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[237:1](bcm62.htm#fr_250) This prayer is
similar to that in the *Key of Solomon*, Book ii. c. 2, with the
exception of the names which are much mutilated in the Grimoire; these
should read:--*Herachio, Asac, Asacro, Bedrimulael, Tilath, Arabonas,
Ierahlem, Ideodoc, Archarzel, Zophiel, Blautel, Baracata, Edoniel,
Elohim, Emagro, Abragateh, Samoel, Geburahel, Onurberah, Cadato, Era,
Elohi, Achsah, Ebmisha, Imachedel, Daniel, Dama, Elamos, Izachel, Bael,
Segon, Gemon, Demas*. But the majority of these are unintelligible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 1: The Rite of Lucifuge](bcm63)
