[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm60)  [Next](bcm62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 2. Concerning the Rite of Conjuration, from the Lemegeton

In communicating with the seventy-two spirits, the age of the Moon
should be observed, for it is affirmed on the authority of Solomon that
all days are profitable save the second, fourth, sixth, ninth, tenth,
twelfth or fourteenth of that luminary.

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

The seals must be made of metals; those of the chief kings should be of
gold; marquises, of silver; dukes, of copper; prelates, of tin or
silver; knights, of lead; presidents, of fixed quicksilver; <span
id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_243) and earls, of silver and copper in equal
parts. The entire cohort is governed by AMAYMON, King of the

<span id="img_22100"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/22100.jpg)  
THE DOUBLE SEAL OF SOLOMON

East; CORSON, King of the West; ZIMINAR, King of the North; and GAAP,
King of the South. These may be bound from 9 A.M. till noon, but, except
on occasions of great importance, should not be invoked themselves, as
they act commonly by their inferiors. Marquises may be bound from 3 to 9
P.M. and from sunset to sunrise; dukes from sunrise till noon, in

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

clear weather; prelates in any hour of the day; knights only from dawn
till sunrise, or from 4 P.M. till sunset; presidents in any daylight
hour up to the evening twilight; counts and earls in any hour of the
day, but it must be in the woods and forests, or in a place that is free
from noise and far from the resort of

<span id="img_22200"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/22200.jpg)  
THE PENTAGRAM OF SOLOMON

men. The ceremonial circle must be drawn towards that side to which the
spirit who is to be called is attributed. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_244) The triangle into which Solomon summoned
the rebellious demons must be made two feet outside this circle and
three feet over it. The double seal and pentagram of Solomon must be
drawn on a parchment of calf-skin, or otherwise on gold or silver,

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

 

<span id="img_22300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/22300.jpg)  
THE MAGICAL CIRCLE

 

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

and should be worn upon the white vestment of the operator, together
with the seal of the spirit, which must be exhibited on his
appearance--to compel obedience and assumption of the human form. In
addition to these characters, the secret seal of Solomon must be drawn
with the blood of a black cock that has never engendered, on virgin
parchment, the operator himself being clean within and without, having
abstained from sexual intercourse for the space of one month and having

 

<span id="img_22500"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/22500.jpg)  
MAGICAL SWORDS AND WAND

 

obtained pardon for his sins by means of fasting and prayer. <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_245) It is to be composed on a Tuesday or
Saturday at midnight, with the Moon increasing in Virgo, and with
burning of perfumes of aloes, resin, cedar and alum.

The other directions correspond broadly to those prescribed in the
second chapter. There is the rod or sceptre; the sword; the mitre or
cap; a long robe of white linen; a girdle of lion's skin, three inches
wide and inscribed with the names which appear in the outer circle of
practice; material for the

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

fumigations; oil to anoint the temples and eyes; and clean water for the
ablution. The Prayer at Lustration is simply the versicle of
David:--*Thou shall purge me with hyssop, O Lord, and I shall be
cleansed; Thou shall wash me and I shall be made whiter than snow*.

 

<span id="img_22600"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/22600.jpg)  
THE SECRET SEAL OF SOLOMON

 

PRAYER AT VESTING

By the figurative mystery of this holy vestment, I will clothe me with
the armour of salvation in the strength of the Most High, ANCOR, AMICAR,
AMIDES, THEODONIAS, ANITOR*, that so the end which I desire may be
effected, O* ADONAI*, through Thy strength, to whom be praise and glory
for ever and ever*. <span id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_246)

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

Prayers should also be offered in harmony with the intention of the
operator before pronouncing the forms of evocation, as follows--

<span id="img_22700"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/22700.jpg)  
THE RING OF THE EXORCIST

FIRST CONJURATION

I invoke and conjure thee, O Spirit N., and, fortified with the power of
the Supreme Majesty, I strongly command thee by BARALAMENSIS,
BALDACHIENSIS, PAUMACHIE, APOLORESEDES *and the most potent princes*
GENIO, LIACHIDE*, Ministers of the Tartarean Seat, chief princes of the
seat of* APOLOGIA *in the ninth region; I exorcise and command thee, O
Spirit N., by Him Who spake and it was done, by the Most Holy and
glorious Names* ADONAI, EL, ELOHIM, ELOHE, ZEBAOTH, ELION, ESCHERCE,
JAH, TETRAGRAMMATON, SADAI*: do thou forthwith appear and shew thyself
unto me, here before this circle, in a fair and human shape, without any
deformity or horror; do thou come forthwith, from whateverpart of the
world, and make rational answers to my questions; come presently, come
visibly, come affably, manifest that which I desire, being conjured by
the Name of the Eternal, Living and True God,* HELIOREM*; I conjure thee
also by the particular and true Name of thy God to whom thou owest thine
obedience; by the name of the King who rules over thee, do thou come
without tarrying; come, fulfil my desires; persist unto the end,
according, to mine intentions*.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

I conjure thee by Him to Whom all creatures are obedient, by this
ineffable Name, TETRAGRAMMATON JEHOVAH*, by which the elements are
overthrown, the air is shaken, the sea turns back, the fire is
generated, the earth moves and all the hosts of things celestial, of
things terrestrial, of things infernal, do tremble and are confounded
together; speak unto me visibly and affably in a clear, intelligible
voice, free from ambiguity. Come therefore in the name* ADONAI ZEBAOTH*;
come, why dost thou tarry?* ADONAI SADAY*, King of kings, commands
thee*.

This being repeated frequently, if the spirit do not yet appear, say as
follows:--

SECOND CONJURATION

I invoke, conjure and command thee, O Spirit N., to appear and shew
thyself visibly before this circle, in fair and comely shape, without
deformity or guile, by the Name Of ON*; by the Name* Y *and* V*, which
Adam heard and spake; by the Name Of* JOTH*, which Jacob learned from
the Angel on the night of his wresting and was delivered from the hands
of his brother Esau; by the Name of God* AGLA*, which Lot heard and was
saved with his family; by the Name* ANEHEXETON*, which Aaron spake and
was made wise; by the Name* SCHEMES AMATHIA*, which Joshua invoked and
the Sun stayed upon his course; by the Name* EMMANUEL*, which the three
children, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, chanted in the midst of the
fiery furnace, and they were delivered; by the Name* ALPHA *and* OMEGA*,
which Daniel uttered, and destroyed Bel and the Dragon; by the Name*
ZEBAOTH

, which Moses named, and all the rivers and waters in the land of Egypt
brought forth frogs, which ascended into the houses of the Egyptians,
destroying all

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

things; by the Name ESCERCHIE ARISTON*, which also Moses named, and the
rivers and waters in the land of Egypt were turned into blood; by the
Name* ELION*, on which Moses called, and there fell a great hail, such
as never was seen since the creation of the world; by the Name* ADONAI*,
which Moses named, and there came up locusts over all the land of Egypt
and devoured what the hail had left; by the Name* HAGIOS*, by the Seal
of* ADONAI*, by those others, which are* JETROS, ATHENOROS, PARACLETUS*;
by the three Holy and Secret Names,* AGLA, ON, TETRAGRAMMATON*; by the
dreadful Day of Judgment; by the changing Sea of Glass which is before
the face of the Divine Majesty, mighty and powerful; by the four beasts
before the Throne, having eyes before and behind; by the fire which is
about the Throne, by the Holy Angels of Heaven, by the Highly Wisdom of
God; by the Seat of* BASDATHEA*, by this Name* PRIMEMATUM*, which Moses
named, and the earth opened and swallowed Corah, Dathan and Abiram; do
thou make faithful answers unto all my demands, and perform all my
desires, so far as thine office shall permit. Come therefore peaceably
and affably; come visibly and without delay; manifest that which I
desire; speak with a clear and intelligible voice, that I may understand
thee*.

If he come not at the rehearsing of these Conjurations, as without doubt
he will, proceed as follows, it being a Constraint:--

THIRD CONJURATION

I conjure thee, O spirit N., by all the most glorious and efficacious
Names of the Great and Incomparable Lord the God of Hosts, come quickly
and without delay, front whatsoever part

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

of the world thou art in; make rational answers to my demands; come
visibly, speak affably, speak intelligibly to my understanding. I
conjure and constrain thee, O Spirit N., by all the aforesaid Names, as
also by those seven other Names wherewith Solomon bound thee and thy
fellows in the brazen vessels to wit, ADONAI, PRERAI, TETRAGRAMMATON,
ANEXHEXETON, INESSENSATOAL, PATHUMATON *and* ITEMON*; do thou manifest
before this circle, fulfil my will in all things that may seem good to
me. Be disobedient, refuse to come, and by the power of the Supreme
Being, the everlasting Lord, that God Who created thee and me, the whole
world, with all contained therein, in the space of six days; by* EYE*,
by* SARAY*, by the virtue of the Name* PRIMEMATUM*, which commands the
whole host of Heaven; be disobedient, and behold I will curse and
deceive thee of thine office, thy joy and thy place; I will bind thee in
the depths of the bottomless pit, there to remain until the Day of the
Last judgment. I will chain thee in the Lake of Eternal Fire, in the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, unless thou come quickly, appearing before
this circle, to do my will Come, therefore, in the Holy Names* ADONAI,
ZEBAOTH, AMIORAM*; come,* ADONAI *commands thee*.

Should he still fail to appear, you may be sure that he has been sent by
his King to some other place. Invoke, therefore, the King to despatch
his servant as follows:--

INVOCATION OF THE KING

O thou great and powerful King AMAYMON*, Who rulest by the power of the
Supreme God,* EL

, over all Spirits, superior and inferior, but especially over the
Infernal Order in the Dominion of the East, I invoke and command thee by
the

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

particular and true Name of God, by the God Whom thou dost worship, by
the Seal of thy creation, O the most mighty and powerful Name of God,
JEHOVAH, TETRAGRAMMATON*, Who cast thee out of Heaven with the rest of
the Infernal Spirits; by all the other potent and great Names of God,
Creator of Heaven, Earth and Hell, of all contained therein; by their
powers and virtues; by the Name* PRIMEMATUM*, which commands the whole
host of Heaven. Do thou force and compel the Spirit N. here before this
circle, in a fair and comely shape, without injury to myself or to any
creature, that he may give me true and faithful answer, so that I may
accomplish my desired end, whatsoever it be, provided that it is proper
to his office, by the power of God,* EL*, Who hath created and doth
dispose of all things, celestial, aërial, terrestrial and infernal*.

Having twice or thrice invoked the King in this manner, again conjure
the spirit, using the previous forms, and rehearsing them several times,
whereupon he will come assuredly. Yet should he fail, be convinced that
he is bound with chains in hell, and is not in the custody of his King.
To set him free it is necessary to recite

THE CHAIN CURSE

O thou wicked and disobedient N., because thou hast not obeyed or
regarded the words which I have rehearsed, the glorious and
incomprehensible Names of the true God, Maker of all things in the
world, now I, by the power of these Names, which no creature can resist,
do curse thee into the depths of the Bottomless Pit, to remain until the
Day of Doom, in the Hell of unquenchable fire and brimstone, unless thou
shalt forthwith appear in this triangle, before this circle, to do my

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

will. Come, therefore, quickly and peaceably, by the Names ADONAI,
ZEBAOTH, ADONAI, AMIORAM*. Come, come,* ADONAI*, King, of commands
thee*.

Having read so far, if he come not, write his seal on parchment; put it
in a black box, with brimstone, assafœtida and other stinking perfumes;
bind the said box with iron wire, hang it on the point of your sword,
hold it over the fire of charcoal, which shall have been placed towards
that quarter whence the spirit will Come, and say first unto the
Fire:--*I conjure thee, O Fire, by Him Who made thee, and all other
creatures in the world, to torment, burn, and consume this Spirit N.
everlastingly*.

TO THE SPIRIT

Because thou art disobedient, and obeyst not my commandments nor the
precepts of the Lord thy God, now I, who am the servant of the Most High
and Imperial Lord God of Hosts, JEHOVAH*, having His celestial power and
permission, for this thine averseness and contempt, thy great
disobedience and rebellion, will excommunicate thee, will destroy thy
name and seal, which I have in this box, will burn them with
unquenchable fire and bury them in unending oblivion, unless thou comest
immediately, visibly and affably, here before this circle, within this
triangle, assuming a fair and comely form, without doing harm unto
myself or any creature whatsoever, but giving, reasonable answer to m
requests and performing, my desire in all things*.

If he appear not at this point, say as follows:--

Thou art still pernicious and disobedient, willing not to appear and
inform me upon that which I desire to know; now therefore, in the Name
and by the power and dignity of the

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Omnipotent and Immortal Lord God of Hosts,*
JEHOVAH TETRAGRAMMATON*, sole Creator of Heaven, Earth and Hell, with
all contained therein, the marvellous Disposer of all things visible and
invisible, I do hereby curse and deprive thee of all thine office, power
and place; I bind thee in the depth of the Bottomless Pit, there to
remain unto the Day of judgment, in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone,
prepared for the rebellious Spirits. May all the Company of Heaven curse
thee; may the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Light of the Hosts of
Heaven, curse thee into fire unquenchable, into torments unspeakable;
and even as thy name and seal are bound up in this box, to be choked
with sulphureous and stinking substances and to burn in this material
fire, so, in the Name of* JEHOVAH*, and by the power and dignity of the
three Names,* TETRAGRAMMATON, ANEXHEXETON, PRIMEMATUM*, may all these
drive thee, O thou disobedient Spirit N., into the Lake of Fire,
prepared for the damned and accursed Spirits, there to remain until the
Day of Doom, remembered no more before the face of that God Who shall
come to judge the quick and the dead, with the whole world, by fire*.

Set the box in the flame, whereupon he will appear; when he comes,
quench the fire, make sweet perfumes, give him good entertainment,
shewing him the pentacle on the hem of your vestment covered with a
linen cloth, and saying:--*Behold thy confusion, if thou be disobedient.
Behold the Pentacle of Solomon which I have brought into thy presence.
Behold the person of the Exorcist, who is called* OCTINIMOES*, in the
midst of the Exorcism, armed by God and fearless, potently invoking and
calling. Make, therefore, reasonable answers to my demands; be obedient
to me, thy Master, in the Name of the Lord* BATHAL*, rushing upon*
ABRAC, ABEOR*, coming upon* BEROR.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

He will become obedient and bid you ask what you will, for he is made
subject by God to your purpose. When he shews himself humble and meek,
say:--*Welcome, Spirit (or, most noble King), welcome art thou unto me;
I have called through Him Who created Heaven, Earth and Hell, with all
contained therein, and thou hast obeyed, also by the like power. I bind
thee to remain affably and visibly before this circle, within this
triangle, so long as I need thee, to depart not without my license, till
thou hast truly and faithfully fulfilled all that I shall require*.

THE LICENSE TO DEPART

O Spirit N., because thou hast diligently answered my demands, I do
hereby license thee to depart, without injury to man or beast. Depart, I
say, and be thou willing and ready to come, whensoever duly exorcised
and con red by the Sacred Rites of Magic. I conjure thee to withdraw
peaceably and quietly, and may the peace of God continue for ever
between me and thee. Amen.

Go not out of the circle till he be gone, but make prayers to God for
the great blessing He has bestowed upon you by thus granting your
desires and delivering you from the malice of the enemy.

For these verbose and tiresome conjurations the Latin version of Wierus
substitutes one general form of citation, in the Name of the Christian
Trinity, which is not really an especial anachronism, for the compiler
of the *Lemegeton* was acquainted at least with the books of the New
Testament. This is proved by the references in the Second Conjuration

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

to the Living Creatures of the Apocalypse, and it leaves the attribution
to Solomon in precisely that state which our respect for a prince in
Israel would naturally desire. No doubt, however, the English editor of
The Key Major of Magic would see no reason to question the attribution
and would explain the anachronism very simply as a late interpolation.

<span id="img_23500"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/23500.jpg)  
HELL MOUTH AND THE DEVIL CHAINED.  
*From Cædmon*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_243"></span>[221:1](bcm61.htm#fr_244) Numerous experiments
of the alchemists are concerned with congealing and fixing quicksilver,
but there are also "cabalistic" processes by which this substance was
prepared expressly for the construction of talismans, and these must not
be confused with the more sober--if not more successful--recipes of
Hermetic Art. On this point see *Les Secrets du Petit Albert*. Lyons
edition, 1775, pp. 63-65.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[222:1](bcm61.htm#fr_245) The chief
consecrations of the circle are summarised by Francis Barrett in *The
Key to Ceremonial Magic* as follows: Therefore when you would consecrate
any place or circle, you should take the Prayer of Solomon used in the
dedication and consecration of the Temple; you must likewise bless the
place by sprinkling with holy water and with suffumigations, and
commemorate in the benediction holy mysteries, such as these: the
sanctification of the throne of God, of Mount Sinai, of the Tabernacle
of the Covenant, of the Holy of Holies. . . . And by invocating all
Divine Names which are significant to this.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[225:1](bcm61.htm#fr_246) I do not think that
an intentional profanation of the sacraments and holy offices of the
Church was here intended. This would be ascribing a depth to the motive
of the Grimoires which they never possessed.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[226:1](bcm61.htm#fr_247) VARIANT: *Amor,
Amacor, Amides, Theodanias, Anitor*; by the merits of the angels, O
Lord, I will put on the garment of salvation, that this which I desire I
may bring to effects through Thee, the Most Holy Adonai, Whose Kingdom
endureth for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Concerning the Mystery of the Sanctum Regnum, or the
Government of Evil Spirits; being the Rite of Conjuration according to
the Grimorium Verum](bcm62)
