[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm67)  [Next](bcm69) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONJURATION OF THE DEMONS

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Take
heed! Come, all Spirits! By the virtue and

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

power of your King, by the seven crowns and chains of your Kings, all
Spirits of the Hells are forced to appear in my Presence before this
Pentacle or circle of Solomon, whensoever I shall call them. Come, then,
all at my orders, to fulfill that which is in Your Power, as commanded.
Come, therefore, from the East, South, West and North! I conjure and
command you, by the virtue and Power of Him Who is three, eternal,
equal, Who is God invisible, consubstantial, in a word, Who has created
the heavens, the sea and all which is under heaven.

After these Conjurations you shall command them to affix the Seal

CONCERNING THE FIGURE OF THE CIRCLE

Circles should be described with charcoal or holy water, sprinkled with
the wood of the blessed Cross. <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_264)
When they have been duly made, and the words have been written about the
circle, the holy water which has served to bless the same may also be
used to prevent the spirits from inflicting any hurt. Standing in the
middle of the circle, you shall command them in a lively manner, as one
who is their master.

WHAT MUST BE SAID IN COMPOSING THE CIRCLE

O Lord, we fly to Thy virtue! O Lord, confirm this work! What is
operated in us becomes like dust driven before the wind, and the Angel
of the Lord pausing (sic)*, let the darkness disappear, and the Angel of
the Lord ever pursuing*, ALPHA, OMEGA, ELY, ELOHE, ELOHIM, ZABAHOT,
ELION, SADY.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

Behold the Lion Who is the conqueror of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of
David! I will open the Book, and the seven seals thereof. I have beheld
Satan as a bolt falling from heaven. It is Thou Who hast given us Power
to crush dragons, scorpions and all Thine enemies beneath Thy feet.
Nothing shall harm us, not even ELOY, ELOHIM, ELOHE, ZABAHOT, ELION,
ESARCHIE,

 

<span id="img_28100"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/28100.jpg)  
THE MAGIC CIRCLE OF HONORIUS

 

ADONAY, JAH, TETRAGRAMMATON, SADY. *The earth is the Lord's and all
those who dwell therein, because He established it upon the seas and
prepared it in the midst of the waves. Who shall ascend unto the
mountain of the Lord? Who shall be received in his Holy Place? The
innocent of hands and clean of heart. Who hath not received his soul in
vain and hath not sworn false witness against his neighbour. The same
shall be blessed of God and shall obtain mercy of God to his salvation.
He is of the generation of those who seek Him*.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Open your gates, ye princes, open the eternal
gates, and the King of Glory shall enter! Who is this King of Glory? The
Lord Almighty, the Lord, mighty in battle. Open your gates, ye Princes!
Lift up the eternal gates. Who is this King of Glory? The Lord Almighty.
This Lord is the King of Glory. Glory be to the Father, &c*.

<span id="img_28200"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/28200.jpg)  
A LESSER PENTACLE OF SOLOMON

To dismiss them, the Pentacle of Solomon must be exhibited, at the same
time saying as follows:--

Behold your sentence! Behold that which forbids rebellion to our wills
and doth ordain you to return unto your abodes. May peace be between us
and you, and be ye ready to come, each and all, as ye are called to do
my will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[280:1](bcm68.htm#fr_265) On the hypothesis
that the *Method of Honorius* is dealing in efficacious Rites provided
that its conditions are fulfilled, the operation must fail because this
requirement is unattainable, if not indeed impossible. I mention this
point for the benefit of those occultists who may possibly believe in
the efficacy. I do not think that they exist, but seeing that there is
no end to occult foolishness, it is within the compass of a dream.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conjurations of the Kings of the Cardinal Directions](bcm69)
