[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm75)  [Next](bcm77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### § 6. Concerning Divination by the Word of Uriel

As there are many practices passing under the name of White Magic which
are doubtful in character on the surface, while they are more than
doubtful within, so there are experiences described in the Grimoires, or
in the treasuries of secrets which accompany them, having nothing in
their nature which can be

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

termed especially repulsive; they belong, however, to the Grimoires;
their connections in occult literature are those of Black Magic, and
they deserve a place here. Moreover, a process which in one Ritual will
be merely curious or diverting, hypnotic or clairvoyant, may in another
bear all the outward marks of diabolism. The mode of divination termed
the. Word or Speech of Uriel--signifying answers or oracles obtained
from that spirit ceremonially invoked--appears in the *Grimorium Verum*
as an experiment in lucidity induced by means of Hydromancy, but in the
*Verus Jesuitarum Libellus* the Conjuration of Uriel appears as an
infernal conjuration, and it is a process of Black Magic undisguised.

The experiment in the *Grimorium Verum* is worded as follows:--

THE INVOCATION OF URIEL

To succeed in this operation, it is needful that whosoever makes the
experiment shall do in all things as hereinafter enjoined. Let him
choose a small chamber or cabinet which has not been frequented by
impure women for at least nine days. Let such Place be well cleansed and
consecrated by aspersions and fumigations. In the middle of the said
chamber let there be a table covered with a white cloth; set as follows
thereon--to wit, a new glass phial filled with spring water, drawn
shortly before the operation; three small tapers of virgin wax mixed
with human fat; a sheet of virgin parchment six inches square; a raven's
quill cut ready for writing; a china ink-well filled with fresh ink; a
small pan furnished with the materials for a fire. Let there be also a
young boy of nine or ten years, cleanly and modestly dressed and of good
behaviour, who must be placed near the table. One of the three tapers
should be fixed upon a great new needle at a distance of six inches
behind the phial,

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

and the two others, erected after the same manner, should stand on the
right and left at the same distance. While arranging these matters,
recite the following words:--Gabamiah, Adonay, Agla

, O Lord God of Powers, do Thou assist us!

The virgin parchment should be on the right and the pen with the ink on
the left side of the phial. The windows and door must be closed before
beginning the operation. The fire should then be stirred, the tapers
lighted, and the boy placed on his knees so that he can look into the
phial; observe that he should be bareheaded and his hands joined. The
Master of the operation shall thereupon command him to gaze fixedly into
the phial, when, approaching his right ear, and in a moderate tone of
voice, but as distinctly as possible, let him make the following

CONJURATION

Uriel, Seraph, Josata, Ablati, Agla, Caila, *I pray and conjure thee by
the Four Words which God uttered with His mouth unto His servant Moses,*
Josata, Ablati, Agla, Caila*, and by the* Nine Heavens *wherein thou
dwellest, as also by the virginity of this child who is before thee,
that thou appearest, and without any delay, visibly in this phial, to
discover, without disguising, the truth which I desire to know; which
done, I will discharge thee in peace and goodwill, in the Name of the
Most Holy Adonay*.

After this conjuration the child must be asked whether he beholds
anything in the phial; and if he should reply that he beholds an Angel
or another apparition, the Master of the operation shall say in an
affable tone of voice:

Blessed Spirit, be thou welcome! I conjure thee once more, in the Name
of the Most Holy Adonay, to give me prompt enlightenment

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

upon, &c. \[Here name the subject upon which information is desired.\]
*And if for reasons unknown to us, thou art unwilling to proceed in an
audible tone of voice*, <span id="fr_276"></span>[1](#fn_275) *I conjure
thee in the Most Holy Name of Adonay to write upon the virgin parchment
here present, between now and to-morrow morning, or at least reveal unto
me that which I desire this coming might in my sleep*.

If the Spirit make answer to what is said, he shall be heard
respectfully; should he fail to speak after thrice making the same
supplication, let the tapers be extinguished and withdraw from the
chamber, closing the door until the morrow, when the operator may return
in the morning, and that which was required will be found within, on the
virgin parchment, unless indeed it shall have been made known in the
night.

In the *Verum Jesuitarum Libellus* this experiment in the induction of
clairvoyance by means of a seering cup and a fantastic ceremonial,
having only one monstrous condition, is replaced by a fierce conjuration
of many pages, commanding the Spirit Uriel by all the words which have
ever proceeded out of the mouth of the Creator of Heaven and Earth
against the Evil Angels, and on pain of compulsion and torture, to
appear before the operator, an unworthy servant of God, wherever the
said Spirit may be, even in the abyss of Hell. He is directed to appear
visibly and modestly in a human form, and to bring whatsoever is desired
in all tranquillity and patience, without tumult, without detriment,
without blinding, without dumbness, without whispering, without thunder,
without hail, without explosion, without puffing up, without trembling.
It is unnecessary to quote the entire citation, as the

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

process is not complete; but it is evident that the Conjuration of Uriel
in the forged treatise on the Magic of the Jesuits is intended for the
compulsion of a devil and not for the solicitation of favours from the
Blessed Spirit of the *Grimorium Verum*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_275"></span>[317:1](bcm76.htm#fr_276) That is, in a voice
audible to the clairvoyant boy, the process being obviously intended for
those who are not themselves seers. It recalls the vast seering
experiments of Dr. Dee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7: Concerning the Mirror of Solomon, suitable for all
Kinds of Divination](bcm77)
