[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bcm78)  [Next](bcm80) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

# CHAPTER IX

### Concerning Infernal Necromancy

IT is only within recent times that the attempt to communicate with the
dead has been elevated to the dignity of White Magic. Here it is
necessary to affirm that the phenomena of Modern Spiritualism are to be
distinguished clearly from those of old Necromancy. The identity of
purpose is apt to connect the methods, but the latter differ
generically. To compare them would be almost equivalent to saying that
the art of physical Alchemy is similar to mercantile pursuits because
the acquisition of wealth is the end in either case. To appreciate the
claim of Modern Spiritualism would be to exceed the limits of this
inquiry; it is mentioned only with the object of setting it quite apart.
It should, however, be added that occult writers--with the
indiscrimination which is common to their kind--have sometimes sought
ambitiously to represent the communication with departed souls by means
of Ceremonial Magic as something much more exalted than mere
Spiritualism, whereas the very opposite is nearer the truth. Ancient
Necromancy was barbarous and horrible in its rites; it is only under the
auspices of Éliphas Lévi and Pierre Christian that it has been purged
and civilised, but in the hands of these elegant magicians it has become
simply a process of auto-hallucination, having no scientific consequence
whatever. The secret of true evocation belongs to the occult
sanctuaries, by the hypothesis of those who are their spokesmen; it is
not the process

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

of Spiritualism, and still less, so far as may be gleaned, is it that of
the magical Rituals, nor would the secret at best seem respected by
those who possess it, because the higher soul of man transcends
evocation, and that which does respond ought to be beneath the initiate.
The claim, however, is naturally one of delusion complicated by
imposture.

In any case, the Necromancy of the Rituals is, properly speaking, a
department of Black Magic, and for this reason no doubt it was excluded
from the theurgic scheme of the *Arbatel*; nor do even such composite
works as the two *Keys of Solomon* and the *Magical Elements* contain
any account of a process which was always held in execration. It was
lawful apparently for the Magus to conjure and compel the devils, to
rack the hierarchy of Infernus by the agony of Divine Names, but he must
leave the dead to their rest.

Where the process is given, as in the Fourth Book of Cornelius Agrippa,
it is confined to the evocation of those souls who might be reasonably
supposed to be damned, and it involves revolting rites. It assumes that
the evil liver carries with him into the next world the desires which
have depraved him here, and it allures him by his persistent affinities
with the relinquished body. <span id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_279) In
this way the use of blood came to be regarded as indispensable, because
blood was held to be the medium of physical life; so also a portion of
the body itself, whether flesh or bone, was prescribed in the rite.
There is not any need to say that evocations involving the use of such
materials belong to Black Magic, but they would not in any case offer a
redeeming feature to the consideration of the informed student.

"It is also to be understood," says pseudo-Agrippa, "that

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

those who are proposing to raise up the souls of any deceased persons
must do so in places with which it is known that they were familiar, in
which some special alliance between soul and body may be assumed, or
some species of attracting affection, still leading the soul to such
places. . . . Therefore the localities most suited for the purpose are
churchyards, and, better still, those which have been the scene of the
execution of criminal judgments"--in plain words, the immediate
neighbourhood of a gibbet. A battlefield or other place of public
slaughter is still more favourable, but best of all is the scene of a
murder before the removal of the carcase.

The ritual of Necromantic Evocation is indicated but not given by the
authority just cited; we must seek it in Ebenezer Sibley and in the
supplementary portions of the *Grand Grimoire* and the *Red Dragon*. The
astrologer Sibley does not give account of his sources, but they were
evidently not in printed books. The Sloane MS. numbered 3884 in the
Library of the British Museum would appear to have been one. It is, in
any case, not an invented process; it develops the principles laid down
in pseudo-Agrippa and is quite in harmony with the baleful genius of
Black Magic. It is here given verbatim.

But if, instead of infernal or familiar spirits, the ghost or apparition
of a departed person is to be exorcised, the Magician, with his
assistant, must repair to the churchyard or tomb where the deceased was
buried, exactly at midnight, as the ceremony can only be performed in
the night between the hours of twelve and one. The grave is first to be
opened, or an aperture made by which access may be had to the naked
body. The magician having described the circle, and holding a magic wand
in his right hand, while his companion or assistant beareth a
consecrated torch, he turns himself to all the four winds, and, touching

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

the dead body three times with the magical wand, repeats as follows:--By
the virtue of the Holy Resurrection, and the torments of the damned, I
conjure and exorcise thee, Spirit of N. deceased, to answer my liege
demands, being obedient unto these sacred ceremonies, on pain of
everlasting torment and distress. . . . BERALD, BEROALD, BALBIN, GAB,
GABOR, AGABA*. Arise, arise, I charge and command thee*. <span
id="fr_281"></span>[1](#fn_280)

After these forms and ceremonies, the ghost or apparition will become
visible, and will answer any questions put to it by the exorcist. But if
it be desired to put interrogatories to the spirit of any corpse that
has hanged, drowned or otherwise made away with itself, the conjuration
must be performed while the body lies on the spot where it is first
found after the suicide hath been committed, and before it is touched or
removed. The ceremony is as follows. The exorcist binds upon the top of
his wand a bundle of St. John's wort or *Millies perforatum*, with the
head of an owl; and having repaired to the spot where the corpse lies,
at twelve o'clock at night, he draws the circle and solemnly repeats
these words:--*By the mysteries of the deep, by the flames of Banal, by
the Power of the East and the silence of the night, by the Holy Rites of
Hecate, I conjure and exorcise thee, thou distressed spirit, to present
thyself here and reveal unto me the cause of thy calamity, why thou
didst offer violence to thy own liege life, where thou art now in being,
and where thou wilt hereafter be*.

Then gently smiting the carcase nine times with the rod, he adds:--

I conjure thee, thou Spirit of this N. deceased, to answer my demands
that I propound unto thee, as thou ever hopest for the rest of the holy
ones and ease of all thy misery; by the

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Blood of Jesus which He shed for thy soul, I
conjure and bind thee to utter unto me what I shall ask thee*.

Then, cutting down the carcase from the tree, they shall lay its head
towards the east; in the space that this following conjuration is
repeating, they shall set a chafing-dish of fire at its right hand, into
which they shall pour a little wine, some mastic and some gum-aromatic,
and lastly \[the contents of\] a vial full of the sweetest oil. They
shall have also a pair of bellows and some unkindled charcoal to make
the fire burn bright when the carcase rises. The conjuration is this:--

I conjure thee, thou Spirit of N., that thou do immediately enter into
thy ancient body again and answer to my demands; by the virtue of the
Holy Resurrection, and by the posture of the body of the Saviour of the
world, I charge thee, I conjure thee, I command thee, on pain of the
torments and wandering of thrice seven years. which I, by the force of
sacred magic rites, have power to inflict upon thee; by thy sighs and
groans I conjure thee to utter thy voice. So help thee God and the
prayers of the. Holy Church. Amen.

This ceremony being thrice repeated, while the fire is burning with
mastic and gum-aromatic, the body will begin to rise, and at last will
stand upright before the exorcist, answering with a faint and hollow
voice the questions propounded unto it: why it destroyed itself, where
its dwelling is, what its food and life are, how long it will be ere it
enter into rest, and by what means the magician may assist it to come to
rest; also of the treasures of this world, where they are hid. Moreover,
it can answer very punctually concerning the places where ghosts reside,
and of the manner of communicating with them, teaching the nature of
Astral Spirits and hellish beings so far as its capacity alloweth.

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

\[paragraph continues\] All this when the ghost hath fully answered, the
magician ought out of commiseration and reverence to the deceased, to
use what means can possibly be used for procuring rest unto the spirit,
to which effect he must dig a grave, and, filling the same half full of
quick-lime, with a little salt and common sulphur, must put the carcase
naked into it. Next to the burning of the body into ashes, this is of
great force to quiet and end the disturbance of the Astral Spirit. But
in this and in all cases where the ghosts or apparitions of deceased
persons are raised up and consulted, great caution is to be observed by
the Magician to keep close within the circle; for if, by the
constellation and position of the stars at his nativity, he be in the
predicament of those who follow the Black Art for iniquitous purposes,
it is very dangerous to conjure any spirits without describing the form
of the circle, and wearing upon the heart, or holding in the hand, the
Pentacle of Solomon. For the ghosts of men deceased can easily effect
sudden death to the magician born under such a constellation of the
planets, even whilst in the act of being exorcised.

It must be confessed that this process is grim and depressing, and the
occult student will not envy the sorcerer at the first palpitation of
the corpse. Yet the rite is methodical, and even sober, when compared
with the monstrous alternative of the *Grand Grimoire*, which must be
given on the authority of Lévi; for no available editions of the work
which is in question, nor yet of the *Red Dragon*, nor indeed any ritual
of my acquaintance, contains it. There is reasonable probability that he
invented it to make out his case at the moment.

"There are also necromantic processes, comprising the tearing up of
earth from graves with the nails, dragging out some of the bones,
setting them crosswise on the breast, then assisting at midnight mass on
Christmas Eve, and flying out

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

of the church at the moment of consecration, crying: 'Let the dead rise
from their tombs!'--then returning to the graveyard, taking a handful of
earth nearest to the coffin, running back to the door of the church,
which has been alarmed by the clamour, depositing the two bones
crosswise, again shouting: 'Let the dead rise from their tombs!'--then,
if we escape being seized and shut up in a madhouse, retiring at a slow
pace, and counting four thousand five hundred steps in a straight line,
which means following a broad road or scaling walls; finally, having
traversed this space, lying flat upon the earth as if in a coffin,
repeating in doleful tones: 'Let the dead rise from their tombs!'--and
calling thrice on the person whose apparition is desired."

The object of Necromantic evocations was much the same as the other
operations of the Grimoires. If the sorcerer of old, like the modern
magician, had ever dispossessed the shade of Apollonius of its eternal
rest, it would have been upon a question of finance. The remaining
process in Necromancy will be therefore an appropriate conclusion to our
whole inquiry, as it is designed to raise up and expel a human spirit
who is supposed to stand guard over a hidden treasure. It is from the
*Verus Jesuitarum Libellus*, and is the *ne plus ultra* of Ceremonial
Magic, however distributed according to the colours of the spectrum. The
end of all things is money, says the sorcerer, and if asked to define
Occult Science, he would answer that it was the method of obtaining
concealed money. The testimony of the entire literature coincides with
this definition.

A CONJURATION FOR THE SPIRIT GUARDIANS OF HIDDEN TREASURE

I cite, require and command thee, Human Spirit, who frequentest this
place, and in thy life hast interred thy treasure

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

herein, who also of recent time, to wit, in the day or night of . . . .,
about the hour of . . . ., hast shewn thyself in the form of a fire at
this spot.. I conjure thee by God the Father e, by God the Son ✠*, by
God the Holy Spirit* ✠*, by the most glorious and Holy Mother* ✠ *of
God* ✠*, by the most holy wounds of our Saviour, by all miracles
performed through His Divine sorrows, Passion and tears, by His material
death, by His descent into Hell, by His triumphant Resurrection, by His
most glorious ascension into Heaven, by His sitting on the right hand of
God the Father, giving rule to His angels from thence over the whole
earth* ✠*. I conjure thee by the terrible Day of Judgment* ✠*, by the
power and virtue. of St. John the Baptist* ✠*, by all the martyrs,
apostles and prophets. Come to me. I adjure and beseech thee by the
terrible, ineffable and Divine Names inscribed on this sheet, and in
reverence and confession of their power, to come before me, and to make
thy sign visible, without lightning, without thunder, without noise of
dread tempests, without causing fear or trembling, harm to body or soul,
or annoyance of any kind. But do thou perform my will in all things,
even as I shall command thee, by the virtue of the, one stupendous and
holy Name, which even the adverse and inferior powers of the Abyss do
venerate and adore, ever confessing the Almighty, Whose creatures we all
are. Be this done by the virtue of God the Father* ✠*, by His blessed
Son* ✠ *and by the union of the Holy Spirit* ✠*, even by the Trinity in
unity, Which liveth and reigneth for ever and ever. Amen* ✠*.
Incessantly do I call, adjure, conjure, ordain and require thee, Human
Spirit, by the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity, by the immortality which
cometh after death, by the power and victory of Hell, by the bearer of
the Seven Swords, by the Most Holy and Secret Seal, by the sacred love
of Jesus, by all the Ministers and Archangels of God, Ophanim* ✠*,
Aralim* ✠*, Hasmalim* ✠

,

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Cherubim* ✠*, Seraphim* ✠*, and Malachim* ✠*,
and by the terrible torments of the demons. I conjure thee also by the
good angels Maluzim* ✠*, Penpalabim* ✠*, and Calizantin* ✠*, by all the
Powers of Heaven* ✠*, by the earth* ✠ *and by the torments of Hell; I
adjure thee by all mysteries, by the Crucifixion, by the dolorous
scourging, by the crowning with thorns, by the bitterness of the Divine
death, by the Most Holy and Ineffable Name of Jesus* ✠*, which is sacred
unto all Christians, but terror and anguish to the evil, for they have
refused the salvation which has been offered them by the great living
God. I conjure thee to come before me immediately, in thy Proper human
form, even as when thy treasure was buried. Come before this circle,
answer me faithfully, without falsehood and without enigmas. This I
command thee, in the Name and by the Power of the Triune God, Father,
Son and Holy Ghost. Amen*.

A CONJURATION COMPELLING OBEDIENCE

I adjure and command thee, Human Spirit, to appear before me under the
similitude of fire. By the ineffable Name JEHOVAH*, by the ineffable and
incomprehensible Fiat, by the power which created all things and
sustains all things, I conjure and adjure thee to come visibly before
this circle. By the good ness of God when He created man in His own
likeness, by the power of His justice, which expelled the demons,
enchaining them in the Infernal Abyss; by His infinite mercy when He
sent His Son to redeem us; by all Divine Names and Attributes; by the
omnipotence of our Saviour Jesus Christ, destroying the works of hell,
blessing the seed of the woman and empowering it to crush the serpent's
head--do thou answer me and obey faithfully. By the ineffable Name*
TETRAGRAMMATON

, inscribed on this rod, answer me without deception or equivocation. By

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

the Power of our Saviour, Who shall judge both thee and me, the quick
and the dead, I conjure thee. Come.

IF THE SPIRIT BE OBSTINATE

I conjure thee, Human Spirit, by the Ineffable Name of God, written on
this sheet, but not to be Pronounced; by my blood, most excellently
redeemed by the Lord of the Prophets, Jesus Christ; by His most Glorious
Mother; by the insignia of His humility; by the great book of the
judgments of God; by the angels, archangels and all the host of heaven.
Be thou obedient unto me, a Christian baptized in the holy waters of
Jordan. Answer me exactly, without enigma or pretence. Make known the
power which aids thee. I command thee by the most holy Name of God, Who
hath condemned thee to frequent this place wherein thou hast buried thy
treasure. Amen. Amen. Amen.

Citation

COLPRIZIANA, OFFINA, ALTA, NESTERA, FUARO, MENUET.

Charge

ALIM, JEHOH, JEHOVAH, AGLA, ON, TETRAGRAMMATON.

When the Spirit makes visible appearance, say:--

ADON, SCHADAI, ELIGON, AMANAI, ELION, PNEUMATON, ELII, ALNOAL, MESSIAS,
JA, HEYNAAN, TETRAGRAMMATON.

Add the following Conjuration:--

ADONAI, ZEBOTH. ADON, SCHADAI. ELION, TETRAGRAMMATON, ELOI, ELOHIM,
MESSIAS, JA, HAGIOS, Ho THEOS. Amen.

Say inwardly:--

ALLEY, FORTISSIAN, FORTISSIO, ALLINSON, ROA.

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

The Discharge

OMGROMA, EPYN, SEYOK, SATANY, DEGONY, EPARYGON, GALLIGANON, ZOGOGEN,
FERSTIGON.

The most barbarous and unintelligible words are said by Picus de
Mirandola to be the most powerful in Black Magic, and the affirmation
applies everywhere, for the whole art is one of illiterate delight in
unintelligible images. As those here cited from the *Verus Jesuitarum
Libellus* seem in most cases fortuitous assemblages of letters, they are
doubtless all that can be desired, but additional constraints and
conjurations, should the spirit of the deceased miser refuse to appear,
will readily occur to the reader.

Here ends the Complete Grimoire of Black Magic

<span id="img_33300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/33300.jpg)  
APOPHIS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_279"></span>[324:1](bcm79.htm#fr_280) The more intimate the
knowledge possessed by the operator concerning the deceased person, the
more easily he was supposed to call him up.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[326:1](bcm79.htm#fr_281) The process by which
the soul was called back into the dead body prior to its interment
constituted necromancy proper. The calling up of the shadow was
sometimes termed sciomancy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](bcm80)
