[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp02)  [Next](ptp04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Third Century

His successor was <span class="smallcaps">Victor</span>, a strong willed
man who did

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

not hesitate to strike with the drastic weapon of excommunication when
he deemed it necessary. He rightly pronounced this awful sentence
against the apostate and schismatic Theodotus, and indeed he almost gave
the same penalty to the entire Eastern Church over a dispute based on
the old argument of the Easter date. However, Irenaeus, a Syrian
theologian who became Bishop of Lyons in France, persuaded him to
reconsider this action. Thus peace was made, with the Eastern bishops
resolutely keeping to their own customs. Victor died in 199 and the
third century of Christianity dawned with <span
class="smallcaps">Zephyrinus</span>, a Roman of humble birth, as Pope.
He was kind to sinners and generous to the poor but possessing little
education he sought the advice in many matters of his friend, the deacon
and ex-slave, Callistus. For this he was bitterly criticized by such
writers as Tertullian and the scholar-priest Hippolytus, both of whom at
this period fell into heresy, becoming adherents of the harshly ascetic
doctrine of Montanism. Their outcries fortunately did not serve to
prevent the election of <span class="smallcaps">Callistus</span> after
the death of Zephyrinus in 217. Able qualities of leadership soon
justified the confidence of his friend and the decision of those who had
chosen him. However, Hippolytus whose undeniable brilliance had won him
a considerable following declared the election to have been false and
then allowed his own disciples to bestow upon him the title of Head of
the true Church. Thus for the first time we have an Anti-Pope. No salvo
of excommunications from Callistus however followed this announcement.
Indeed unlike some of his contemporaries who, immersed in the
interpretation of the Gospel, were apt to forget the essence of
Christian teachings, the Pope in this and many other matters exhibited a
charity worthy of his office. He changed and modified the harsh
penitential system and in one radical edict made known that adulterers,

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

providing their remorse was sincere, were not to be refused absolution.
This gesture of mercy drew the wrath of certain righteous doctors who
had forgotten the famous admonition to those who would stone the
Magdalen. "Where shall we post up this generous concession," asked the
irate Tertullian, "on the doors of brothels?"

The pretensions of Hippolytus persisted after the death of Callistus,
throughout the pontificate of <span class="smallcaps">Urban</span>
(222-230), and into that of <span class="smallcaps">Pontian</span>. For
the first five years of this Pope's reign the struggle was bitter and
grave for Hippolytus was a dangerously skilled antagonist. Then in a
fresh outburst of persecution by an Emperor who took no trouble to
differentiate between true or schismatic Christianity, both were
banished to the Sardinian mines. In the stultifying confines of
imprisonment antipathies are usually intensified into deadly hatred:
less commonly a friendship is formed strong with understanding and
loyalty. Happily it was the latter case with Pope and Anti-Pope.
Hippolytus acknowledged his error and made a complete and unconditional
submission to Pontian who without rancor received him back into the
Church. Soon after, this new friendship was sealed with the bond of dual
martyrdom.

When Pontian had been seized he had resigned his office and elected in
his stead was <span class="smallcaps">Anterus</span> who, however, died
a few months later. The next Pope was <span
class="smallcaps">Fabian</span> and he proved himself to be a capable
executive, directing the Church through times that were turbulent not
only for his co-religionists but for all under Roman rule. The barbarity
of the peasant-born Emperor Maximin had thrown the Empire into excesses
of disorder that were to endure for many reigns. Murder now seemed to be
the usual instrument of accession to the honors of the purple and it was
by this decidedly un-Christian method that Philip, sometimes known as
the first Christian Emperor, achieved

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the Imperial station. Little is known of his conversion but once on the
throne he seems to have been suitably remorseful of his former
violences. In his reign and for the first time official tolerance was
accorded Christians and to Pope Fabian was granted the right for
ecclesiastical authorities to possess properties.

But the unfamiliar tranquillity was not to endure for long. In 249
Philip was dispossessed of his rank in the same bloody manner in which
it had been acquired. Decius, his erstwhile lieutenant, was now hailed
by the Legions, savage in their passions and so fickle in their
loyalties, as Emperor. He was a man of severe nature who sincerely
believed the salvation of the State could be only achieved by return to
the pagan standards of ancient Rome and his temper towards the Church
was quickly manifested in an edict which declared that death was to be
the penalty for all who would not forsake Christianity. This savage
decree was a challenge quickly accepted by Fabian who made gallant
answer with his life. Nor did he die alone. With splendid celerity there
was a rush of martyrs worthy of his heroic example. But this time too
there were also found many who in the terror of the moment denied their
faith. The easy years of non-persecution had produced "easy" Christians
who preferred to live with the accusations of their consciences rather
than to die before the sentences of the judges.

The Church was a public enough organization by now for Decius to have a
thorough knowledge of its means of government. Without a Pope, he
reasoned, the Christians would be without a centralized authority and so
eventually would be bound to dissolve as an organized society. He set
himself to prevent a new election after Fabian's execution and so
vigilant were his officers that for a year the scheme was successful.
But though no Pope was elected the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

administration of the Church went on uninterruptedly in the persons of a
Council of Presbyters who in defiance of the Emperor met and dwelt
secretly in Rome. To this regency there came one Novatus from Africa
with accusations of apostasy against the powerful Bishop of Carthage.
This was Cyprian who, better to direct his clergy, had justifiably taken
refuge from the civil power. Novatus had no success with the Council but
he did find an ally in the clever but too ambitious priest Novatian who,
as later events proved, harbored designs on the papacy.

Meanwhile there were problems other than the Christians to employ the
attention of the Emperor. For the first time of any importance the Goths
invaded the Empire and the Emperor was summoned to the Danube to head
his soldiery. His absence from Rome was the signal for a papal election
where the honor fell to the gentle-mannered <span
class="smallcaps">Cornelius</span>, a Roman of aristocratic antecedents.
Quite naturally this choice found no favour with the envious Novatian
who, embittered by his own lack of success, soon fell into schism,
declaring loudly that Cornelius was at error in permitting penitent
apostates to be granted forgiveness. As this was a question widely
discussed in the Church at that time Cornelius with some wisdom called
upon sixty bishops to journey to Rome and form a Council. This was in
the autumn of 251 and the result was the condemnation of Novatian's
propaganda, and the excommunication of him and his followers.

The net of the persecution now tightened around Pope Cornelius and he
was sentenced to banishment and then, while still in exile, put to
death. <span class="smallcaps">Lucius</span>, named as his successor,
was promptly sent to exile also. But instead of being executed he was
ordered back to Rome at the direct command of a new Emperor, Valerian,
the second successor of Decius. This ruler at first exhibited every sign

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

of being tolerant and conciliatory. The Pope on his return was
astonished to find openly professing members of his flock in favor at
the Imperial Court and there were other evidences of official
magnanimity to warm his heart. To the happy Pontiff, so recently a
prisoner, it seemed as though a new era had commenced and he was never
to suffer disillusionment for that same year, just twelve months after
his election, he passed away peacefully; a death rare enough to merit
mention in the history of the earlier Popes. He was followed by <span
class="smallcaps">Stephen</span> who, apparently anxious that no
incident should stir Pagan ire and so start the persecutions again,
cautioned that the clergy should not wear ecclesiastical vestments,
except inside the churches. A long argument with the Bishop of Carthage
concerning the validity of baptism by heretics then engaged his
attention. Stephen, who affirmed such baptisms as valid, finally made
public throughout the Church a definite ruling on the subject which
served to draw several other bishops into the fray. This altercation
lasted three years and was interrupted, although not settled, by an
alarming change in Valerian's attitude.

For the first time in history a Prince became suspicious and envious of
the Church's material wealth. The moment was propitious. Disorder at the
frontiers and a series of internal confusions had reduced the Imperial
coffers to a near-emptyness. The growing strength of the Church, the
increasing importance of the bishops, presented a target too conspicuous
to escape the envy of a perturbed Emperor. Readily he listened to the
calumnies and advice of an anti-Christian member of his court and soon
there came an edict. Gatherings of Christians were forbidden and the
bishops and clergy were ordered, under pain of death or exile, to render
sacrifice to the Pagan gods. There followed the same brave sad sequel of
the previous persecutions. The

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pope perished in
exile and a new crop of martyrs was made.

Terribly certain of martyrdom was he who would be chosen to head the
faithful at such a hazardous time. <span class="smallcaps">Sixtus</span>
II courageously accepted the fatal honour and soon after was beheaded
upon his own throne. The lot of his successor, <span
class="smallcaps">Dionysius</span>, was happier for once again an
invasion of the Empire providentially caused a cessation of the
persecution. The alarmed Valerian marched to a campaign which was to
mean his defeat, his capture, and his death. To him came the most
ignominious end that was to befall a Roman ruler. During his
imprisonment he was used by his Persian conqueror as a human stool upon
which to step to the saddle and after his death in these shameful
circumstances his corpse was stuffed with straw and publicly exhibited
as a trophy of his defeat. These formidable insults to the purple and to
the prestige of Rome were lightly borne by his son, Gallienus, who in
fact lost no time in changing the policies of his father, including,
happily, the laws against the Christians. Nor for them was this change
the mere benignity of a tolerant mind. Active restitutions for past
damages were made, full privileges of citizenship were granted, and
Church property was restored.

Again it seemed as though the clouds of persecution had been permanently
relegated to the past, and with the horizon of the future clear, the
jubilant pontiff was now able to devote full energies to the internal
affairs of the Church. During his lifetime the happy relationship of
State and Church continued to exist and at his death (in 268) he left it
as a legacy which was to prevail until near the close of the century,
throughout the pontificates of his next three successors, who were
respectively <span class="smallcaps">Felix</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">Eutychian</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Caius</span>. These Popes successfully carried on the
tradition of good administration. There was much to do, for the

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

faith was spreading rapidly. Heresies were abundant but were met with
wise discipline, and orthodoxy was protected. Bishoprics grew, both in
numbers and size, and certain powers of authority were delegated to
higher bishops who were termed Metropolitans. The Papal position did not
suffer by these necessary acts of administration. On the contrary during
this period the primacy of the Apostolic See was becoming a more
accomplished and more regulated fact than ever before. As the age of
concealment passed the dark caverns of the catacombs ceased to provide
the only chapels for Rome. Churches were built, and splendidly,
everywhere. The Church had finally emerged as a recognized and united
Society, with too numerous and powerful a membership to invite, so many
thought, aggressive restrictions again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fourth Century](ptp04.md)
