[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp06)  [Next](ptp08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Seventh Century

The Middle Ages had begun, and the complete collapse of the Roman Empire
in the West makes that commencement a chronicle of savagery,
lawlessness, and ignorance. In the gloom of the century following
Gregory's death no fewer than twenty men take their places in the
succession of the papacy and none of them approached the stature of his
magnitude. Their story is mainly a repetitious narrative of doctrinal
controversy, preservation of hierarchical harmony, and continual
struggle with the Byzantine Emperors and Patriarchs. To the name of one
the stigma of heresy is attached, to another the glory of martyrdom.
Forty or more years after the death of Honorius, actually a pious and
saintly man, condemnation came, not for formal heresy, but because as
one of his successors, Leo II, declared: "He did not extinguish at once
the incipient flame of heretical error, as befitted Apostolic authority,
but by his negligence nourished the same." The martyred pope was Martin
I who, presiding at a council which antagonized the Emperor Constans II,
was seized by troops and brought to Constantinople where at an
outrageously unjust trial he was convicted of being a traitor and
blasphemous usurper. A victim to the harsh treatment of his imprisonment
he died—to become, despite the propaganda of the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Emperor, an object
of veneration and inspiration to the faithful. In continuity the
pontiffs of the Seventh Century and the first years of the Eighth were:
<span class="smallcaps">Sabinian</span>, 604-6, <span
class="smallcaps">Boniface</span> III, 606-7, <span
class="smallcaps">Boniface</span> IV, 608-15, <span
class="smallcaps">Deusdedit</span>, 615-18, <span
class="smallcaps">Boniface</span> V, 619-25, <span
class="smallcaps">Honorius</span>, 625-38, <span
class="smallcaps">Severinus</span>, 640, <span
class="smallcaps">John</span> IV, 640-42, <span
class="smallcaps">Theodore</span>, 642-49, <span
class="smallcaps">Martin</span>, 649-54, <span
class="smallcaps">Eugenius</span>, 654-57, <span
class="smallcaps">Vitalian</span>, 657-72, <span
class="smallcaps">Adeodatus</span> II, 672-76, <span
class="smallcaps">Donus</span>, 676-78, <span
class="smallcaps">Agatho</span>, 678-83, <span
class="smallcaps">Leo</span> II, 682-83, <span
class="smallcaps">Benedict</span> II, 684-85, <span
class="smallcaps">John</span> V, 685-86, <span
class="smallcaps">Conon</span>, 686-87, <span
class="smallcaps">Sergius</span>, 687-701, <span
class="smallcaps">John</span> VI, 701-5,<span
class="smallcaps">John</span> VII, 705-7, <span
class="smallcaps">Sisinnius</span>, 707-8, <span
class="smallcaps">Constantine</span>, 708-15.

The absence of individual genius in the recorded acts of the seventh
century popes does not rob the Church of the credit due for the survival
of the graces that made for the machinery of civilization. Private law
had usurped public law but in the chaotic gloom that followed there was
one brightness, the stabilizing influence of the monasteries. The monks
had spread everywhere and not only were they zealously implanting and
nourishing the truths of Christian philosophy but the network of
monasteries was founding a structure that was to be the only hope for a
social order of any kind. From the wild coasts of Ireland to the equally
wild shores of Africa the monks labored and preached; their monasteries
housing the principles of justice and the exercise of mercy. In an age
when academies of learning were but ruined buildings and their uses the
dimly remembered echoes of earlier generations the cloisters were alone
open to the practice of the arts. Not that all these champions of the
faith were scholars and philosophers. There was also the vast army of
their sturdy brethren, bound by the same vows of service, who tilled the
soil, hewed the wood, and performed the many other prodigious tasks of
industry which made possible the formation and continuance of those
communities which, in

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the seas of surrounding disorder, were self-supporting havens of peace,
citadels of learning, and asylums of charity.

Christian monasticism had originated in the deserts of Egypt during the
IVth Century when groups of ascetic hermits gathered to dwell under one
rule. The movement in various forms spread rapidly throughout the
Christian world. The great figure of its inauguration in the East was
St. Basil; in the West, nearly two hundred years later—although it had
existed there previously—St. Benedict. This founder of the great Order
which was to be of such immense service to the papacy, and from whose
ranks were to come over four thousand bishops, sixteen hundred
archbishops, two hundred cardinals, twenty-eight popes, and five
thousand saints, can best be judged by St. Benedict's description of the
ideal abbot ". . . he must be chaste, sober, and merciful, ever
preferring mercy to justice, that he himself may obtain mercy. Let him
hate sin and love the brethren. And even in his corrections, let him act
with prudence, and not go too far, lest while he seeketh too eagerly to
scrape off the rust, the vessel be broken. And by this we do not mean
that he should suffer vices to grow up; but that prudently and with
charity he should cut them off, in the way he shall see best for each,
as we have already said; and let him study rather to be loved than
feared. Let him not be violent nor over anxious, not exacting nor
obstinate, not jealous nor prone to suspicion, or else he will never be
at rest. In all his commands, whether spiritual or temporal, let him be
prudent and considerate. In the works which he imposeth, let him be
discreet and moderate, bearing in mind the discretion of holy Jacob,
when he said: 'If I cause my flocks to be overdriven, they will all
perish in one day.' Taking, then, such testimonies as are borne by these
and the like words to discretion, the mother of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

virtues, let him so temper all things, that the strong may have
something to strive after, and the weak nothing at which to take alarm."

Such were the standards the monks had for their guidance when they set
out to implant their faith throughout the world and such were the
standards that were to keep the spirit of the Church alive when many
princes and prelates, dazzled by the pomp of sovereign status, succumbed
to the temptations of rank. These indeed were the standards so
gloriously upheld by Gregory the Great. Benedictine wisdom shines in his
letter to an abbot missionary in England. "Tell him," he wrote,
referring to St. Augustine whom he had sent to convert England, "what I
have long been considering in my own mind concerning the matter of the
English people; to wit, that the temples of the idols in that nation
ought not to be destroyed; but let the idols that are in them be
destroyed; let water be consecrated and sprinkled in the said temples,
let altars be erected, and relics placed there. For if those temples are
well built, it is requisite that they be converted from the worship of
devils to the service of the true God; that the nation, seeing that
their temples are not destroyed may remove error from heir hearts and,
knowing and adoring the true God, may the more freely resort to the
places to which they have been accustomed. And because they are used to
slaughter many oxen in sacrifice to devils, some solemnity must be given
them in exchange for this, as that on the day of the dedication, or the
nativities of the holy martyrs, whose relics are there deposited, they
should build themselves huts of the boughs of trees about those churches
which have been turned to that use from being temples, and celebrate the
solemnity with religious feasting, and no more offer animals to the
devil, but kill cattle and glorify God in their feast, and return thanks
to the Giver of all

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

things for their abundance; to the end that, while some out- ward
gratifications are retained, they the more easily consent to the inward
joys. For there is no doubt that it is impossible to cut off everything
at once from their rude natures; because he who endeavours to ascend to
the highest place rises by degrees or steps, and not by leaps . . ."

The spirit of such men was to prove of immense aid to the Church. But in
this, the VIIth Century, there also was born another influence which for
centuries was to be a bitter and fiercely militant antagonist of
Christianity. A theocratic state was welded in Arabia by one Mohammed
who claimed to be a true Prophet of God. With fanatical zeal he
propounded to his nomad listeners a religion that was a strange mixture
of Judaism, Christianity, and Paganism.

"Four women I revere above all others," he said, "the sister of Moses,
the Mother of Jesus, my wife Kadiza, and my daughter, Fatima."

His doctrine did not call for a definite priesthood although there were
to be interpreters in the form of doctors and preachers. The real
leaders were to be warriors, for it was by sword and conquest he
proposed to spread his faith. "The sword," he declared, "is the key of
heaven and hell; a drop of blood shed in the cause of God, a sigh spent
in arms, is of more avail than two months of fasting or prayer:
whosoever falls in battle, his sins are forgiven at the day of judgment,
his wounds shall be resplendent as vermilion, and odoriferous as musk;
and the loss of his limbs shall be supplied by the wings of angels and
cherubim."

The visions such eloquence conjured dazzled his audiences and they
became frenzied armies which, as they rushed rapturously to battle,
chanted "There is but one God, and Mohammed is the Prophet of God." With

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

astonishing swiftness the standards of Islam were implanted throughout
Arabia; then, defeating the Byzantine legions, in Syria; and in
Palestine, Egypt, and Persia. For a time the bulwark of Constantinople
was avoided, but not so the fertile islands of the Mediterranean or the
coasts of Northern Africa. Unafraid and feared, the indomitable Saracens
marched and sailed and plundered and at the beginning of the Eighth
Century they had landed in Spain and with determined eyes fixed on Gaul
were triumphantly advancing to the Pyrenees. Such was the alarming
progress of their conquests, achieved in less than a hundred years, when
Pope <span class="smallcaps">Gregory</span> II succeeded Constantine I
in 715.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eighth Century](ptp08.md)
