[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp10)  [Next](ptp12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Eleventh Century

Even yet the obstinate Romans were not subdued and though armies were
lacking there remained subtler weapons. The wearisome narrative of
bloodshed and violence must continue and as the last year of the tenth
century ebbed it was stained by the murder of another Pope as Gregory
succumbed in the convulsions of poison.

Disillusionment was mixed with his sorrow as the tearful Otto knelt
beside the prostrate body. Gone now were the lofty dreams born of his
idealism wherein youth, in the form of his cousin and himself, were to
bring an era of harmony and hope to a united Empire. He realized that
the next Pope must be a man not only of virtue but of worldly wisdom,
one who could with equal clarity discern the deeds of saints or the
plots of villains. With such thoughts in mind it was only natural that
the Emperor should turn to his ex-teacher, Gerbert, Archbishop of
Ravenna, for here was a prelate familiar with the intrigues of courts
and yet a scholar of such ability as in an age of almost universal
ignorance had earned for him a reputation for necromancy. The prodigious
education of this remarkable man had begun in a Benedictine monastery at
Aurillac, then schools in Spain and Italy and finally at

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rheims had fed a
genius which excelled with an equal facility in the arts of literature,
music, mathematics, and astronomy. At a time when bishoprics were
reserved almost entirely for the kin of kings and nobles he had fought
his way up from a humble birth to a position where the ailing Archbishop
of Rheims had nominated him as his successor. Hugh Capet, King of
France, had in turn objected, approved, and objected again, to this
move, and there had been trouble for some years but now the Emperor, the
boy whom he had dazzled with the glories of Charlemagne's dreams, was
offering him the highest position of all. He accepted and was
consecrated Pope with the style of <span
class="smallcaps">Sylvester</span> II. Fervour, ability, and severity
characterized his efforts at reforming the clergy. "Sylvester, Bishop,
Servant of the Servants of God," he wrote to one unruly bishop. "Be not
astonished that you do not find at the head of our letter either
greeting or apostolic benediction. Bearing the name of bishop, you have,
by your misdeeds, ceased to be a man. If fidelity lifts a man up to God,
treachery brings him down to the level of brutes." Schools were founded
and favoured under his rule for he knew well the value of learning. "The
just man liveth by faith" was his message to another prelate "but it is
meet to join knowledge thereto." Kings received from him favors or
rebukes as the occasion demanded. Stephen, ruler of Hungary, received
the hereditary title of "Apostolic Majesty" but to the French King went
a sentence of penance for his transgression of the matrimonial law.

Otto established residence in Rome and together he and the Pope talked
of the future and of Charlemagne. The great dream would be realized and
across the splendid conversations a prophecy of the Crusades would flit
for Sylvester's vision was not confined to boundaries and he had plans
to liberate the Holy Sepulchre. But before any

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

such schemes could be attempted Rome itself would have to be tamed for
neither the learning and charm of the Pope, nor the force of the
Emperor, had yet thawed the chill hostility of the Romans. The turbulent
Marozian blood ran strong in two rival factions, headed by John
Crescentius, son of the executed Patrician, and his cousins the Counts
of Tusculum. Neither branch of the tempestuous and greedy family was
lacking the ancestral ambitions, avarices, or audacity, and Otto was
forced to give battle to their defiance at Tivoli. Finally even the
gates of his palace in Rome were not inviolate against their insults and
under such conditions it became increasingly evident to the young Prince
that his plans would never grow to success. A melancholia gradually
replaced his hopes and, abandoning his bright majestic mirages, he took
to prayers and alms-giving and talked of entering a monastery. His
spirit was gone and he died, only twenty-two years old, in the early
Spring of 1003. The Marozian clan crowded nearer as the royal corpse was
anointed by the sad Sylvester before being despatched across the Alps to
its resting place alongside the great Charlemagne. The Pope was grief
stricken but in three months he too was dead, and against these deaths,
so close together, some historians have levelled suspicion and hinted of
murder.

The Imperial title passed to Henry, duke of Bavaria, whose own troubles
were to prevent him from coming to Italy for eleven years. John
Crescentius, outwitting his cousins, assumed control of Rome and his
influence secured the election of the next three popes. <span
class="smallcaps">John</span> XVII lived only six months after his
consecration. Then came <span class="smallcaps">John</span> XVIII,
simple and pious, who devoted himself to bringing harmony to
ecclesiastical affairs and whose soothing influence seems to have won
Constantinople; for again the papal name appeared on the diptychs of
that Church.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He was an earnest
patron of the monastic institutions and indeed, preferring the simpler
life, he abdicated in 1009 to enter the cloisters of St. Paul's near
Rome. <span class="smallcaps">Sergius</span> IV, who was the son of a
Roman cobbler, was of the same mold as his predecessor and after earning
a splendid reputation as a friend of the poor he died in the May of
1012.

Just a few weeks previous to his own death he had celebrated the funeral
mass of his patron, John Crescentius, and then the stage was set for
another unedifying contest as the Count of Tusculum presented one of his
sons, Theophylact, as a candidate for the papacy. The Crescentii did not
agree with their cousins and announced as their own choice a certain
Gregory. Both branches of the ancient family could support their
opinions by private armies and each conducted a separate election. Two
Popes claimed the title and while the Crescentii held the city, the
Tusculans prowled the provinces. It was an insufferable deadlock and the
only way to solve it was by appeal to other authority. Henry II was now
safely ensconced and once again couriers sped north to enlist Imperial
support and sympathy. Henry, a wise and good ruler, gave his decision in
favor of Theophylact who as Pope took the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Benedict</span> VIII. Victory for the Tusculans meant
that the pretentions of Gregory were soon to be abandoned and the new
Pope was left unhindered to his responsibilities. Although he owed his
elevation to the efforts of his father he quickly proved it was to be
his own will which would govern his policies. Peace in Italy and reform
throughout the Church were the immediate goals of a vigorous energy.

In the Spring of 1014 Henry, defeating some troublesome clans en route,
came to receive his crown and with it the Pope presented a significant
and symbolical gift, a jewelled orb upon which was attached a cross. The
Emperor passed the costly bauble to the monks at Cluny but

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

the hint was not lost; for with his aid, now tendered, Benedict was able
to mass an army and completely defeat a Saracen force which had landed
at Luni in Maremma. They were the best of friends and the Pope did not
resent Henry's interest in ecclesiastical matters for the Emperor, no
less than himself, was distressed at the sad discipline of the clergy
and was desirous of ending a sorry state of affairs. Clerical
incontinence was an all too familiar evil and with a view to stamping it
out an important synod, held under both Imperial and Papal auspices, was
convened at Pavia in 1022. This meeting was successful but the exalted
partners had greater plans and talked of instituting a great reform
throughout all Christendom. It was a laudable but tremendous scheme and
careful preparation was needed for the morass of opposition was large
and all encompassing. How could simony be abolished when it was the
revenue of powerful rulers and how could a married clergy be purged back
to chastity when wives dwelt openly and contentedly in many an episcopal
palace? Undaunted the Pope and the Emperor set to work but the world was
large and their time was short. Two years after Pavia both men, and,
alas, their schemes with them, were in their graves.

While Benedict had occupied his time with lofty projects the mundane
affairs of the Papal States had been directed by his brother, Romanus,
who as he quickly changed from lay to clerical state managed the next
election with such dexterity that he was declared Pope with the name of
<span class="smallcaps">John</span> XIX. With him came a revival of the
old abuses and simony flourished again. He held lavish court and with
generous gifts, in the manner of the ancient Caesars, kept the good-will
of the Roman mobs and with magnificent hospitality entertained Kings or
their Ambassadors. Pageantry and splendor enveloped the

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

ancient city when the new Emperor, Conrad, accompanied by two Kings,
Canute of England and Rudolph of Burgundy, arrived for the Imperial
coronation in 1027. Sorely taxed were the papal coffers by
extravagances; and when envoys, laden with valuable presents and richer
promises, arrived from the Byzantine Emperor, Basil II, with suggestions
that the Pope should agree that the rule of all the Oriental Churches be
under Constantinople, John was inclined to give his sanction. The
proposals had been made in secret but somehow the news leaked out and an
uproar came from the clergy. One alarmed Abbot wrote "It is a wholly
unjustifiable presumption on the part of the Greeks to have claimed the
privilege which, it is said, they wished to obtain from you. We beseech
you to show greater firmness in correcting abuses and maintaining
discipline in the bosom of the Catholic and Apostolic Church." The gifts
were hastily rejected and in Constantinople the frustrated Basil had the
papal name again erased from the diptychs of the churches. John seems to
have been the first pope to have granted indulgences in return for alms
bestowed; but offsetting this revenue he abolished the taxes that
hitherto under the guise of customs duties had been levied on Danish and
English pilgrims. He called together several synods but their fruit was
unimportant. Verbose decisions were made concerning the precedence of
powerful prelates whilst the splendid ambitions of his dead brother were
forgotten.

But although scandals continued and grew and remained unchided from the
Lateran the domestic bliss of many a cleric was now being disturbed by
the sudden appearance outside his windows of stern-eyed and loud-voiced
monks who did not allow any similarity of calling to stifle their
accusations or horror. These good men were militantly on the march and
at Cluny was their inspiration

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

in a succession of Abbots renowned for virtue and austerity. That these
influences as yet counted for little in Rome was evidenced by the
selection of the next Pope, <span class="smallcaps">Benedict</span> IX.
His name had been Theophylact and he was the nephew of his two
predecessors so it can be seen that the Tusculans were still in control.
Various historians have claimed Benedict's age at his election to have
been anywhere from ten to twenty. Whatever it was does not matter; for
he soon proved himself as capable in crime as any veteran of vice and to
be as lacking in discretion as the most foolish of adolescents. Together
with his brother Gregory, who bore the rank of Prefect, the youthful
bandit inflicted on Rome a series of misconducts until in angry
desperation the citizens allowed themselves to be incited by his family
rivals, the Crescentii, into a revolt which at first seemed successful.
Benedict was driven from Rome and the opposite party declared a new Pope
in the person of Sylvester III who had been John, Bishop of Sabina. But
the Tusculans were quick to rally and soon their troops expelled the
usurper and restored the capricious young villain to the Lateran.

Their loyalty was repaid only four months later by the supreme simony of
all time—the papal office was sold! For a large amount of money Benedict
resigned and attempted to convey the Apostolic Succession to John
Gratian, Archpriest of the church of St. John at the Latin Gate. Here
was a situation to stun canonists for there was no law to vitiate such a
transaction. Actually the practical minded citizens of Rome sighed with
relief at the new accession for John Gratian, now taking the name of
<span class="smallcaps">Gregory</span> VI, was a pious and good man who,
along with many others, had been appalled and shocked by the misdeeds of
Benedict. Disdaining such means, so common to the age, as the dagger or
poison he had resorted to gold

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

to remove the criminal presence before further chaos ensued. Once
installed he began reform and to assist he called from his monastery a
zealous and clever Benedictine named Hildebrand. Their labors were
promptly obstructed by the reappearance of the anti-Pope Sylvester who
backed by the Crescentii loudly called upon the faithful to deliver
homage to him as the true Pope. To complicate matters further Benedict
whose word was as doubtful as his morals decided to revoke his
resignation and, surrounded by Tusculan retainers, loftily announced
that of course his had been the only valid consecration. The truly pious
gathered in alarm around Gregory and begged him as their only hope for
order to stay firm.

This he did and thus three Popes, each guarded by his soldiery, held
court in a city whose lawless streets were now not thoroughfares but
skirmishing grounds for ruffians and brigands. It was the year 1045 and
once again history was repeated as a German Emperor, now Henry III,
marched south to take command and bring discipline to the Roman scene.
With alacrity Gregory accepted the Emperor's suggestion to convene a
synod and at Sutri the Fathers assembled against a background of German
spears. Sylvester was quickly judged, deposed, and conveyed to a
monastery. Attention turned to Gregory who gracefully admitting his own
consecration to have been a "shameful and demoniacal heresy" witnessed
with signature a decree of his invalidity and was then, accompanied by
his faithful secretary Hildebrand, taken to Germany as a state prisoner.
Benedict was now ordered to appear and answer for his crimes. And when
he refused to attend or recognize the authority of the synod and
retreated to wait and brood behind the impregnable walls of the family
fortress at Tusculum he was, amidst the solemnity of a ceremonial at St.
Peter's, ordered deposed. To the dismay of the jealous

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Romans who, no
matter how villainous a native-born pontiff might be, could seldom
stomach the idea of a foreigner, the German bishop, Suidger of Bamberg,
now took possession of the Sacred Chair as <span
class="smallcaps">Clement</span> II. His first act was to crown his
Emperor and Empress and sullenly the Roman nobles and their retinues
thronged to St. Peter's to listen while northern accents echoed about
the High Altar.

In the same dangerous mood the same audience watched Clement give his
farewell blessing to Henry as the latter departed for Germany. The Pope
was left with a bodyguard of his countrymen; tall, yellow-haired men who
had no liking for the prospects of an exile to be spent amidst the
sultriness of the approaching Italian summer. These simple northerners
were skilled and faithful warriors but fidelity and adept sword play
were to prove equally useless against the devices of Roman cunning. From
his bulwarked fastness the waiting Benedict watched and commanded, and
soon the German Pope was writhing in the tortures of a fatal and obscure
poison. Flanked by the troops of the Marquis of Tuscany Benedict swept
into Rome, drove out the small German garrison, and once again held
possession of the Lateran. There he remained until, nine months later,
the Emperor, who had been busy elsewhere, was able to send an expedition
sufficiently large to dislodge him. Accompanying this army was the
Bishop of Brixen who proudly took the title of Pope <span
class="smallcaps">Damasus</span> II; an appellation with which he was
fated never to become familiar. His sentence was already written in the
resentful glare of the mobs that his bodyguards were thrusting back with
stern commands and bared steel. Despite the most elaborate
precautions—German swords were waved at every passing shadow near the
papal residence and in the kitchens the most intricate care was taken
against poison

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —he was dead
within three weeks and an unsurprised Roman clergy were solemnly
arranging his funeral. The Emperor received the news with an anger that
stiffened his determination. A German must preside as Pontiff.

This time his choice fell on the royal born Bruno, Bishop of Toul. Rome
would be no novelty for this pious and courageous cleric who had been
there as a simple pilgrim and also as a commander of cavalry with the
Emperor Conrad's expedition in 1027. Soldier prelates were no rarity in
the Middle Ages but Bruno was also possessed of the talents which make
for a successful diplomat. Before accepting the dangerous honor he
insisted the Roman clergy should be unanimous in the approval of him and
when he made his journey south he took as his adviser the monk named
Hildebrand, the same who had been the assistant and friend of John
Gratian. Guided by the monk's wisdom Bruno did not enter Rome with the
pomp of a great prelate or the splendor of a German prince but instead
came as an ordinary pilgrim, barefooted and humble alike in garment and
manner. The lack of display did not rob but rather enhanced his imposing
appearance for. he was a tall, straight-backed, fair-haired man of
vigorous middle age. Nor were his companions vain and quarrelsome
nobles. They were devout churchmen and the Romans, displaying less
surliness than was their wont, offered no objections when his new name
was announced as being <span class="smallcaps">Leo</span> IX. That his
humility was no subterfuge was evidenced throughout the term of this
third German pontiff. The influence of Cluny chastened the Lateran
atmosphere and with Hildebrand at his elbow Leo, employing a
thoroughness born of military skill and experience, set out to convey
the spirit of reform throughout the Church. He ruled five years and was
incessantly busy; for in addition to those enormous ecclesiastical
problems his ambitions

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

challenged there were to annoy him the temporal affairs of the Papal
States which were in a deplorable condition. And there was war too. The
depredations of the Normans in southern Italy, in 1053, forced him to
engage them but his troops were outnumbered and, despite great valor,
defeated. But not their General. He was taken prisoner and in one of
those incidents, bright with honor and kindness and so rare in history,
the Normans impressed by the virtues and station of the illustrious
captive, fell on their knees and declared themselves to be henceforth
his soldiers.

Never dormant were his energies against the seemingly insurmountable and
gigantic evils of simony and lay investiture. A series of councils were
convened and directed against corrupt clergy and their decrees were
conveyed in person by the Pope himself in journeys that took him
throughout Germany and on to Rheims where he met "Spaniards, Bretons,
Franks, Irish and the English." He charmed and swayed and directed the
actions of their rulers; forbidding the marriage of William (soon to be
the Conqueror) to Matilda of Flanders but sending friendly letters to
Edward the Confessor of England (whose piety produced a generosity that
resulted in the erection of Westminster Abbey). Hungary's monarch asked
for advice, and to Rome begging for the soothing words of absolution
came the King of Scotland, Macbeth, the same whom Shakespeare was to
immortalize. But this heavy traffic with Western royalties did not awe
the Patriarch of Jerusalem who, adhering to the teachings of Photius,
chose at this time to declare all Latin Catholics to be heretics. Latin
Churches in the East were closed and their bewildered and frightened
congregations hastily made report to Rome. As the altercation was
carried to its height Leo was seized by a serious illness and, his
exhausted frame offering no resistance, he died amidst a general and
sincere

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

lamentation during the April of 1054. But his will persisted from the
grave and on the July following, his legates the Cardinals Humbert and
Frederick, in whom he had invested full authority, formally
excommunicated the Byzantine Patriarch and all who remained his
adherents. Thus the Eastern Church was definitely severed from Rome.

For almost a year after Leo's death there was no Pope. The mood of Rome
grew heavy with unrest and anxiety and it was only the delicate
diplomacy of Hildebrand that stayed hot tempers from breeding rash
actions. It was his caution which restrained the impulsive Roman nobles
from staging hasty "elections" before the Emperor had chance to nominate
a German candidate. There were not lacking many who declared that the
wise monk himself should be Pope but the very virtues which excited
their admiration were the same that made him hastily and emphatically
discourage their proposals. Personal ambitions played little part in
Hildebrand's actions and with history to guide him he saw that in the
interests of peace a German should occupy the Papal throne. With rare
unselfishness he set out to win the goodwill of the Romans for Gebhard,
Bishop of Eichstatt, and in September at Mainz the Emperor met a Roman
delegation and it was agreed Gebhard should be Pope. To their surprise
their choice refused to accept the honor unless—and here again we
discern the hand of Hildebrand—the Emperor guaranteed to restore the
duchies of Spoleto and Camerino and also to send troops sufficient to
repel the Norman invasions. This last condition was not easy for the
German ruler to grant; for now, to bar his soldiers from access to
Italy, were the newly consolidated territories of the war-like and
hostile Godfrey of Lorraine who had strengthened his position and
augmented his power by marrying the widow of the Marquis of Tuscany. The
negotiations continued for

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

months but finally the Emperor acceded to Gebhard's demands—something he
most certainly would not have done with an Italian candidate—and the new
Pope was formally installed in Rome on the 17th day of April 1055. <span
class="smallcaps">Victor</span> II was the name he chose and he kept it
bright with zeal and honor in a pontificate that endured for the next
two years and which continued the policies of Leo and the plans of
Hildebrand.

A year after his election Victor was summoned to the death bed of the
Emperor and against that gloomy and dramatic background he was, at the
dying sovereign's request, made guardian of the six year old princeling,
Henry IV, and appointed Regent of Germany. The Emperor died and the Pope
was left with heavy responsibilities. He met them well. First he
safeguarded the Imperial succession by solemnly crowning and enthroning
the Boy-Emperor, then he transferred the regency to the child's mother
who was surrounded by a court of loyal and strong vassals. His attention
now turned to Godfrey of Lorraine, the late Emperor's enemy, who might
be expected to cause trouble. The Pope journeyed south, met this Prince
and won him to peace. Alas, he was not destined to enjoy the sweets of
his triumph for long. In the hot midsummer of the following year he died
suddenly whilst settling a dispute between the bishops of Arenno and
Siena.

Who was to be the next Pope? The present Emperor was but a child and his
office controlled by an unambitious woman. The German shadow rested but
lightly on Rome where there was a sudden stirring amongst old families.
Swords were counted as Crescentii and Tusculans took hope again and had
it not been for the capable actions of the resolute and incorruptible
Hildebrand there would undoubtedly have been a repetition of the old
regime of anarchy. Once again we read of his discouraging his own

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

enthusiastic supporters and swinging their allegiance to a candidate who
could steady the Papal throne with the support of a powerful prince and
who at the same time would bring no disgrace to the high station. His
choice was Cardinal Frederick, cousin of Pope Leo IX, and brother of
Godfrey of Lorraine, now the strongest ruler in Italy. Despite his high
birth Frederick had proved by long service his ability as a cleric. He
had been the Papal librarian and it was he, along with Cardinal Humbert,
who had headed the historic embassy to Constantinople at the end of Leo
IX's reign. He assumed the style of <span
class="smallcaps">Stephen</span> X and was consecrated during the August
of 1057.

One of his first acts was to dispatch Hildebrand on a mission that had a
dual purpose; he was to visit the German court and win the good will of
the Emperor-Regent, and he was then to campaign throughout Germany and
France on a crusade against the stubborn evils of simony. Reform was
still the determined Papal goal but some comprehension of the obstacles
greeting the efforts of the reformers can be gleaned from the events
which now took place. With Hildebrand across the Alps and only eight
months after Stephen's installation the Papal throne became empty again.
Some said it was poison, and whether the whispers were true or not the
dying Pope was sufficiently apprehensive of what might happen after his
death to beg, with his last breath, that there should be no election
until after the return of Hildebrand. He died and his wishes were
ignored. The suspicion that his end bore the stain of murder was
strengthened by the unseemly haste with which the old factions now moved
to present their candidates. The Counts of Tusculum were, by a great
show of arms and liberal donations of liquor to the fickle mobs,
successful with their protégé John Mincius, Bishop

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

of Villetri, who now took the highly significant name of Benedict X.
And, while such worthy prelates as Cardinals Humbert and Peter Damien
publicly and courageously but fruitlessly voiced objections, he was
installed on the fifth of April 1058.

Unhappy and miserable must have been the mood of the absent Hildebrand
when the news reached him. A puppet Pope had been proclaimed to the
world and Tusculan soldiers, with the firm tread of possessors, were
striding the streets of Rome. But, unhappy as he was at these facts,
Hildebrand was neither daunted nor intimidated. Despair at the seeming
collapse of his reforms was no brake to his energies. Rather it acted as
a spur to his indomitable will for resourcefully he turned to the German
court and successfully pleaded for support. The aid of Godfrey of
Lorraine was also won and so with a mixed army behind him the zealous
monk marched on Rome. At Sutri, under his auspices, an election was held
and chosen to bear the supreme but dangerous honor was Gerard, Bishop of
Florence. Rome was then invaded and the Tusculan dispossessed. The
anti-Pope fled and Gerard was canonically installed amidst the cheers of
the relieved citizens. This Pope took the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Nicholas</span> II and ruled well until his death
eighteen months later. The most important act of his reign was the
promulgation of a new electoral law. Guarding against the abuses which
had preceded his own elevation Nicholas assembled some hundred and
thirteen important prelates who formulated the *Constitution on the
Election of the Sovereign Pontiff* which amongst other resolutions,
provided that: The election is to take place in Rome; but if for some
reason it cannot be held there, the electors may repair elsewhere. The
candidate must be a member of the Roman clergy, if there is a suitable
one; if not, the electors must look elsewhere

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

for one. The Cardinal-bishops, that is, the bishops of certain sees
close to Rome, take the lead by choosing a candidate after which the
other Cardinals are called in to vote. The rest of the Roman clergy and
people are then given the opportunity to express their consent by
acclamation. King Henry of Germany, the future Emperor, and those of his
successors who shall have obtained this privilege personally from the
Apostolic See, shall be asked to confirm the election.

It is important to grasp what the Cardinals were and why they chose the
Bishop of Rome. From the late fifth century the term was applied to the
senior priest of each of the Churches of the city of Rome, also to the
deacons in charge of the seven regions into which for various
administrative purposes Rome was divided, and later to the bishops of
the Sees adjacent to Rome. The Cardinals really were in that sense the
local clergy of Rome, to whom it naturally fell to elect the Bishop of
Rome. Later the title of Cardinal was given to distinguished Churchmen
resident in various parts of the world. With the title, they were made
titular priests of this or that Roman church, thus members of the clergy
of Rome. It is as such that these foreign Cardinals too take part in the
election of the Bishop of Rome. A Cardinal is called Cardinal Bishop,
Cardinal Priest or Cardinal Deacon according to the See near Rome or
church in Rome to which he is appointed.

The new law was a determined effort of the Church to free the Papal
elections from lay influences; a fact instantly perceived by both the
German court and interested Italian factions. There was a loud outcry
from these sources and it seemed perhaps that the new regulations had
rashly deprived the Papacy of all temporal protection, and therefore it
would be at the mercy of and subject to the whims of any tyrant who
might wish to invade Rome.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But Hildebrand had
foreseen this situation and guided by him the Pope made a treaty with
those Normans who were strongly ensconced in their own colony in
southern Italy. In return for various privileges of recognition their
Duke, Richard Guiscard, promised to provide an army of protection for
the Holy See and to guarantee the freedom of the Papal elections. When
the news of the treaty was made known the anti-Pope Benedict who had
been persisting in his claims while hiding in one of the Tusculan
retreats now made his formal submission to the real Pope. Nicholas died
in the summer of 1061 at Florence and as Hildebrand assembled the
Cardinal-bishops to select his successor a curious thing happened. The
Roman nobles, frustrated in their schemes and prevented from violence by
the presence of the Normans, sent emissaries to the German court where
they had no trouble in arousing indignation and resentment at the
exercise of the new electoral law. But while the smooth-tongued Italians
were inciting the suspicious of the credulous and often foolish Empress
Regent the Cardinals at Rome, free from temporal influences, quickly and
unanimously elected the austere Bishop of Lucca, Anselm, who became Pope
<span class="smallcaps">Alexander</span> II.

The news, as the constitution provided, was then sent to Germany where
it was received with scorn and anger. Indeed, the royal widow, firmly
convinced that the Imperial prerogatives had been encroached upon,
assembled a group of intimidated and political-minded churchmen who
obediently declared a new pontiff in the person of the Bishop of Palma.
This man, by no accident, was the candidate advanced by the Italian
nobility; and when the boy Emperor, Henry IV, under the prompting of his
mother and amidst the smiles of the Italians, ratified the "election,"
he took the name of Honorius II. An army escorted his person and
pretentions to Rome and it appeared

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

for a while as though success was with him. His troops defeated the
Normans and took possession of St. Peter's. Dismal indeed was the
outlook for Alexander until help came from Godfrey of Lorraine who was
jealous of German intrusion in Italy. Finally the sad spectacle of two
claimants attempting to administer the Church was solved by the seizure
from the Empress of the Imperial Regency by the Archbishop of Cologne.
This stern prelate, Hanno by name, with his German prejudices, had
little sympathy for the Norman alliance with the Papacy but there could
be no doubt as to the legitimacy of Alexander's election. At the
suggestion of Peter Damien, Hanno convened a general council which after
deliberation acknowledged the true Pope and condemned the contender.
Thus ended the stormy circumstances that arose from the first effort to
exercise the new electoral regulations.

The troubles of inauguration did not prevent the twelve year pontificate
of Alexander II from becoming a splendid record of unremitting reform
and courage. The Pope was well endowed with this latter virtue and
fearlessly he deposed powerful ecclesiastics who had the protection of
rulers but had acquired their rank by simoniacal means.

When the young Emperor on reaching manhood showed disposition to be a
libertine he was suitably reproved and his request for a divorce sternly
rejected. To William, Duke of Normandy, a Prince of far different
nature, about to embark on his historic invasion of England, he sent, as
a token of his regard, a consecrated banner. Harold, William's enemy,
had accepted the authority of Stigand, Archbishop of Canterbury, who was
regarded by Rome as being a schismatic; for, after receiving the pallium
from Benedict X, this prelate had never since bowed to the rule of the
lawful Pope.

Standing by and serving Alexander during his twelve-year

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

term with the same genius and fidelity he had given the previous
pontiffs was Hildebrand, now Chancellor of the Apostolic See. For twenty
years the inspired monk had been the outstanding figure in the
ecclesiastical world. Physically he was puny and sickly, small of
stature and wan of face, but the frailness of a vessel is not indicative
of the strength of its contents. To that august station which he had so
assiduously avoided he had helped direct far healthier men than himself
and had outlived them all. Some men in history have been given the title
of kingmaker but the humble monk was even more than that, and when Pope
Alexander died on the twenty-first of April 1073, it must have been with
heavy heart that his friend Hildebrand pondered on the problem of
succession as he labored over the burial arrangements. But for the
people and clergy of Rome there was no problem. For them there was only
one candidate and as the Chancellor turned from Alexander's tomb on the
day of the funeral he was startled and horrified to hear on every side a
steady chant "Let Hildebrand be Pope!" "Blessed Peter has chosen
Hildebrand!" "Let Hildebrand be Pope!"

There could be no evasion this time. Both clergy and people were
overwhelmingly insistent and the Cardinals voted accordingly. The
reluctant Hildebrand, who up to this time had deemed himself worthy only
to hold the minor orders of the priesthood, was fully ordained and a few
weeks later consecrated Bishop of Rome. He took the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Gregory</span> VII and following the directions of the
electoral regulations he hastened to inform the profligate Henry IV of
his elevation. In this same communication he warned the young Emperor,
whose court was fast becoming infamous as a market for simony, that his
policy would be even more stern than had been those of his predecessors.
It was a bold letter but Henry seemed

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

to bear no resentment and answered as a dutiful son, admitting error and
swearing repentance.

The new Pope surveyed his problems and found them many and grave. Past
popes had issued decrees of reform and the monastic elements had worked
unceasingly but that which they opposed remained undislodged and
undefeated. Two years after his election found the depressed Pontiff
writing to his friend, Hugh, Abbot of Cluny: "Wherever I turn my eyes—to
the west, to the north, or to the south—I find everywhere Bishops who
have obtained their office in an irregular way, whose lives and
conversation are strangely at variance with their sacred calling; who go
through their duties not for the love of Christ but for motives of
worldly gain. There are no longer Princes who set God's honor before
their own selfish ends, or who allow justice to stand in the way of
their ambitions. . ."

Beyond the scenes of these vexations he had lofty plans for once again
uniting Christendom by restoring peace between the Eastern and Western
Churches and he also harbored ambitions to commence a crusade and free
from the Mohammedan yoke the site of the Holy Sepulchre. But beyond the
preliminary stages of the splendid schemes he could not advance because
of the evils that flourished so near to Rome, evils that kept his wits
and energies occupied to their fullest capacity. Finally he saw that it
was useless to thunder against erring ecclesiastics when they had the
protection and encouragement of rulers. There was only one weapon that
he could use effectively against the latter class and that was the
sentence of excommunication. This he promised to do whilst addressing a
Roman synod in 1075: "Whoever in the future receives a bishopric or an
abbacy from the hands of a layman, shall not be regarded as a bishop or
an abbot. Similarly if an Emperor,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

a duke, a marquis, or a count dares to confer an investiture in
connection with a bishopric or any other ecclesiastical office, he shall
be cut off from the communion of Blessed Peter."

The warning was received in Germany with sullenness and opposition by a
well-beneficed and incontinent clergy and with rage by Henry, who chose
to regard it as a direct insult to the Imperial Majesty of his person.
There was no mistaking the direct words of rebuke for there was only one
Emperor and despite his previous letter, so filial and submissive to the
Pope, he deemed the practice of lay investiture to be one of his
inherited privileges. We have already seen this matter of investiture as
troubling the Popes. It had become very much the custom within the
Empire that on the death of a bishop or abbot, the Emperor should
appoint his successor and bestow on him the ring and staff of office. It
was obviously unfitting that the lay power should appoint to spiritual
office, yet one can see the Emperor's point of view. Bishops of
important sees (more so in the Empire than in the rest of Christendom)
and the abbots of rich monasteries were of a necessity great temporal
lords. In the feudal system their territories were of vital economic and
military importance. It was unthinkable, reasoned Henry, for the
bestowal of such powerful offices not to be vested in him who was the
highest temporal authority. To counter the threat of excommunication he
invoked at Worms a convention of German bishops, all of whom were linked
by feudal ties, and most of whom were married. Their defence in this
respect was that the laws enjoining celibacy had no basis in scriptural
teachings. They quoted St. Paul that "It is better to marry than to
burn" and "It behoveth therefore a bishop to be blameless, the husband
of one wife." Clergy of this type declared they were men, not the angels
that

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gregory's
standards required, and to emphasize their opinion they treated his
legates with open and oft times dangerous hostility. With such a spirit
animating high prelates revolt against Rome flared fiercely and spread
quickly. The Archbishop of Rouen whilst trying to enforce celibacy among
his clergy was stoned and forced to flee, while the Abbot of Pontoise
was for the same reason hurled into prison and threatened with death.
Such was the respect shown to Gregory's commands! But not even content
with this brand of lawlessness the Emperor's churchmen at Worms brought
a series of absurd and outrageous charges against the Pontiff and then
proceeded to "depose" him. To Gregory came a preposterous message:
"Henry, king, not by usurpation but by the will of God, to Hildebrand
who is no longer pope but a false monk. Having been condemned by the
sentence of our bishops and by our sentence, vacate the place which you
have usurped."

At the Lateran Gregory calmly read the outrageous missive to the
assembled Roman clergy and the next morning made his effective reply:
"Hearken, O Blessed Peter. . . . In thy place, and by thy favor, God has
given me authority to bind and to loose upon earth. Wherefore, filled
with this confidence, for the honor and defence of thy Church, in the
name of God Almighty, by thy power and thy authority, I deprive Henry
the king, son of Henry the Emperor, who with unheard of pride has risen
against thy Church, of all authority in the kingdom of the Teutons and
in Italy. I release all Christians from their oaths of fidelity sworn to
him or that they shall swear to him. I forbid any person to do him any
of the service due to kings. . . . I bind him with the chain of
anathema. . . ."

The sentence was as formidable as it was unprecedented and it served its
purpose well. The potent words from the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vatican were to
defeat the presumptuous monarch far more quickly and more completely
than any army would have done. In the dangerously balanced feudal
structure that was Germany, the Papal decree was an excellent and timely
pretext for secession by many of the Imperial vassals who already were
disgusted with a corrupt reign. Tumult and dissension swept through the
land like fire through dry timber and even those Churchmen who had
behaved so basely at Worms now quickly changed their minds and policies.
Suddenly the alarmed Henry found himself without friends or allies,
without authority or even a court, and surrounded by menacing princes
who threatened to depose him.

It was obvious that there was only one person who could save him his
precarious position and to that source of mercy, the Pope whom he had so
lately and so arrogantly reviled, he now turned. Although it was harsh
winter he commenced the arduous journey south, accompanied only by his
wife and child and one servant. His goal was the castle of Canossa where
Gregory was in residence as the guest of Mathilde, Countess of Tuscany.
The once proud Emperor arrived outside the walls of the fortress on the
morning of January 25, 1077. There he sought entrance not as a
consecrated monarch but as a penitent pilgrim, barefooted, clad
wretchedly, speaking lowly, and weeping copiously. For three days his
tears fell in the snow and his wails drifted up to the turreted
battlements. Perhaps he was playing the hypocrite. Later events
certainly support that theory and Gregory, with his vast understanding
of human nature, must have allowed such suspicion to visit his mind. But
Gregory was also a priest and the charity of his vocation triumphed over
the cynicism which might have been expected of so astute a diplomatist.
Finally he succumbed to the entreaties and re-admitted

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the wailing sovereign to the communion of the Church. Absolution was
given on condition that Henry should, on his return to Germany, perform
no act of Government until he had appeared before and appeased a Diet of
those princes who had harbored charges against him.

The papal act of mercy was ill received in Germany and Henry's return
was viewed with well founded suspicion. Surely enough he broke his
pledges and avoided the Diet. These exasperated princes considered such
duplicity to be abdication and elected Duke Rudolph of Swabia to his
place. But another party, swayed by extravagant promises, rallied to the
sovereign and soon a savage civil war was in progress. Gregory was
forced to remain neutral and his efforts to effect a peace only served
to make him unpopular with both sides. Eventually the persistent
villainies of Henry made further papal neutrality impossible and the
sentence of excommunication was once again pronounced. This time Henry
was not intimidated. In the civil war his troops were gathering victory
after victory and this circumstance was sufficient to ensure him of the
good will of those odious and conscienceless feudatory churchmen who
once before had so brazenly supported his antipapal scheme. At Brixen,
in 1080, these creatures assembled and with a great showing of the pomp
of their rank but with little evidence of honor they announced that
henceforth Guibert, the excommunicated and simoniacal Archbishop of
Ravenna, was to be called Pope under the title of Clement III. The
fortunes of war continued to favor Henry. His rival, Rudolph, was
defeated and mortally wounded and the Emperor, who had never forgotten
the humiliation of Canossa, prepared his revenge. His triumphant armies
began the long march south to storm Rome and capture the Pope. But it
was three years before they finally forced entrance to the city and by
that time

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

the pontiff was behind the impregnable walls of Saint Angelo. With a
typical and blatant treachery Henry now tried to negotiate, even
promising to deliver as a prisoner his protégé, the anti-pope, if his
demands were met. For answer came a re-affirmation of his sentence of
excommunication. Angrily he turned back to Rome and there solaced his
[disappointment](errata.htm#3.md) by having his puppet crown him Emperor.
But not for long was the royal criminal to enjoy the city for to avenge
the Pope came the Norman, Robert Guiscard, with six thousand knights and
thirty thousand foot soldiers, many of whom were Saracens. Henry fled
and the rescuers took possession, bringing back Gregory in triumphant
procession.

Once again the Pope held the Lateran but it was only to be for a brief
and unhappy tenure. Fighting soon broke out between the Roman citizens
and the hot blooded Normans. Cavalry charged the streets and ancient
residences were put to the torch. Rapine and bloodshed plunged the city
into chaos and the unhappy pontiff was forced to retreat to a monastery.
The peace so long denied to him then approached. In the pangs of his
constant illness and disappointments he had often cried. "Lord, take me
away from this world. Make no long delay." At last his wishes were
heeded and on the 25th May, 1085, the frail and pain-wracked frame
reached its final exhaustion. Near his death the great champion wrote:
"I have loved justice and hated iniquity, therefore, I die in exile."
And one of his Cardinals wrote back in splendid answer, "In exile, Holy
Father, thou canst not die; *behold I have given thee the heathen for
thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession*."

Two years went by before there was another Pope and because of this
procrastination there was confusion. It took a full year before the
fancies of the Cardinals could

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

unite in a choice and it took as much time again before <span
class="smallcaps">Victor</span> III could be persuaded to accept
consecration. His name had been Desiderius and he was noble by birth and
nature. As a young man his family had shown a violent opposition when he
had announced his vocation for a monastic career. But the cloisters did
not hide his ability as a scholar or leader and for thirty successful
years he presided as Abbot of Monte Cassino. The world outside his walls
held no allure for him and it was with trepidation and reluctance that
he finally bowed to persuasion and accepted the supreme honor. When the
pretender Clement III promptly contested his election and appeared
outside Rome with an army of mercenaries, the new pontiff sped back to
his monastery with a celerity that evidenced little regret. These events
happened quietly, for Victor was an old and sick man and only survived
his installation by four months.

A friend of Gregory VII and recommended by Pope Victor was their
successor <span class="smallcaps">Urban</span> II. He was French by
birth and was the unanimous selection of the Cardinals. His given name
was Odo and his record as an ecclesiastic was brilliant. While still in
his thirties he had achieved the position of Archdeacon of Rheims but
this honour he had renounced to bury himself as a monk at Cluny. At the
monastery his talents were recognized and employed and he became Prior.
But neither peace nor security was to be his lot and from the
contemplative life Pope Gregory summoned him to be Cardinal Archbishop
of Ostia. Six months elapsed after Victor's death before he was elected.
He was then Pope but he was also a bishop denied his See. A strong force
of Imperial soldiery held Rome and "Clement III" paraded schism at St.
Peter's. The affairs of the Papacy were in a truly lamentable state and
because of the absence, during the past few years, of a strong and

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

guiding hand, most of the gains won so valiantly by Gregory had been
lost. Had Urban been a lesser man an "arrangement" would probably have
been made with Henry IV but fortunately compromise was not his way and,
as if to give challenge and allow of no intrigues, he reiterated the
sentence of excommunication against the Emperor. German troops plundered
afresh in Italy after this latest hurt to their master's pride and Urban
was forced to the south and Norman protection; but gradually favor
returned to sweeten his destiny as a series of disasters afflicted the
papal antagonist. Troubles were coming to the pugnacious Emperor from
unexpected sources, avenues indeed upon which he would find it difficult
to unloosen his usual savageries. His favorite son, Conrad, weary of the
shame and sycophancy and evil of his father's court, had deserted that
sad scene and had joined forces with the proven and good friend of
several Popes, the Countess Matilda and her new husband Guelf of
Bavaria. With their support and Urban's approval the German prince was
crowned King of Italy at Milan. Meanwhile Henry's second wife chose to
deliver an impassioned account of her grievances and his sins before a
synod of sympathetic churchmen and while the Emperor's mind was occupied
by his misfortunes an apathy seems to have incapacitated his warriors.
The anti-Pope fled from Rome and to Urban came a torrent of sudden
power. The papal dominions were enlarged and from all sides the papal
authority was sought.

To the country of his birth, seven years after his election, the pontiff
proceeded with the confidence of a victor. Acting truly as a Father of
Kings he rebuked and chastized on his own soil the wretched Philip, King
of France, whose only evidence of strength was the tenacity or obstinacy
he displayed in adhering to a scandalous and

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

adulterous union with the Countess Bertrada of Anjou. But while in
France the Pope delivered a speech far more important both in content
and result than a rebuke to a monarch. It was at Clermont where, before
a Council of several hundred prelates and thousands of clergy and
laymen, he delivered a plea for united Christendom, a holy unity which
would liberate the precious Shrine of the Holy Sepulchre, a Christendom
which would defeat and throw off the shameful yoke of oppression. He
spoke well, his theme was magnificent, and the moment was propitious.
"Altars are profaned and broken, Christians tortured, women violated. .
. . Who will avenge these wrongs? On you, rests this duty, on you. . . .
That which above all other thoughts should stir you most is the Holy
Sepulchre of the Savior and the Holy Places, ravaged and profaned by an
impure race. Valiant soldiers, descendants of those who never know
defeat, make your way to the Holy Sepulchre and tear the Holy Land from
the grasp of this abominable nation."

His audience wept and groaned in sympathy and with the vast sorrow and
deep anger a mighty enthusiasm was born. Their Pope was not the first to
tell them of Jerusalem's plight. There had been rumors, for always,
despite insult and hardship, there had been pilgrims. And lately,
travelling throughout Europe, stirring city and hamlet alike to
compassion and indignation had been a returned pilgrim, a holy hermit,
Peter of Amiens, who made it his vocation to tell of Christian disgraces
and Turkish profanities. "Who will avenge these wrongs?" cried the Pope
with all the power of a flaming conscience. "On you rests this duty . .
. on you!"

"God wills it!" shouted his audience in wild excitement. "God wills it."
The First Crusade was born but its story cannot be told in these pages.
It is a history, like

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

most narrative of human endeavor, of shame and honor, of pain and
ecstasy. More even than the beginning of a gigantic adventure it marked
the definite formation of a great Christian confederation. Princes and
peasants alike were enthralled again to the Christian spirit by its
splendid ideals and before its enthusiasm chivalry took form, feuds
ceased, and schisms wilted. Three years after Urban's speech at
Clermont, Godfrey de Bouillon set up his standard, splendid and
poignant, scarlet and white, at Jerusalem. In Rome the joy this triumph
brought was subdued by the solemnity of a Pope's Requiem. Urban II was
dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twelfth Century](ptp12.md)
