[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp13)  [Next](ptp15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Fourteenth Century

The Sacred College decided that the abdication (of Celestine V) was
valid and within twelve days proclaimed a successor. Apparently a sharp
lesson had been taught for the new pope, <span
class="smallcaps">Boniface</span> VIII, the former Cardinal Benedetto
Gaetani, was certainly no recluse, ignorant of the ways of the world. He
was a canonist of skill and a diplomat who as legate had exercised his
wits at the courts of Sicily, France and England. Although born at
Anagni and related to three previous pontiffs, he was sprung of an
ancient and noble family which had its roots in Spain. The University of
Paris had bestowed upon him a distinguished degree and that he was no
mean diplomat was shown by the fact of his election being approved by

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

both the Orsini and Colonna and Charles of Naples. Accusation has been
made that it was his ambition which planted the idea of abdication in
the mind of his predecessor but this charge is untrue. Celestine, well
aware of the confusions bred by his inability, determined his own
destiny. Perhaps the calumny against Boniface was born of the
confinement, after his election, of the sorrowing and miserable
ex-pontiff. This apparently drastic measure was the only course open;
for the dangers to the new reign of the simple Celestine being at large
and subject to the control of any adventurer can readily be seen. The
old man was placed in a castle near Anagni where he is reputed to have
said "I wished for nothing in the world but a cell, and a cell they have
given me." And it was there and in such a mood that he expired, ten
months after his abdication from a pontificate which had lasted five
months.

In almost every way Boniface differed from Celestine. He was strong and
confident, proud of his noble lineage and proud of his august rank. He
enjoyed and expected the splendours due to a temporal ruler and it was
with magnificence that he received the tiara. Rome was the scene of this
ceremony for following his election he had come to the City to escape
the dangerous proximity of Charles of Naples. Well indeed that he was
self confident. That quality was needed in the man who faced his
problems, for they were many and large and complicated. The Eastern
Church had resumed its schism, the Holy Land was lost and war raged in
every direction, between Naples and Sicily, Castile and Aragon, France
and England and with the latter nation also fighting the Scots. In
Germany Albert of Austria had drawn the sword against Adolph of Nassau
whilst in Rome of course there were the usual altercations between the
usual factions.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dissension was
even disturbing the domestic unity of these clans. The Colonna were
quarreling and this quarrel was to bring the new pontiff much trouble
and to contribute to the failure that was to darken his reign. For
disaster, no less than that which had confronted the simple and pious
Celestine, was to be the lot of this pope who had been selected for his
great skill in law and for his great knowledge of worldly matters. He
knew and accepted his problems and at first met them without hesitation
and with strong action. His plan was to make practical that elusive
structure which had been the ideal of the Holy Roman Empire and all
rulers and all states were to be subject in spiritual matters to the
authority of the Holy See. This was, briefly, the basis of his famous
bull, *Unam Sanctam*, issued in 1302. It brought forth violent
opposition from Philip of France for in truth the life and properties of
the Church were so tightly woven into the fabric of society that divorce
from the temporalities was impracticable and indeed unthinkable. The new
bull, so interpreted the French king along with many of his royal
colleagues, merely meant that all princes and rulers should be vassals
not only of the spiritual head of Christendom but also of the temporal
ruler of Rome.

From the commencement of his reign Boniface had incurred the wrath of
Philip. France and England were at war and the kings of both countries
were paying their armies and fleets with monies appropriated from
ecclesiastical revenues. To impose peace the Pope, after lighter
protestations had been ignored, issued the bull *Clericis Laicos* which
prohibited, under penalty of excommunication, any layman from taxing or
annexing Church revenues. So far, so good. But promptly Philip countered
by making a law which, by preventing the export of gold and other
negotiable things under certain conditions,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

hindered the transit of the normal and periodical dues from the Church
in France to the Holy See. At this stage of the quarrel Boniface,
employing the devices he had learned as legate, adopted a policy of
compromise and withdrew some of the demands he had made with such vigour
and haughtiness. It was an unfortunate move, fatal to his aims, for
compromise is a highly delicate and dangerous business which can easily
degenerate to appeasement instead of equity and justice. The same
mistake was made in his relations with Edward I of England. First the
drastic Clericis Laicos, followed by a compromise, then another rupture
because Boniface, on the ground that Scotland was an ancient fief of the
Holy See, emphatically declared the English king should refer any rights
he claimed over that country to Rome. But again his assertiveness proved
temporary for in order to enlist the support of Edward against Philip he
changed his policy and withdrew his demands.

As it proved, the struggle between Boniface and the French king was
never to end and was to reach the extremes of invective and indignity on
both sides. To assist Philip came those Colonna, including two
cardinals, whom the Pope had sided against in their family quarrel. It
was a powerful alliance and was responsible for a council in France
which declared Boniface's election to be invalid and levelled a long
list of accusations, including heresy, simony, and murder, against his
name. In an epistle, contemptuous and libellous, Philip referred to the
pontiff as "Your Supreme Foolishness" and called upon him to vacate the
Holy See. These insults were not the end. There were greater to come,
yet there was but meagre defence rallied for this pope who had launched
his reign so auspiciously. The friendships that were cradled in his
magnificence were as unstable as his dreams. Despite his errors he had
brought

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

to Rome prosperity and gain but the gratitude of the citizens was small.
Under his seal, in 1300, there had been the Holy Jubilee and to the
great celebration, splendidly organized by him, had come a vast
gathering of pilgrims from all parts of Europe. He had caused to be
founded the University of Rome and the city gained liberal proof of his
lavish patronage of the arts. Nevertheless as his enemies became
triumphant the city, adhering to its traditional fickleness, could not
be trusted to afford him safe asylum. He retired, as had other popes in
similar circumstances, to Anagni where utilizing his considerable skill
as a canonist he prepared a bull of excommunication and deposition
against Philip. Before it was issued however a gang of mercenaries, led
by Guillaume de Nogaret and Sciarra Colonna, stormed the papal retreat.
They found Boniface deserted by his attendants but gloriously unafraid.
He had donned the formal insignia of his office and was seated on his
throne. "Here is my head," he said, "I, a Catholic, lawful Pontiff and
Vicar of Christ, desire to die for the faith of Christ and His Church."

With singular brutality, for he was now in his eighty-sixth year, he was
thrown to a prison cell whence after three days he was liberated by the
indignant townspeople but only to be captured again. This time it was
the Orsini who held him. They called it a rescue and conveyed him back
to Rome with a show of respect but he was their prisoner. It was the
final humiliation and one he did not survive, for he died on the 11th of
October, 1303. Broken-hearted and unhonoured went the once proud man
whose worldliness was to have been the cure for the errors born of the
inexperience of the saintly Celestine. Eleven days later there was the
election of the Cardinal Nicholas Bocrasini, <span
class="smallcaps">Benedict</span> XI, an Italian and an ex-General of
the Dominicans, who had also served

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

extensively as a legate. For the sake of desperately needed peace he
made treaty with Philip although to his credit he refused to lift the
censures against those villains, friends of the French king though they
were, who had maltreated and insulted his predecessor at Anagni.
Benedict was a good man and he essayed peace and reform in all
directions but unfortunately for his plans his reign was brief. The dark
temper of the Romans caused him to move to Perugia where he died, by
poison according to rumour, during the summer following his election. So
great was the hatred Philip bore for Boniface that he had urged that a
General Council be convened to pass judgment on the supposed misdeeds of
that pope. This Benedict, despite his desire for conciliation, refused.
Soon after came his sudden death and then, gathering like clouds around
his tomb, came the rumours of foul play.

The time now comes when the march of the great drama shifts to Avignon.
Rome had reached the extremes of degradation and despair. Its broken
thoroughfares were, for the most part, the uncontested property,
filth-littered and unsightly, of starved mongrels and lawless wretches.
Those houses which remained occupied were fortified and barricaded and
if their owners were not bandits they were forced to a fierce
self-reliant code which rendered possible their survival amongst
bandits. Benedict had died at Perugia and it was there the Cardinals
chose the next pope. The election was long and only after eleven months
was a name announced. It was the Cardinal Bertrand de Goth, ex-Vicar
General of Lyons and Archbishop of Bordeaux, and his election was
obviously a triumph for the French faction in general and in particular
King Philip and those of the Colonna who were his allies. The new pope
took the name of <span class="smallcaps">Clement</span> V and for his
installation he went, not to Rome, but to Lyons where with

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

great pomp and surrounded by the elated French cardinals he was given
the tiara. There was never any attempt on his part to visit Rome after
his election and after a few years spent at various residences in France
he finally chose a permanent home, a Dominican monastery by the banks of
the placid Rhone, at Avignon where the papacy was to remain for nearly
three quarters of a century. Most historians unite in seeing it as a
grievous sojourn and many words have been written of the resultant evils
and mistakes, although little, as Pastor remarks, has been said of the
successful missionary activities of the Avignon popes.

Clement V was unaggressive and admittedly a servant of French interests,
nevertheless under his patronage great progress was made in the
propagation of the faith. India, Abyssinia, Nubia, Egypt and Morocco saw
his missionaries, and in his time the metropolitan see of Pekin was
established with a Franciscan, John of Montecorvino, as the first
Archbishop and seven fellow-members of his order as his suffragans.
Clement owed his election to the French king and probably had, before
that circumstance, entered upon some sort of an agreement with him; yet
twice, and importantly, he displayed both opposition and principle
against the royal will. Revenge and cupidity still haunted the dark
dreams of Philip, revenge against Boniface whose memory he still wished
to have stained by official condemnation, and a cupidity which was
stirred by the rich possessions of the Order of the Knights Templars.
The pope showed complaisance in most matters, cardinals were created at
Philip's whim and the same reason caused new decrees to be issued and
existing ones to be annulled. But he would not lift the ban of
excommunication against the assailants of Boniface nor would he, as
Philip wished, arbitrarily suppress the Knights Templars. Finally both
matters,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

as was canonically correct, were referred to a General Council, the
Fifteenth, which Clement convoked at Vienna in 1312 and which was
attended by one hundred and fourteen prelates. The charges against
Boniface were reviewed and, despite the powerful menace of Philip,
rejected; but the Knights Templars fared less well and the order was
given for their dissolution. It was an order which fitted so well with
the schemes of Philip that he did not wait for it and by the time of its
publication many of the Knights in France had already perished at the
stake, their property confiscated.

The Order of the Knights Templars was a religious organization, with a
strong military flavouring, which had been founded early in the twelfth
century with the object of defending Jerusalem. The three vows of
religion—poverty, chastity and obedience—were undertaken by the Knights,
and skill in the military art was required as were also certain
genealogical qualifications. Over 20,000 members of the Order had
perished in battle in less than two centuries. Great properties were
accumulated and such an organization, rich and armed, claiming indeed at
certain times the prerogatives of a sovereign power, could not but be an
affront to a monarch of the calibre of Philip. Heresy and sacrilege and
the practice of unnatural lust was his cry and soon the loathsome glare
of the dreaded stake was visible against the sky of many a city and
castle as confessions, before the processes of rack and screw, came
quick and bountiful. The nature of these admissions can be gauged by
that of the Grand Master Molay who swore that on his entrance to the
Order "he was made to deny Christ and spit upon the crucifix, and that,
by his command, the same was done by postulants who were received by him
after he became the Grand Master."

Despite the fact of Avignon and the ugly nature of

<span class="small">Clement V. Reigned from 1305 to 1314.</span>

<span id="img_18500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Pope Clement
V.](tn/18500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/18500.jpg)  
Pope Clement V.  
</span>

<span class="small">The first Avignon Pope: he suppressed the Knights
Templar. See pages [182](#page_182) to [185](#page_185).</span>

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> King Philip, the
Italians were resolved the next pope should not be French. After
Clement's death in 1314 the strife between the cardinals was bitter. The
election was held on French soil and the majority of the twenty-four
electors were of that nationality. But the Italians were stubborn and
two years went by before Clement's successor was chosen. He was a
sixty-seven-year-old French Cardinal, James d’Euse who thus became Pope
as <span class="smallcaps"></span>John XXII. He was the son of a
shoemaker and had a reputation for austerity and good judgment, learning
and administrative ability, and he was of such unprepossessing
appearance that no writer of his day neglects to mention his
extraordinary ugliness. He was the most energetic of the Avignon popes
and during his reign, lasting some eighteen years, he issued sixty
thousand official documents. His first acts were aimed at securing the
success of his faction and to the despair and anger of the Italians
seven more Frenchmen were created cardinals. During the long interval
which passed before he became pope death struck at both Philip and his
son Louis. Another Philip became the new French king but royal enmity
against the papacy now was to shift from France to Germany as Louis of
Bavaria, whose claims to the Imperial title were not accepted promptly
enough by John, made alliance with the notorious and excommunicated
Sciarra Colonna and took upon himself the protection of all those
antagonistic to the pontiff. Prominent amongst the latter were the
Spirituals or *Fraticelli*, a fanatical division of the Franciscans, and
another group sprung from the same Order who were just as troublesome
because they were no less sincere. Both of these parties or sects had
been seduced to heresy because of impracticable dreams of a return to
the austerities of primitive Christianity. Supported by theologians from
their ranks and in connivance

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

with the wily Colonna, Louis with insolence and arrogance called for a
General Council to depose the pope. Nor was this the end of his
effrontery. At Rome his accomplice, Sciarra Colonna, enacted the farce
of creating an anti-pope, one Peter Rainalducci, who assumed the style
of "Nicholas V." It was too much even for the Romans who ever ready for
violence rose in angry riot and within three days put the anti-pope to
flight. Eventually he made full submission to John who treated him with
mercy and consideration.

Throughout this considerable reign controversy mounted concerning the
relations of Church and State. Criticism and doubt were everywhere, and
throughout all Christendom there was an epidemic of charges and
counter-charges of heresy. Even the pontiff himself was not to escape
this stigma for in one of his sermons he declared the Beatific Vision
was held from the dead until the Last Judgment. There was an immediate
storm of protest from the theologians and the harassed pope pointed out
that his statement was a private opinion and not a dogmatic definition.
But the uproar was not abated until, at the request of the University of
Paris, he made a public profession of orthodoxy, saying that "the Saints
are in heaven, where they see God face to face."

John continued that policy of Clement which had given sturdy
encouragement to the foreign missions, and Tartary and Turkestan were
invaded by zealous monks whilst the established missions of Africa,
Persia, and India were enlarged. Universities also profited by his
interest and in 1321 he even gave some substance to the dream that never
could really have been absent from the ambitions of a pope of those
times. A crusade, very small but a fact, was formed and, consisting of a
fleet of galleys, gained a few victories over the Turks. John's private
life

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

was void of scandal for he adhered, as much as his many administrative
duties would allow, to the strict regime of a simple monk. His great
fault was an unswerving belief that the papacy should remain in France.
Of the close on thirty cardinals he created twenty-three were French,
three were Italian, and one a Spaniard. Such a majority at least
obviated any chance of a long interregnum and when he died, on 4th
December, 1334, his successor, <span class="smallcaps">Benedict</span>
XII, was chosen and installed within two weeks. The votes of the
conclave had at first gone to the Cardinal of Porto, much to the delight
of the Italians, but he was a determined man who refused to give
guarantee that the Curia would remain at Avignon. The choice then went
to one who, although a good man and probably sincere in his every
action, could be depended upon to take the advice of his faction.
Indeed, after becoming pope, he made two attempts to go to Rome but each
time he was thwarted, without any real opposition on his part, by the
French cardinals. Finally he abandoned all such wishes and as though to
express his viewpoint he wholeheartedly set about building the palace
which was intended for the permanent papal residence. The tranquillity
of the Avignon landscape quickly vanished as a swarm of busy artisans
built palaces not only for the Pope but for each of his cardinals and
their retinues. There was the construction necessary to house and feed
and defend the great army required of any administrative centre.
Soldiers and priests, clerks and bureaucrats, lawyers and merchants,
beggars and lackeys, jostled and shouted through thoroughfares that were
no longer peaceful country lanes.

The man who was the centre of this new activity had begun his
ecclesiastical career as a Cistercian monk and the influence was never
to leave him. Perhaps he lacked the strength of will and ambitions of a
successful ruler

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

but this did not prevent him from the exercise of those simple virtues
which make for a good man. He was gentle in manner and sincerely
religious. He tried to make peace between France and England and in fact
one of the reasons given for his failure to visit Rome was that his
presence was required in France because of this aim. To his see however
he sent gifts for the poor and money to repair the churches. Embassies
passed between him and Louis of Bavaria but the interdict remained. The
practice of nepotism was an especial object of his dislike and he made
every effort to eradicate it. Before wearing the tiara his name had been
James Fournier but no kinsmen came to flaunt it at the papal court. "A
pope should be like Melchisedec," he said, "without father, or mother or
genealogy."

This statement did not influence his successor, <span
class="smallcaps">Clement</span> VI, for out of a creation of
twenty-five cardinals, most of whom were French, twelve were drawn from
his own family which was powerful and noble. His name had been Pierre
Roger and he had worn the Benedictine habit although it could not be
said that his life was ever restrained to the monastic pattern. High
birth and influence combined with intelligence and eloquence had
previously won for him the rich sees of Arras, Sens, and Rouen. Luxury
and splendour had always characterized his career as a high prelate and
the acquisition of the tiara was an opportunity he did not neglect to
indulge these traits further. The papal court became the scene of lavish
hospitality although to his credit it is recorded that his extravagances
were equalled and always accompanied by deeds of charity. The funds
accumulated by the economies and administration of the previous reigns
were now dispensed with an open hand. "Our predecessors," he is reputed
to have said, "did not know how to be pope." That

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

he firmly believed the home of the papacy should remain in France is
shown by his purchasing, from the Queen of Naples, the sovereignty of
Avignon. The price paid was 80,000 gold florins. The death in Italy of
Robert of Anjou had enabled the Romans to bring some sort of peace to
their city and they had formed a none too strong democratic government,
consisting of thirteen members, which sent an embassy to Avignon in an
attempt to persuade the pontiff that he should return to Rome. Clement
listened to their entreaties with sympathy and although he refused the
request he did, as a measure to bring some prosperity back to the
ravaged city, give his support and encouragement for an official Jubilee
to be held in Rome at the turn of the half century.

In Germany Louis of Bavaria was losing his sway and in 1346 several of
the more powerful princes suggested that the Imperial title should be
given to Charles of Bohemia. Clement agreed and thus to Avignon came
Charles where with splendid ceremony he held the papal stirrup and
received confirmation of an empty title. Trouble with Louis was averted
by the death of that prince during the following year whilst boar
hunting. The real ruler of Rome at this time was a young and ambitious
man, named Cola di Rienzi, who had met Clement as a member of the
visiting Roman mission. Upon his return he had defeated the factions,
already conspiring again, and it seemed, for a few hopeful years, that
he might achieve his aim of reviving the ancient unity and harmony. But
his success was fleeting and the intoxication of being Master of Rome,
even though briefly and insecurely, was to whirl him quickly to ruin and
to a violent death.

The greatest virtue possessed by Clement VI was his charity. This took
on proportions equal to his usual sense of the magnificent, with the
energetic measures he used

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

to abate the miseries that followed in the wake of the Black Plague
which devastated all Europe during his reign. Another aftermath of the
dreaded epidemic was a wave of anti-semitism, for fanatics were
hysterically accusing the Jews of spreading the disease by poisoning
wells. The aptly named Pope fought the libel with vigour and announced
that the Jews were under his protection. Consequently, at his death on
the 6th December, 1352, there was not only the prescribed mourning in
Christian churches but there was also sorrow in the synagogues of
Israel.

A different figure took his place. The cardinals, with the extravagances
of Clement affecting their own revenues, had found the memory of the
sombre and economical John XXII to be most agreeable. They scrutinized
their ranks for a man of similar quality and found him in the person of
the cardinal-bishop of Ostia, Stephen Aubert, who upon receiving their
favour took the name of <span class="smallcaps">Innocent</span> VI.
Whilst gathered together at this Conclave their Eminences also formed a
pact to the effect that in future a pope should rely upon the guidance
of the Sacred College in such matters as the disposal of the higher
revenues, the appointment of new cardinals, and similar important
affairs. The first act of the new pope was to cause the nullification of
this agreement. That he did it so forthrightly was a tribute both to his
perception and to his courage and that there was no great manifestation
of discontent from its originators was proof of his diplomacy. Highly
dangerous indeed would it have been for a pope to transfer such
authority from his own province to what would have become, if so
endowed, an autocratic and entirely independent body. The supporters of
Innocent VI were not disappointed in either his economies or reforms.
With the help of his friend, the General of the

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Carthusians,
drastic changes came to Avignon and a gloom descended upon the
companions of the late pope as court life was diminished sharply and
courtiers scattered and a great throng of absentee prelates sent back to
their sees and benefices. The latter act however did but emphasize the
sad truth of the pontiff's being absent from his own see. Rome still
remained unvisited by its bishop and outside the borders of France
resentment was gradually mounting with the belief that the pope was
entirely under French influence. Furthermore, protection from such a
source was held with scant respect: for France, weakened by war with
England, was in poor position to defend anybody and when gangs of
mercenaries hovered in sinister proximity to Avignon the Pope was forced
to avert attack by resort to his coffers. Another affront was a
proclamation, known as the *Golden Bull*, issued by the Emperor Charles
which stated that henceforth the bestowal of the Imperial title would be
decided by seven Electors; the lay fiefs of Bohemia, Saxony,
Brandenburg, and the Palatinate; and the three archbishops of Menty,
Treves, and Cologne. The coronation of Charles, with the full approval
of the Pope who sent his legate to officiate, had been held at Rome in
1335 and the *Golden Bull* came a year later. Ruling Rome at this time
was a firm-handed Spanish prelate, actually more of a soldier than a
churchman, Cardinal Giles de Albornoz who, after the collapse of the
Rienzi regime had been sent to the city by the pontiff. The resolute
methods employed by this warrior cleric had restored some semblance of
order and were in fact to clear the way for a return of the papacy.

When it came time again to choose a new pope the conclave looked beyond
itself and selected the Benedictine Abbot of St. Victor's monastery at
Marseilles, William de Grimoard, who chose to be called <span
class="smallcaps">Urban</span> V because, as

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

he said, "all the popes called Urban have been Saints." He was a holy
man, a patron of many missions and universities including that of
Oxford, who valiantly tried to solve problems and stem circumstances
that were now too great, it appeared, to be vanquished by any one man.
Five years after his election which had occurred in 1367 he even,
against strenuous opposition from all who surrounded him, went to Rome
where he was greeted with joy. The news spread quickly throughout Europe
and was received with pleasure everywhere outside the boundaries of
French influence. The Emperor Charles came to meet him and protestations
of amity and cooperation were exchanged. The Emperor of the East, John V
Palaeologus, made the long journey from Constantinople and Urban
received him graciously on the steps of St. Peter's. The Byzantine ruler
swore he was not in schism but perhaps his oath may have been influenced
by the fact that he had come for aid against the ever pressing Turks.

Military assistance was a commodity Urban could not afford anyone.
Indeed his own safety was at times insecure in turbulent Italy and both
he and his court looked with longing eyes and an increasing nostalgia
back to Avignon. In Rome they felt as aliens in an alien land and the
sullen hostility of the factions, ever present even though in temporary
retreat behind family walls, did but heighten the impression. Albornoz,
able protector of the papal interests, had died and everywhere the
French attendants of the pope were greeted with hisses and insults. At
length preparations were made for a return to Avignon and the fact was
reluctantly announced. Cries of protest sprung from both the faithful
and from those who for their own devices wished the next election to be
held in Rome. They begged that the decision be reconsidered and the
chorus of entreaty was swelled by the royal voices of

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pedro of Arragon
and the Swedish princess, St. Bridget. The latter warned the pontiff
that he would die if he deserted Rome but it was all in vain. Urban was
convinced France needed his presence and so he left Italy in the Autumn
of 1370; but all that he accomplished in his native land was to give
truth to the royal prophecy, for within three months of his return the
monks of St. Victor's were making ready a tomb to receive the body of
their ex-abbot and late pope. The memory of Urban V is held to be that
of a good and saintly man and one writer, expressing the thoughts of his
time, says of him: "He was a light of the world and a way of truth; a
lover of righteousness." But another writer, the celebrated
poet-philosopher Petrarch, could not forgive the return to France.
"Urban would have been reckoned among the most glorious of men," he
wrote, "if he had caused his dying bed to be laid before the altar of
St. Peter's and had there fallen asleep with a good conscience, calling
God and the world to witness that if ever the pope had left this spot it
was not his fault but that of the originators of so shameful a flight."

The fifteenth century was nearing and the way was steadily being made
the easier for a Luther. Despite the acts of saints and the sturdy faith
of the zealous and the feats and good deeds of a vast army of churchmen
who were sincerely serving their vocation, sure contempt for papal
authority was increasing everywhere because of abuses persistently
perpetuated by those in the clerical high places. In England an eloquent
priest, John Wyclif, was cheered when he preached the subjection of
Church to State and when later he attacked the doctrine of
transubstantiation and called the Host "an effectual sign" there were
neither riots nor drastic measures. He did not lose his life or his
living but merely was forbidden to preach.

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There were
constant signs of the spreading mood but the Sacred College seemed to
pay little heed and the results of the conclave after the death of Urban
provided sure ammunition for the cynics and apprehension on the part of
believers. The new pope, <span class="smallcaps">Gregory</span> XI, was
not a bad man but he was not remarkable for any talent and the best that
could be said of him was that his nature was docile. He was the product
of nepotism and he was to employ nepotism. As Peter Roger de Beaufort he
had at eighteen years of age been created a cardinal by his uncle Pope
Clement VI, though he was not ordained priest until his elevation to the
apostolic throne twenty-two years later. Such a nature as his was easy
prey to persuasion and influence and strangely enough it was this very
weakness which was responsible for the return of the papacy to Rome.

Italy might be seething with unrest and disorder but all Italians were
united in their intense dislike of everything French. Those papal
properties, districts and cities, which had been, a few years earlier,
pacified by the soldier-prelate Albornoz were once again in revolt and
even the Republic of Florence, which for a long time had been a staunch
ally of the Papal States, participated in the general antagonism. The
Pope was forced to action and from Avignon went a stern and capable
legate, the Cardinal Robert of Geneva, leading an army of Bretons. The
papacy had turned to the sword and in an effort to stay it a woman's
voice was suddenly heard. St. Catherine of Siena came to Avignon and the
power of her goodness and courage proved sufficient to penetrate the
morasses of court intrigue. Boldly she told Gregory his errors and
weaknesses and with determination she stressed the fact that his
presence in Rome was a dire necessity. His courtiers, both lay and
clerical, were alarmed and showed their opposition; but the calm voice
went on and with awe the

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

impressionable Pope listened for he knew the advice was coming from one
who since childhood had worn a reputation for saintliness and who had
many times evidenced her closeness to the Holy State. Her words had
effect and Gregory, to the disgust of his attendants, sailed from
Marseilles soon after and arrived in Rome during the middle of January,
1377.

The Romans employed their fickle mood to give him a boisterous welcome
but their ready noise was a hollow greeting in the great emptiness of
the city's ruins. The number of the people had been reduced to 30,000
and most of them were in a state of abject poverty. The historic
landscape had become a sad sight, for most of the famous monuments were
broken and the majority of the basilicas, numbering over four hundred,
were in disrepair. The streets were torn and dirty and the great
edifices of ancient majesty and beauty were victims of a riotous and
unopposed decay. It was an unhappy environment for the Pope and it
became unhappier as the brightness of his welcome quickly faded; for
unfortunately his occupancy did not bring tranquillity to the city or to
any portion of Italy. The Florentines refused to make peace and other
cities were quick to adopt the same bellicose attitude. And if possible
even more odium was being attached to the French name because of the
cruelties practised in Northern Italy by those mercenaries who were
there under the command of the legate, Cardinal Robert. In Rome the
shelter of heavily armed escorts did not protect the French cardinals
from insults and curses and in that city of many shadows every shadow
seemed a threat to the satellites of the papal court. Under such
conditions it is understandable Gregory should make the same decision as
Urban. "I shall return to Avignon," he said. But he was wrong, for as
preparations were made he became prey to a fatal

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

sickness and died, one year and three months after his entrance.

For the first time in many a year a pope had died in Rome and the
citizens were resolved his successor should be elected there. Six
cardinals were at Avignon but there were sixteen in the city and the
Romans, clanging shut the city gates, informed them with ferocity and
tumult that the next to sit upon the pontifical throne should not be
French and that, furthermore, he should be elected with rapidity. A
great mob, many of whom were drunk for the papal cellars had been
looted, seethed outside the building where the electors had congregated
and filled the air with demands and huzzas and threats. The majority of
votes in the Sacred College was, of course, controlled by the French
cardinals but this time and under such circumstances the ballot went to
an Italian from Naples, Bartholomew Prignano, Archbishop of Bari. He was
not of cardinal's rank and therefore had not attended the conclave: so
while the news was sped to him an attempt to appease the increasingly
noisy crowds was made by the announcement of his name. In the uproar the
name *Bari* was mistaken by the people as being *Bar* which was the name
of a highly unpopular French prelate and such was the resultant fury
that the cardinals decided to flee to their respective refuges. To cover
escape they resorted to a ruse and vesting the aged Cardinal
Teobaldeschi in the pontifical robes they hurriedly displayed him as
proof that an Italian had been elected. The excited Romans thrust aside
the guards and swept forward to kiss, despite his objections and
explanations, the feet of the bogus pontiff. Their delight was boundless
that an Italian should again be successor of Peter and so happy was
their temper that when informed of the trick they bore no ill-feelings

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

and with equal heartiness and joy cheered the arrival of the real pope
who, after gathering twelve of his scattered electors, was installed
with the name of <span class="smallcaps">Urban</span> VI.

He quickly showed he had little respect for those who had given him his
position. The spirit of reform was strong within him and he regarded
with horror clerical laxities which had been in large and flamboyant
evidence during previous regimes. Unfortunately his measures against the
abuses displayed neither tact nor understanding nor tolerance, and a
nature that hitherto had borne a reputation for self confidence and
austerity now became, with the omnipotence of his rank, harsh and
arrogant. He was the Pope; and with his broad squat figure and his
swarthy countenance set in rigid lines he imperiously summoned the
Princes of the Church and rudely told them of their deficiencies and of
his resolution to change such things. His choleric emphasis and blunt
language bred disquietude among even the Italian cardinals. The six of
their colleagues who had remained at Avignon had at first accepted the
calamity, for such it was from their viewpoint, of the Italian triumph
at the conclave, but now as rumours reached them of the unpopular and
uncouth methods of Urban they sent a representative, the
Cardinal-Archbishop of Amiens, to investigate. When this prelate, with
bold urbanity, gently suggested to the Pope that he should come to
Avignon, Urban flew into an ungovernable rage and loudly swore he would
create a larger batch of Italian cardinals in order to subordinate the
French influence. The Avignon emissary withdrew but from then on the
dark business of intrigue rapidly gained momentum with a climax
approaching when the impetuous pontiff, during one of his rages, gave
substance to the growing suspicion of his sanity by attempting to strike
a distinguished prelate. The whispers and secret meetings of the
cardinals increased

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

until there was a stealthy exodus of them from the city. Even the
Chamberlain of the papal court deserted Rome taking with him,
significantly, the tiara. The conspirators, for such was now their
status, made rendezvous at Anagni and from there dramatically announced
the selection of Urban to be invalid because it had been made under
duress. It was a grave statement, coming as it did not from any
heretical body but from the men who held the electoral privileges.
Urban's answer, after one of his characteristic fits of anger, was to
name twenty-nine new cardinals and two days later his antagonists calmly
proclaimed a new pope, Clement VII. This was the formidable and powerful
Cardinal Robert of Geneva, related to most of the royal houses of Europe
and well known for his ruthlessness and indomitable energies, who, after
an unsuccessful skirmish with troops loyal to Urban, journeyed on to
Avignon.

The Great Western Schism, as it is called, had begun. There had been
anti-popes before, twenty-seven in all, but never before had two
claimants been elected by the same group. There is no doubt that Urban
was the true pontiff but in the confusion of the time there was much
dispute. St. Catherine of Siena and St. Bridget of Sweden unhesitatingly
declared for Urban but equally sincere in the support of Clement were
such men of unblemished character as St. Vincent Ferrer and Blessed
Peter of Luxemburg. France, of course, supported the Avignon pope and by
alliance and treaty it also gained for him the allegiance of Aragon,
Castile, Savoy, Scotland and Wales, while Urban's legates secured the
recognition of England, Brittany, Portugal, Germany, Hungary, Poland,
Flanders, Sweden, Norway, the Catholic Orient, and most of Italy. A
continued hurt to his own cause was the unfortunate bitterness of the
Pope. The loyalty of Naples was

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

lost because of his violent quarrel with its ruler and six of his
cardinals he tortured and then executed because, it was alleged, they
had sought to place him under the guardianship of a group of cardinals.
"Accomplish your task with moderation," wrote the grieved St. Catherine.
"For the love of Christ crucified, curb these sudden impulses prompted
by your nature."

The advice went unheeded and to the end of his days Urban persisted in
disastrous actions. The unhappy man died on October 15, 1389, after a
reign of eleven distressful years and his death presented an opportunity
to "Clement VIII" and his supporters which was not neglected. The dark
processes of intrigue and plot moved into action while the requiem for
the late pope still echoed in St. Peter's. Bribes were attempted,
promises made, and persuasion wielded, but to no avail and two weeks
after Urban had breathed his last the conclave at Rome elected the
Cardinal Peter Tomacelli to be Pope with the name of <span
class="smallcaps">Boniface</span> IX. He was from Naples and was to rule
for fifteen years but not at any time was he to be popular. Never was he
guilty of any grave error but neither can he be applauded for the
invention or application of any outstanding reform. He lacked the genius
of greatness and the magical quality which is charm; and because of his
meticulous care in harvesting sorely needed revenues a stigma of avarice
gradually enveloped his name. Throughout his entire time desperate but
fruitless attempts were made to restore harmony again to the Church. The
lamentable stage in its history had been reached where rival bishops
were claiming authority to the same see and likewise abbots to
monasteries and priests to churches, large and small. Temporal rulers
could see the dangers of the unedifying situation and attempts on all
sides were made to have Boniface and the Avignon pope

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

resign and a new election held. In the fifth year of Boniface's reign,
Clement died but the Avignon dynasty was rapidly assured by a quick
replacement in the person of "Benedict XIII" who was the Cardinal Peter
de Luna, a Spaniard by birth but pledged wholeheartedly to the French
interest. Even his supporters were to disagree and eventually there was
a party in France which refused to accept either claimant because both
rejected a suggestion calling for arbitration and, in case of deadlock,
resignation, put forth by the authorities of the University of Paris. It
was laudable that the Parisian theologians should attempt to end the
schism but their proposal, the danger of which was seen at both Avignon
and Rome, and the measures they took after its rejection, were
manifestations of the increasing belief that the actions of a pope could
be subjected to the opinions and judgments of Councils.

It was to a General Council that Boniface's successor, <span
class="smallcaps">Innocent</span> VII, proposed to submit the entire
vexatious question but he died before the project could be accomplished.
His death could have not been a surprise to his electors for he had been
almost seventy when he had won their votes. Most of his time and efforts
were taken up with troubles in and about Rome, troubles that were well
fertilized by the dreary curse, so familiar to the papal scene, of
nepotism; for he enriched his family, hitherto neither wealthy nor
ennobled, and in particular a favourite nephew who was given, along with
many other favours, a cardinal's hat. Before donning the tiara
Innocent's name had been Cosimo de’ Migliorati and he had been
Archbishop of Ravenna and Cardinal-priest of Holy Cross.

His reign did not last two years. Following him was one even older than
he. <span class="smallcaps">Gregory</span> XII, the former Cardinal
Angelo Corrario, was about eighty years of age when

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="small">Sixtus IV. Reigned 1471 to 1484.</span>

<span id="img_20100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Pope Sixtus
IV.](tn/20100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20100.jpg)  
Pope Sixtus IV.  
</span>

<span class="small">This is the death mask of the fishermen's son who
appointed Torquemada as the Grand Inquisitor. See pages
[214](#page_214)-5.</span>

he caught the favour of the Conclave and his solemn promise at that time
was that he would end the schism even if it meant abdication on his
part. Perhaps he was sincere when he made the promise but his faction
and his family, for he too had acquisitive nephews, were resolved that
the great dignity should not leave their sphere. Consequently when
negotiations were made with the Avignon pope and that dignitary said he
would consider resignation providing Gregory would do the same there was
procrastination in Rome. His cardinals were incensed at the development
and when the Pope, prompted by his family, created four new and amenable
cardinals the majority of the Sacred College left Rome and rebelliously
convened at Pisa. Here they were joined by a group of Avignon prelates
who were also discontented with the policies and stubbornness of their
elected choice and who were resolved to end the schism. Such a meeting
was a desperate measure and at Rome and at Avignon there were
pronouncements, immediate and angry, against it. Nevertheless the
sympathy and hopes of the schism-fatigued peoples of all Europe were at
Pisa and here the cardinals, twenty-four in number, were joined by one
hundred and eighty-two bishops and hundreds of other distinguished
churchmen or their representatives to form what became known as the
Council of Pisa. Benedict and Gregory were summoned to appear before the
determined group and when both ignored the unprecedented invitation
sentences of deposition, on the grounds of heresy and schism, were
pronounced against them. An election was then held and at this stage the
course of reform became diverted by contemporary guile and again we
discover the wishes and schemes of one person dominating an entire
assemblage. This time it was the will of the powerful Cardinal Balthazar
Cossa from Naples which was imposed and thus

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

his protégé, a learned and good but ineffectual Greek cardinal named
Peter Philargos was given to Christendom as Pope <span
class="smallcaps">Alexander</span> V. Such an election was of course
illegal but Alexander's name and that of his successor have always been
included on the papal list as Popes of Pisa. His successor came soon,
for Alexander only survived his election by ten months and "chosen" to
follow him was his patron the Cardinal Cossa who took the name of <span
class="smallcaps">John</span> XXIII.

There now existed the sad spectacle, so tragic to Christendom, of three
great prelates, each supported by a considerable party, claiming the
papal honour. John, for a time, had the greatest following, although
today, with the clouds of contemporary confusion and distortion and
clamour removed, Pope Gregory stands as the validly elected pontiff. How
then was the dilemma to be solved? Surely not by the entrance of John
XXIII upon the historic stage for "of all the miserable consequences of
the disastrous Synod of Pisa," states Pastor, "this election was the
worst." John was not, indeed, the moral monster his enemies afterwards
endeavoured to represent him, but he was utterly worldly-minded and
completely engrossed by temporal interests. An astute politician and
courtier, he was not scrupulously conscientious and was more of a
soldier than a churchman. No help for the distracted Church was to be
hoped from him. All eyes, therefore, turned to the powerful and right
minded Sigismund, the King of the Romans, who was necessarily most
deeply interested in the termination of the schism, inasmuch as his
coronation as Emperor in Rome could not take place until Western
Christendom was again united under one spiritual head. He did not
disappoint the hopes which were fixed upon him, for the termination of
the schism and the restoration of

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

unity to the Church in the West were in a great measure his work.

Sigismund, on the basis of his imperial authority, planned and brought
to actuality the sixteenth Oecumenical Council at Constance. Previously
John, acting on a resolution formulated at Pisa, had held a council at
Rome but the attendance, because of his hostile relations with the King
of Naples and because of the waning respect for papal authority, was
limited and the gathering had adjourned. The Council of Constance was
probably the greatest assemblage of its kind ever yet convened. At the
Imperial invitation came cardinals and prelates of the three obediences
and significantly there also came ambassadors from seven kingdoms. The
balloting was not the privilege alone of the great and care was taken to
allow each nation an equitable share in the discussions. Indeed the
convention can be said to have been conducted on democratic lines for to
offset the schemes of a highly placed few, votes were given to parish
priests and representative laymen and doctors of divinity as well as to
ambassadors and prelates. John arrived with a great display of pomp to
preside at the assembly but instead of a submissive flock he found an
unfriendly throng, united in its intention to oppose him.

A long document, accusing him of almost every crime, had been drawn up
by canonists, and realizing the campaign against him the second pope of
Pisa accepted defeat: fearing for his personal safety he ignominiously
fled the conference. However, at the behest of Sigismund, who gave him
guarantee of safe conduct, he returned meekly to acknowledge the
authority of the Council and to accept the sentence of deposition. He
was at first imprisoned, but with dignity, and later he was made
Cardinal-bishop of Frascati. There now remained only two claimants to
the

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

papal honour and the deadlock was soon broken by a magnanimous gesture
from the true pontiff, Gregory XII, who abdicated and accepted the
appointment of Cardinal-bishop of Porto, a position he occupied until
his death during the autumn of 1417. His acceptance of the authority of
this Council was a donation of legality to its judgments and decrees.
The Avignon pope was not possessed of the same spirit of generosity and
cooperation and even when his own cardinals withdrew their allegiance he
stubbornly persisted in his pretensions. To his death, in the stern
precincts of a lonely Spanish stronghold, he thus remained a pope
without a church, pathetically and daily delivering interdicts and
excommunications against an unheeding world.

For two years the papal throne remained empty and while the electors
slowly pondered, the ambassadors of the various nations and interests
pressed forward the claims of their candidates with a multiplicity of
devices. Finally, on November 11, 1419, a name was announced and the
Cardinal Odo Colonna became Pope <span class="smallcaps">Martin</span>
V. His very name was a signal for the lowering of hopes and was a proof
that his family had lost neither its ambitions nor its peculiar genius.
Yet while he cannot be absolved of nepotism and he was certainly not the
great reformer so urgently needed, he was, at least in the temporal
sense, a good ruler and furthermore his private life was decent and
empty of scandal; a circumstance not so rare as might be desired in the
lives of other great prelates who had obtained their status in a similar
way. To his credit he returned the papacy to Rome whereas a weaker man
might have listened to the urgings of the Emperor who wished the Pope to
dwell in Germany or to the French who offered Avignon. It took two years
before he was able to enter his see and this was one occasion when the

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

usually sinister system of family preferment had advantages: for with
the help of the powerful Colonna clan he brought order to the horribly
disordered and ruined city. Large projects, involving great
expenditures, were embarked upon to bring beauty and cleanliness,
discipline and prosperity, back to the ancient streets. Supported by the
troops of his family he ruled with an iron hand and a contemporary
writer describing the treatment of his cardinals states: "He has so
crushed all the cardinals that they turn red and pale by turn when they
speak in his presence."

That scientific and literary movement of the Renaissance which was
called *Humanism*, which was illuminated at its beginning by the
brilliance of Dante, and which endured until the sixteenth century
received scant encouragement from Martin. "While we have Augustine," he
said, "what care we for the sagacity of Aristotle, the eloquence of
Plato, the prudence of Varro. We do not need these men. Augustine is
enough for us." Extreme Humanists, in an effort to recapture the glories
of the ancient culture, often rebelled against the authority and
concepts of the Church but there rapidly came into being a school of
philosophy, consisting of truly Catholic scholars who saw no reason why
full appreciation of the treasures of the past should necessarily entail
a denial of Christian principles.

A Council had been responsible for his elevation but Martin regarded
such institutions with distaste; and although at Constance it had been
agreed they should be convened with periodic regularity he displayed
little enthusiasm or energy in that direction. That some semblance of
sincerity should be given his promises he did, at Pavia in 1423, summon
a Council. But when there was an outbreak of the plague at this city he
transferred it to Siena and soon after, on the pretext of poor
attendance, he

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

dissolved it. But because of pressure from non-Italian interests he. was
forced to issue a summons for another to be held in 1431. The scene was
to be Basle and that Martin suspected trouble is shown by the fact of
his legate having authority to conclude the proceedings at any time he
deemed it necessary. Before the prelates could be assembled an attack of
apoplexy brought death to the Pope and in an honoured place before the
High Altar of St. John Lateran were interred the remains of the man who
has often been called the Second Founder of the Papal Monarchy.

The cardinals who met within the walls of a Roman convent to select his
successor were of a generation which had witnessed the power and the
presumptions of Councils and they were resolved that he who followed
Martin should not be as dictatorial as that autocrat had been. Their
votes went to the Cardinal Eugenius Gabriel Condolmieri, a nobleman of
Venice and a nephew of Gregory XII, but only after he had promised that
a major share of the government of both the Papal States and the Church
should be controlled by the Sacred College. After making this bargain he
was quickly made Pope <span class="smallcaps">Eugenius</span> IV and
almost as quickly he discovered that capitulation is a process that once
begun is difficult to end. Five months after his installation found the
Council of Basle in convention and although at its beginning there were
only fifteen bishops the number gradually grew and soon was reinforced
by several hundreds of earnest canonists and divines, eager for dispute
and keenly alert for fancied infringements of fancied privileges, who
came as representatives of the universities or absentee prelates. This
gathering was strong with the tradition of Constance and the majority of
its members were convinced that as a unity they were superior to the
authority of a pope. Therefore

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

when Eugenius saw the trend and ordered its dissolution he was met with
defiance and contempt. Furthermore the rebellious attitude was endorsed
by the Emperor Sigismund and almost every other ruling sovereign. This
was not all. Even Rome turned against the Pope for he, on taking office,
had tried to oust the Colonna from the position they had achieved during
the reign of Martin. They were quick to rebel and to incite rebellion
and soon there was the not unprecedented spectacle of the lawful head of
all Christendom fleeing for his life from that place which should have
been the sturdiest of his refuges. A Tiber boatman gave him the meagre
shelter of a small river craft and with the humiliated but dauntless
pontiff, disguised as a monk, crouching low in the flimsy stern-sheets
and with only the added protection of a leather shield given by a
friendly soldier, an escape was made through a blockade established by
ships filled with the unscrupulous henchmen of the vengeful Colonna.

It was Florence, so prosperous and powerful at this time, which gave him
succour and protection and there came those of his cardinals who had
remained loyal. The tide of the Renaissance was surging strong in this
place which was to be the papal home for almost a decade and the spirit
of the lovely city was gay and boisterous with the vitality of the new
movement. It was a happy spirit which found a hearty patron in the
person of the exiled Pope and it was this spirit and such patronage
which fostered the genius of Michelangelo, Brunelleschi, Donatello, Fra
Angelico, Botticelli, Lippi, Massalino, and Masaccio. But while there
was gaiety in Florence the shadow of the Turk was falling closer to
Constantinople and once again we witness a Byzantine Emperor appealing
to a pope in an effort to enlist the aid of Latin Christendom. His
representatives and those of the Eastern Patriarchs came to

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Florence and after
much negotiation a reunion between the two Churches was announced
although unfortunately the pact when attempted in practice proved to be
but optimistic words. More than a decree, formulated in stress, was
needed to heal the long schism and the reunion was never really accepted
by the peoples of either the Eastern or Western Church. However, the
appeal and the entire affair illustrated the fact that Eugenius was
regaining the authority that was rightfully his, and aiding him was a
powerful friend, Cosimo di Medici, the ruler of Florence who was
possessed of a host of allies. Against this happy friendship the
rebellious divines at Basle, still convened in their obstinate Council,
were gradually losing princely supporters and particularly so when they
reached the climax of their impertinence by proclaiming a new pope,
"Felix V." Europe, even those nations who had been against Eugenius, had
nought but despair at the prospects of two claimants again contesting
the papal throne. The anti-pope had been found in the person of the Duke
Amadeus of Savoy who indisputably was an earnest minded and pious
nobleman, specially ordained and consecrated for his dubious honour, and
thoroughly convinced, thanks to the eloquence of his electors, that his
pretensions were valid and just.

In the ninth year of his exile Eugenius was able to return to Rome with
power and authority. The Colonna and Orsini were defeated and evicted
and in a spirit of rejoicing he set out lavishly to endow the city with
those arts he had enjoyed at Florence. A host of painters and sculptors
and architects received his commands and while buildings grew and
frescoes and statues and canvases progressed he commissioned the famous
Lorenzo Ghiberti to produce, among many objects of beauty, a magnificent
tiara, heavily encrusted with precious stones. The magnificence

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

which surrounded these undertakings was not reflected in his private
life for as much as possible he lived with simplicity and austerity and
always he was a determined opponent of nepotism. As the end of his reign
neared he redoubled his efforts to bring back that unity which was his
cherished dream and to achieve it he sacrificed many of the papal
privileges in Germany. Thus peace was made with Sigismund, and
ambassadors came from the Emperor to make formal pledge of their
master's allegiance. Eugenius received them gladly but instead of his
pleasure being voiced from his throne the words of welcome were
delivered from his deathbed.

Within a fortnight there was a new pope but the brevity of the Conclave
did not prevent spirited argument and much intrigue, for the Colonna
tried by every means they knew save direct force to secure the tiara for
their own House. They failed however and far from being sprung of such
exalted lineage the family of the Cardinal Thomas Parentucelli, who
became <span class="smallcaps">Nicholas</span> V, was not even possessed
of the right to sport a coat-of-arms. This new pope was above all things
a scholar and used to the company of scholars. The son of a country
physician he had since childhood displayed a marked aptitude for
learning and this appetite was never to leave him. He was fifty years
old when made pope and his policies, it was soon evident, were modelled
after those of his predecessor. He concluded the concordat with Germany
and entered upon more harmonious relations with Scotland and France so
that eventually it was only the stubborn prelates at Basle, rapidly
dwindling in number and importance, who persisted in schism. But even
they, and in this reign, were to admit mistake; and the good but
misguided man whom they had called Felix V was magnanimously forgiven by

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nicholas and given
an honoured place in the College of Cardinals.

In 1450, the third year of this Pope, a great Jubilee was held in Rome
and crowds of pilgrims, drawn from all corners of Christendom, came to
celebrate the unity of the Church. They found a busy and happy city for
Nicholas, thoroughly imbued with the spirit of the Renaissance, was an
even more avid patron of the arts than Eugenius had been and he was
determined that Rome should not only be the religious centre of the
world but that she should also lead in cultural enterprise. His
particular fancy was the development of the Vatican library and, ardent
book lover that he was, he collected and catalogued and preserved every
manuscript of any value, ancient or contemporary, he could find. It was
happy industry and one that kept him poring over books and bindings for
long peaceful hours. But suddenly there came news which changed his mood
and shocked him so that he sickened in body and soul. Constantinople,
that place which, even if in schism, had been the Christian bulwark
against the forces of Islam, had finally been conquered and occupied by
the Turk. The Pope hurriedly and with desperation appealed to the
various sovereigns and rulers for aid but there was no eager or quick
response. It is true that when the news permeated throughout Europe of
how the Sultan Mohammed II had with sacrilegious arrogance triumphantly
ridden his horse through the splendid Church of Sancta Sophia there was
some stirring of conscience and attempts were made to form a Crusade.
Nicholas worked hard to organize and unite these attempts but before any
perceptible progress was made he died, saddened and exhausted.

Both the Colonna and the Orsini fought desperately to control the next
Conclave and perhaps to avert the deadlock

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

so easily born of such maneuverings the cardinals quickly selected a
non-Italian who was eighty years old. He was a Spaniard and he was the
first pope from that family whose name on the written page seldom fails
to quicken the interest of the reader. He was the Cardinal Alfonso
Borgia and as Pope he was known as <span
class="smallcaps">Callistus</span> III. Like Nicholas he tried to
inaugurate a great and unified campaign against the Turk but his appeal
had little response. Such Christian forays as there were remained
independent and the victories were few. The Hungarians scored the
greatest success against the Mohammedans in the field; and on the sea a
papal fleet, commanded by an archbishop, captured twenty-five Turkish
ships. At Rome, without shame or pretense, Callistus gave what he could
to his family; two of his nephews, neither conspicuous for the
excellence of his conduct, were made cardinals at a very early age.
Indeed the unabashed preference shown to the Borgia clan was probably
one of the reasons why the Sacred College should, after the end of his
three year reign, once again turn to an Italian, the Cardinal Aeneas
Piccolomini who was of a noble Siennese family and who was in every way
a true and typical figure of the Renaissance.

The new Pope had been a courtier and he had been Poet Laureate to the
Emperor Frederick. As a young man his talents as a writer, combined with
that spirit of rebellious scepticism common to youthful intellectuals,
had resulted in a document which questioned the papal authority. The
existence of such a work was of course splendid ammunition for his
critics when he became Pope Pius II. So much so that he was forced to
make a formal repudiation and this he did in a communication to the
University of Cologne. "Reject Aeneas," he wrote, "and accept Pius." His
time was six years and although he tried

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

valiantly his reign cannot be considered successful; for his attempts to
bring reform in Church affairs met with as little response as did his
appeals for a Crusade. Busy with their own troubles the leaders of
nations had no wish to indulge in the costly luxury of distant
adventures and the Pope's entreaties, like those of his predecessors,
went for the most part unheeded. While he hopefully waited for
favourable responses, he appointed a commission which was to devise a
scheme for the contemplated ecclesiastical reform but the errors and
laxities this commission found were of such magnitude and number, their
report was so gloomy and pessimistic that it seemed as though a complete
or honest eradication of such abuses would be impossible to achieve, at
least in any one lifetime.

At last the Pope, stung by the impotence of his position and the
futility of his pleas, determined on a dramatic course that would
provide an example to the apathetic Princes of Christendom. If they
would not resist the Turk then he, Pope though he was, would take to the
field and assume their duty. Solemnly he pledged himself to the vows of
a Crusader in the Vatican Basilica and the eighteenth day of June, 1464,
saw him, despite his old age and frail health and lack of experience as
a campaigner, beginning the militant journey, surrounded by a gay and
undisciplined army which for the most part consisted of French and
Spanish knights who had been attracted by the spectacular deed of the
pontiff. "Farewell Rome," he cried as he left the city. "Never again
will you see me alive." The cavalcade proceeded to Ancona and from there
it was intended the journey should be continued on the sea, for Venice
had promised to provide a fleet. The ships were long in coming and very
quickly the sad history of previous crusades was given repetition.
Mischief born of indolence and intrigue brought discord to the camps and

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pius, now so weak
from his illnesses that he could not leave his bed, was told that his
army was melting away instead of growing stronger with those
reinforcements which were his hope. Eventually the Venetian ships came
and when their sails were raised on the horizon the Pope was carried to
a window so he could see the long awaited sight. It was an attempt to
revive him but it was an attempt doomed like his Crusade, to failure.
The ships had come too late and, after exhorting his cardinals to
continue with the expedition, Pius II breathed his last.

The cardinals sped to Rome where after sitting in a conclave which
lasted only two days they elected the Venetian born cardinal of San
Marco, Pietro Barbo, now to be <span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> II, a
somewhat eccentric character who had been made a cardinal because of the
fondness of his uncle, Pope Eugenius IV. Like his relative he was a
devoted patron of the arts and was resolved that Rome should be made the
most beautiful and cultured city of the world. His rich hospitality
became famous and a familiar sight of his reign was to see him smiling
benignly down from his palace window upon a throng banqueting at his
expense. Carnivals and horse races and public games were other gifts he
showered upon the populace in emulation of the ancient tradition. The
new art of printing received his interest and encouragement and artists
and sculptors and goldsmiths were familiar to his court. The famous
tiara that Ghiberti had made for his uncle had cost thirty-eight
thousand ducats but the one designed and made to meet his luxurious
taste cost nearly four times as much. He was popular with the Roman mob
and they cheered his extravagances and generosity; but with the
intelligentsia it was another story for he frowned upon the pretensions
and affectations of the extreme Humanists. When such members of the
Roman Academy considered

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

it fashionable to display pagan tendencies in their writings and
discussions he caused the institution to be disbanded and imprisoned
some of the leaders. The anger and resentment of these men found
sympathy with most of the cardinals, who felt they had been deceived:
for at the conclave which had given him the tiara Paul had glibly
promised that if elected he would transfer fuller privileges and
authority to the Sacred College. The promise was not fulfilled on the
grounds that such an action would be invalid and contrary to canon law.
Paul did not abandon the project of a Crusade and after the usual
appeals had been made and received with the familiar lethargy of the
temporal rulers he formulated a scheme whereby a general tax was to be
levied and with the monies so derived mercenaries employed to carry on
the campaign against the ever encroaching Turk who by now indeed was
marching through Greece. His plan proved impracticable and the apathy of
the nations, with the exception of Albania and Hungary (to whom the Pope
sent financial assistance), remained unbroken; and although
Charlemagne's title was still jealously claimed and used, the most
powerful sovereign of the world was acknowledged to be the Moslem
warrior, Mohammed II.

From the next conclave came <span class="smallcaps">Sixtus</span> IV,
the former Cardinal Francis della Rovere (a name which was not his by
birth but gained by association with the noble family in the capacity of
tutor) . Born the son of a fisherman he had joined the Franciscans at a
very early age and from that commencement his astuteness had won him
promotion step by step until finally the supreme rank was his. Like most
other popes of this era the acquisition of the tiara meant the
enrichment of his family. Two of his nephews, unworthy in every respect,
became cardinals and like the rest of their rejoicing relatives revelled
in

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

preferment and favour. He ruled thirteen years and, although he brought
no improvement to his spiritual domain, the temporal power of the Papal
States was regularized and strengthened—a process that could not
apparently be accomplished without the accompaniment of intrigue,
treachery, and bloodshed. A cathedral in Florence became the background
of a particularly horrible crime when Giuliano Medici, one of the
leaders of his family, now in disagreement with the Papal States, was
brutally murdered whilst attending mass although his brother Lorenzo
escaped to wreak a terrible revenge on the actual assassins and to
declare war against their admitted ally, the Pope. The lack of
saintliness in his own character did not prevent Sixtus from being a
great friend of the monastic orders, whom he encouraged and protected by
statutes and gifts; nor did his preoccupation with political affairs
prevent him from sustaining that bright continuity of artistic patronage
which was the happy legacy of a Renaissance pope to his successors. The
Sistine Chapel owed its beauty to his generosity as do many other works
of beauty still in existence. With less vigour perhaps, even though at
one time he sold his silver plate to pay his mercenaries, he continued
on the tradition of a Crusade. But in these years such efforts were
reduced to a series of minor campaigns, even though at one time the
Turks invaded Southern Italy, and the withdrawal of this capable foe was
not due to any Christian victory but because of the opportune death of
the Mohammedan leader. To the Inquisition in Spain Sixtus sent a message
in which he stressed the need of moderation and the necessity of freedom
from domination by political parties; with the latter purpose in mind he
appointed the Cardinal Thomas de Torquemada as Grand Inquisitor.

The death of Sixtus was a signal for the Roman mob to

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

demonstrate against his relatives. The family palace, rich with newly
acquired treasures, was raided and plundered and the streets became
noisy with maledictions and curses against the family name. But even
violent proof of an intense popularity could not stifle the ambitions
and designs of his favourite nephew, Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere. The
opponent of this product of nepotism, in the elaborate intrigues which
were set in motion with the gathering of the next conclave, was another
favoured nephew, but of an earlier pope. Rodrigo Borgia wished the tiara
for himself but his promises and schemes were less effective, this time,
than the persuasions of the unpopular but wily della Rovere. For, after
brief deliberation, the latter's candidate, the Cardinal John-Baptist
Cibo, became <span class="smallcaps">Innocent</span> VIII. Little could
be expected of one elected under such auspices and indeed his reign was
no interruption in what was now becoming a long and shameful record.
Typical in all ways of the sad era was the move made by the new pope
when, ungratefully wishing to free himself from the demanding and
irksome friendship of his sponsor, he made peace with Florence by
marrying his illegitimate son to the daughter of the enemy of the
previous pontiff, Lorenzo de Medici. Such an alliance was not considered
extraordinary at the time and the fact that a condition of the marriage
contract made the sixteen-year-old brother of the bride a cardinal
caused neither indignation nor protest save from such isolated
personages as the eloquent Dominican friar, Girolamo Savonarola, who at
this time was tramping throughout Italy and attracting large audiences
by the fearless outspokenness and vigour of his sermons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifteenth Century](ptp15)
