[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](spe00)  [Next](spe02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE

IN bringing out a new edition of "Sports and Pastimes," it will probably
be of interest to put on record a few facts with regard to the author,
who has a fair claim to be ranked among the distinguished literary men
of the close of the eighteenth century.

Joseph Strutt, engraver, artist, antiquary and author, was born at
Chelmsford in 1749. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) His father, a
wealthy miller, died the year after his birth. He was educated at the
Chelmsford Grammar School, and apprenticed at the age of fourteen to the
engraver, William Wynne Ryland. In 1770 he became a student of the Royal
Academy, and in the following year secured both the gold and silver
medals, the former for oil painting and the latter "for the best Academy
figure." In the summer of 1771 he was employed by a gentleman to make
some drawings for him from British Museum MSS. This gave the direction
to his subsequent life's work, and he resolved to devote himself to the
study of mediaeval social England. In 1773 Joseph Strutt produced his
first work, "The Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities of England,"
drawing and engraving the whole of the plates, and at the same time
producing letter-press that bore witness to the breadth and accuracy of
his reading. This is also true of all his subsequent works; considering
the almost entire absence of genuine works of reference at that period,
his books are marvels of careful research. Between 1774 and 1746 he
published the three volumes of "Manners, Customs, Arms, Habits, etc., of
the People of England," and in 1777-8 two volumes of "Chronicle of
England," all of them being in large 4to and profusely illustrated. From
this date he for some years gave his attention to painting, and
exhibited nine pictures in the Royal Academy, which were chiefly
classical subjects. In 1785 Mr Strutt published the first volume of his
"Dictionary of Engravers"; the second volume appeared in the following
year. Continued asthma caused him to leave London in 1790, and whilst
residing in a county village of Hertford-shire, he produced a series of
engravings for Bradford's edition of the Pilgrim's Progress. With the
improvement of his health in 1795 Strutt returned to London, and resumed
his favourite researches at the British Museum. In 1796-1799 he brought
out his valuable work on "Dresses and Habits of the English People."
This was followed in 'Sol by the most popular of all his books, "Sports
and Pastimes of the People of England," "a performance," says his son,
"which, from the novelty of the subject, attracted the notice and
admiration of readers of almost every class." In 1802 he died, when he
had nearly completed

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "a legendary romance," intended to illustrate
the usages and domestic manners of the fifteenth century, to which he
gave the name of "Queenhoo Hall." A very special interest attaches to
this posthumous work. After Strutt's death the incomplete manuscript was
placed by John Murray in the hands of Walter Scott, who added the
concluding chapter. It was published in four small volumes in 1808. In
the general preface to the Waverley notes, written by Sir Walter Scott
in 1829, acknowledgment is made by the great romance writer of his
indebtedness to Joseph Strutt. Although "Queenhoo Hall" was not a
success, in consequence of its appealing only to antiquaries through
being overloaded with details, Scott acknowledges that Waverley would
never have been completed, and his initial triumph won, had he not been
called upon to edit Strutt's tale. Even if Strutt had no special merit
of his own, he is well deserving of a niche in the temple of literary
fame as the foster-parent of the immortal series of Waverley novels.

When, however, any reflective person, more particularly the English
mediaeval antiquary or historian, studies the writings and illustrations
of Joseph Strutt, he cannot fail to realise that he was a laborious and
conscientious worker in a hitherto unexplored vein of literary research,
and possessed a remarkable power of assimilating a vast store of
material. Somewhat shallow or inconsiderate folk from time to time
indulge in sneers at the mistakes or inaccuracies in certain points of a
writer who toiled a century ago; they do not reflect on the remarkable
accumulation of valuable works of reference during the nineteenth
century, absolutely unknown in the days when Joseph Strutt was a British
Museum reader, or on the present far greater accessibility of public
records and similar documents. Strutt was the pioneer in almost every
branch of English mediaeval archaeology, and as such is entitled to the
respect of every antiquary.

With regard to "Sports and Pastimes," this, the most popular of all his
works, was originally published in quarto in 1801. The numerous plates
were hand coloured in the majority of the issues; but were evidently
drawn by the author with sufficient care to be produced without any
colouring adjunct. Indeed, from the style of the drawings it is
debatable whether the colouring was not an afterthought of the
publisher. It may safely be asserted that Joseph Strutt had nothing
whatever to do with the colouring. He was ill at the time the work was
produced, and died shortly afterwards. Though in the main an engraver,
it will be recollected that Strutt was himself a colourist and won his
first Academy medal by an oil painting. His son states of his first
work, "The Regal and Ecclesiastical Antiquities of England," that the
plates of part of the impression were coloured in order to make them
more nearly resemble the originals. But whoever was responsible for
treating a large number of the copies of "Sports and Pastimes" in a like
fashion never took the trouble to even glance at the originals, but
simply dipped the brush into whatever colour caprice suggested, with a
result that is sometimes comical in its extravagance and sometimes false
in its facts. An ape painted brilliant green is an

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

example of the one, whilst the same coat of arms appearing twice on the
same plate in quite different tinctures is an example of the other.
After collating five coloured copies of the first edition, with the more
important MSS. of the British Museum which furnished Strutt with his
illustrations, it was found that each one differed absolutely in colours
from the actual pictures. The primary intention of giving coloured
plates in this edition was therefore abandoned, more particularly as the
drawings from some of the most frequently used manuscripts are not
definitely coloured in the originals, but merely tinted here and there
with a delicate wash.

The decision to take this course was confirmed, when it was found that
the work was reissued in 1810, with the plates printed in a uniform
terra-cotta shade as reproduced in the current volume. The 1810 edition
was in slightly larger and much superior type to that of 1801, and it is
thought that the type now used will favourably compare with it.

"A Set of Humorous and Descriptive Illustrations in Twenty-one
Engravings, by Stephenhoff and others, of the Sports and Pastimes of the
People of England, from Paintings of the XVII. and XVIII. Century, in
continuation of Joseph Strutt's," was issued in 1816; but they are
vulgar in subject, poor in style, and quite unworthy to be associated
with any work of Strutt's. That enterprising cheap publisher, William
Hone, reprinted "Sports and Pastimes" in octavo, in 1830, with rough
cuts in the letterpress in lieu of the plates. This octavo edition,
nearly identical in letterpress with the original, was reproduced in
1837, in 1841, and again in 1875.

This is, however, the first time that any endeavour has been made to
bring out a new edition of Mr Strutt's great and entertaining work. In
producing this largely revised edition, Mr Strutt has been left for the
most part to speak in his own characteristic fashion and out of his own
store of learning. A few obvious mistakes and rash conclusions have been
corrected, whilst now and again certain unimportant omissions have been
made. It is peculiarly difficult in a work of this kind to decide on the
best plan and arrangement; but Mr Strutt's scheme of dividing sports and
pastimes into four books descriptive of "Rural Exercises practised by
Persons of Rank," "Rural Exercises generally practised," "Pastimes
usually exercised in Towns and Cities," and "Domestic Amusements"--each
book being sub-divided into chapters--has been followed. In one or two
cases a slight rearrangement has taken place; such, for instance, as
bringing together the descriptions of bear and bull baiting, and the
scattered references to dancing.

Nearly a third of the book is new. To the paragraphs for which the
Editor is responsible a small asterisk is prefixed.

It was found necessary to rewrite almost the whole of the chapter
dealing with cricket, golf, tennis, football, and other ball games.
There is also much that is new with regard to archery, wrestling, and
the hunting of wolves and boars.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

No attempt has been made to bring the book generally up to date, or to
turn it into an encyclopædia of sports, ancient and modern. Many volumes
would be required for such a purpose, and they are already to be found
in the admirable Badminton series. At the same time, brief indications
are given of the growth and change in sports and pastimes during the
nineteenth century, together with references to the best modern sources
as to their respective methods.

It is interesting to reflect upon the simply astounding change that has
come over all classes of the community with regard to games during the
hundred years that have elapsed since Joseph Strutt first wrote upon the
subject. Whether the extraordinary devotion of the English of the
present generation to every conceivable kind of sport and pastime is a
sign of national decay or of national progress is not a matter for
discussion in these pages, which merely aim at being a true chronicle of
the past.

J. CHARLES COX  

  CLYDE LODGE,  
SYDENHAM, *May* 1903

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](spe01.htm#fr_0.md) This brief sketch of the
literary life of Joseph Strutt is taken, in the main, from a short
biography contributed by his elder son to Nichols' Literary Anecdotes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](spe02.md)
