[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](spe15)  [Next](spe17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

<span id="img_pl25"></span>

[![Tutored Bears](tn/pl25.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl25.jpg.md)  
Tutored Bears  

 

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

### CHAPTER VI

Animals how tutored by the Jugglers--Tricks performed by Bears--Tricks
performed by Apes and Monkeys--Bears in Britain--Tricks by Horses in the
thirteenth Century--In queen Anne's Reign--Origin of the Exhibitions at
Astley's, the Circus, etc.--Dancing Dogs--The Hare beating a Tabor, and
learned Pig--A Dancing Cock--The Deserter Bird--Imitations of
Animals--Mummings and Masquerades--Mumming to royal Personages--Partial
Imitations of Animals--The Horse in the Morris-dance--Counterfeit Voices
of Animals--Animals trained for Baiting--Paris Garden--Bull and
Bear-baiting patronised by Royalty--How performed--Bears and
Bear-wards--Baiting in queen Anne's time--Recent
Bull-baiting--Bull-running at Tutbury and Stamford--Sword-play--The
Masters of Defence--Pepys on Prize-play--Public
Sword-play--Quarter-staff.

ANIMALS HOW TUTORED BY JUGGLER.--One great part of the joculator's
profession was the teaching of bears, apes, horses, dogs, and other
animals, to imitate the actions of men, to tumble, to dance, and to
perform a variety of tricks, contrary to their nature; and sometimes he
learned himself to counterfeit the gestures and articulations of the
brutes. The plates that illustrate this chapter relate to both these
modes of diverting the public, and prove the invention of them to be
more ancient than is generally supposed. The tutored bear lying down at
the command of his master, represented on the top of [plate
twenty-five](#img_pl25.md), is taken from a manuscript of the tenth
century; and the three dancing bears beneath it are as early as the
fourteenth century. I have already had occasion to make mention of these
delineations; and the other two require no explanation. <span
id="fr_690"></span>[1](#fn_689.md)

On we find a bear standing on its head, and another dancing with a
monkey on its back; the original occurs in a book of prayers in the
Harleian Collection, <span id="fr_691"></span>[2](#fn_690.md) written
towards the close of the thirteenth century.

I shall only observe, that there is but one among these six drawings in
which the animal is depicted with a muzzle to prevent him from biting.
The dancing bears have retained their place to the present time, and
they frequently perform in the public streets for the amusement of the
multitude; but the miserable appearance of their masters plainly
indicates the scantiness of the contributions they receive on these
occasions.

\* BEARS IN BRITAIN.--That bears were found in Britain during the eighth
century is known from Archbishop Egbert's Penitential, where it is laid
down that "if any one shall hit a deer or other animal with an arrow,
and it escapes and is found dead three days afterwards, and if a dog, a
wolf, a fox, or a bear or any other wild beast hath begun to feed upon
it, no Christian shall touch it." Mr Harting is of opinion that the
trained bears exhibited by the Anglo-Saxon gleemen were native animals
taken young and tamed. The great Caledonian

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

forest was so well supplied with bears that it furnished a considerable
supply for the barbarous sports of Rome. It is supposed that bears
became extinct in Britain before the tenth century. <span
id="fr_692"></span>[1](#fn_691.md)

TRICKS PERFORMED BY APES AND MONKEYS.--Thomas Cartwright, in his
*Admonition to Parliament against the Use of the Common Prayer*,
published in 1572, says: "If there be a bear or a bull to be baited in
the afternoon, or a jackanapes to ride on horseback, the minister
hurries the service over in a shameful manner, in order to be present at
the show." We are not, however, hereby to conceive, that these
amusements were more sought after or encouraged in England than they
were abroad. "Our kings," says St Foix, in his *History of Paris*, "at
their coronations, their marriages, and at the baptism of their
children, or at the creation of noblemen and knights, kept open court;
and the palace was crowded on such occasions with cheats, buffoons,
rope-dancers, tale-tellers, jugglers, and pantomimical performers. They
call those," says he, "jugglers, who play upon the vielle, and teach
apes, bears," and perhaps we may add, dogs, "to dance." <span
id="fr_693"></span>[2](#fn_692.md)

Apes and monkeys seem always to have been favourite actors in the
joculator's troop of animals. A specimen of the performance of both, as
far back as the fourteenth century, is given on plate twenty-six. <span
id="fr_694"></span>[3](#fn_693.md) Leaping or tumbling over a chain or cord
held by the juggler, as we here see it depicted, was a trick well
received at Bartholomew Fair in the time of Ben Jonson; and in the
prologue to a comedy written by him, which bears that title, in 1614, it
is said: "He," meaning the author, "has ne’re a sword and buckler man in
his fayre; nor a juggler with a well-educated ape to come over the
chaine for the king of England, and back again for the prince, and sit
still on his haunches for the pope and the king of Spaine." In recent
times, and probably in more ancient times also, these facetious mimics
of mankind were taught to dance upon the rope, and to perform the part
of the balance-masters.

\* Evelyn records in his *Diary*, under date September 13th, 1660, that
he saw "in Southwark, at St Margaret's Fair, monkeys and apes dance and
do other feats of activity on the high-rope; they were gallantly clad *à
la monde*, went upright, saluted the company, bowing and pulling off
their hats; they saluted one another with as good a grace as if
instructed by a dancing-master; they turned heels over head with a
basket having eggs in it, without breaking any; also with lighted
candles in their hands and on their head, without extinguishing them,
and with vessels of water without spilling a drop."

In the reign of queen Anne, there was exhibited at Charing Cross, "a
wild hairy man," who, we are told, danced upon the tight-rope "with a
balance, true to the music"; he also "walked upon the slack-rope" while
it was swinging, and drank a glass of ale; he "pulled off his hat, and
paid his respects to the company"; and "smoaked tobacco," according to
the bill, "as, well as any

 

<span id="img_pl26"></span>

[![Tutored Animals](tn/pl26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl26.jpg.md)  
Tutored Animals  

 

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Christian." <span
id="fr_695"></span>[1](#fn_694.md) But all these feats were afterwards
outdone by a brother monkey, mentioned before, who performed many
wonderful tricks at the Haymarket Theatre, both as a rope-dancer and an
equilibrist. <span id="fr_696"></span>[2](#fn_695.md)

TRICKS PERFORMED BY HORSES IN THE THIRTEENTH CENTURY.--We are told that,
in the thirteenth century, a horse was exhibited by the joculators which
danced upon a rope; and oxen were rendered so docile as to ride upon
horses, holding trumpets to their mouths as though they were sounding
them. <span id="fr_697"></span>[3](#fn_696.md) If we refer to [plate
twenty-seven](#img_pl27.md) we shall find the representation of several
surprising tricks performed by horses, far exceeding those displayed in
the present day (1800). At the top is depicted the cruel diversion of
baiting a horse with dogs, from a fourteenth century manuscript. <span
id="fr_698"></span>[4](#fn_697.md)

\* This wretched sport lingered on until the seventeenth century. In
Evelyn's *Diary*, on August 17th, 1667, occurs the following entry:
"There was now a very gallant horse baited to death with dogs; but he
fought them all, so as the fiercest of them could not fasten on him,
till the men run him through with their swords. This wicked and
barbarous sport deserved to have been punished in the cruel contrivers
to get money, under pretence that the horse had killed a man, which was
false. I would not be persuaded to be a spectator."

In the centre of the plate is a horse dancing upon his hind feet to the
music of the pipe and tabor; <span id="fr_699"></span>[5](#fn_698.md) and
opposite to him is another horse rearing up and attacking the joculator,
who opposes him with a small shield and a cudgel. <span
id="fr_700"></span>[6](#fn_699.md) These mock combats, to which the animals
were properly trained, were constantly regulated by some kind of musical
instrument. The two performances delineated at the bottom of the plate
are more astonishing than those preceding them.

In one instance, the horse is standing upon his hind feet, and beating
with his fore feet upon a kind of tabor or drum held by his master; in
the other the animal is exhibiting a similar trick with his hind feet,
and supports himself upon his fore feet. The original drawings,
represented by these engravings, are all of them upwards of four hundred
and fifty years old; and at the time in which they were made the
joculators were in full possession of the public favour.

Here it is deemed worthy to note, that in the year 1612, at a grand
court festival, Mons. Pluvinel, riding-master to Louis XIII. of France,
with three other gentlemen, accompanied by six esquires bearing their
devices, executed a grand ballette-dance upon managed horses. <span
id="fr_701"></span>[7](#fn_700.md) Something of the same kind is now done
(1800) at Astley's and the Circus; but at these places the dancing is
performed by the horses moving upon their four feet according to the
direction of their riders; and of course it is by no means so surprising
as that exhibited by the latter engravings.

TRICKS BY HORSES IN QUEEN ANNE'S REIGN.--Horses are animals exceedingly

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

susceptible of instruction, and their performances have been extended so
far as to bear the appearance of rational discernment. In the Harleian
Library <span id="fr_702"></span>[1](#fn_701.md) is a show-bill, published
in the reign of queen Anne, which is thus prefaced: "To be seen, at the
Ship upon Great Tower Hill, the finest taught horse in the world." The
abilities of the animal are specified as follows: "He fetches and
carries like a spaniel dog. If you hide a glove, a handkerchief, a door
key, a pewter bason, or so small a thing as a silver two-pence, he will
seek about the room till he has found it; and then he will bring it to
his master. He will also tell the number of spots on a card, and leap
through a hoop; with a variety of other curious performances." And we
may, I trust, give full credit to the statement of this advertisement:
for a horse equally scientific is to be seen in the present day (1800)
at Astley's amphitheatre; this animal is so small, that he and his
keeper frequently parade the streets in a hackney coach.

ORIGIN OF HORSE EXHIBITIONS AT ASTLEY'S, THE CIRCUS, ETC.--Riding upon
two or three horses at once, with leaping, dancing, and performing
various other exertions of agility upon their backs while they are in
full speed, is, I believe, a modern species of exhibition, introduced to
public notice about forty years back (1760) by a man named Price, who
displayed his abilities at Dobney's near Islington; soon afterwards, a
competitor by the name of Sampson made his appearance; and he again was
succeeded by Astley. The latter established a riding-school near
Westminster bridge, and has been a successful candidate for popular
favour. These performances originally took place in the open air, and
the spectators were exposed to the weather, which frequently proving
unfavourable interrupted the show, and sometimes prevented it
altogether; to remedy this inconvenience, Astley erected a kind of
amphitheatre, completely covered, with a ride in the middle for the
displayment of the horsemanship, and a stage in the front, with scenes
and other theatrical decorations; to his former divertisements he then
added tumbling, dancing, farcical operas, and pantomimes. The success he
met with occasioned a rival professor of horsemanship named Hughes, who
built another theatre for similar performances not far distant, to which
he gave the pompous title of the Royal Circus. Hughes was unfortunate,
and died some years back; but the Circus has passed into other hands;
and the spectacles exhibited there in the present day (1800) are far
more splendid than those of any other of the minor theatres.

DANCING DOGS.--I know no reason why the joculators should not have made
the dog one of their principal brute performers; the sagacity of this
creature and its docility could not have escaped their notice; and yet
the only trick performed by the dog, that occurs in the ancient
paintings, is simply that of sitting upon his haunches in an upright
position, which he might have been taught to do with very little
trouble. Three specimens are given, one on [plate twenty-six](#img_pl26.md)
and two on [plate twenty-eight](#img_pl28.md); they are all from the
oft-cited Oxford manuscript of 1344.

 

<span id="img_pl27"></span>

[![Tricks taught to Horses](tn/pl27.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl27.jpg.md)  
Tricks taught to Horses  

 

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

Neither do I recollect that dogs are included in the list of animals
formerly belonging to the juggler's exhibitions, though, no doubt, they
ought to have been; for, in Ben Jonson's play of *Bartholmew Fayre*,
first acted in 1614, there is mention made of "dogges that dance the
morrice," without any indication of the performance being a novelty.

\* Neither Pepys nor Evelyn make any reference to "performing dogs" in
their respective diaries; but the performance of a non-professional dog
recorded by the former, under September 11th, 1661, is certainly worthy
of mention: "To Dr Williams, who did carry me into his garden, where he
hath abundance of grapes; and he did show me how a dog that he hath do
kill all the cats that come thither to kill his pigeons, and do
afterwards bury them; and do it with so much care that they shall be
quite covered; that if the tip of the tail hangs out, he will take up
the cat again and dig the hole deeper, which is very strange; and he
tells me that he do believe he hath killed above too cats."

Dancing dogs, in the present day (1800), make their appearance in the
public streets of the metropolis; but their masters meet with very
little encouragement, except from the lower classes of the people, and
from children; and of course the performance is rarely worthy of notice.
At the commencement of the last century, a company of dancing dogs was
introduced at Southwark Fair by a puppet-showman named Crawley. He
called this exhibition "The Ball of Little Dogs"; and states in his
bill, that they came from Lovain: he then tells us, that "they performed
by their cunning tricks wonders in the world of dancing"; and adds, "you
shall see one of them, named marquis of Gaillerdain, whose dexterity is
not to be compared; he dances with madame Poncette his mistress and the
rest of their company at the sound of instruments, all of them observing
so well the cadence, that they amaze every body." At the close of the
bill, he declares that the dogs had danced before queen Anne and most of
the nobility of England. But many other "cunning tricks," and greatly
superior to those practised by Crawley's company, have been performed by
dogs some few years ago, at Sadler's Wells, and afterwards at Astley's,
to the great amusement and disport of the polite spectators. One of the
dogs at Sadler's Wells acted the part of a lady, and was carried by two
other dogs; some of them were seated at a table, and waited on by
others; and the whole concluded with the attack and storming of a fort,
entirely performed by dogs. <span id="fr_703"></span>[1](#fn_702.md)

THE HARE AND TABOR, AND LEARNED PIG.--It is astonishing what may be
effected by constant exertion and continually tormenting even the most
timid and untractable animals; for no one would readily believe that a
hare could have been sufficiently emboldened to face a large concourse
of spectators without expressing its alarm, and beat upon a tambourine
in their presence; yet such a performance was put in practice not many
years back, and exhibited at Sadler's Wells; and, if I mistake not, in
several other places in and about the metropolis.

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Neither is this whimsical spectacle a recent
invention. A hare that beat the tabor is mentioned by Jonson, in his
comedy of *Bartholmew Fayre*, acted at the commencement of the
seventeenth century; and a representation of the same feat, taken from a
drawing on a manuscript upwards of four hundred years old, is given on
plate [twenty-two](spe15.htm#img_pl22.md). <span
id="fr_704"></span>[1](#fn_703.md)

And here I cannot help mentioning a very ridiculous show of a learned
pig, which of late days attracted much of the public notice, and at the
polite end of the town. This pig, which indeed was a large unwieldy hog,
being taught to pick up letters written upon pieces of cards, and to
arrange them at command, gave great satisfaction to all who saw him, and
filled his tormenter's pocket with money. One would not have thought
that a hog had been an animal capable of learning: the fact, however, is
another proof of what may be accomplished by assiduity; for the showman
assured a friend of mine, that he had lost three very promising brutes
in the course of training, and that the phenomenon then exhibited had
often given him reason to despair of success. It was first shown in the
vicinity of Pall Mall, in 1789, at five shillings each person; the price
was afterwards reduced to half a crown; and finally to one shilling.

A DANCING COCK AND THE DESERTER BIRD.--The joculators did not confine
themselves to the tutoring of quadrupeds, but extended their practice to
birds also; and a curious specimen of their art appears on [plate
twenty-six](#img_pl26.md), where a cock is represented dancing on stilts to
the music of a pipe and tabor. <span id="fr_705"></span>[2](#fn_704.md)

In the present day (1800), this may probably be considered as a mere
effort of the illuminator's fancy, and admit of a doubt whether such a
trick was ever displayed in reality; but many are yet living who were
witnesses to an exhibition far more surprising, shown at Breslaw's, a
celebrated juggler, who performed in Cockspur Street, opposite the
Haymarket, about 1775. His prices for admission were five shillings and
half a crown. A number of little birds, to the amount, I believe, of
twelve or fourteen, being taken from different cages, were placed upon a
table in the presence of the spectators; and there they formed
themselves into ranks like a company of soldiers: small cones of paper
bearing some resemblance to grenadiers' caps were put upon their heads,
and diminutive imitations of muskets made with wood, secured under their
left wings. Thus equipped, they marched to and fro several times; when a
single bird was brought forward, supposed to be a deserter, and set
between six of the musketeers, three in a row, who conducted him from
the top to the bottom of the table, on the middle of which a small brass
cannon charged with a little gunpowder had been previously placed, and
the deserter was situated in the front part of the cannon; his guards
then divided, three retiring on one side, and three on the other, and he
was left standing by himself. Another bird was immediately produced;
and, a lighted match being put into one of his claws, he hopped boldly
on the other to the tail of the cannon, and, applying the match to the
priming, discharged the piece without the least appearance of fear or
agitation. The

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

moment the explosion took place, the deserter fell down, and lay,
apparently motionless, like a dead bird; but, at the command of his
tutor he rose again; and the cages being brought, the feathered soldiers
were stripped of their ornaments, and returned into them in perfect
order.

IMITATIONS OF ANIMALS.--Among the performances dependent on imitation,
that of assuming the forms of different animals, and counterfeiting
their gestures, do not seem to have originated with the jugglers; for
this absurd practice, if I mistake not, existed long before these
comical artists made their appearance, at least in large companies, and
in a professional way. There was a sport common among the ancients,
which usually took place on the kalends of January, and probably formed
a part of the Saturnalia, or feasts of Saturn. It consisted in mummings
and disguisements; for the actors took upon themselves the resemblance
of wild beasts, or domestic cattle, and wandered about from one place to
another; and he, I presume, stood highest in the estimation of his
fellows who best supported the character of the brute he imitated. This
whimsical amusement was exceedingly popular, and continued to be
practised long after the establishment of Christianity; it was, however,
much opposed by the clergy, and particularly by Paulinus, bishop of
Nola, in the ninth century, who in one of his sermons tells us, that
those concerned in it were wont to clothe themselves with skins of
cattle, and put upon them the heads of beasts. <span
id="fr_706"></span>[1](#fn_705.md) What effect his preaching may have had
at the time, I know not: the custom, however, was not totally
suppressed, but may be readily traced from vestiges remaining of it, to
the modern times. Dr Johnson, in his *Journey to the Western Islands of
Scotland*, says a gentleman informed him, that, at new year's eve, in
the hall or castle of the laird, where at festivals there is supposed to
be a very numerous company, one man dresses himself in a cow-hide, on
which other men beat with sticks; he runs with all this noise round the
house, which all the company quits in a counterfeited fright; the door
is then shut, and no readmission obtained after their pretended terror,
but by the repetition of a verse of poetry, which those acquainted with
the custom are provided with. <span id="fr_707"></span>[2](#fn_706.md) The
ancient court games, described in a former chapter, are certainly
off-shoots from the Saturnalian disfigurements; and from the same stock
we may pertinently derive the succeeding masquings and disguisements of
the person frequently practised at certain seasons of the year; and
hence also came the modern masquerades. Warton says, that certain court
theatrical amusements were called mascarades very anciently in
France. <span id="fr_708"></span>[3](#fn_707.md)

MUMMINGS AND MASQUERADES.--In the middle ages, mummings were very
common. Mumm is said to be derived from the Danish word *mumme*, or
*momme* in Dutch, and signifies to disguise oneself with a mask: hence a
mummer, which is properly defined by Dr Johnson to be a masker, one who
performs frolics in a personated dress.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Jugglers and dancers, antics, mummers, mimics.

\[paragraph continues\] From the time of Edward III. mummings or
disguisings, accompanied with figurative dances, were in vogue at court,
of which there were memorable instances in the years 1377 and 1400. In
the mansions of the nobility, on occasions of festivity, it also
frequently happened that the whole company appeared in borrowed
characters; and, full license of speech being granted to every one, the
discourses were not always kept within the bounds of decency. <span
id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_708.md) These spectacles were exhibited with
great splendour in former times and particularly during the reign of
Henry VIII.; they have ceased, however, of late years to attract the
notice of the opulent; and the regular masquerades which succeeded them,
are not supported at present (1800) with that degree of mirthful spirit
which, we are told, abounded at their institution; and probably it is
for this reason they are declining so rapidly in the public estimation.

The mummeries practised by the lower classes of the people usually took
place at the Christmas holidays; and such persons as could not procure
masks rubbed their faces over with soot, or painted them; hence
Sebastian Brant, in his *Ship of Fools*, <span
id="fr_710"></span>[2](#fn_709.md) alluding to this custom, says:--

The one hath a visor ugley set on his face,  
  Another hath on a vile counterfaite vesture,  
Or painteth his visage with fume in such case,  
  That what he is, himself is scantily sure.

It appears that many abuses were committed under the sanction of these
disguisements; and for this reason an ordinance was established, by
which a man was liable to punishment who appeared in the streets of
London with "a painted visage." <span id="fr_711"></span>[3](#fn_710.md) In
the third year of the reign of Henry VIII. it was ordained that no
persons should appear abroad like mummers, covering their faces with
vizors, and in disguised apparel, under pain of imprisonment for three
months. The same act enforced the penalty of 20s. against such as kept
vizors or masks in their houses for the purpose of mumming.

Bourne, in his *Vulgar Antiquities*, <span
id="fr_712"></span>[4](#fn_711.md) speaks of a kind of mumming practised in
the North about Christmas time, which consisted in "changing of clothes
between the men and the women, who, when dressed in each other's habits,
go," says he, "from one neighbour's house to another, and partake of
their Christmas cheer, and make merry with them in disguise, by dancing
and singing and such like merriments."

MUMMING TO ROYAL PERSONAGES.--Persons capable of well supporting assumed
characters were frequently introduced at public entertainments, and also
in the pageants exhibited on occasions of solemnity; sometimes they were
the bearers of presents, and sometimes the speakers of panegyrical
orations.

 

<span id="img_pl28"></span>

[![Animals imitated](tn/pl28.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl28.jpg.md)  
Animals imitated  

 

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Froissart tells us, that, after the coronation
of Isabel of Bavaria, the queen of Charles VI. of France, she had
several rich donations brought to her by mummers in different
disguisements; one resembling a bear, another an unicorn, others like a
company of Moors, and others as Turks or Saracens. <span
id="fr_713"></span>[1](#fn_712.md)

When queen Elizabeth was entertained at Kenilworth castle, various
spectacles were contrived for her amusement, and some of them produced
without any previous notice, to take her as it were by surprise. It
happened about nine o'clock one evening, as her majesty returned from
hunting, and was riding by torchlight, there came suddenly out of the
wood, by the road-side, a man habited like a savage, covered with ivy,
holding in one of his hands an oaken plant torn up by the roots, who
placed himself before her, and, after holding some discourse with a
counterfeit echo, repeated a poetical oration in her praise, which was
well received. This man was Thomas Gascoyne the poet; and the verses he
spoke on the occasion were his own composition. The circumstance took
place on the 10th of July 1575. <span id="fr_714"></span>[2](#fn_713.md)

The savage men, or wodehouses, as they are sometimes called, frequently
made their appearance in the public shows; they were sometimes clothed
entirely with skins, and sometimes they were decorated with oaken
leaves, or covered, as above, with ivy.

PARTIAL IMITATIONS OF ANIMALS.--The jugglers and the minstrels,
observing how lightly these ridiculous disguisements were relished by
the people in general, turned their talents towards the imitating of
different animals, and rendered their exhibitions more pleasing by the
addition of their new acquirements. On [plate twenty-eight](#img_pl28.md)
are three specimens of their performances, all taken from the fourteenth
century Bodleian MS. that has supplied so many of our illustrations. One
of them presents to us the resemblance of a stag, and another that of a
goat walking erectly on his hind feet. Neither of these fictitious
animals have any fore legs; but to the first the deficiency is supplied
by a staff, upon which the actor might recline at pleasure; his face is
seen through an aperture on the breast; and, I doubt not, a person was
chosen to play this part with a face susceptible of much grimace, which
he had an opportunity of setting forth to great advantage, with a
certainty of commanding the plaudits of his beholders. It was also
possible to heighten the whimsical appearance of this disguise by a
motion communicated to the head; a trick the man might easily enough
perform, by putting one of his arms into the hollow of his neck; and
probably the neck was made pliable for that purpose. In the third
delineation we find a boy, with a mask resembling the head of a dog,
presenting a scroll of parchment to his master. In the original there
are two more boys, who are following disguised in a similar manner, and
each of them holding a like scroll of parchment. The wit of this
performance, I protest, I cannot discover.

COUNTERFEIT VOICES OF ANIMALS.--I have not been able to ascertain how

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

far the ancient jugglers exerted their abilities in counterfeiting the
articulation of animals; but we may reasonably suppose they would not
have neglected so essential a requisite to make their imitations
perfect.

In the reign of queen Anne, a man whose name was Clench, a native of
Barnet, made his appearance at London. He performed at the corner of
Bartholomew Lane, behind the Royal Exchange. His price for admittance
was one shilling each person. I have his advertisement before me; <span
id="fr_715"></span>[1](#fn_714.md) which states that he "imitated the
horses, the huntsmen, and a pack of hounds, a sham doctor, an old woman,
a drunken man, the bells, the flute, the double curtell, and the organ
with three voices, by his own natural voice, to the greatest
perfection." He then professes himself to "be the only man that could
ever attain to so great an art." He had, however, a rival, who is noted
in one of the papers of the *Spectator*, and called the whistling man.
His excellency consisted in counterfeiting the notes of all kinds of
singing birds. <span id="fr_716"></span>[2](#fn_715.md) The same
performance was exhibited in great perfection by the bird-tutor
associated with Breslaw the juggler, mentioned a few pages back. This
man assumed the name of Rosignol, <span id="fr_717"></span>[3](#fn_716.md)
and, after he had quitted Breslaw, appeared on the stage at Covent
Garden Theatre, where, in addition to his imitation of the birds, he
executed a concerto on a fiddle without strings; that is, he made the
notes in a wonderful manner with his voice, and represented the bowing
by drawing a small truncheon backwards and forwards over a stringless
violin. His performance was received with great applause; and the
success he met with produced many competitors, but none of them equalled
him: it was, however, discovered, that the sounds were produced by an
instrument contrived for the purpose, concealed in the mouth; and then
the trick lost all its reputation. Six years ago (1794) I heard a poor
rustic, a native of St Alban's, imitate, with great exactness, the whole
assemblage of animals belonging to a farm-yard; but especially he
excelled in counterfeiting the grunting of swine, the squeaking of pigs,
and the quarrelling of two dogs.

ANIMALS TRAINED FOR BAITING.--Training of bulls, bears, horses, and
other animals, for the purpose of baiting them with dogs, was certainly
practised by the jugglers; and this vicious pastime has the sanction of
high antiquity. Fitz-Stephen, who lived in the reign of Henry II., tells
us that, in the forenoon of every holiday, during the winter season, the
young Londoners were amused with boars opposed to each other in battle,
or with bulls and full-grown bears baited by dogs. <span
id="fr_718"></span>[4](#fn_717.md) This author makes no mention of horses;
and I believe the baiting of these noble and useful animals was never a
general practice: it was, however, no doubt, partially performed; and
the manner in which it was carried into execution appears on plate
twenty-seven. Asses also were treated with the same inhumanity; but
probably the poor beasts did not afford sufficient sport in the
tormenting, and therefore were seldom brought forward as the objects of
this barbarous diversion.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

PARIS GARDEN.--There were several places in the vicinity of the
metropolis set apart for the baiting of beasts, and especially the
district of Saint Saviour's parish in Southwark, called Paris Garden;
which place contained two bear-gardens, said to have been the first that
were made near London; and in them, according to Stow, were scaffolds
for the spectators to stand upon: <span id="fr_719"></span>[1](#fn_718.md)
and this indulgence, we are told, they paid for in the following manner:
"Those who go to Paris Garden, the Bell Savage, or Theatre, to behold
bear-baiting, enterludes, or fence-play, must not account of any
pleasant spectacle, unless first they pay one pennie at the gate,
another at the entrie of the scaffold, and a third for quiet
standing." <span id="fr_720"></span>[2](#fn_719.md) One Sunday afternoon in
January 1583, the scaffolds being over-charged with spectators, fell
down during the performance; and a great number of persons were killed
or maimed by the accident. <span id="fr_721"></span>[3](#fn_720.md)

BULL AND BEAR-BAITING PATRONISED BY ROYALTY.--Bull and bear-baiting is
not encouraged by persons of rank and opulence in the present day
(1800); and when practised, which rarely happens, it is attended only by
the lowest and most despicable part of the people; which plainly
indicates a general refinement of manners and prevalency of humanity
among the moderns; on the contrary, this barbarous pastime was highly
relished by the nobility in former ages, and countenanced by persons of
the most exalted rank, without exception even of the fair sex.

\* The office of Master of the Bears used to be held under the Crown,
with a salary of 16d. a day. It was his duty to provide bears and dogs
and superintend the baiting whenever required. He had authority to issue
commissions to his officials to press into the royal service any bears
or dogs that seemed suitable. On October 11th, 1561, a patent was issued
to Sir Saunders Duncombe "for the sole practice and profit of the
fighting and combating of wild and domestic beasts within the realm of
England for the space of fourteen years." Prince Arthur had a bear-ward;
when he visited the prior of Durham in 1530 with his troop of bears and
apes, he received a gratuity of five shillings. <span
id="fr_722"></span>[4](#fn_721.md)

Erasmus, who visited England in the reign of Henry VIII., says, there
were "many herds of bears maintained in this country for the purpose of
baiting." <span id="fr_723"></span>[5](#fn_722.md) When queen Mary visited
her sister the princess Elizabeth during her confinement at Hatfield
House, the next morning, after mass, a grand exhibition of bear-baiting
was made for their amusement, with which, it is said, "their highnesses
were right well content." <span id="fr_724"></span>[6](#fn_723.md) Queen
Elizabeth, on the 25th of May 1559, soon after her accession to the
throne, gave a splendid dinner to the French ambassadors, who afterwards
were entertained with the baiting of bulls and bears, and the queen
herself stood with the ambassadors looking on the

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

pastime till six at night. The day following, the same ambassadors went
by water to Paris Garden, where they saw another baiting of bulls and of
bears; <span id="fr_725"></span>[1](#fn_724.md) and again, twenty-seven
years posterior, queen Elizabeth received the Danish ambassador at
Greenwich, who was treated with the sight of a bear and bull-baiting,
"tempered," says Holinshed, "with other merry disports"; <span
id="fr_726"></span>[2](#fn_725.md) and, for the diversion of the populace,
there was a horse with an ape upon his back; which highly pleased them,
so that they expressed "their inward-conceived joy and delight with
shrill shouts and variety of gestures." <span
id="fr_727"></span>[3](#fn_726.md)

BULL AND BEAR-BAITING, HOW PERFORMED.--The manner in which these sports
were exhibited towards the close of the sixteenth century, is thus
described by Hentzner, <span id="fr_728"></span>[4](#fn_727.md) who was
present at one of the performances: "There is a place built in the form
of a theatre, which serves for baiting of bulls and bears; they are
fastened behind, and then worried by great English bull-dogs; but not
without risque to the dogs, from the horns of the one and the teeth of
the other; and it sometimes happens they are killed on the spot; fresh
ones are immediately supplied in the places of those that are wounded or
tired. To this entertainment there often follows that of whipping a
blinded bear, which is performed by five or six men standing circularly
with whips, which they exercise upon him without any mercy, as he cannot
escape because of his chain; he defends himself with all his force and
skill, throwing down all that come within his reach, and are not active
enough to get out of it, and tearing the whips out of their hands, and
breaking them." Laneham, speaking of a hear-baiting exhibited before
queen Elizabeth in 1575, says: "It was a sport very pleasant to see the
bear, with his pink eyes learing after his enemies, approach; the
nimbleness and wait of the dog to take his advantage; and the force and
experience of the bear again to avoid his assaults: if he were bitten in
one place, how he would pinch in another to get free; that if he were
taken once, then by what shift with biting, with clawing, with roaring,
with tossing, and tumbling, he would work and wind himself from them;
and, when he was loose, to shake his ears twice or thrice with the blood
and the slaver hanging about his physiognomy." The same writer tells us,
that thirteen bears were provided for this occasion, and they were
baited with a great sort of ban-dogs. <span
id="fr_729"></span>[5](#fn_728.md) In the foregoing relations, we find no
mention made of a ring put into the nose of the bear when he was baited;
which certainly was the more modern practice; hence the expression by
the duke of Newcastle, in the *Humorous Lovers*, printed in 1617: "I
fear the wedlock ring more than the bear does the ring in his nose."

BEARS AND BEAR-WARDS.--When a bear-baiting was about to take place, the
same was publicly made known, and the bear-ward previously paraded the
streets with his bear, to excite the curiosity of the populace, and
induce them to become spectators of the sport. The animal, on these
occasions, was usually

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

preceded by a minstrel or two, and carried a monkey or baboon upon his
back. In the *Humorous Lovers*, the play just now quoted, "Tom of
Lincoln" is mentioned as the name of "a famous bear"; and one of the
characters pretending to personate a bear-ward, says: "I'll set up my
bills, that the gamesters of London, Horsleydown, Southwark, and
Newmarket, may come in and bait him here before the ladies; but first,
boy, go fetch me a bagpipe; we will walk the streets in triumph, and
give the people notice of our sport."

BAITING IN QUEEN ANNE'S TIME.--The two following advertisements, <span
id="fr_730"></span>[1](#fn_729.md) which were published in the reign of
queen Anne, may serve as a specimen of the elegant manner in which these
pastimes were announced to the public:

"At the Bear Garden in Hockley in the Hole, near Clerkenwell Green, this
present Monday, there is a great match to be fought by two Dogs of
Smith-field Bars against two Dogs of Hampstead, at the Reading Bull, for
one guinea to be spent; five lets goes out of hand; which goes fairest
and farthest in wins all. The famous Bull of fire-works, which pleased
the gentry to admiration. Likewise there are two Bear-Dogs to jump three
jumps apiece at the Bear, which jumps highest for ten shillings to be
spent. Also variety of bull-baiting and bear-baiting; it being a day of
general sport by all the old gamesters; and a bull-dog to be drawn up
with fire-works. Beginning at three o'clock."

"At William Well's bear-garden in Tuttle-fields, Westminster, this
present Monday, there will be a green Bull baited; and twenty Dogs to
fight for a collar; and the dog that runs farthest and fairest wins the
collar; with other diversions of bull and bear-baiting. Beginning at two
of the clock."

\* The noise of the bear-gardens, with the shouts and excitement of the
spectators, was something prodigious; the term "bear-garden" still
applied to a noisy household serves to perpetuate a once popular
national pastime.

\* RECENT BULL-BAITING.--Bull-baiting lingered with us much longer than
bear-baiting, and was a far more universal sport throughout England.
Butchers who sold unbaited bull beef were subject in various boroughs to
considerable penalties. It used to be supposed that this order was made
in consequence of baited beef being more digestible, but the enactments
were really intended to promote the continuation of what used to be
regarded as a manly sport. After the Restoration this pastime was
generally resumed with much zest. Sir Miles Stapleton replaced the ring
for bull-baiting and the stone to which it was affixed in the
market-place of Bedale, Yorkshire, in 1661. <span
id="fr_731"></span>[2](#fn_730.md)

\* Bull-baiting was, however, considered more the sport of the populace
than of gentlefolk. It was followed up in the Southwark Bear Garden, but
it disgusted not only Evelyn, but even Pepys. The latter was present at
a Southwark bull-baiting on August 14th, 1666, when the bull tossed one
of the dogs "into the very boxes"; Pepys had the sense to write "it is a
very rude and nasty pleasure." Evelyn was at the same place on June
16th, 1670, and wrote:

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "I went with some friends to the Bear Garden,
where was cock-fighting, dog-fighting, and bear and bull-baiting, it
being a famous day for all these butcherly sports, or rather barbarous
cruelties. The bulls did exceeding well, but the Irish wolf- dog
exceeded, which was a tall greyhound, a stately creature indeed, who
beat a cruel mastiff. One of the bulls tossed a dog full into a lady's
lap, as she sate in one of the boxes at a considerable height from the
arena. Two poor dogs were killed, and so all ended with the ape on
horseback, and I most heartily weary of the rude and dirty pastime,
which I had not seen, I think, in twenty years before."

\* In bull-baiting a rope about 15 feet long was fastened to the root of
the horns, and the other end secured to an iron ring fixed to a stone or
stake driven into the ground. The actual ring for bull-baiting still
remains in several places in England, such as Hedon, Colchester, and
Brading in the Isle of Wight. Several towns, like Birmingham and
Dorchester, retain traces of the sport in their street nomenclature. In
1802 a Bill was introduced into Parliament for the suppression of this
barbarous custom, but it was resisted, especially by Mr Windham, as part
of a conspiracy of the Jacobins and Methodists to render the people
grave and serious, and to uproot constitutional government.
Notwithstanding the earnestness of Wilberforce and the eloquence of
Sheridan, the Bill was defeated by a majority of thirteen. A worse fate
befell a like measure introduced in 1829, which was defeated by 73 votes
to 28. But after the great Reform Bill became law the protests of decent
folk could no longer be set at naught, and bull-baiting was made illegal
in 1835. Nevertheless the sport was still continued, after an illicit
fashion, in a few places. It is said that there were bull-baitings at
Wirksworth in 1840, at Eccles in 1842, and at West Derby in 1853. <span
id="fr_732"></span>[1](#fn_731.md)

\* BULL-RUNNING AT TUTBURY AND STAMFORD.--The bull-running, as practiced
at Tutbury and Stamford, and probably in other parts of England in old
days, was a very different pastime, for which more could be said as a
sport than the worrying of a chained-up brute. The bull-running at
Tutbury was first described with any detail by Dr Plot in 1686. <span
id="fr_733"></span>[2](#fn_732.md) A court of minstrels was established at
Tutbury by John of Gaunt who held their festival on August 16, the
morrow of the feast of the Assumption. At the conclusion of the
festivities a bull was given them at the priory gate by the prior of
Tutbury. The poor beast had the tip of its horns sawn off, his ears and
tail cut off, the body smeared with soap, and the nostrils filled with
pepper. The minstrels rushed after the maddened creature, and if any of
those of the county of Stafford could succeed in holding him long enough
to cut off a piece of his hair before sunset, he became the property of
the king of the minstrels, who had that day been elected to his office
by a jury who chose the monarch of the year alternately from the
minstrels of Staffordshire and Derbyshire. If, on the other hand, the
beast escaped from them untaken, or crossed another river into
Derbyshire, he

 

<span id="img_pl29"></span>

[![Sword and Buckler](tn/pl29.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl29.jpg.md)  
Sword and Buckler  

 

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

was returned to the prior. This supplying of the bull was a customary
tenure due from the prior. After the dissolution of the monasteries,
this tenure devolved upon the earls and afterwards the dukes of
Devonshire. Dr Plot considered that John of Gaunt had introduced this
custom from Spain in imitation of the bull-fights of that nation. But Dr
Pegge, in 1765, pointed out the absurdity of this contention. <span
id="fr_734"></span>[1](#fn_733.md) The duke of Devonshire suppressed this
riotous custom in 1788.

\* From time immemorial the town of Stamford annually celebrated, on
November 13th, a bull-running. The animal, provided by the butchers of
the town, was turned into the main street, and thence driven by the
crowd on to the bridge over the Welland, whence it was usually
precipitated into the water. When the bull swam ashore it was again
pursued, and the hunt was carried on till both mob and beast were
wearied out. Then the animal was killed and its flesh sold at a low
rate. There were many local rules connected with the sport, such as
there was to be no iron about the clubs or staves carried by the
pursuers. Tradition had it that the custom originated in the days of
king John, when William, earl of Warren, saw from his castle two bulls
fighting in the meadow below. Some butchers striving to part the brutes,
one of them ran into the town causing great uproar. The earl on
horseback followed the bull, and so enjoyed the sport that he gave the
meadow where the fight began to the butchers of Stamford on the
condition of their finding a bull to be run on the anniversary for ever.
An attempt was made to stop the sport in 1788, but it survived until
1839, when, in spite of a troop of dragoons and a strong force of
metropolitan police, the last bull-running, by the successful
introduction of a smuggled-in bull, was accomplished amid fierce
excitement. In a later year there was a feeble and last attempt to renew
the ancient custom. <span id="fr_735"></span>[2](#fn_734.md)

SWORD-PLAY.--The sword-dance, or, more properly, a combat with swords
and bucklers, regulated by music, was exhibited by the Saxon gleemen. We
have spoken on this subject in a former chapter, and resume it here,
because the jugglers of the middle ages were famous for their skill in
handling the sword.

The combat, represented on the centre of [plate twenty-nine](#img_pl29.md),
taken from a thirteenth century manuscript, <span
id="fr_736"></span>[3](#fn_735.md) varies, in several respects, from that
on , though both, I presume, are different modifications of the same
performance, as well as that on the top of , <span
id="fr_737"></span>[4](#fn_736.md) which is carried into execution without
the assistance of a minstrel.

These combats bore some resemblance to those performed by the Roman
gladiators; for which reason the jugglers were sometimes called
gladiators by the early historians. *Mimi, salii, balatrones, emiliani,
gladiatores, palestrite--et tota joculatorum copia*, are the titles
given them by John of Salisbury. <span id="fr_738"></span>[5](#fn_737.md)
It also appears that they instituted schools for teaching the art of
defence in

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

various parts of the kingdom, and especially in the city of London,
where the conduct of the masters and their scholars became so
outrageous, that it was necessary for the legislature to interfere; and,
in the fourteenth year of the reign of Edward I. (1286), an edict was
published by royal authority, which prohibited the keeping of such
schools, and the public exercise of swords and bucklers.

It is said that many robberies and murders were committed by these
gladiators; hence the appellation of swash buckler, a term of reproach,
"from swashing," says Fuller, "and making a noise on the buckler, and
ruffian, which is the same as a swaggerer. West Smithfield was formerly
called Ruffian Hall, where such men usually met, casually or otherwise,
to try masteries with sword and buckler; more were frightened than hurt,
hurt than killed therewith, it being accounted unmanly to strike beneath
the knee. But since that desperate traytor Rowland Yorke first used
thrusting with rapiers, swords and bucklers are disused." <span
id="fr_739"></span>[1](#fn_738.md) Jonson, in the induction to his play
called *Bartholomew Fair*, speaks of "the sword and buckler age in
Smithfield"; and again, in the *Two Angry Women of Abbington*, a comedy
by Henry Porter, printed in 1599, we have the following observation:
"Sword and buckler fight begins to grow out of use; I am sorry for it; I
shall never see good manhood again; if it be once gone, this poking
fight of rapier and dagger will come up; then a tall man, that is, a
courageous man, and a good sword and buckler man, will be spitted like a
cat or a rabbit."

Such exercises had been practised by day and by night, to the great
annoyance of the peaceable inhabitants of the city; and by the statute
of Edward I. the offenders were subjected to the punishment of
imprisonment for forty days; to which was afterwards added a mulct of
forty marks. <span id="fr_740"></span>[2](#fn_739.md) These restrictions
certainly admitted of some exceptions; for it is well known that there
were seminaries at London, wherein youth were taught the use of arms,
held publicly after the institution of this ordinance. "The art of
defence and use of weapons," says Stow, "is taught by professed
masters"; <span id="fr_741"></span>[3](#fn_740.md) but these most probably
were licensed by the city governors, and under their control. The author
of a description of the colleges and schools in and about London, which
he calls *The Third University of England*, printed in black letter in
1615, says: "In this city," meaning London, "there be manic professors
of the science of defence, and very skilful men in teaching the best and
most offensive and defensive use of verie many weapons, as of the
long-sword, back-sword, rapier and dagger, single rapier, the case of
rapiers, the sword and buckler, or targate, the pike, the halberd, the
long-staff, and others. Henry VIII. made the professors of this art a
company, or corporation, by letters patent, wherein the art is intituled
'The Noble Science of Defence.' The manner of the proceeding of our
fencers in their schools is this: first, they which desire to be taught

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

at their admission are called scholars, and, as they profit, they take
degrees, and proceed to be provosts of defence; and that must be wonne
by public trial of their proficiencie and of their skill at certain
weapons, which they call prizes, and in the presence and view of many
hundreds of people; and, at their next and last prize well and
sufficiently performed, they do proceed to be maisters of the science of
defence, or maisters of fence, as we commonly call them." The king
ordained "that none, but such as have thus orderly proceeded by public
act and trial, and have the approbation of the principal masters of
their company, may profess or teach this art of defence publicly in any
part of England." Stow informs us, that the young Londoners, on
holidays, after the evening prayer, were permitted to exercise
themselves with their wasters and bucklers before their masters' doors.
This pastime, I imagine, is represented by the fourteenth century
drawing at the bottom of [plate twenty-nine](#img_pl29.md), <span
id="fr_742"></span>[1](#fn_741.md) from whence the annexed engraving is
taken, where clubs or bludgeons are substituted for swords.

\* THE MASTERS OF DEFENCE.--"The Maisters of the Noble Science of
Defence" organised by Henry VIII. in July 1540, were still further
consolidated in the reign of Elizabeth. Among the Sloane MSS. of the
British Museum is an interesting book compiled in 1575, which contains a
record of this Association of Masters, with its rules, notes of prizes
played by them, and many other details. <span
id="fr_743"></span>[2](#fn_742.md) The Association consisted first of the
"Scholler," or probationer; secondly, the "Free Scholler," which was the
junior grade; then the "Provost," or assistant master; and lastly the
"Maister." From the masters was chosen the small governing body known as
"The Four Ancient Maisters of the Noble Science of Defence." The
provosts and masters were licensed by "our soveraigne lady, Elizabeth,"
to teach in their schools "within this realme of England Irelande and
Calleis and the precincts of the same" gentlemen or yeomen who were
willing to learn the science of defence, "as playinge with the two hande
sworde, the Pike, the bastard sworde, the dagger, the Backe sworde, the
sworde and Buckeler, and the staffe, and all other maner of weapons
apperteyninge to the same science." The scholar had to play with at
least six scholars with the long sword and back sword before he could be
a free scholar. Before a free scholar could become a provost he had to
play at the two-hand sword, the back-sword, and the staff with all
manner of provosts that came on the appointed day; notice being sent to
all provosts within threescore miles of the place of play. Amongst other
obligations, if successful, the new provost had to be bound over to the
four ancient masters not to keep any school within seven miles of any
master without license from the governing four. When a provost was
minded to take the master's degree, he had to play any masters, who
might appear from within forty miles of the appointed place, at the
two-hand sword, the bastard sword, the pike, the back-sword, and the
rapier and dagger.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

\* The notes as to play for these different degrees extend from 1575 to
1591, and show the fierceness of the contests. Gregorye Greene, who
played for his scholar's prize at Chelmsford in 1578, contended with
eight at two-hand sword and seven at back-sword. Edward Harvye in the
same year played for his scholar's prize at the Bull within Bishopsgate
(the favourite London place of meeting) with fourteen at two-hand sword
and two at sword and buckler. The provost's prizes were played in
public, usually at some tavern such as the Bull in Bishopsgate and the
Bellesavage at Ludgate. Other places named for the playing for master's
prizes were Hampton Court, the Artillery Garden, and Canterbury.

\* This Association was at its zenith in Elizabeth's reign; it lingered
on in the reign of James I. and Charles I., though after a humble
fashion, and expired during the Commonwealth struggle. With the
Restoration came in prize-fighting as opposed to the earlier
prize-playing with broad or back-sword, the cudgel, and the staff. The
play of this kind from Henry VIII. to end of Elizabeth was for the
honour and gain of being promoted as teachers in a gild or association
of fencers; but with the advent of Charles II., when the two-hand sword
and the long rapier had gone out of fashion, came the men who merely
fought for money prizes, with the addition of whatever coins might be
thrown to them on the stage by the public. The lively pages of Pepys
yield several accounts of the fierce prize-fighting with swords.

\* PEPYS ON PRIZE-PLAY.--"June 1, 1663.--I with Sir J. Minnes to the
Strand Maypole, and there light of his coach, and walked to the New
Theatre, which, since the King's players are gone to the Royal one, is
this day begun to be employed for the fencers to play prizes at. And
here I came and saw the first prize I ever saw in my life: and it was
between one Matthews, who did beat at all points, and one Westwicke, who
was soundly cut both in the head and legs, that he was all over blood;
and other deadly blows did they give and take in very good earnest. They
fought at eight weapons, three boutes at each weapon. This being upon a
private quarrel, they did it in good earnest, and I felt one of their
swords, and found it very little, if at all, blunter on the edge than
the common swords are. Strange to see what a deal of money is flung to
them both upon the stage between every boute.

"May 27th, 1667.--Abroad, and stopped at Beargarden stairs, there to see
a prize fought. But the house so full there was no getting in there, so
forced to go through an ale house into the pit where the bears are
baited; and upon a stool did see them fight, a butcher and a waterman.
The former had the better all along, till by and by the latter dropped
his sword out of his hand, and the butcher, whether not seeing his sword
dropped I know not, but did give him a cut over the wrist, so that he
was disabled to fight any longer. But Lord! to see in a minute the whole
stage was full of watermen to revenge the foul play, and the butchers to
defend their fellow, though most blamed him; and there they fell to it,
knocking down and cutting many on each side. It was

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

pleasant to see, but that I stood in the pit, and feared that in the
tumult I might get some hurt. At last the battle broke up, so I away.

"Sept. 1st, 1667.--To the Beargarden where now the yard is full of
people, and those most of them seamen, striving by force to get in. I
got into the common pit; and there with my cloak about my face, I stood
and I saw the prize fought, till one of them, a shoemaker, was so cut in
both his wrists that he could not fight any longer, and then they broke
off. The sport very good, and various humours to be seen among the
rabble that is there.

"April 12th, 1669.--By water to the Beargarden, and there happened to
sit by Sir Fretcheville Hollis, who is still full of his vainglorious
and profane talk. Here we saw a prize fought between a soldier and a
country fellow, one Warrell who promised the least in his looks, and
performing the most of valour in his boldness and evenness of mind, and
smiles in all he did, that ever I saw; and we were all both deceived and
infinitely taken with him. He did soundly beat the soldier, and cut him
over the head. Thence back to White Hall, mightily pleased all of us
with this sight, and particularly this fellow, as a most extraordinary
man for his temper and evenness in fighting."

PUBLIC SWORD-PLAY.--The following show-bill, dated July 13, 1709,
contains the common mode of challenging and answering used by the
combatants of those days; it is selected from a great number now lying
before me; <span id="fr_744"></span>[1](#fn_743.md) and, being rather
curious, I shall transcribe it without making any alteration.

"At the Bear Garden in Hockley in the Hole, near Clerkenwell Green, a
trial of skill shall be performed between Two Masters of the noble
Science of Defence on Wednesday next, at two of the clock precisely.

"I George Gray, born in the city of Norwich, who have fought in most
parts of the West Indies, namely, Jamaica and Barbadoes, and several
other parts of the world, in all twenty-five times, and upon a stage,
and never yet was worsted, and being now lately come to London, do
invite James Harris to meet and exercise at these following weapons,
namely, back-sword, sword and dagger, sword and buckler, single falchon,
and case of falchons."

"I James Harris, Master of the said noble Science of Defence, who
formerly rid in the horse-guards, and hath fought a hundred and ten
prizes, and never left a stage to any man, will not fail, God willing,
to meet this brave and bold inviter at the time and place appointed;
desiring sharp swords, and from him no favour. No person to be upon the
stage but the seconds. Vivat Regina!"

With the accession of George I. the taste for these gladiatorial shows
began to wane, and their place was ere long taken by pugilism.

QUARTER-STAFF.--In another challenge of the reign of Anne the
quarter-staff is added to the list of weapons named on these occasions.
Quarter-staff Dr Johnson explains to be "A staff of defence, so called,
I believe, from the

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

manner of using it; one hand being placed at the middle, and the other
equally between the end and the middle." <span
id="fr_745"></span>[1](#fn_744.md) The quarter-staff was formerly used by
the English, and especially in the western parts of the kingdom. I have
seen a small pamphlet of 1625 with this title: "Three to One; being an
English-Spanish combat, performed by a western gentleman of Tavystock,
in Devonshire, with an English quarter-staff, against three rapiers and
poniards, at Sherries in Spain, in the presence of the dukes, condes,
marquisses, and other great dons of Spain, being the council of war"; to
which is added, "the author of this booke, and actor in this encounter,
being R. Peecke." On the same page there is a rude wooden print,
representing the hero with his quarter-staff, in the action of fighting
with the three Spanyards, who are armed with long swords and daggers.
Caulfield has copied this print in his *Assemblage of Noted Persons*.

\* This favourite old English weapon or implement was a stout pole or
staff varying from eight to five feet in length, but usually in
encounters of a regular length of six and a half feet. It seems to have
been originally a mere walking-staff, like the Swiss alpenstock, and
then found useful for defence and offence. In action it was grasped by
one hand in the middle, and by the other between the middle and the end.
When attacking, the latter hand shifted from one quarter of the staff to
the other, giving the weapon a rapid circular motion, which brought the
ends on the adversary at unexpected points. <span
id="fr_746"></span>[2](#fn_745.md)

\* In the old *Playe of Robyn Hode* mention is made of his meeting a
stout friar with "a quarter-staffe in his hande," and of the blows they
exchanged with these weapons. <span id="fr_747"></span>[3](#fn_746.md)
Bouts at quarter-staff are of frequent occurrence in all ballad
histories of Robin Hood. When Robin encountered Arthur a Bland, the
tanner of Nottingham, we are told that--

Then Robin he unbuckled his belt  
  And laid down his bow so long;  
He took up a staff of another oak graff,  
  That was both stiff and strong.

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*

"But let me measure," said jolly Robin,  
  "Before we begin our fray;  
For I'll not have mine to be longer than thine,  
  For that will be counted foul play."

"I pass not for length," bold Arthur replied,  
  "My staff is of oak so free;  
Eight foot and a half it will knock down a calf,  
  And I hope it will knock down thee."

Then Robin Hood could no longer forbear,  
  He gave him such a knock,  
Quickly and soon the blood came down,  
  Before it was ten o'clock.

\*       \*       \*       \*       \* <span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

About and about and about they went,  
  Like two wild boars in a chase,  
Striving to aim each other to maim  
  Leg, arm, or any other place.

And knock for knock they hastily dealt,  
  Which held for two hours and more;  
That all the wood rang at every bang  
  They plied their work so sore. <span id="fr_748"></span>[1](#fn_747.md)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_689"></span>[195:1](spe16.htm#fr_690.md) The two in the middle
are from the Bodleian MS. 264.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[195:2](spe16.htm#fr_691.md) No. 6563.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[196:1](spe16.htm#fr_692.md) Harting's *Extinct
British Animals*, 19.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[196:2](spe16.htm#fr_693.md) *Essais Hist. sur
Paris*, vol. ii. p. 178.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[196:3](spe16.htm#fr_694.md) The tumbling ape is
from Bodleian MS. No. 264.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[197:1](spe16.htm#fr_695.md) From a Miscellaneous
Collection of Papers, Harl. Lib. 5931.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[197:2](spe16.htm#fr_696.md) Granger, *Biog.
Hist.* vol. iv. p. 353.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[197:3](spe16.htm#fr_697.md) *Mem. sur Ann.
Cheval*, tom. i. p. 247.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[197:4](spe16.htm#fr_698.md) Roy. Lib. No. 2, B.
vii.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[197:5](spe16.htm#fr_699.md) Roy. Lib. 20 D. iv.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[197:6](spe16.htm#fr_700.md) This and the two
illustrations at the bottom of the Plate are from Bodleian MSS. No. 264.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[197:7](spe16.htm#fr_701.md) Menestrier, *Trait.
de Tournois*, p, 218.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[198:1](spe16.htm#fr_702.md) No. 5938.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[199:1](spe16.htm#fr_703.md) \* In Chambers's
*Book of Days*, i. 293-295, there is an illustrated account of a
wonderfully trained troup of dogs and monkeys that performed in London
in 1753, under the name of "Mrs Midnight's Animal Commedians."

<span id="fn_703"></span>[200:1](spe16.htm#fr_704.md) Harl. MSS. No. 6563.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[200:2](spe16.htm#fr_705.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[201:1](spe16.htm#fr_706.md) Du Cange, *Glossary*,
in vocibus *Cervula* et *Kalends*.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[201:2](spe16.htm#fr_707.md) See also Bourne's
*Vulgar Errors*, edited by Brand, p. 175.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[201:3](spe16.htm#fr_708.md) *History of English
Poetry*, vol. i. p. 237.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[202:1](spe16.htm#fr_709.md) *Mem. Anc. Cheval*,
tom. ii. p. 68.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[202:2](spe16.htm#fr_710.md) Translated by
Alexander Barclay, and printed by Pynson in 1508.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[202:3](spe16.htm#fr_711.md) Stow's *Survey*, fol.
680.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[202:4](spe16.htm#fr_712.md) Chap. xvi.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[203:1](spe16.htm#fr_713.md) *Chron*. tom. i. iv.
chap. 157, Lord Berners' translation.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[203:2](spe16.htm#fr_714.md) See Nichols'
*Progresses*, vol. i.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[204:1](spe16.htm#fr_715.md) Miscell. Collect.
Harl. Lib. No. 115.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[204:2](spe16.htm#fr_716.md) Vol. viii. No. 570.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[204:3](spe16.htm#fr_717.md) Literally,
nightingale.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[204:4](spe16.htm#fr_718.md) *Description of
London*. See also Stow's Survey, p. 78.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[205:1](spe16.htm#fr_719.md) *Survey of London*,
ubi supra.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[205:2](spe16.htm#fr_720.md) Lambarde's
*Perambulation of Kent*, published A.D. 1570, p. 248.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[205:3](spe16.htm#fr_721.md) \* This accident
produced a pamphlet entitled "A Godly Exhortation by occasion of the
late Judgment of God shewed at Paris Garden, 13 January, 1583, upon
divers Persons, whereof some were killed and many hurt at a
Bear-bating."

<span id="fn_721"></span>[205:4](spe16.htm#fr_722.md) Harting's *Extinct
British Animals*, 27, 28. Mr Harting makes a curious blunder over the
account roll of Durham Abbey, and imagines that the prior himself kept
bears and apes.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[205:5](spe16.htm#fr_723.md) *Erasmi Adagia*, p.
361.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[205:6](spe16.htm#fr_724.md) *Life of Sir Thomas
Pope*, sect. iii. p. 85.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[206:1](spe16.htm#fr_725.md) Nichols'
*Progresses*, vol. i. p. 40.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[206:2](spe16.htm#fr_726.md) *Chronicle of Eng.*
vol. iii. fol. 1552.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[206:3](spe16.htm#fr_727.md) Nichols'
*Progresses*, vol. ii. p. 228.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[206:4](spe16.htm#fr_728.md) *Itinerary*, printed
in Latin, A.D. 1598. See Lord Orford's translation, Strawberry Hill, p.
42.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[206:5](spe16.htm#fr_729.md) Nichols'
*Progresses*, vol. i. fol. 249.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[207:1](spe16.htm#fr_730.md) Harl. MSS. No. 15.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[207:2](spe16.htm#fr_731.md) The details are given
in his *Household Books*: see *Ancestor*, Nos. ii. and iii.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[208:1](spe16.htm#fr_732.md) *Notes and Queries*,
Ser. VI. i 86, 105, 186.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[208:2](spe16.htm#fr_733.md) *Natural History of
Staffordshire*, 439.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[209:1](spe16.htm#fr_734.md) *Archæologia*, ii.
86-91.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[209:2](spe16.htm#fr_735.md) There is a good
summary of the history of the Stamford bull-running in Chambers's *Book
of Days*, ii, 574-576.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[209:3](spe16.htm#fr_736.md) Roy. Lib. No. 14, E.
iii.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[209:4](spe16.htm#fr_737.md) Roy. Lib. No. 20, D.
vi.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[209:5](spe16.htm#fr_738.md) Johan.
Sarisburiensis, *De Nugis Curialium*, lib. i. cap. viii. p. 34.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[210:1](spe16.htm#fr_739.md) *Worthies of
England*, A.D. 1662.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[210:2](spe16.htm#fr_740.md) Maitland's *History
of London*, book i, chap. xi.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[210:3](spe16.htm#fr_741.md) *Survey of London*,
chap. ii.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[211:1](spe16.htm#fr_742.md) Bodleian MSS. No.
264.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[211:2](spe16.htm#fr_743.md) \* These rules are
printed in full and many other extracts given in the chapter entitled
"Prize-players and prize-fighters," of Mr A. Hutton's valuable book,
*The Sword and the Centuries* (1901).

<span id="fn_743"></span>[213:1](spe16.htm#fr_744.md) In a Miscellaneous
Collection of Title-pages, Bills, etc., in the Harleian Library, No.
115.

\* "Mr Hutton, in *The Sward and the Centuries*, gives many other
particulars of the prize-fighting heroes of queen Anne's days, such as
Donald MacBane and James Figs.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[214:1](spe16.htm#fr_745.md) Dictionary, word
*Quarter-staff*.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[214:2](spe16.htm#fr_746.md) *Century Dictionary*.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[214:3](spe16.htm#fr_747.md) Child's *Ballads*,
iii. 127.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[215:1](spe16.htm#fr_748.md) Child's *Ballads*,
iii. 138.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](spe17.md)
