[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](spe19)  [Next](spe21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

### CHAPTER III

The Lord of Misrule said to be peculiar to the English--A Court
Officer--The Master of the King's Revels--The Lord of Misrule and his
Conduct reprobated--The King of Christmas--of the Cockneys--A King of
Christmas at Norwich--The King of the Bean--Whence
originated--Christmastide in Charles I. Reign--The Boy-Bishop--Plough
Monday--Shrove Tuesday--Easter Game--Hock-Tide--May-Games--The Lord and
Lady of the May--Grand May-Game at Greenwich--Royal May-Game at
Shooter's-hill--May Poles--May Milk-Maids--May Festival of the Chimney
Sweepers--Whitsun-Games--Lamb Ale--The Vigil of Saint John the Baptist,
how kept--Its supposed origin--Setting of the Midsummer
Watch--Processions on Saint Clement's and Saint Catherine's
day--Wassails--Sheep-shearing and Harvest-home--Wakes--Sunday
Festivals--Church Ales--Funds raised by Church Ales--Fairs, and their
diversions and abuses--Bonfires--Illuminations--Fireworks--Books on
Fireworks--A Fiery Drake or Fiery Kite--London Fireworks--Fireworks on
Tower-hill--at Public Gardens, and in Pageants.

THE LORD OF MISRULE PECULIAR TO ENGLAND.--It is said of the English,
that formerly they were remarkable for the manner in which they
celebrated the festival of Christmas; at which season they admitted
variety of sports and pastimes not known, or little practised in other
countries. <span id="fr_856"></span>[1](#fn_855.md) The mock prince, or
lord of misrule, whose reign extended through the greater part of the
holidays, is particularly remarked by foreign writers, who consider him
as a personage rarely to be met with out of England; <span
id="fr_857"></span>[2](#fn_856.md) and, two or three centuries back,
perhaps this observation might be consistent with the truth; but I trust
we shall upon due examination be ready to conclude, that anciently this
frolicksome monarch was well known upon the continent, where he probably
received his first honours. In this kingdom his power and his dignities
suffered no diminution, but on the contrary were established by royal
authority, and continued after they had ceased to exist elsewhere. But
even with us his government has been extinct for many years, and his
name and his offices are nearly forgotten. In some great families, and
also sometimes at court, this officer was called the Abbot of Misrule.
Leland says, "This Christmas <span id="fr_858"></span>[3](#fn_857.md) I saw
no disguiseings at court, and right few playes; but there was an abbot
of misrule that made much sport, and did right well his office." <span
id="fr_859"></span>[4](#fn_858.md) In Scotland he was called the Abbot of
Unreason, and prohibited there in 1555 by the parliament. <span
id="fr_860"></span>[5](#fn_859.md)

THE LORD OF MISRULE A COURT OFFICER.--Holingshed, speaking of Christmas,
calls it, "What time there is alwayes one appointed to make sporte at
courte called commonly lorde of misrule, whose office is not unknowne to
such as have bene brought up in noblemen's houses and among great
housekeepers, which use liberal feasting in the season." <span
id="fr_861"></span>[6](#fn_860.md) Again: "At the feast of Christmas," says
Stow, "in the king's court wherever he chanced to reside, there was

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

appointed a lord of misrule, or master of merry disports; the same merry
fellow made his appearance at the house of every nobleman and person of
distinction, and among the rest the lord mayor of London and the
sheriffs had severally of them their lord of misrule, ever contending,
without quarrel or offence, who should make the rarest pastimes to
delight the beholders; this pageant potentate began his rule at
All-hallow eve, and continued the same till the morrow after the Feast
of the Purification; in which space there were fine and subtle
disguisings, masks, and mummeries." <span
id="fr_862"></span>[1](#fn_861.md)

THE MASTER OF THE KING'S REVELS.--In the fifth year of Edward VI., at
Christmas time, a gentleman named George Ferrers, who was a lawyer, a
poet, and an historian, was appointed by the council to bear this
office; "and he," says Holingshed, "being of better calling than
commonly his predecessors had been before, received all his commissions
and warrauntes by the name of master of the kinge's pastimes; which
gentleman so well supplied his office, both of shew of sundry sights,
and devises of rare invention, and in act of divers interludes, and
matters of pastime, played by persons, as not only satisfied the common
sorte, but also were verie well liked and allowed by the council, and
others of skill in lyke pastimes; but best by the young king himselfe,
as appeared by his princely liberalitie in rewarding that service."

THE LORD OF MISRULE--HIS CONDUCT REPROBATED.--This master of merry
disports was not confined to the court, nor to the houses of the
opulent, he was also elected in various parishes, where, indeed, his
reign seems to have been of shorter date. Philip Stubbs, who lived at
the close of the sixteenth century, places this whimsical personage,
with his followers, in a very degrading point of view. <span
id="fr_863"></span>[2](#fn_862.md) I shall give the passage in the author's
own words, and leave the reader to comment upon them. "First of all, the
wilde heades of the parish flocking togither, chuse them a graund
captaine of mischiefe, whom they innoble with the title of Lord of
Misrule; and him they crowne with great solemnity, and adopt for their
king.. This king annoynted chooseth forth twentie, fourty, threescore,
or an hundred lustie guttes, like to himself, to waite upon his lordly
majesty, and to guarde his noble person. Then every one of these men he
investeth with his liveries of greene, yellow, or some other light
wanton colour, and as though they were not gawdy ynough, they bedecke
themselves with scarffes, ribbons, and laces, hanged all over with gold
ringes, pretious stones, and other jewels. This done, they tie aboute
either legge twentie or fourtie belles, with riche handkerchiefes in
their handes, and sometimes laide acrosse over their shoulders and
neckes, borrowed, for the most part, of their pretie mopsies and loving
Bessies. Thus all thinges set in order, then have they their hobby
horses, their dragons, and other antiques, together with their baudie
pipers, and thundring drummers, to strike up the devil's daunce with
all. Then march this heathen company towards the church, their pypers
pyping, their drummers thundring, their stumpes dauncing, their belles
jyngling, their

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

handkerchiefes fluttering aboute their heades like madde men, their
hobbie horses and other monsters skirmishing amongst the throng: and in
this sorte they go to the church, though the minister be at prayer or
preaching, dauncing and singing like devils incarnate, with such a
confused noise that no man can heare his owne voyce. Then the foolish
people they looke, they stare, they laugh, they fleere, and mount upon
the formes and pewes to see these goodly pageants solemnized. Then after
this, aboute the church they go againe and againe, and so fourthe into
the churche yard, where they have commonly their sommer-halls, their
bowers, arbours, and banquetting-houses set up, wherein they feast,
banquet, and daunce all that day, and paradventure all that night too;
and thus these terrestrial furies spend the sabbath day. Then, for the
further innobling of this honourable lurdane, lord I should say, they
have certaine papers wherein is painted some babelerie or other of
imagerie worke, and these they call my Lord of Misrule's badges or
cognizances. These they give to every one that will give them money to
maintain them in this their heathenage devilrie, whordom, dronkennesse,
pride, and whatnot. And who will not show himself buxome to them and
give them money, they shall be mocked and flouted shamefully; yea, and
many times carried upon a cowlstaffe, and dived over heade and eares in
water, or otherwise most horribly abused. And so assotted are some, that
they not only give them money, but weare their badges or cognizances in
their hates or cappes openly. Another sorte of fantasticall fooles bring
to these helhounds, the Lord of Misrule and his complices, some bread,
some good ale, some new cheese, some old cheese, some custardes, some
cracknels, some cakes, some flauns, some tartes, some creame, some meat,
some one thing, and some another; but if they knewe that as often as
they bring any to the maintenance of these execrable pastymes, they
offer sacrifice to the Devill and Sathanas, they would refeus and
withdrawe their handes, whiche God grant they maie." Hence it should
seem the Lord of Misrule was sometimes president over the summer sports.
The author has distinguished this pageantry from the May-games, the
wakes, and the church-ales, of which, I should otherwise have thought,
it might have been a component part.

\* As a set-off to the extravagant condemnation of Stubbs, it may be
well to state that the old English custom of the Christmas Lord of
Misrule, with his twelve days of sovereignty, was maintained and
supported by gentle folk of the highest position, who doubtless did
their best to suppress the coarser elements. For instance, Richard
Evelyn, a most worshipful squire and deputy-lieutenant of the counties
of Surrey and Sussex, father of the author of the *Diary*, drew up
regulations for appointing and defining the functions of this Christmas
official on his Surrey estate at Wotton:--Imprimis, I give free leave to
Owen Flood, my trumpeter, gentleman, to be Lord of Misrule of all good
orders during the twelve days. And also I give free leave to the said
Owen Flood to command all and every person or persons whatsoever, as
well servants as others to be at his command whensoever he shall sound
his trumpet or music, and to do him

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

good service, as though I were present myself, at their perils. . . . I
give full power and authority to his lordship to break up all locks,
bolts, bars, doors and latches, and to fling up all doors out of hinges,
to come at those who presume to disobey his lordship's commands. God
save the King."

\* The various colleges both at Oxford and Cambridge elected a Christmas
Lord, or Lord of Misrule, to preside over the sports, plays and pageants
of the season. <span id="fr_864"></span>[1](#fn_863.md)

THE KING OF CHRISTMAS.--The society belonging to Lincoln's Inn had
anciently an officer chosen at this season, who was honoured with the
title of King of Christmas Day, because he presided in the hall upon
that day. This temporary potentate had a marshal and a steward to attend
upon him. The marshal, in the absence of the monarch, was permitted to
assume his state, and upon New Year's Day he sat as king in the hall
when the master of the revels, during the time of dining, supplied the
marshal's place. Upon Childermas Day they had another officer,
denominated the King of the Cockneys, who also presided on the day of
his appointment, and had his inferior officers to wait upon him. <span
id="fr_865"></span>[2](#fn_864.md)

A KING OF CHRISTMAS AT NORWICH.--In the history of Norfolk, <span
id="fr_866"></span>[3](#fn_865.md) mention is made of a pageant exhibited
at Norwich upon a Shrove Tuesday, which happened in the month of March,
"when one rode through the street, having his horse trapped with tyn
foyle and other nyse disgysynges, crowned as King of Christmas, in token
that the season should end with the twelve moneths of the year; and
afore hym went yche moneth dysgysyd as the season requiryd."

THE KING OF THE BEAN.--The dignified persons above mentioned were, I
presume, upon an equal footing with the King of the Bean, whose reign
commenced upon the vigil of the Epiphany, or upon the day itself. <span
id="fr_867"></span>[4](#fn_866.md) We read that, some time back, "it was a
common Christmas gambol in both our universities, and continued," at the
commencement of the last century, "to be usual in other places, to give
the name of king or queen to that person whose extraordinary good luck
it was to hit upon that part of a divided cake which was honoured above
the others by having a bean in it." <span
id="fr_868"></span>[5](#fn_867.md) The reader will readily trace the
vestige of this custom, though somewhat differently managed, and without
the bean, in the present method of drawing, as it is called, for king
and queen upon Twelfth-day. I will not pretend to say in ancient times,
for the title is by no means of recent date, that the election of this
monarch, the King of the Bean, depended entirely upon the decision of
fortune: the words of an old kalendar belonging to the Romish
church <span id="fr_869"></span>[6](#fn_868.md) seem to favour a contrary
opinion; they are to this effect: On the fifth of January, the vigil of
the Epiphany, the Kings of the Bean are created; <span
id="fr_870"></span>[7](#fn_869.md) and on the sixth the feast of

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

the kings shall be held, and also of the queen; and let the banqueting
be continued for many days. At court, in the eighth year of Edward III.,
this majestic title was conferred upon one of the king's minstrels, as
we find by an entry in a computus so dated, which states that sixty
shillings were given by the king, upon the day of the Epiphany, to Regan
the trumpeter and his associates, the court minstrels, in the name of
King of the Bean. <span id="fr_871"></span>[1](#fn_870.md)

WHENCE THESE MOCK DIGNITIES WERE DERIVED.--Selden asserts, <span
id="fr_872"></span>[2](#fn_871.md) and in my opinion with great justice,
that all these whimsical transpositions of dignity are derived from the
ancient Saturnalia, or Feasts of Saturn, when the masters waited upon
their servants, who were honoured with mock titles, and permitted to
assume the state and deportment of their lords. These fooleries were
exceedingly popular, and continued to be practised long after the
establishment of Christianity, in defiance of the threatenings and the
remonstrances of the clergy, who, finding it impossible to divert the
stream of vulgar prejudice, permitted their occasional exercise. The
most daringly impious of such practices was the Festival of Fools, in
which the most sacred rites and ceremonies of the church were turned
into ridicule; but as this festival had happily very little and only
short-lived hold on any part of England, it may be passed by.

An interesting condensed account of England's Christmastide in the days
of Charles I. is worth citing:

"It is now Christmas, and not a Cup of drinke must passe without a
Caroll, the Beasts, Fowle, and Fish come to a generall execution, and
the Corne is ground to dust for the Bakehouse and the Pastry. Cards and
Dice purge many a purse, and the Youth show their agility in Shoeing of
the Wild Mare. <span id="fr_873"></span>[3](#fn_872.md) Now good cheere and
welcome, and God be with you and I thanke you. And against the new yeare
provide for the presents. The Lord of Mis-Rule is no meane man for his
time, and the ghests of the High Table must lacke no Wine. The lusty
bloods must looke about them like men, and piping and dauncing puts away
much melancholy. Stolen Venison is sweet, and a fat Coney is worth
money. Pitfalles are now set for small Birdes, and a Woodcocke hangs
himselfe in a gynne. A good fire heats all the house, and a full
Almesbasket makes the Beggars Prayers. The Masters and the Mummers make
the merry sport; but if they lose their money, their Drumme goes dead.
Swearers and Swaggerers are sent away to the Alehouse, and unruly
Wenches goe in danger of Judgment. Musicians now make their Instruments
speake out, and a good song is worth the hearing. In summe, it is a holy
time, a duty in Christians, for the remembrance of Christ, and custome
among friends, for the maintenance of good fellowship. In briefe, I thus
conclude of it, I hold it (Christmas) a memory of

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

the Heaven's Love, and the world's peace, the myrth of the honest, and
the meeting of the friendly. Farewell." <span
id="fr_874"></span>[1](#fn_873.md)

\* THE BOY-BISHOP.--The election and the investment of the Boy-Bishop, a
general English custom, was probably derived from the festival of fools.
It does not appear at what period this curious ceremony was first
established, but apparently it was ancient, at least we can trace it
back to the thirteenth century. It had been long established at
Salisbury in 1319, when Bishop Roger de Mortival specially regulated its
observance.

\* On the eve of St Nicholas's Day (December 5th), the most deserving
chorister or scholar was appointed the bishop of boys until the end of
the day of the Holy Innocents or Childermas (December 28th). The custom
seems to have prevailed in all our cathedral churches, in the larger
minster and monastic churches to which schools were attached, and in
such purely scholastic foundations as those of the colleges of
Winchester and Eton. Dean Colet, in his foundation of St Paul's School,
desired to perpetuate this custom, as a stimulus to Christian ambition,
and expressly orders that the scholars "shall, every Childermas, that
is, Innocents' Day, come to Paule's churche, and hear the Childe
Byshop's sermon, and after be at hygh masse, and each of them offer a
penny to the childe byshop; and with them the maisters and surveyors of
the schole." <span id="fr_875"></span>[2](#fn_874.md) Full episcopal
vestments were provided for the Boy-Bishop, and copes for his
companions; they occur in a great variety of inventories. At Salisbury,
the Boy-Bishop and his fellows completely reversed the usual order of
procession. The dean's residentiaries went first, followed by the
chaplains, the bishops, and petty prebendaries. The choristers and their
bishop came last; they sat in the upper stalls, the residentiaries
furnished the incense and book, and the petties were the taper-bearers.
The Boy-Bishop gave the benediction. Full Rubrical directions are given
in the Sarum *Processional* for the Boy-Bishop during the few days that
he held office. There is not the slightest touch of farce or
ribaldry. <span id="fr_876"></span>[3](#fn_875.md) After divine service,
the Boy-Bishop and his associates went about to different parts of the
town, and visited the religious houses, collecting money. These
ceremonies and processions were formally abrogated by proclamation from
the king and council, in 1542, the thirty-third year of Henry VIII. The
concluding clause of the ordinance runs thus: "Whereas heretofore dyvers
and many superstitious and chyldysh observances have been used, and yet
to this day are observed and kept in many and sundry places of this
realm upon St Nicholas, St Catherines, St Clements, and Holy Innocents,
and such like holydaies; children be strangelie decked and apparayled to
counterfeit priests, bishops, and women, and so ledde with songs and
dances from house to house, blessing the people, and gathering of money;
and boyes do singe masse, and preache in the pulpits, with such other
unfittinge and inconvenient usages, which tend rather to derysyon than
enie true glorie to God, or honor of his

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

sayntes." <span id="fr_877"></span>[1](#fn_876.md) This idle pageantry was
revived by his daughter Mary; and in the second year of her reign an
edict, dated November 13, 1554, was issued from the Bishop of London to
the clergy of his diocese, to have a Boy-Bishop in procession. <span
id="fr_878"></span>[2](#fn_877.md) The year following, "the child bishop,
of Paules church, with his company," were admitted into the queen's
privy chamber, where he sang before her on Saint Nicholas' Day and upon
Holy Innocents' Day. <span id="fr_879"></span>[3](#fn_878.md) Again the
next year, says Strype, "on Saint Nicholas-even, Saint Nicholas, that
is, a boy habited like a bishop in pontificalibus, <span
id="fr_880"></span>[4](#fn_879.md) went abroad in most parts of London,
singing after the old fashion; and was received with many ignorant but
well-disposed people into their houses, and had as much good cheer as
ever was wont to be had before."

\* On the death of Mary this ancient custom was finally abandoned. The
expression in Henry VIII.'s proclamation and elsewhere as to the
Boy-Bishop "singing mass" must not be taken too literally; for though he
aped much of the offices, the canon of the mass was certainly not sung
by him, but only certain parts, such as the prose and offertory at
Rouen.

\* The elaborate account rolls of the great abbey of Durham for the
fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth centuries show that the institution
of Boy-Bishop was regularly observed there, year by year, with but few
exceptions. It is stated in the hostillar's roll of 1405 that there was
no Boy-Bishop that year because of the wars; the insurrection of the
Percys had not then come to a close. There was an almery school at
Durham in connection with the Infirmary, where the boys were daily fed
and taught. The Boy-Bishop seems to have been chosen from these
children, and is usually described in the accounts as *Episcopus
Elemosinariæ*. He received gratuities from almost all the officers of
the abbey, who entered the amount on their different rolls. These sums
varied from 20d. to 5s. <span id="fr_881"></span>[5](#fn_880.md)

\* Richard Berde, doctor of laws, by will of May 2nd, 1501, left to the
abbey church of the Austin Canons of St James, Northampton, his
"mousterdevile hoode, with the lynyng of grene silk, for the
cross-bearer on Seynt Nicholas-night." Doubtless the doctor, who had
long had a chamber within the precincts, had often in his lifetime lent
his parti-coloured hood for the festival of the monastery school. <span
id="fr_882"></span>[6](#fn_881.md)

\* PLOUGH MONDAY.--There were three special seasons for the performance
of what is termed English folk-drama, and traces of all three survive.
They are the Christmas Mumming play, the Plough Monday play, and the
Easter or Pace-Egg play. In all three the sword dance was usually
introduced. The character of St George, and various forms of his legend,
formed part of the Christmas and Easter play, but not of the
intermediate one. Plough Monday, the Monday after Twelfth Day, was
formerly kept throughout most parts of agricultural England by the
ploughmen yoking themselves together and drawing

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

about a plough, accompanied by mummers and music. Their original object
was to gather supplies in kind or money for the support of the Plough or
Labourers' light in the parish church, and doubtless to use some part of
the gathering for their own festivity or for a general Plough-Ale. But
after the Reformation, when these special lights and gilds were
suppressed, the tribute collected was spent entirely upon themselves.
When the ploughboys came to any house of substance in the parish or
district, the sword dance was executed, when one of the combatants was
usually killed, and revived by a "doctor." Beelzebub or a fool, and one
dressed extravagantly as a woman, and usually termed "Bessy," were two
other of the characters. At the end of the mumming the money-box was
rattled and the music played, and if neither refreshment nor money was
forthcoming, the ground in front of the house, whether grass-plot or
gravel walk, was roughly ploughed up, and the mummers departed. This
last feature used to be vigorously carried out as late as the "forties"
in the Peak of Derbyshire. <span id="fr_883"></span>[1](#fn_882.md) Plough
Monday was observed in Huntingdonshire in 1860, where the mummers were
termed "Plough-Witchers." <span id="fr_884"></span>[2](#fn_883.md) A Plough
Monday play was acted at Wiverton Hall, Nottinghamshire, in 1893; no
plough was brought round, but the mummers' clothes were ornamented with
paper ploughs in red and black. <span id="fr_885"></span>[3](#fn_884.md)

SHROVE TUESDAY.--Cock-fighting, and throwing at cocks on Shrove Tuesday,
have been already mentioned, with other trifling sports which are
comprised under their appropriate heads, and need not to be repeated.
The day before Lent began used to be a universal holiday given up to a
variety of sports. <span id="fr_886"></span>[4](#fn_885.md)

\* EASTER GAMES.--Easter, as has been already stated, was the usual
season for an Easter play or mumming, which is still sometimes called
the Pace-Egg play, a corruption of *pasche* or passover. The egg was
always held to be an apt symbol of the Resurrection, hence Easter eggs
and various customs that yet linger connected with them. This Easter
play is still occasionally printed, <span
id="fr_887"></span>[5](#fn_886.md) and occasionally acted by village
players. The characters are much the same as they probably were in
pre-Reformation days, namely, St George, Fool, Slasher, Doctor, Prince
of Paradine, King of Egypt, Hector, Beelzebub, and Devil-Doubt.
Occasionally the King of Egypt's daughter is introduced in character and
not only mentioned. The play doubtless had a crusading origin.

HOCK-TIDE.--The popular holidays of Hock-tide, mentioned by Matthew
Paris and other early writers, were kept on the Monday and Tuesday
following the second Sunday after Easter Day; and distinguished,
according to John Rouse, the Warwickshire historian of the fifteenth
century, by various sportive

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

pastimes, in which the towns-people, divided into parties, were
accustomed to draw each other with ropes. Spelman is more definite, and
tells us, "they consisted in the men and women binding each other, and
especially the women the men," and hence it was called
Binding-Tuesday. <span id="fr_888"></span>[1](#fn_887.md) Cowel informs us
that it was customary in several manors in Hampshire for "the men to
hock the women on the Monday, and the women the men upon the Tuesday;
that is, on that day the women in merriment stop the ways with ropes and
pull the passengers to them, desiring something to be laid out in pious
uses in order to obtain their freedom." <span
id="fr_889"></span>[2](#fn_888.md) Such are the general outlines of this
singular institution, and the pens of several able writers have been
employed in attempting to investigate its origin. <span
id="fr_890"></span>[3](#fn_889.md) Some think it was held in commemoration
of the massacre of the Danes, in the reign of Ethelred the Unready, on
Saint Brice's Day; <span id="fr_891"></span>[4](#fn_890.md) others, that it
was in remembrance of the death of Hardicanute, which happened on
Tuesday the 8th of June, 1041, by which event the English were delivered
from the intolerant government of the Danes: and this opinion appears to
be most probable. The binding part of the ceremony might naturally refer
to the abject state of slavery in which the wretched Saxons were held by
their imperious lords; and the donations for "pious uses," may be
considered as tacit acknowledgments of gratitude to heaven for freeing
the nation from its bondage. In the churchwarden's accounts for the
parish of Lambeth for the years 1515 and 1516, are several entries of
hock monies received from the men and the women for the church service.
And here we may observe, that the contributions collected by the fair
sex exceeded those made by the men. <span
id="fr_892"></span>[5](#fn_891.md)

Hock-day was generally observed as lately as the sixteenth century. We
learn from Spelman that it was not totally discontinued in his time. Dr
Plott, who makes Monday the principal day, has noticed some vestiges of
it at the distance of fifty years, but now it is totally abolished.

\* The derivation of the word Hock is still a puzzle to
etymologists. <span id="fr_893"></span>[6](#fn_892.md) The roughly humorous
games of this season, when the men extorted payment from the women on
the Monday, and the women from the men on the Tuesday, are peculiar to
England, whatever may be their historic origin, and were certainly in
general use in the fourteenth century, and probably much earlier. The
ransom money in olden times was usually handed over to the
churchwardens. The large majority of extant parish accounts of
pre-Reformation date have entries relative to Hock-tide payments.

MAY-GAMES.--The celebration of the May-games, at which we have only
glanced in a former part of the work, <span
id="fr_894"></span>[7](#fn_893.md) will require some enlargement in this
chapter. "On the calends or first of May," says Bourne, <span
id="fr_895"></span>[8](#fn_894.md) "commonly called May-day, the juvenile
part of both sexes were wont to rise a little after midnight

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

and walk to some neighbouring wood, accompanied with music and blowing
of horns, where they break down branches from the trees, and adorn them
with nosegays and crowns of flowers; when this is done, they return with
their booty homewards about the rising of the sun, and make their doors
and windows to triumph with their flowery spoils; and the after part of
the day is chiefly spent in dancing round a tall pole, which is called a
May-pole; and being placed in a convenient part of the village, stands
there, as it were, consecrated to the Goddess of Flowers, without the
least violation being offered to it in the whole circle of the year."

This custom, no doubt, is a relic of one more ancient, practised by the
Heathens, who observed the last four days in April, and the first of
May, in honour of the goddess Flora. An old Romish calendar, cited by Mr
Brand, says, on the 30th of April, the boys go out to seek May-trees,
"Maii arbores a pueris exquirunter." Some consider the May-pole as a
relic of Druidism; but I cannot find any solid foundation for such an
opinion.

It should be observed, that the May-games were not always celebrated
upon the first day of the month; and to this we may add the following
extract from Stow: "In the month of May the citizens of London of all
estates, generally in every parish, and in some instances two or three
parishes joining together, had their several mayings, and did fetch
their may-poles with divers warlike shows; with good archers,
morrice-dancers, and other devices for pastime, all day long; and
towards evening they had stage-plays and bonfires in the streets. These
great mayings and May-games were made by the governors and masters of
the city, together with the triumphant setting up of the great shaft or
principal May-pole in Cornhill before the parish church of Saint
Andrew," <span id="fr_896"></span>[1](#fn_895.md) which was thence called
Saint Andrew Undershaft.

No doubt the May-games are of long standing, though the time of their
institution cannot be traced. Mention is made of the May-pole at
Cornhill, in a poem called the "Chaunce of the Dice," attributed to
Chaucer. In the time of Stow, who died in 1605, they were not conducted
with so great splendour as they had been formerly, owing to a dangerous
riot which took place upon May-day, 1517, in the ninth year of Henry
VIII., on which occasion several foreigners were slain, and two of the
ringleaders of the disturbance were hanged.

Stow has passed unnoticed the manner in which the May-poles were usually
decorated; this deficiency I shall supply from Philip Stubs, a
contemporary writer, one who saw these pastimes in a very different
point of view, and some may think his invectives are more severe than
just; however, I am afraid the conclusion of them, though perhaps much
exaggerated, is not altogether without foundation. He writes thus: <span
id="fr_897"></span>[2](#fn_896.md) "Against Maie-day, Whitsunday, or some
other time of the year, every parish, towne, or village, assemble
themselves, both men, women, and children; and either all together, or
dividing themselves into companies, they goe some to the woods and
groves, some to the hills and mountaines,

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

some to one place, some to another, where they spend all the night in
pleasant pastimes, and in the morning they return, bringing with them
birche boughes and branches of trees to deck their assemblies withal.
But their chiefest jewel they bring from thence is the Maie-pole, which
they bring home with great veneration, as thus--they have twentie or
fourtie yoake of oxen, every oxe having a sweete nosegaie of flowers
tied to the tip of his hornes, and these oxen drawe home the May-poale,
their stinking idol rather, which they covered all over with flowers and
hearbes, bound round with strings from the top to the bottome, and
sometimes it was painted with variable colours, having two or three
hundred men, women, and children following it with great devotion. And
thus equipped it was reared with handkerchiefes and flagges streaming on
the top, they strawe the ground round about it, they bind green boughs
about it, they set up summer halles, bowers, and arbours hard by it, and
then fall they to banquetting and feasting, to leaping and dauncing
about it, as the heathen people did at the dedication of their idolls. I
have heard it crediblie reported, by men of great gravity, credite, and
reputation, that of fourtie, threescore, or an hundred maides going to
the wood, there have scarcely the third part of them returned home
againe as they went."

In the churchwarden's account for the parish of St Helen's in Abingdon,
Berks, dated 1566, the ninth of Elizabeth, is the following article:
"Payde for setting up Robin Hoode's bower, eighteenpence;" that is, a
bower for the reception of the fictitious Robin Hood and his company,
belonging to the May-day pageant. <span id="fr_898"></span>[1](#fn_897.md)

THE LORD AND LADY OF THE MAY.--It seems to have been the constant
custom, at the celebration of the May-games, to elect a Lord and Lady of
the May, who probably presided over the sports. On the thirtieth of May,
1557, in the fourth year of Queen Mary, "was a goodly May-game in
Fenchurch Street, with drums, and guns, and pikes; and with the nine
worthies who rode, and each of them made his speech, there was also a
morrice dance, and an elephant and castle, and the Lord and Lady of the
May appearing to make up the show." <span
id="fr_899"></span>[2](#fn_898.md) We also read that the Lord of the May,
and no doubt his Lady also, was decorated with scarfs, ribbands, and
other fineries. Hence, in the comedy called *The Knight of The Burning
Pestle*, written by Beaumont and Fletcher in 1611, a citizen, addressing
himself to the other actors, says, "Let Ralph come out on May-day in the
morning, and speak upon a conduit, with all his scarfs about him, and
his feathers, and his rings, and his knacks, as Lord of the May." His
request is complied with, and Ralph appears upon the stage in the
assumed character, where he makes his speech, beginning in this manner:

With gilded staff and crossed scarf the May Lord here I stand.

\[paragraph continues\] The citizen is supposed to be a spectator, and
Ralph is his apprentice, but permitted by him to play in the piece.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

At the commencement of the sixteenth century, or perhaps still earlier,
the ancient stories of Robin Hood and his frolicsome companions seem to
have been new-modelled, and divided into separate ballads, which much
increased their popularity; for this reason it was customary to
personify this famous outlaw, with several of his most noted associates,
and add them to the pageantry of the May-games. He presided as Lord of
the May; and a female, or rather, perhaps, a man habited like a female,
called the Maid Marian, his faithful mistress, was the Lady of the May.
His companions were distinguished by the title of "Robin Hood's Men,"
and were also equipped in appropriate dresses; their coats, hoods, and
hose were generally green. Henry VIII., in the first year of his reign,
one morning, by way of pastime, came suddenly into the chamber where the
queen and her ladies were sitting. He was attended by twelve noblemen,
all apparelled in short coats of Kentish kendal, with hoods and hosen of
the same; each of them had his bow, with arrows, and a sword, and a
buckler, "like outlawes, or Robyn Hode's men." The queen, it seems, at
first was somewhat afrighted by their appearance, of which she was not
the least apprised. This gay troop performed several dances, and then
departed. <span id="fr_900"></span>[1](#fn_899.md)

Bishop Latimer, in a sermon which he preached before king Edward VI.,
relates the following anecdote, which proves the great popularity of the
May pageants. "Coming," says he, "to a certain town on a holiday to
preach, I found the church door fast locked. I taryed there half an
houre and more, and at last the key was found, and one of the parish
comes to me and sayes, Syr, this is a busy day with us, we cannot hear
you; it is Robin Hoode's day; the parish are gone abroad to gather for
Robin Hood; I pray you let <span id="fr_901"></span>[2](#fn_900.md) them
not. I was fayne, therefore, to give place to Robin Hood. I thought my
rochet would have been regarded; but it would not serve, it was faine to
give place to Robin Hoode's men." <span id="fr_902"></span>[3](#fn_901.md)
In Garrick's Collection of Old Plays <span
id="fr_903"></span>[4](#fn_902.md) is one entitled "A new Playe of Robyn
Hoode, for to be played in the May-games, very pleasaunte and full of
Pastyme," printed at London by William Copland, black letter, without
date. This playe consists of short dialogues between Robyn Hode, Lytell
John, Fryer Tucke, a potter's boy, and the potter. Robyn fights with the
friar, who afterwards becomes his chaplain; he also breaks the boy's
pots, and commits several other absurdities. The language of the piece
is somewhat low, and full of ribaldry. <span
id="fr_904"></span>[5](#fn_903.md)

GRAND MAY-GAME AT GREENWICH.--It has been observed that the May-games
were not confined to the first day of the month, neither were they
always concluded in one day; on the contrary I have now before me a
manuscript, <span id="fr_905"></span>[6](#fn_904.md) written apparently in
the reign of Henry VII., wherein a number of gentlemen, professing
themselves to be the servants of the Lady May, promise to be in the

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

royal park at Greenwich, day after day, from two o'clock in the
afternoon till five, in order to perform the various sports and
exercises specified in the agreement; that is to say,

On the 14th day of May they engage to meet at a place appointed by the
king, armed with the "harneis <span id="fr_906"></span>[1](#fn_905.md)
thereunto accustomed, to kepe the fielde, and to run with every commer
eight courses." Four additional courses were to be granted to any one
who desired it, if the time would permit, or the queen was pleased to
give them leave; agreeable to the ancient custom by which the ladies
presided as arbitrators at the justs.

On the 15th the archers took the field to shoot at "the standard with
flight arrows."

On the 16th they held a tournament with "swords rebated to strike with
every commer eight strokes," according to the accustomed usage.

On the 18th, for I suppose Sunday intervened, they were to be ready to
"wrestle with all commers all manner of ways," according to their
pleasure.

On the 19th they were to enter the field, to fight on foot at the
barriers, with spears in their hands and swords rebated by their sides,
and with spear and sword to defend their barriers: there were to be
eight strokes with the spear, two of them "with the foyne," or short
thrust, and eight strokes with the sword; "every man to take his best
advantage with gript or otherwise."

On the 20th they were to give additional proof of their strength by
casting "the barre on foote, and with the arme, bothe heavit and hight."
I do not clearly understand this passage, but suppose it means by
lifting and casting aloft.

On the 21st they recommenced the exercises, which were to be continued
daily, Sundays excepted, through the remaining part of May, and a
fortnight in the month of June.

ROYAL MAY-GAME AT SHOOTER'S HILL.--Henry V III., when young, delighted
much in pageantry, and the early part of his reign abounded with gaudy
shows; most of them were his own devising, and others contrived for his
amusement. Among the latter we may reckon a May-game at Shooter's Hill,
which was exhibited by the officers of his guards; they in a body,
amounting to two hundred, all of them clothed in green, and headed by
their captain, who personated Robin Hood, met the King one morning as he
was riding to take the air, accompanied by the queen and a large suite
of the nobility of both sexes. The fictitious foresters first amused
them with a double discharge of their arrows; and then, their chief
approaching the king, invited him to see the manner in which he and his
companions lived. The king complied with the request, and the archers,
blowing their horns, conducted him and his train into the wood under the
hill, where an arbour was made, with green boughs, having a hall, a
great chamber, and an inner chamber, and the whole was covered with
flowers and sweet herbs. When the company had entered the arbour, Robin
Hood

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

excused the want of more abundant refreshment, saying to the king, "Sir,
we outlaws usually breakfast upon venison, and have no other food to
offer you." The king and queen then sat down, and were served with
venison and wine; and after the entertainment, with which it seems they
were well pleased, they departed, and on their return were met by two
ladies riding in a rich open chariot, drawn by five horses. Every horse,
according to Hollingshed, had his name upon his head, and upon every
horse sat a lady, with her name written. On the first horse, called
Lawde, sat Humidity; on the second, named Memeon, sat Lady Vert, or
green; on the third, called Pheton, sat Lady Vegitive; on the fourth,
called Rimphon, sat Lady Pleasaunce; on the fifth, called Lampace, sat
Sweet Odour. <span id="fr_907"></span>[1](#fn_906.md) Both of the ladies in
the chariot were splendidly apparelled; one of them personified the Lady
May, and the other Lady Flora, "who," we are told, "saluted the king
with divers goodly songs, and so brought him to Greenwich."

We may here just observe that the May-games had attracted the notice of
the nobility long before the time of Henry; and agreeable to the custom
of the times, no doubt, was the following curious passage in the old
romance called *The Death of Arthur*: "Now it befell in the moneth of
lusty May, that queene Guenever called unto her the knyghtes of the
round table, and gave them warning that, early in the morning, she
should ride on maying into the woods and fields beside Westminster." The
knights were all of them to be clothed in green, to be well horsed, and
every one of them to have a lady behind him, followed by an esquire and
two yeomen, etc. <span id="fr_908"></span>[2](#fn_907.md)

\* MAY-POLES.--By an ordinance of the Long Parliament in April, 1644,
all May-poles were to be taken down as "a heathenish vanity." The
constables and churchwardens were to be fined 5s. weekly until the poles
were removed. After the Restoration their use naturally revived. Hall
wrote indignantly on the subject, in the bitterest Puritan vein, in a
treatise that he called *Funebria Flora, The Downfall of May Games*,
published in 1660. At the end he versifies, in "A May Pooles Speech to a
Traveller," as follows:

"I have a mighty retinue  
The scum of all the raskal crew  
Of fidlers, pedlers, jayle-scapt slaves,  
Of tinkers, turncoats, tospot knaves,  
Of theeves and scape-thrifts many a one,  
With bouncing Besse, and jolly Jone,  
With idle boyes, and journeyman,  
And vagrants that their country run;  
Yea, hobby-horse doth hither prance,  
Maid Marrian and the morrice dance,  
My summons fetcheth, far and near,  
All that can swagger, roar, and swear,  
All that can dance, and drab, and drink,  
They run to me as to a sink.  
These me for their commander take,  
And I do them my blackguard make. <span id="page_281">p. 281</span>  
The honour of the Sabbath day  
My dancing greens have ta’en away,  
Let preachers prate till they grow wood,  
Where I am they can do no good."

\[paragraph continues\] The author states that "most of these May-poles
are stollen, yet they give out that the poles are given them." In
another place he says: If Moses were angry when he saw the people
dancing about a golden calf, well may we be angry to see people dancing
the morrice about a post in honour of a whore, as you shall see anon."

MAY MILK-MAIDS.--"It is at this time," that is, in May, says the author
of one of the papers in the *Spectator*, <span
id="fr_909"></span>[1](#fn_908.md) "we see the brisk young wenches, in the
country parishes, dancing round the May-pole. It is likewise on the
first day of this month that we see the ruddy milk-maid exerting herself
in a most sprightly manner under a pyramid of silver tankards, and like
the virgin Tarpeia, oppressed by the costly ornaments which her
benefactors lay upon her. These decorations of silver cups, tankards,
and salvers, were borrowed for the purpose, and hung round the
milk-pails, with the addition of flowers and ribbands, which the maidens
carried upon their heads when they went to the houses of their
customers, and danced in order to obtain a small gratuity from each of
them. In a set of prints called Tempest's *Cryes of London*, there is
one called the merry milk-maid's, whose proper name was Kate Smith. She
is dancing with the milk-pail, decorated as above mentioned, upon her
head. <span id="fr_910"></span>[2](#fn_909.md) Of late years the plate,
with the other decorations, were placed in a pyramidical form, and
carried by two chairmen upon a wooden horse. The maidens walked before
it, and performed the dance without any incumbrance. I really cannot
discover what analogy the silver tankards and salvers can have to the
business of the milk-maids. I have seen them act with much more
propriety upon this occasion, when in place of these superfluous
ornaments they substituted a cow. The animal had her horns gilt, and was
nearly covered with ribbands of various colours, formed into bows and
roses, and interspersed with green oaken leaves and bunches of flowers.

MAY FESTIVAL OF THE CHIMNEY-SWEEPERS.--The chimney-sweepers of London
have also singled out the first of May for their festival; at which time
they parade the streets in companies, disguised in various manners.
Their dresses are usually decorated with gilt paper, and other mock
fineries; they have their shovels and brushes in their hands, which they
rattle one upon the other; and to this rough music they jump about in
imitation of dancing. Some of the larger companies have a fiddler with
them, and a Jack in the Green, as well as a Lord and Lady of the May,
who follow the minstrel with great stateliness, and dance as occasion
requires. The Jack in the green is a piece of pageantry consisting of a
hollow frame of wood or wicker-work, made in the

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

form of a sugar-loaf, but open at the bottom, and sufficiently large and
high to receive a man. The frame is covered with green leaves and
bunches of flowers interwoven with each other, so that the man within
may be completely concealed, who dances with his companions, and the
populace are mightily pleased with the oddity of the moving pyramid.

WHITSUN GAMES.--The Whitsuntide holidays were celebrated by various
pastimes commonly practised upon other festivals; but the Monday after
the Whitsun week, at Kidlington in Oxfordshire, a fat lamb was provided,
and the maidens of the town, having their thumbs tied behind them, were
permitted to run after it, and she who with her mouth took hold of the
lamb was declared the Lady of the Lamb, which, being killed and cleaned,
but with the skin hanging upon it, was carried on a long pole before the
lady and her companions to the green, attended with music, and a morisco
dance of men, and another of women. The rest of the day was spent in
mirth and merry glee. Next day the lamb, partly baked, partly boiled,
and partly roasted, was served up for the lady's feast, where she sat,
"majestically at the upper end of the table, and her companions with
her," the music playing during the repast, which, being finished, the
solemnity ended." <span id="fr_911"></span>[1](#fn_910.md)

\* LAMB-ALE.--Mr G. A. Rowell, in 1886, gave the following interesting
and corrected account of this lamb-ale, which was held annually at
Kirtlington (not Kidlington), a village about nine miles north of
Oxford: <span id="fr_912"></span>[2](#fn_911.md)

"The name of Kidlington is given for Kirtlington, the two villages being
about four miles apart: the story of the maidens catching the lamb with
their teeth is doubtless a mere made up tale, and I can only account for
its having passed so long without contradiction from its apparent
absurdity rendering it unnecessary for those of the neighbourhood.
However, a description of the Kirtlington lamb-ale, and how it was
conducted, may be interesting and set this question in a proper light.
This I hope to do fairly, as my remembrance will go back over seventy
years; and I am kindly assisted by a native, and long resident of the
village, an observer, and well qualified to aid in the task.

The lamb-ale was held in a large barn, with a grass field contiguous for
dancing, etc.; this was fitted up with great pains as a refreshment room
for company (generally numerous) and was called 'My Lord's Hall.' The
lord and lady, being the ruling persons, attending with their
mace-bearers, or pages, and other officers. All were gaily and suitably
dressed, with a preponderance of light blue and pink, the colours of the
Dashwood family, the lady appearing in white only, with light blue or
pink ribands on alternate days.

The lamb-ale began on Trinity Monday, when--and on each day at 11
A.M.--the lady was brought in state from her home, and at 9 P.M. was in
like manner conducted home again; the sports were continued during the
week, but Monday, Tuesday, and Saturday were the especial days.

The refreshments, as served, were not charged for; but a plate was
afterwards

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

handed round for each to give his donation. This seems strikingly to
accord with Aubrey's account of the Whitsun-ales of his grandfather's
time.

The Morisco dance was not only a principal feature in the lamb-ale, but
one for which Kirtlington was noted. No expense was spared in getting up
as described in the paper on that subject; and with the liveries of the
whitest and ribands of the best, the display of the Dashwood colours was
the pride of the parish, and in my early times it was generally
understood that the farmers' sons did not decline joining the dancers,
but rather prided themselves on being selected as one of them. The
simple tabor and pipe was their only music, but by degrees other
instruments came into use in the private halls, and dancing on the
green, and besides these the surroundings of stalls made up a sort of
fair.

On opening the lamb-ale a procession was formed to take the lamb around
the town and to the principal houses. It was carried on a man's
shoulders or rather on the back of his neck with two legs on each side
of it; the lamb being decorated with blue or pink ribands in accordance
with the lady's colour of the day.

The great house was first visited, when after a few Morisco dances (as
generally supposed) two guineas were given, and thus within the week
every farm or other house of importance within the parish was visited.
During the week there were various amusements; many hundreds visited the
place from all sides, with a very general display of generosity and good
will amongst all.

From about sixty or seventy years ago, the lamb used in the lamb-ale has
been borrowed and returned; but previous to that time--for how long I
cannot say--the lamb was slaughtered within the week, made into pies and
distributed--but in what way is uncertain. It would be interesting if
some light could be thrown on the lamb-ale. There is much which seems to
connect it with the Whitsun-ale of early times; but, from the
differences in the days and the possession of the lamb, there seems to
be a wide distinction between the festivals.

As the lamb-ale appears to be unique, at least in this part of the
country, an examination of the parish-registers might be interesting and
throw some light on the subject."

MIDSUMMER EVE FESTIVAL.--On the Vigil of St John the Baptist, commonly
called Midsummer Eve, it was usual in most country places, and also in
towns and cities, for the inhabitants, both old and young, and of both
sexes, to meet together, and make merry by the side of a large fire made
in the middle of the street, or in some open and convenient place, over
which the young men frequently leaped by way of frolic, and also
exercised themselves with various sports and pastimes, more especially
with running, wrestling, and dancing. These diversions they continued
till midnight, and sometimes till cock-crowing; <span
id="fr_913"></span>[1](#fn_912.md) several of the superstitious ceremonies
practised upon this occasion are contained in the following verses, as
they are translated by Barnabe Googe from the

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

fourth book of *The Popish Kingdome*, written in Latin by Tho.
Neogeorgus: the translation was dedicated to queen Elizabeth, and
appeared in 1570.

"Then doth the joyfull feast of John the Baptist take his turne,  
When bonfiers great, with loftie flame, in every towne doe burne:  
And yong men round about with maides doe daunce in every streete,  
With garlands wrought of Mother-wort, or else with Vervaine sweete  
And many other flowres faire, with Violets in their handes  
Whereas they all do fondly thinke, that whosoever stands,  
And thorow the flowres beholds the flame, his eyes shall feele no
paine.  
When thus till night they daunted have, they through the fire amaine  
With striving mindes doe run, and all their hearbes they cast therin,  
And then, with wordes devout and prayers, they solemnely begin,  
Desiring God that all their illes may there confounded bee,  
Whereby they thinke through all that yeare, from Agues to be free."

At London, in addition to the bonfires, "on the eve of this saint, as
well as upon that of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, every man's door was
shaded with green birch, long fennel, Saint John's wort, orpin, white
lilies, and the like, ornamented with garlands of beautiful flowers.
They, the citizens, had also lamps of glass with oil burning in them all
night; and some of them hung out branches of iron, curiously wrought,
containing hundreds of lamps lighted at once, which made a very splendid
appearance." This information we receive from Stow, who tells us that,
in his time, New Fish Street and Thames Street were peculiarly brilliant
upon these occasions.

SUPPOSED ORIGIN OF THE MIDSUMMER VIGIL.--The reasons assigned for making
bonfires upon the vigil of St John the Baptist in particular are
various, for many writers have attempted the investigation of their
origin; but unfortunately all their arguments, owing to the want of
proper information, are merely hypothetical, and of course cannot be
much depended upon. Those who suppose these fires to be a relic of some
ancient heathenish superstition engrafted upon the variegated stock of
ceremonies belonging to the Romish church, are not, in my opinion, far
distant from the truth. The looking through the flowers at the fire, the
casting of them finally into it, and the invocation to the Deity, with
the effects supposed to be produced by those ceremonies, as mentioned in
the preceding poem, are circumstances that seem to strengthen such a
conclusion.

According to some of the pious writers of antiquity, they made large
fires, which might be seen at a great distance, upon the vigil of this
saint, in token that he was said in holy writ to be "a shining light."
Others, agreeing with this, add also, these fires were made to drive
away the dragons and evil spirits hovering in the air; and one of them
gravely says, in some countries they burned bones, which was called a
bone-fire; for "the dragons hattyd nothyng mor than the styncke of
brenyng bonys." This, says another, habent ex gentilibus, they have from
the heathens. The author last cited laments the abuses committed upon
these occasions. "This vigil," says he, "ought to be held with
cheerfulness and piety, but not with such merriment as is shewn by the
profane lovers of

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

this world, who make great fires in the streets, and indulge themselves
with filthy and unlawful games, to which they add glotony and
drunkenness, and the commission of many other shameful
indecencies." <span id="fr_914"></span>[1](#fn_913.md)

SETTING OF THE MIDSUMMER WATCH.--In former times it was customary in
London, and in other great cities, to set the Midsummer watch upon the
eve of St John the Baptist; and this was usually performed with great
pomp and pageantry. <span id="fr_915"></span>[2](#fn_914.md) The following
short extract from the faithful historian, John Stow, will be sufficient
to show the childishness as well as the expensiveness of this idle
spectacle. The institution, he assures us, had been appointed, "time out
of mind;" and upon this occasion the standing watches "in bright
harness." There was also a marching watch, that passed through all the
principal streets. In order to furnish this watch with lights, there
were appointed seven hundred cressets; the charge for every cresset was
two shillings and fourpence; every cresset required two men, the one to
bear it, and the other to carry a bag with light to serve it. The
cresset was a large lanthorn fixed at the end of a long pole, and
carried upon a man's shoulder. The cressets were found partly by the
different companies, and partly by the city chamber. Every one of the
cresset-bearers was paid for his trouble; he had also given to him, that
evening, a strawen hat and a painted badge, besides the donation of his
breakfast next morning. The marching watch consisted of two thousand
men, most of them being old soldiers of every denomination. They
appeared in appropriate habits, with their arms in their hands, and many
of them, especially the musicians and the standard-bearers, rode upon
great horses. There were also divers pageants and morris-dancers with
the constables, one half of which, to the amount of one hundred and
twenty, went out on the eve of Saint John, and the other half on the eve
of Saint Peter. The constables were dressed in "bright harnesse, some
over gilt, and every one had a joinet of scarlet thereupon, and a chain
of gold; his henchman following him, and his minstrels before him, and
his cresset-light at his side. The mayor himself came after him, well
mounted, with his sword-bearer before him, in fair armour on horseback,
preceded by the waits, or city minstrels, and the mayor's officers in
liveries of worsted, or say jackets party-coloured. The mayor was
surrounded by his footmen and torch-bearers, and followed by two
henchmen on large horses. The sheriffs' watches came one after the other
in like order, but not so numerous; for the mayor had, besides his
giant, three pageants; whereas the sheriffs had only two besides their
giants, each with their morris-dance and one henchman: their officers
were clothed in jackets of worsted, or say party-coloured, but differing
from those belonging to the mayor, and from each other: they had also a
great number of harnessed men." <span id="fr_916"></span>[3](#fn_915.md)
This old custom of setting the watch in London was maintained until the
year 1539, in the 31st year of Henry VIII. when it was discontinued on

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

account of the expense, and revived in the year 1548, the 2d of Edward
VI. and soon after that time it was totally abolished.

On Midsummer eve it was customary annually at Burford, in Oxfordshire,
to carry a dragon up and down the town, with mirth and rejoicing; to
which they also added the picture <span id="fr_917"></span>[1](#fn_916.md)
of a giant. Dr Plott tells us, this pageantry was continued in his
memory, and says it was established, at least the dragon part of the
show, in memory of a famous victory obtained near that place, about 750,
by Cuthred, king of the west Saxons, over Ethebald, king of Mercia, who
lost his standard, surmounted by a golden dragon, <span
id="fr_918"></span>[2](#fn_917.md) in the action.

PROCESSIONS ON ST CLEMENT'S AND ST CATHERINE'S DAYS.--The Anniversary of
Saint Clement, and that of Saint Catherine, the first upon the 23rd, and
the second upon the 25th, of November, were formerly particularised by
religious processions which had been disused after the Reformation, but
again established by Queen Mary. In the year she ascended the throne,
according to Strype, on the evening of Saint Catherine's Day, her
procession was celebrated at London with five hundred great lights,
which where carried round Saint Paul's steeple; <span
id="fr_919"></span>[3](#fn_918.md) and again three years afterwards, her
image, if I clearly understand my author, was taken about the
battlements of the same church with fine singing and many great
lights. <span id="fr_920"></span>[4](#fn_919.md) But the most splendid show
of this kind that took [place in](errata.htm#2.md) Mary's time was the
procession on Saint Clement's Day, exhibited in the streets of London;
it consisted of sixty priests and clerks in their copes, attended by
divers of the inns of court, who went next the priests, preceded by
eighty banners and streamers, with the waits or minstrels of the city
playing upon different instruments. <span
id="fr_921"></span>[5](#fn_920.md)

WASSAILS.--Wassail, or rather the wassail bowl, which was a bowl of
spiced ale, formerly carried about by young women on New-year's eve, who
went from door to door in their several parishes singing a few couplets
of homely verses composed for the purpose, and presented the liquor to
the inhabitants of the house where they called, expecting a small
gratuity in return. Selden alludes to this custom in the following
comparison: "The Pope, in sending reliques to princes, does as wenches
do by their wassails at New-year's tide, they present you with a cup,
and you must drink of a slabby stuff; but the meaning is, you must give
them monies ten times more than it is worth." The wassail is said to
have originated from the words of Rowena, the daughter of Hengist; who,
presenting a bowl of wine to Vortigern, the king of the Britons, said,
Wæs hæl, or, Health to you, my lord the king; (<span
id="img_28600"></span> ![](img/28600.jpg) \[Ðær hæl larond cẏnninȝ\]).
If this derivation of the custom should be thought doubtful, I can only
say that it has the authority at least of antiquity on its side. The
wassails are now (1800) quite obsolete; but it seems that fifty years
back, some vestiges of them were remaining in Cornwall; but the time of
their performance was changed to twelfth-day. <span
id="fr_922"></span>[6](#fn_921.md)

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

\* The custom of carrying round the wassail bowl at Christmastide seems
to have long ago disappeared, though the following verse is still (1902)
occasionally sung by children when "carolling" in the west of England:

"Wassail, wassail, all o’er the town,  
Our toast it is white, our ale it is brown;  
Our bowl it is made of the mapling tree,  
With the wassailing bowl we will drink unto thee."

\* Wassailing the orchards may possibly survive in the apple-growing
districts, but tit seems doubtful if it is anything more than boys
shouting rhymes round the trees on Twelfth Night. In the "fifties" of
the last century, it was not infrequent on the Somersetshire side of
Exmoor. A great bowl of cider was placed in one of the biggest trees
after dark. When the verses of incantation had been sung, each of the
company drank from the bowl, and the remainder was flung up into the
tree. <span id="fr_923"></span>[1](#fn_922.md)

\* A correspondent of *Notes and Queries* contributed the following in
1852:

"In this neighbourhood (Chailey, Sussex) the custom of wassailing the
orchards still remains. It is called apple-howling. A troop of boys
visit the different orchards, and encircling the apple-trees they repeat
the following words:

Stand fast root, bear well top,  
Pray the God send us a good howling crop.  
Every twig, apples big,  
Every bough, apples enow,  
Hats full, caps full,  
Full quarters, sacks full.

They then shout in chorus, one of the boys accompanying them on the
cow's horn; during the ceremony they rap the trees with their
sticks. <span id="fr_924"></span>[2](#fn_923.md)

\* In Hazlitt's edition of Brand's *Popular Antiquities*, published in
1870, the shouting of the boys in the orchards is said to still prevail
in several counties.

SHEEP-SHEARING AND HARVEST-HOME.--There are two feasts annually held
among the farmers of this country, which are regularly made in the
spring, and at the end of the summer, or the beginning of autumn, but
not confined to any particular day. The first is the sheep-shearing, and
the second the harvest-home; both of them were celebrated in ancient
times with feasting and variety of rustic pastimes; at present (1800),
excepting a dinner, or more frequently a supper, at the conclusion of
the sheep-shearing and the harvest, we have little remains of the former
customs.

The particular manner in which the sheep-shearing was celebrated in old
time is not recorded; but respecting the harvest-home we meet with
several curious observations. Hentzner, a foreign gentleman, who was in
England at the close of the sixteenth century, and wrote an account of
what he saw here,

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

says, "as we were returning to our inn (in or near Windsor), we happened
to meet some country people celebrating their harvest-home: their last
load of corn they crown with flowers, having besides an image richly
dressed, by which, perhaps, they signify Ceres; this they keep moving
about, while the men and women, and men and maid-servants, riding
through the streets in the cart, shout as loud as they can till they
arrive at the barn." Moresin, another foreign writer, also tells us that
he saw "in England, the country people bring home," from the harvest
field, I presume he means, "a figure made with corn, round which the men
and the women were promiscuously singing, and preceded by a piper or a
drum." <span id="fr_925"></span>[1](#fn_924.md) "In the north," says Mr
Brand, "not half a century ago, they used everywhere to dress up a
figure something similar to that just described, at the end of harvest,
which they called a kern-baby, plainly a corruption of corn-baby, as the
kern, or churn supper, is of corn-supper." <span
id="fr_926"></span>[2](#fn_925.md)

The harvest-supper in some places is called a mell-supper, and a
churn-supper. Mell is plainly derived from the French word mesler, to
mingle together, the master and servant promiscuously at the same
table. <span id="fr_927"></span>[3](#fn_926.md) At the mell-supper,
Bourne <span id="fr_928"></span>[4](#fn_927.md) tells us, "the servant and
his master are alike, and every thing is done with equal freedom. They
sit at the same table, converse freely together, and spend the remaining
part of the night in dancing and singing, without any difference or
distinction." "There was," continues my author," a custom among the
heathens much like this at the gathering of their harvest, when the
servants were indulged with their liberty, and put upon an equality with
their masters for a certain time. Probably both of them originated from
the Jewish feast of tabernacles." <span id="fr_929"></span>[5](#fn_928.md)

WAKES.--The wakes, when first instituted in this country, were
established upon religious principles, and greatly resembled the agapæ,
or love feasts of the early Christians. It seems, however, clear that
they derived their origin from some more ancient rites practised in the
times of paganism. Hence Pope Gregory, in his letter to Melitus, a
British abbot, says, "whereas the people were accustomed to sacrifice
many oxen in honour of dæmons, let them celebrate a religious and solemn
festival, and not slay the animals, diabolo, to the devil, but to be
eaten by themselves, *ad laudem Dei*, to the praise of God." <span
id="fr_930"></span>[6](#fn_929.md) These festivals were primitively held
upon the day of the dedication of the church in each district, or the
day of the saint whose relics were therein deposited, or to whose honour
it was consecrated; for which purpose the people were directed to make
booths and tents with the boughs of trees adjoining to the
churches, <span id="fr_931"></span>[7](#fn_930.md) and in them to celebrate
the feast with thanksgiving and prayer. In process of time the people
assembled on the vigil, or evening preceding the saint's day, and came,
says an old author, "to churche with candellys burnyng, and would

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

wake, and come toward night to the church in their devocion," <span
id="fr_932"></span>[1](#fn_931.md) agreeable to the requisition contained
in one of the canons established by King Edgar, whereby those who came
to the wake were ordered to pray devoutly, and not to betake themselves
to drunkenness and debauchery. The necessity for this restriction
plainly indicates that abuses of this religious institution began to
make their appearance as early as the tenth century. The author above
cited goes on, "and afterwards the pepul fell to letcherie, and songs,
and daunses, with harping and piping, and also to glotony and sinne; and
so tourned the holyness to cursydness; wherefore holy faders ordeyned
the pepull to leve that waking and to fast the evyn, but it is called
vigilia, that is waking, in English, and eveyn, for of eveyn they were
wont to come to churche." In proportion as these festivals deviated from
the original design of their institution, they became more popular, the
conviviality was extended, and not only the inhabitants of the parish to
which the church belonged were present at them, but they were joined by
others from the neighbouring towns and parishes, who flocked together
upon these occasions, and the greater the reputation of the tutelar
saint, the greater generally was the promiscuous assembly. The pedlars
and hawkers attended to sell their wares, and so by degrees the
religious wake was converted into a secular fair, and the time was spent
in festive mirth and vulgar amusements.

SUNDAY FESTIVALS.--"In the northern parts of this nation," says Bourne,
"the inhabitants of most country villages are wont to observe some
Sunday in a more particular manner than the other common Sundays of the
year, namely, the Sunday after the day of dedication of their church,"
that is, the Sunday after the saint's day to whom the church was
dedicated. "Then the people deck themselves in their gaudiest clothes,
and have open doors and splendid entertainments for the reception and
treating of their relations and friends, who visit them on that occasion
from each neighbouring town. The morning is spent for the most part at
church, though not as that morning was wont to be spent, with the
commemoration of the saint or martyr; nor the grateful remembrance of
the builder and endower." Being come from church, the remaining part of
the day is spent in eating and drinking, and so is a day or two
afterwards, together with all sorts of rural pastimes and exercises,
such as dancing on the green, wrestling, cudgelling, and the like. "In
the northern parts, the Sunday's feasting is almost lost, and they
observe only one day for the whole, which among them is called hopping,
I suppose from the dancing and other exercises then practised. Here they
used to end many quarrels between neighbour and neighbour, and hither
came the wives in comely manner, and they which were of the better sort
had their mantles carried with them, as well for show as to keep them
from the cold at the table. These mantles also many did use at the
churches, at the morrow masses, and at other times." <span
id="fr_933"></span>[2](#fn_932.md)

CHURCH-ALES.--The Church-ales, called also Easter-ales, and Whitsun-

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

ales from their being sometimes held on Easter-Sunday, and on
Whit-Sunday, or on some of the holidays that follow them, certainly
originated from the wakes. The churchwardens and other chief parish
officers, observing the wakes to be more popular than any other
holidays, rightly conceived, that by establishing other institutions
somewhat similar to them, they might draw together a large company of
people, and annually collect from them, such sums of money for the
support and repairs of the church, as would be a great easement to the
parish rates. By way of enticement to the populace they brewed a certain
portion of strong ale, to be ready on the day appointed for the
festival, which they sold to them; and most of the better sort, in
addition to what they paid for their drink, contributed something
towards the collection; but in some instances the inhabitants of one or
more parishes were mulcted in a certain sum according to mutual
agreement, as we find by an ancient stipulation, <span
id="fr_934"></span>[1](#fn_933.md) couched in the following terms: "The
parishioners of Elvaston and those of Okebrook in Derbyshire agree
jointly to brew four ales, and every ale of one quarter of malt between
this, and the feast of Saint John the Baptist next comming, and every
inhabitant of the said town of Okebrook shall be at the several ales;
and every husband and his wife shall pay two pence, and every cottager
one penny. And the inhabitants of Elvaston shall have and receive all
the profits comming of the said ales, to the use and behoof of the
church of Elvaston; and the inhabitants of Elvaston shall brew eight
ales betwixt this and the feast of Saint John, at which ales the
inhabitants of Okebrook shall come and pay as before rehearsed; and if
any be away one ale, he is to pay at t’oder ale for both." In Cornwall
the church-ales were ordered in a different manner; for there two young
men of a parish were annually chosen by their foregoers to be wardens,
"who, dividing the task, made collections among the parishioners of
whatever provision it pleased them to bestow; this they employed in
brewing, baking, and other acates, against Whitsontide, upon which
holidaies the neighbours meet at the church-house, and there merely feed
on their own victuals, contributing some petty portion to the stock.
When the feast is ended, the wardens yield in their accounts to the
parishioners; and such money as exceedeth the disbursements, is layed up
in store to defray any extraordinary charges arising in the
parish." <span id="fr_935"></span>[2](#fn_934.md)

To what has been said upon this subject, I shall only add the following
extract from Philip Stubbs, an author before quoted, who lived in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, whose writings <span
id="fr_936"></span>[3](#fn_935.md) are pointed against the popular vices
and immoralities of his time. "In certaine townes," says he, "where
drunken Bacchus bears swaie against Christmass and Easter, Whitsunday,
or some other time, the churchwardens, for so they call them, of every
parish, with the consent of the whole parish, provide half a score or
twentie quarters of mault, whereof some they buy of the church stocke,
and some is given to them of the

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

parishioners themselves, every one conferring somewhat, according to his
ability; which mault being made into very strong ale, or beer, is set to
sale, either in the church or in some other place assigned to that
purpose. Then, when this nippitatum, this huffe-cappe, as they call it,
this nectar of life, is set abroach, well is he that can get the soonest
to it, and spends the most at it, for he is counted the godliest man of
all the rest, and most in God's favour, because it is spent upon his
church forsooth. If all be true which they say, they bestow that money
which is got thereby for the repaire of their churches and chappels;
they buy bookes for the service, cupps for the celebration of the
sacrament, surplesses for Sir John, and such other necessaries," etc. He
then proceeds to speak upon "the manner of keeping wakesses (wakes) in
England," in a style similar to that above cited, and says they were
"the sources of gluttonie and drunkenness"; and adds, "many spend more
at one of these wakesses than in all the whole years besides."

The ingenious researcher into the causes of melancholy on the contrary
thinks that these kinds of amusement ought not to be denied to the
commonalty. <span id="fr_937"></span>[1](#fn_936.md) Chaucer, in the
Ploughman's Tale, reproves the priests because they were more attentive
to the practice of secular pastimes than to the administration of their
holy functions, saying they were expert

"At the wrestlynge and at the wake,  
  And chefe chauntours at the nale,  
Markette beaters, and medlyng make,  
  Hoppen and houters with heve and bale."

FAIRS.--The church-ales have long been discontinued; the wakes are still
kept up in the northern parts of the kingdom; but neither they nor the
fairs maintain their former importance; many of both, and most of the
latter, have dwindled into mere markets for petty traffic, or else they
are confined to the purposes of drinking, or the displayment of vulgar
pastimes. These pastimes, or at least such of them as occur to my
memory, I shall mention here in a cursory manner, and pass on to the
remaining part of this chapter. In a paper belonging to the
*Spectator* <span id="fr_938"></span>[2](#fn_937.md) there is a short
description of a country wake. "I found," says the author, "a ring of
cudgel-players, who were breaking one another's heads in order to make
some impression on their mistresses' hearts." He then came to "a
foot-ball match," and afterwards to "a ring of wrestlers." Here he
observes, "the squire of the parish always treats the company every year
with a hogshead of ale, and proposes a beaver hat as a recompence to him
who gives the most falls." The last sport he mentions is pitching the
bar. But he might, and with great propriety, have added most of the
games in practice among the lower classes of the people that have been
specified in the foregoing pages, and perhaps the whistling match
recorded in another paper. "The prize," we are told, "was one guinea, to
be conferred upon the ablest whistler; that is, he that could whistle
clearest, and go through his tune without laughing, to which at

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

the same time he was provoked by the antic postures of a merry-andrew,
who was to stand upon the stage, and play his tricks in the eye of the
performer. There were three competitors; the two first failed, but the
third, in defiance of the zany and all his arts, whistled through two
tunes with so settled a countenance that he bore away the prize, to the
great admiration of the spectators." This paper was written by Addison,
who assures us he was present at the performance, which took place at
Bath about the year 1708. To this he adds another curious pastime, as a
kind of Christmas gambol, which he had seen also; that is, a yawning
match for a Cheshire cheese: the sport began about midnight, when the
whole company were disposed to be drowsy; and he that yawned the widest,
and at the same time most naturally, so as to produce the greatest
number of yawns from the spectators, obtained the cheese.

The barbarous and wicked diversion of throwing at cocks usually took
place at all the wakes and fairs that were held about Shrovetide, and
especially at such of them as were kept on Shrove-Tuesday. Upon the
abolition of this inhuman custom, the place of the living birds was
supplied by toys made in the shape of cocks, with large and heavy stands
of lead, at which the boys, on paying some very trifling sum, were
permitted to throw as heretofore; and he who could overturn the toy
claimed it as a reward for his adroitness. This innocent pastime never
became popular, for the sport derived from the torment of a living
creature existed no longer, and its want was not to be compensated by
the overthrowing or breaking a motionless representative; therefore the
diversion was very soon discontinued.

At present, snuff-boxes, tobacco-boxes, and other trinkets of small
value, or else halfpence or gingerbread, placed upon low stands, are
thrown at, and sometimes apples and oranges, set up in small heaps; and
children are usually enticed to lay out their money for permission to
throw at them by the owners, who keep continually bawling, "Knock down
one you have them all." A half-penny is the common price for one throw,
and the distance about ten or twelve yards.

The Jingling Match is a diversion common enough at country wakes and
fairs. The performance requires a large circle, enclosed with ropes,
which is occupied by as many persons as are permitted to play. They
rarely exceed nine or ten. All of these, except one of the most active,
who is the jingler, have their eyes blinded with handkerchiefs or
napkins. The eyes of the jingler are not covered, but he holds a small
bell in each hand, which he is obliged to keep ringing incessantly so
long as the play continues, which is commonly about twenty minutes, but
sometimes it is extended to half an hour. In some places the jingler has
also small bells affixed to his knees and elbows. His business is to
elude the pursuit of his blinded companions, who follow him, by the
sound of the bells, in all directions, and sometimes oblige him to exert
his utmost abilities to effect his escape, which must be done within the
boundaries

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

of the rope, for the laws of the sport forbid him to pass beyond it. If
he be caught in the time allotted for the continuance of the game, the
person who caught him claims the prize: if, on the contrary, they are
not able to take him, the prize becomes his due.

Hunting the Pig is another favourite rustic pastime. The tail of the
animal is previously cut short, and well soaped, and in this condition
he is turned out for the populace to run after him; and he who can catch
him with one hand, and hold him by the stump of the tail without
touching any other part, obtains him for his pains.

Sack Running, that is, men tied up in sacks, every part of them being
enclosed except their heads, who are in this manner to make the best of
their way to some given distance, where he who first arrives obtains the
prize.

Smock Races are commonly performed by the young country wenches, and so
called because the prize is a holland smock, or shift, usually decorated
with ribbands. <span id="fr_939"></span>[1](#fn_938.md)

The Wheelbarrow Race requires room, and is performed upon some open
green, or in a field free from encumbrances. The candidates are all of
them blindfolded, and every one has his wheelbarrow, which he is to
drive from the starting-place to a mark set up for that purpose, at some
considerable distance. He who first reaches the mark of course is the
conqueror. But this task is seldom very readily accomplished; on the
contrary, the windings and wanderings of these droll knights-errant, in
most cases, produce much merriment.

The Grinning Match is performed by two or more persons endeavouring to
exceed each other in the distortion of their features, every one of them
having his head thrust through a horse's collar.

Smoking Matches are usually made for tobacco-boxes, or some other
trifling prizes, and may be performed two ways: the first is a trial
among the candidates who shall smoke a pipe full of tobacco in the
shortest time: the second is precisely the reverse; for he of them who
can keep the tobacco alight within his pipe, and retain it there the
longest, receives the reward.

To these we may add the Hot Hasty-pudding Eaters, who contend for
superiority by swallowing the greatest quantity of hot hasty-pudding in
the shortest time; so that he whose throat is widest and most callous is
sure to be the conqueror.

The evening is commonly concluded with singing for laces and ribbands,
which divertisement indiscriminately admits of the exertions of both
sexes.

BONFIRES.--It has been customary in this country, from time immemorial,
for the people, upon occasions of rejoicing, or by way of expressing
their approbation of any public occurrence, to make large bonfires upon
the close of the day, to parade the street with great lights, and to
illuminate their houses.

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

\[paragraph continues\] These spectacles may be considered as merely
appendages to the pageants and pompous shows that usually preceded them;
and they seem to have been instituted principally for the diversion of
the populace. In the reign of Henry VII. a letter was sent from the king
to the lord mayor and aldermen of London, commanding them to cause
bonfires to be made, and to manifest other signs of rejoicing, on
account of the espousals of his daughter Mary. <span
id="fr_940"></span>[1](#fn_939.md) And within these forty years <span
id="fr_941"></span>[2](#fn_940.md) bonfires continued to be made in London
at the city expense, and in certain places at Westminster by order from
the court, upon most of the public days of rejoicing; but of late they
have been prohibited, and very justly, on account of the mischief
occasioned by the squibs and crackers thrown about by the mob who
assembled upon these occasions.

In London, and probably in other large cities, bonfires were frequently
made in the summer season, not only for rejoicing sake, but to cleanse
the air. Hence Stow, writing upon this subject, says, "In the months of
June and July, on the vigils of festival days, and on the evenings also
of those days after sunset, bonfires were made in the streets. The
wealthy citizens placed bread and good drink upon the tables before
their doors upon the vigil of the festival; but on the festival evening
the same tables were more plentifully furnished with meat and drink, to
which not only the neighbours but passengers were also invited to sit
and partake, with great hospitality. These were called bonfires, as well
of amity among neighbours that, being before at controversie, were, at
these times, by the labour of others, reconciled, and made of bitter
enemies loving friends; and also for the virtue that a great fire hath
to purge the infection of the air."

\* Bonfires were in very general use as a token of national rejoicing at
the time of the restoration of the monarchy. In the Household Books of
Sir Miles Stapleton of Carlton there are entries of village bonfire
expenses on his various estates to celebrate the arrival of Charles II.
The Northampton Borough Records contain various bonfire entries. The
earliest is for the coronation of William of Orange, when 7s. was paid
"for halfe c. of faggots." In 1690 12s. 6d. was spent on a bonfire to
celebrate the battle of the Boyne; sixty faggots were consumed at the
taking of Limerick in October of the following year, whilst the like
number, together with a pitch barrel, were burnt on November 5th. On the
evening of the Thanksgiving Day for victories in the Spanish Netherlands
in 1693, the Northampton account include the following particulars:

<div align="center">

|                                                                        |     |     |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|-----|
|                                                                        | S.  | D.  |
| Pd. John Bradshaw for five score Faggots                               | 20  | 5   |
| Pd. Thomas Dunckle for 12 c. of woode                                  | 12  | 0   |
| Pd. Wilby for an Oyll Barrell on Thanksgiving night to place on a pole |     | 0   |

</div>

The taking of Namur, the peace of Ryswick, the coronation of Queen Anne,
all Marlborough's victories, the union of England and Scotland, the
peace of

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Utrecht, the coronation of George II., and "The
Defeat of the Rebels" in 1746 were all celebrated by a great bonfire in
the market place, round which ale was always drunk at the town's
expense. There is no record of a bonfire for the victory of the Nile in
1798, but the Town Hall was illuminated with candles to celebrate the
event. <span id="fr_942"></span>[1](#fn_941.md)

ILLUMINATIONS.--I do not know at what period illuminations were first
used as marks of rejoicing. They are mentioned by Stow, in his *Survey
of London*, who tells us that lamps of glass, to the amount of several
hundreds, were hung upon branches of iron curiously wrought, and placed
at the doors of the opulent citizens upon the vigils of Saint John the
Baptist, and of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. <span
id="fr_943"></span>[2](#fn_942.md) The historian does not speak of these
lights as any novelty, neither is there any reason to conclude that
similar illuminations were not made in other great towns and cities as
well as in London; so that the custom might have been of long standing,
and probably originated from some religious institution. But the lights,
for I can hardly call them illuminations, most generally used at this
period, were the cressets, or large lanthorns, which were carried in
procession about the street. When they were laid aside, the windows of
the houses were decorated with lighted candles, or the outsides
ornamented with lamps of various colours, and placed in variety of
forms; to which may be added, transparent paintings, inscriptions, and
variety of other curious and expensive devices, that seem to be almost
peculiar to the present age; and certainly the grand illuminations
exhibited on the 23d of April 1789, upon the happy occasion of his
Majesty's recovery, far surpassed, not only in the number and brilliancy
of the lights, but also in the splendour and beauty of the
transparencies, every other spectacle of the like kind that has been
made in this country, or perhaps in any other.

FIREWORKS.--Fireworks, for pastime, are little spoken of previous to the
reign of Elizabeth, and seem to have been of a very trifling nature. We
are told, when Ann Bullen was conveyed upon the water from Greenwich to
London, previous to her coronation, in 1533, "there went before the
lord-mayor's barge, a foyste <span id="fr_944"></span>[3](#fn_943.md) for a
wafter full of ordinance; in which foyste was a great red dragon,
continually moving and casting forth wild-fire; and round about the said
foyste stood terrible, monstrous, and wilde men, casting of fire, and
making a hideous noise." This vessel with the fireworks, I apprehend,
was usually exhibited when the lord mayor went upon the water, and
especially when he went to Westminster on the lord mayor's day. Hence
Morose, in Jonson's comedy of *The Silent Woman*, says to his visitors,
who come with drums and trumpets, "Out of my dores, you sonnes of noise
and tumult, begot on an ill May-day, or when the gally-foist is afloate
to Westminster; a trumpetter could not be conceived till then." <span
id="fr_945"></span>[4](#fn_944.md)

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

Among the spectacles prepared for the diversion of Queen Elizabeth at
Kenelworth Castle in 1575, there were displays of fireworks, which are
thus described by Laneham, who was present. <span
id="fr_946"></span>[1](#fn_945.md) "On the Sunday night," says he, "after a
warning piece or two, was a blaze of burning darts flying to and fro,
beams of stars coruscant, streams and hail of fire sparks, lightnings of
wildfire on the water; and on the land, flight and shot of thunderbolts,
all with such continuance, terror, and vehemence, the heavens thundered,
the waters surged, and the earth shook." Another author, Gascoyne,
speaks thus: "On the Sunday were fireworks showed upon the water,
passing under the water a long space; and when all men thought they had
been quenched, they would rise and mount out of the water again and
burne furiously until they were utterlie consumed." <span
id="fr_947"></span>[2](#fn_946.md) On the Thursday following, according to
Laneham, "there was at night a shew of very strange and sundry kinds of
fireworks compelled by cunning to fly to and fro, and to mount very high
into the air upward, and also to burn unquenchable in the water
beneath." And again, sixteen years afterwards, the same queen was
entertained by the earl of Hertford at Elvetham in Hampshire, and after
supper there was a grand display of fireworks, preceded by "a peale of
one hundred chambers, discharged from the Snail Mount"; with "a like
peale discharged from the ship Isle, and some great ordinance withal.
Then was there a castle of fireworkes of all sorts which played in the
fort; answerable to that there was, at the Snail Mount, a globe of all
manner of fireworkes, as big as a barrel. When these were spent there
were many running rockets upon lines, which passed between the Snail
Mount and the castle in the fort. On either side were many fire-wheeles,
pikes of pleasure, and balles of wildfire, which burned in the water."

\* EARLY BOOKS ON FIREWORKS.--Considerable attention was given in
England to the manufacture of fireworks in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. *The Arte of Warre*, by Nicholas Machiavell, was first set
forth in English, by Peter Whitehouse, in 1560. To this Whitehouse
published a supplement in 1562, the concluding part of which deals with
"fireworks," but chiefly from a military standpoint, such as "Howe to
make certayn fyreworkes to tye to the poinctes of pykes or
horsemen-staves." Some of his receipts, however, were equally applicable
for peaceful displays. The treatise was reprinted in 1573 and 1588.

\* In 1588 Cyprian Lucar translated the *Three Bookes of Colloquies* on
the art of gunnery, written by Nicholas Tartaglia in Italian and
dedicated to Henry VIII. To the original work Lucar added a considerable
appendix, a large portion of which relates to "fireworks," though the
term was used by him to denote warlike "Firewoorkes which may be shotte
out of great Peeces of Artillerie or throne out of men's handes"--or
"divers sortes of Fireworkes, which being shotte in a darke night out of
a morterpeece . . . will give so great a light that you may discerne by
the same light whether or no any

 

<span id="img_pl36"></span>

[![The Fiery Drake or Kite](tn/pl36.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl36.jpg.md)  
The Fiery Drake or Kite  

 

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

enemies are in or neare unto that place." But numbers ninety to
ninety-three of Lucar's short chapters deal with fireworks that may be
used in "triumphes." The last of these chapters is concerned with the
making of "Rockettes or Squibbes, which being throne up into the ayre
wil cast foorth flames of fire, and in coming downe towards the ground
will shew like starres falling from heaven."

\* The Gunner, "written by Robert Norton, one of his Majesties Gunners
and Engineers," and printed in 1628, shows that considerable advance had
been made in the art of artificial fireworks for triumphs and displays.
Full directions are given for the making of rockets, coloured fires,
serpents, "shewers of gold," elaborate wheels, and set pieces such as
castles "with 4 Towers and 4 Curtins and a Cavalaria or domineering
Turret in the midst." Chapter seventy-seven deals with "How to make
flying Dragons and Rockets that will runne upon a Lyne and returne
againe, and of Nocturnall Combates in Fireworkes."

\* A "FIER DRAKE" OR FIERY KITE.--In 1634 John Bate put forth the first
edition of his Mysteries of Nature and Art in four parts, the second of
which, covering pages 79 to 116, is entitled "The composing of all
manner of Fier-Works for Triumph and Recreation." The numerous
illustrations and descriptions show that this art had by that date
attained to considerable proportions and displayed much ingenuity. One
of the most curious cuts is that which represents a man flying a "Fier
Drake," which was a kite with crackers for the tail, reproduced on . It
has usually been stated that kites were not introduced into Europe, or
at all events into England, from the East, until early in the eighteenth
century; but this picture of a kite proves that it was not only in use
but well known early in the seventeenth century. The name kite, taken
from the bird, had not however been then given to this flying
machine. <span id="fr_948"></span>[1](#fn_947.md)

FIREWORKS ON TOWER HILL, AT PUBLIC GARDENS, AND IN PAGEANTS.--It was
customary, in my memory, for the train of artillery annually to display
a grand firework upon Tower Hill on the evening of his Majesty's
birthday. This spectacle has been discontinued for several years in
compliance with a petition for that purpose made by the inhabitants on
account of the inconveniences they sustained thereby.

Fireworks were exhibited at Marybone Gardens while they were kept open
for public entertainment; and about five-and-twenty years ago, <span
id="fr_949"></span>[2](#fn_948.md) Torre, a celebrated French artist, was
employed there, who, in addition to the usual displayment of
fire-wheels, fixed stars, figure pieces, and other curious devices,
introduced pantomimical spectacles, which afforded him an opportunity of
bringing forward much splendid machinery, with appropriate scenery and
stage decoration, whereby he gave an astonishing effect to his
performances, and excited the admiration and applause of the spectators.
I particularly remember

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

two, the Forge of Vulcan, and the Descent of Orpheus to Hell in search
of his wife Eurydice. The last was particularly splendid: there were
several scenes, and one of them supposed to be the Elysian fields, where
the flitting backwards and forwards of the spirits was admirably
represented by means of a transparent gauze artfully interposed between
the actors and the spectators.

Fireworks have for many years been exhibited at Ranelagh Gardens; they
are now (1800) displayed occasionally at Vauxhall; and, in an inferior
style, at Bermondsey Spa.

The current advertisements of the illuminations and fireworks at
Ranelagh Gardens in the eighteenth century are sufficiently curious to
warrant the insertion of two of them as specimens. The following is an
advertisement at the beginning of the season of 1764:

"This Evening at Ranelagh, besides the customary entertainment and a
superb Firework in a stile which has been once already honoured with
universal applause, will be exhibited a grand transparent view of the
following scenes as large as life and under separate arches.

"Poetry, Music, Painting, Architecture--and on a large Obelisk fifty
feet high--erected over the Pediment of the great arch at the end of the
Canal--three Medalions finely illuminated--the one a crown, the other a
plume of feathers, and the third a mitre, alluding to his Majesty, the
Prince of Wales, and the Bishop of Osnaburgh with other Prospects, which
the Proprietors from the very favourable reception hitherto given to
their additional exhibitions, flatter themselves will be equally worthy
of public approbation."

\* A much more elaborate advertisement, of the same year, appeared in
the daily press for the last time of the opening of the Gardens for that
season:

"The music composed by Mr Handel for the grand Firework of 1748 will be
performed in the new orchestra lately erected in the Garden which will
be elegantly illuminated.

"*The order of firing*.

"First Firing.--1. Eight half-pound Sky-Rockets. 2. Two Tourballoons. 3.
Two-air-Balloons. 4. A new piece of three Vertical Wheels with brilliant
and white fires intersecting each other. 5. A Pyramid of twenty-one
Boxes and Chinese Fires. 6. A Horizontal and vertical Wheel illuminated.
Second Firing.--7. Eight half-pound Sky-Rockets. 8. Two Tour-balloons.
9. Two air- Balloons. to. A regulation Piece of three mutations: first,
a brilliant Wheel illuminated; second, a Sun and Glory; third, Six
Branches representing Ears of Corn. 11. A new Piece with a Vertical
Brilliant Wheel and yellow fires in the Centre and eight Turilloni
Wheels at the extreme. 12. A regulating piece of three mutations: first,
a Brilliant Wheel illuminated; second, a fixed Sun; third, a Brilliant
Star with eight points. Third Firing.--13. Eight half-pound Sky-Rockets.
14. Two Tour-balloons. 15. Two-air-balloons. 16. A large new piece:
first, a large Brilliant Wheel moved by four fires illuminated

 

<span id="img_pl37"></span>

[![Pageantry](tn/pl37.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl37.jpg.md)  
Pageantry  

 

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

in the centre with tires of various colours; second, a large Brilliant
Sun whose rays extend 50 feet. 17. A large horizontal Wheel moved by six
fires, with six vertical Wheels and a globe illuminated. 18. A Piece
called the Fort, with brilliant Fountains, Roman Candles and Chinese
Fires. 19. Twelve Water Rockets. 20. A grand Buffette of three mutations
extending across the Canal, consisting of illuminated Wheels, Palm
Branches, Fire-Trees of Chinese Fires, and six pont d’argette. 24.
Twelve air-balloons."

At the bottom of the thirty-seventh plate is one of the *Green Men*
flourishing his fire club, which is taken from Bate's treatise on
fireworks issued in 1634. At the top of the same plate is a Wild Man or
Woodwose or Wodehouse, a character very common and popular in the
pageants of former times. It was in a dress like this, I suppose, that
Gascoyne appeared before Queen Elizabeth in 1575, as already narrated.
The figure itself is taken from a ballad, in black letter, entitled "The
mad, merry pranks of Robin Good Fellow." Bishop Percy, probably with
great justice, supposes it to have been one of the stage-disguisements
for the representation of this facetious spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_855"></span>[267:1](spe20.htm#fr_856.md) See Introduction.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[267:2](spe20.htm#fr_857.md) Polydore Vergil de
Rerum Invent. lib. v. cap. 2.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[267:3](spe20.htm#fr_858.md) An. 4 Hen. VII. A.D.
1489.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[267:4](spe20.htm#fr_859.md) Collect. vol. iii.
Append. p. 256.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[267:5](spe20.htm#fr_860.md) See Warton's *Hist.
Eng. Poetry*, vol. i. p. 381.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[267:6](spe20.htm#fr_861.md) *Chron. of Brit*.
vol. iii. fol. 1317.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[268:1](spe20.htm#fr_862.md) *Survey of London*,
p. 79.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[268:2](spe20.htm#fr_863.md) *Anatomie of Abuses*,
first printed, A. D. 1585.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[270:1](spe20.htm#fr_864.md) Warton's *Hist. Eng.
Poet*. ii. 378-80; Wood's *Athenæ*, ii. 239.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[270:2](spe20.htm#fr_865.md) Dugdale's *Origines
Juridiciales*, fol. 247.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[270:3](spe20.htm#fr_866.md) *Blomfield*, vol. ii.
p. 3.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[270:4](spe20.htm#fr_867.md) The Christmas Lord of
Misrule, elected in November by the fellows of Merton College, Oxford,
is termed in the registers *Rex Fabarum*, or *Rex Regni Fabarum*.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[270:5](spe20.htm#fr_868.md) Bourne's *Antiq.
Vulg.* chap. xvii.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[270:6](spe20.htm#fr_869.md) Cited by Mr Brand,
notes to Bourne, p. 205.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[270:7](spe20.htm#fr_870.md) Reges Fabis creantur.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[271:1](spe20.htm#fr_871.md) In nomine Regis de
Fabâ. MS. Cott. Nero, C. viii.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[271:2](spe20.htm#fr_872.md) Table Talk, London,
1689, title Christmas.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[271:3](spe20.htm#fr_873.md) \* "From scattered
notices in several old works, I collect that *Shoeing the Wild Mare* was
a diversion among our ancestors, more particularly intended for the
young, and that the Wild Mare was simply a youth so called, who was
allowed a certain start, and who was pursued by his companions with the
object of being shoed, if he did not succeed in outstripping
them."--Hazlet's edit. of Brand's *Popular Antiquities*, ii. 332-3.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[272:1](spe20.htm#fr_874.md) Nicholas'
*Fantasies*, 1626.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[272:2](spe20.htm#fr_875.md) Knight's *Life of
Colet*, p. 362.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[272:3](spe20.htm#fr_876.md) \* Wordsworth's
*Salisbury Processional Ceremonies*, 1901.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[273:1](spe20.htm#fr_877.md) MS. *Cott. Tiberius*,
B. i.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[273:2](spe20.htm#fr_878.md) Strype's *Eccl. Mem*.
vol. iii. chap. xxxix. p. 310.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[273:3](spe20.htm#fr_879.md) *Ibid*. chap. xxxv.
p. 202.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[273:4](spe20.htm#fr_880.md) *Ibid*. chap. xxxix.
p. 310.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[273:5](spe20.htm#fr_881.md) *Durham Account
Rolls* (Surtees Society), 3 vols., 1898-1900.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[273:6](spe20.htm#fr_882.md) Wills of Northampton
Probate Court.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[274:1](spe20.htm#fr_883.md) I have a vivid
recollection of seeing the Plough Monday mummers with their plough, when
a small boy, at Parwich, near Ashborne, in 1847-1848, and being taken in
the latter year to see the havoc made by the plough in the small front
garden of a well-to-do but niggardly resident.--J. C. C.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[274:2](spe20.htm#fr_884.md) *Notes and Queries*,
Ser. II. ix. 381.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[274:3](spe20.htm#fr_885.md) Mr Ordish on the
"English Folk Drama," *Folk Lore Quarterly*, vol. iv. pp. 149-174.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[274:4](spe20.htm#fr_886.md) Can it be any
survival of Shrove Tuesday cock-throwing that makes this day at the
present time (1902), in several English towns, the season for children
to begin playing with shuttlecocks in the streets.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[274:5](spe20.htm#fr_887.md) I bought copies in
Sheffield market-place in 1869 and again in 1878.--J. C. C.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[275:1](spe20.htm#fr_888.md) Gloss. under the
title Hock-day.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[275:2](spe20.htm#fr_889.md) Hist. Hampshire.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[275:3](spe20.htm#fr_890.md) See a Memoir by the
Rev. Mr Jenne, *Archæologia*, vol. vii. p. 244.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[275:4](spe20.htm#fr_891.md) A.D. 1002. But the
time of the year does not agree. St Brice's Day is the 13th of November.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[275:5](spe20.htm#fr_892.md) Memoir, *ut supra*.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[275:6](spe20.htm#fr_893.md) See Oxford
Dictionary, *sub. voc*.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[275:7](spe20.htm#fr_894.md) Page 223, and
Introduction.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[275:8](spe20.htm#fr_895.md) *Antiq. Vulgares*,
chap. 25.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[276:1](spe20.htm#fr_896.md) *Survey of London*,
p. 80.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[276:2](spe20.htm#fr_897.md) In his *Anatomie of
Abuses*, printed in 1595.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[277:1](spe20.htm#fr_898.md) *Archæologia*, vol.
i. cap. 4, p, 11.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[277:2](spe20.htm#fr_899.md) Strype's *Eccles.
Mem.* vol. iii. cap. 49, p. 377.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[278:1](spe20.htm#fr_900.md) Hall, in Vit. Hen.
VIII. fol. vi.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[278:2](spe20.htm#fr_901.md) Hinder or prevent.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[278:3](spe20.htm#fr_902.md) Latimer's Sermons,
printed 1589.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[278:4](spe20.htm#fr_903.md) K. vol. x.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[278:5](spe20.htm#fr_904.md) \* On the whole
subject of Robin Hood Plays and Ballads, see Child's *Ballads*, iii. pp.
39-333.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[278:6](spe20.htm#fr_905.md) Harl. Lib. 69.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[279:1](spe20.htm#fr_906.md) I suppose the author
means tilting armour, for the purpose of justing, here called running of
courses.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[280:1](spe20.htm#fr_907.md) Hall, in Vit. Hen.
VIII. an 2, p. vi.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[280:2](spe20.htm#fr_908.md) See an account of
this book in the Introduction.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[281:1](spe20.htm#fr_909.md) Vol. v. No. 365,
first published A.D. 1712.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[281:2](spe20.htm#fr_910.md) See Granger's *Biog.
Hist.* vol. iv. p. 354.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[282:1](spe20.htm#fr_911.md) Blount's *Ancient
Tenures*, p. 49.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[282:2](spe20.htm#fr_912.md) *Folk Lore Society
Journal* (1886), vol. iv. pp. 107-9.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[283:1](spe20.htm#fr_913.md) Bourne's *Antiq*.
vol. ix. chap. 27.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[285:1](spe20.htm#fr_914.md) MSS. Harl. 2354 and
2391.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[285:2](spe20.htm#fr_915.md) The midsummer
pageants at Chester are fully described in the Introduction.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[285:3](spe20.htm#fr_916.md) *Survey of London*,
pp. 84, 85.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[286:1](spe20.htm#fr_917.md) Perhaps it should be
image, and resembled those commonly used in other pageants.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[286:2](spe20.htm#fr_918.md) *Nat. Hist. Oxford*,
p. 343, and Blount's *Ancient Tenures*, p. 154.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[286:3](spe20.htm#fr_919.md) *Eccl. Memoirs*, vol.
iii. chap. xxxix. p. 51.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[286:4](spe20.htm#fr_920.md) *Ibid*. p. 309.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[286:5](spe20.htm#fr_921.md) *Eccl. Memoirs*, iii.
377.

<span id="fn_921"></span>[286:6](spe20.htm#fr_922.md) Heath's *Cornwall*,
445.

<span id="fn_922"></span>[287:1](spe20.htm#fr_923.md) I have witnessed this
in Luccombe parish on several occasions when a boy.--J.C.C.

<span id="fn_923"></span>[287:2](spe20.htm#fr_924.md) *Notes and Queries*,
Ser. I. v. 293.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[288:1](spe20.htm#fr_925.md) *Præcedente tibicine
aut tympano*. Moresin, *Deprav. Reliq. Orig*. in verbo vacina.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[288:2](spe20.htm#fr_926.md) Brand's Observations
on Bourne's *Vulg. Antiq*. chap. xxxi. p. 303. \* As to the occasional
later survival of the "kern-baby," or "melt-doll" at harvest
celebrations, see the various publications of the Folk-lore Society.

<span id="fn_926"></span>[288:3](spe20.htm#fr_927.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_927"></span>[288:4](spe20.htm#fr_928.md) *Vulg. Antiq*. ut
supra.

<span id="fn_928"></span>[288:5](spe20.htm#fr_929.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_929"></span>[288:6](spe20.htm#fr_930.md) Bede, *Eccl. Hist.*
lib. i. cap. 30.

<span id="fn_930"></span>[288:7](spe20.htm#fr_931.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_931"></span>[289:1](spe20.htm#fr_932.md) Homily for the Vigil
of St John Baptist. MS. Harl.

<span id="fn_932"></span>[289:2](spe20.htm#fr_933.md) *Antiq. Vulg*. chap.
30.

<span id="fn_933"></span>[290:1](spe20.htm#fr_934.md) Dodsworth's MSS.,
vol. 148, fol. 97.

<span id="fn_934"></span>[290:2](spe20.htm#fr_935.md) Carew's *Survey of
Cornwall*, 1602, book i. p: 68.

<span id="fn_935"></span>[290:3](spe20.htm#fr_936.md) The *Anatomie of
Abuses*, 1595.

<span id="fn_936"></span>[291:1](spe20.htm#fr_937.md) Burton, *Anat.
Melancholy*, part ii. sect. 2, cap. 4.

<span id="fn_937"></span>[291:2](spe20.htm#fr_938.md) Vol. ii. No. 16i,
first printed 1711.

<span id="fn_938"></span>[293:1](spe20.htm#fr_939.md) \* In Hazlitt's
edition of Brand's *Popular Antiquities* (i. i 19), it is stated
that:--"The smock race, run by young girls in their chemises only, was
formerly used on Ascension Day in the north of England. The sport, not a
very delicate one, is described in the *Poetical Miscellanies*,
published by Steele, 1714."

<span id="fn_939"></span>[294:1](spe20.htm#fr_940.md) See the Introduction.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[294:2](spe20.htm#fr_941.md) Reckoning from 1800.

<span id="fn_941"></span>[295:1](spe20.htm#fr_942.md) Cox's Northampton
Borough Records, ii. pp. 478-485.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[295:2](spe20.htm#fr_943.md) It does not appear
that these lamps were made with glass of various colours, according to
the present fashion (1800). I rather think this improvement is perfectly
modern.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[295:3](spe20.htm#fr_944.md) A galley, or small
vessel.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[295:4](spe20.htm#fr_945.md) Act iv. scene 2.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[296:1](spe20.htm#fr_946.md) Nichols's *Progresses
of Elizabeth*, vol. i.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[296:2](spe20.htm#fr_947.md) *Princely Pleasures
at Kenelworth Castle*, p. 62.

<span id="fn_947"></span>[297:1](spe20.htm#fr_948.md) See "Kite" in next
chapter.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[297:2](spe20.htm#fr_949.md) Reckoning from 1800.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](spe21.md)
