[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Mars](../mars/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipm01)  [Next](ipm03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691001014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*From India to the Planet Mars*, by Théodore Flournoy; tr. Daniel B.
Vermilye, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

THE translation into English of *From India to the Planet Mars* has been
undertaken in response to the demand created by the widespread and
increasing interest which is manifesting itself both in Great Britain
and the United States in the phenomena exhibited by its heroine—an
interest which marks a new era in the progress of human knowledge.

Twenty—even ten—years ago the phenomena which Prof. Flournoy here
describes in detail, and of which he offers a keen, skilful,
psychological analysis, would have met with the sneers of popular
science and the contempt of obscurantist orthodoxy; the book would have
found few readers.

Times have greatly changed since the Society for Psychical Research was
founded, eighteen years ago, by a few thoughtful men (included among
them were those whose names would have conferred honor upon any body of
men) interested in the investigation of abnormal mental or psychic
phenomena.

In explaining their reasons for organizing that

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

society, its founders made the following statement:

"From the recorded testimony of many competent witnesses, past and
present, including observations accurately made by scientific men of
eminence of various countries, there appears to be, among much illusion
and deception, an important body of remarkable phenomena which are
*prima facie* inexplicable on any generally recognized hypothesis, and
which, if incontestably established, would be of the highest possible
value."

The organization of this society constituted the first attempt in the
world's history to investigate the phenomena of clairvoyance, automatic
writing and speaking, trance conditions, second sight, apparitions of
persons at the point of death, alleged spirit messages, etc., by a
scientific body formed upon a broad basis.

As was to have been expected, the work and aims of the society were met
by a storm of derision and ridicule, and by attacks which poured in from
every quarter, the bitterest of which came from the always too numerous
class of narrow-minded scientists, whose partisan prejudices, confining
them to a narrow rut, hinder their seeing anything from a point of view
other than that of their preconceived hypotheses, and prevent them from
attaining that open-mindedness which is indispensable to and one of the
first requisites of a true scientist in any field of investigation.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

The interest shown to-day in the work of psychical research—among the
evidences of which may be noted the reception accorded this work of
Prof. Flournoy, which has, within a few months from the date of its
publication, attained its third French edition—demonstrates the ultimate
triumph of the founders of that society in their efforts to bring the
thinking public to a realization of the supreme importance of a
systematic scientific study of the mysterious psychic phenomena so long
neglected by official science, but which are now beginning to assume
their rightful place in the field of study and observation.

Men have come to realize that the facts proved by science have not thus
far been adequate to satisfy the needs of mankind, and many are to-day
asking whether the scientific investigation of psychic phenomena may not
succeed in proving *the preamble of all religions*.

Already science has disclosed the existence of a hidden, subliminal
world within each individual being, and it is the investigation of that
part of the individuality of Hélène Smith which our author has
undertaken in the following pages.

The importance of the subject and its intense interest lie in the fact
that psychical research hints at a possible solution, by means of the
same methods which science has been accustomed to use in the physical
world, of the great problem of man's future destiny, of an answer to the
question asked by Job

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

four thousand years ago, "If a man die, shall he live again?" and which
has been repeated in vain by every generation of men who have since
inhabited the earth.

While, it is true, the great majority of men are still skeptical as to
the ability of science ever to solve this problem, it is, however, a
fact that a continually increasing number of thoughtful men are coming
to believe that the hidden subliminal world within us may point to an
unseen but spiritual world without, communication with which, if once
established, would furnish us with the solution so ardently longed for.

Such men do not believe that it behooves them to be content with the
passivity of pure Agnosticism are not willing that *Ignoramus et
Ignorabimus* should be their only creed. They are beginning to search
for new facts in the domain of the human mind, just as they have
searched for and found them everywhere else they have looked for them.

Mr. F. W. H. Myers, the pioneer and leader of the psychical research
movement, in an address recently delivered, says: "Starting from various
stand-points, we endeavor to carry the newer, the intellectual virtues
into regions where dispassionate tranquillity has seldom yet been known.
. . . First, we adopt the ancient belief—implied in all monotheistic
religion, and conspicuously confirmed by the progress of modern
science—that the world as a whole, spiritual and material together, has
in some

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

way a systematic unity: and on this we base the novel presumption that
there should be a unity of method in the investigation of all fact. We
hold therefore that the attitude, the habits of mind, the methods by
which physical science has grown deep and wide, should be applied also
to the spiritual world. We endeavor to approach the problems of that
world by careful collection, scrutiny, testing of particular facts; and
we account no unexplained fact too trivial for our attention."

This is just what Prof. Flournoy has endeavored to do in regard to the
strange phenomena manifested by Mlle. Helene Smith. No fact has been
regarded by him as too trivial to escape his keen, careful scrutiny from
a psychological point of view.

The first task which the investigators of these obscure mental phenomena
set themselves was, naturally, that of separating and sifting the real,
actually existent facts from the mass of fraud and deception in which
mercenary charlatans, aided by the easy credulity of the simple-minded,
had contrived so completely to bury from sight the true phenomena that
for a long time the intelligent public refused utterly to believe in the
existence of any real phenomena of the kind, but insisted that
everything when fully probed would be found to be mere delusion, the
result of trickery and fraud.

Probably no scientific fact since the dawn of modern science has
required so great a weight of cumulative evidence in its favor to
establish the

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

reality of its existence in the popular mind than have the phenomena in
question. The task, however, has been accomplished.

Prof. Flournoy's heroine, although she is a high-minded, honorable
woman, regarded by all her neighbors and friends as wholly incapable of
conscious fraud, has been subjected to the closest surveillance on the
part of a number of eminent physicians and scientists of Geneva for more
than five years past, while Mrs. Piper, the famous Boston medium, has
been subjected to an even closer scrutiny by the Society for Psychical
Research for the past fifteen years. In spite of the fact that this
society has announced its willingness to become responsible for the
entire absence of fraud in Mrs. Piper's case, and of a similar
declaration on the part of Prof. Flournoy and his associates in regard
to Mlle. Smith, there still remain a considerable number of
ultra-skeptical persons who persist in asserting that fraud and deceit
are at the bottom of, and account for, all this species of phenomena.

The well-known gentlemen who have investigated these crises have never
been accused of easy credulity in other matters, and have cautiously and
perseveringly continued, in their endeavor to satisfy skepticism, to
pile Pelion upon Ossa in the way of cumulative proofs of the genuineness
of the phenomena and to safeguard their investigations in every possible
manner against all possibility of fraud, until they have finally come to
feel

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

that more than sufficient proof has been furnished to satisfy any
honest, fair-minded, sensible doubt. They do not feel that they have the
right to devote further time to the question of the genuineness of the
facts observed by them—time which they believe might be better employed
in endeavoring to discover the laws by which the phenomena are governed.
They believe that those who are not satisfied with the evidence already
offered will not be convinced by any amount of further testimony—that
their skepticism is invincible. For persons so constituted this book
will have no interest; its perusal will afford them no pleasure.

The endeavor to explain these mysterious phenomena by scientific
investigators has resulted in their adoption of one or other of two
hypotheses, viz.:

1\. That the phenomena are the product of and originate in the
subliminal consciousness of the medium; or,

2\. That the phenomena are really of supernormal origin and emanate from
the disincarnate spirits of the dead, who return to earth and take
temporary possession of the organism of the medium, talking through her
mouth, writing with her hand while she is in a somnambulistic state.

The first theory involves the crediting of the subliminal consciousness
with almost miraculous powers of telepathy, since, on that hypothesis,
it is necessary, in order to account for the knowledge possessed by the
medium, to suppose that her subliminal

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

consciousness is able to roam at will throughout the entire universe and
read the mind of any being possessing the information sought for.

All open-minded investigators freely admit that either of the above
hypotheses may be untrue; that very little is known by them as yet in
regard to the nature of the phenomena; that the data are too slight to
justify more than a provisional hypothesis, which the discovery of new
facts may at any time entirely demolish. But, thus far, the hypotheses
above given seem to be the only ones which will in any way rationally
account for the facts: in which case, it is evident that each individual
observer will be influenced in his choice of a hypothesis by his
religious belief, which will greatly affect the point of view from which
he approaches the subject, and also by his natural temperament, habits
of thought, etc.

Prof. Flournoy states that he has endeavored to keep constantly in mind
and to be guided by two propositions, which he designates respectively
the "Principle of Hamlet" and the "Principle of La Place," the former
being, "*All things are possible*," the latter, "*The weight of the
evidence ought to be proportioned to the strangeness of the facts*."

Guided by these two principles, Prof. Flournoy has come to the
conclusion that Mlle. Smith really possesses the faculty of
telekinesis—the ability to move ponderable objects situated at a
distance, without contact and contrary to known natural

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

laws. On the other hand, he does not believe the phenomena manifested by
her to be of supernormal origin. The various alleged "spirit" messages,
"incarnations," "gift of tongues," and all other apparently supernormal
phenomena, in his opinion, spring from Mlle. Smith's subliminal
consciousness, and he exercises great skill and ingenuity in his effort
to trace the very wonderful and astonishing manifestations with which he
has had to deal to natural sources.

Whether the individual reader adopts the author's views and theories, or
finds in others a more natural explanation of the facts narrated by
Prof. Flournoy, he cannot fail to admire the frankness, candor, and
entire freedom from prejudice displayed by him. He evinces a true,
open-minded, scientific spirit, never distorting facts in order to make
them fit his hypotheses, and freely admitting the possibility of the
discovery of new facts at any time, of a nature to compel him to adopt
some other hypothesis than that which he has provisionally assumed to
explain the phenomena.

 

A word on another subject before the reader goes on to the perusal of
this narrative of strange facts:

One who is interested in Psychical Research,—when he has finally
succeeded in convincing some obstinate skeptic of the genuineness of the
phenomena—when the doubter has at last yielded to the weight of
evidence, then, very frequently, the next question,

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

which comes as a wet blanket to dampen the ardor of the enthusiastic
devotee, is: "*Cui bono?* Admitting the truth of the facts, what useful
purpose is subserved by their study? Science will never succeed in
solving the problem of man's future destiny. It is all a waste of time
and will end in nothing." And in a review of this very book, which
recently appeared in one of our leading metropolitan newspapers, the
reviewer asks, "What will science make of all this?" (referring to the
phenomena manifested by Mlle. Smith); and then answers his own question
by saying, "It is very unlikely that science will ever discover the
nature of these mysterious phenomena or the laws which govern them."

From this conclusion the followers of Psychical Research emphatically
dissent. It seems passing strange to them that such an opinion should be
held by intelligent men at the present stage of development of human
knowledge, in view of the mighty discoveries which have been wrested
from nature by the laborious process of persevering observation of
seemingly trivial facts. An eighteenth-century writer might with some
show of reason have made a similar observation in regard to Dr. Franklin
and his experiments with kite and key in a thunder-storm. It would
indeed, at that epoch, have seemed unlikely that science would succeed
in discovering the secret of the electric fluid by such means. But
to-day, at the dawn of the

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

twentieth century, with all the experience of the past to judge from,
are not the probabilities all in favor of great results to science from
repeated experiments by trained observers, such as Prof. Flournoy, upon
cases similar to that of Mlle. Smith?

If the hypothesis that the world as a whole, spiritual and material
together, has in some way a systematic unity, be true—and that is the
hypothesis accepted by a majority of thinking men at the present
time—then the importance of collecting and recording and analyzing such
facts as those presented to us in the present narrative cannot be
overestimated.

The scientific demonstration of a future life may be one of the great
triumphs reserved for the science of the twentieth century to win, and
Hélène Smith and Prof. Flournoy may ultimately appear to have
contributed largely to its accomplishment.

To those who still persist in asking *Cui bono?* in reference to such
work as that which Prof. Flournoy has here so ably performed, I beg
leave to quote further from Mr. Myers the following:

"The faith to which Science is sworn is a faith in the uniformity, the
coherence, the intelligibility of, at any rate, the material universe.
Science herself is but the practical development of this mighty
postulate. And if any phenomenon on which she chances on her onward way
seems arbitrary, or incoherent, or unintelligible, she does not
therefore suppose that she has come upon an unravelled

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

end in the texture of things; but rather takes for granted that a
rational answer to the new problem must somewhere exist—an answer which
will be all the more instructive because it will involve facts of which
that first question must have failed to take due account.

"This faith in the uniformity of material Nature formulates itself in
two great dogmas—for such they are;—the dogma of the Conservation of
Matter and the dogma of the Conservation of Energy. Of the Conservation
of Matter, within earthly limits, we are fairly well assured; but of the
Conservation of Energy the proof is far less complete, simply because
Energy is a conception which does not belong to the material world
alone. Life is to us the most important of all forms of activity—of
energy, I would say—except that we cannot transform other energies into
Life, nor measure in foot-pounds that directive force which has changed
the face of the world. Life comes we know not whence; it vanishes we
know not whither; it is interlocked with a moving system vaster than
that we know. To grasp the whole of its manifestation, we should have to
follow it into an unseen world. Yet scientific faith bids us believe
that there, too, there is continuity; and that the past and the future
of that force which we discern for a moment are still subject to
universal Law.

"Out of the long Stone Age our race is awakening into consciousness of
itself. We stand in the

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

dawn of history. Behind us lies a vast and unrecorded waste—the mighty
struggle *humanam condere gentem*. Since the times of that ignorance we
have not yet gone far; a few thousand years, a few hundred thinkers,
have barely started the human mind upon the great æons of its onward
way. It is not yet the hour to sit down in our studies and try to eke
out Tradition with Intuition—as one might be forced to do in a planet's
senility, by the glimmer of a fading sun. *Daphni, quid antiquos
signorum suspicis ortus?* The traditions, the intuitions of our race are
themselves in their infancy; and before we abandon ourselves to brooding
over them let us at least first try the upshot of a systematic search
for actual facts. For what should hinder? If our inquiry lead us first
through a jungle of fraud and folly, need that alarm us? As well might
Columbus have yielded to the sailors' panic when he was entangled in the
Sargasso Sea. If our first clear facts about the Unseen World seem small
and trivial, should that deter us from the quest? As well might Columbus
have sailed home again, with America in the offing, on the ground that
it was not worth while to discover a continent which manifested itself
only by dead logs."

 

It is deeply to be regretted that no appeals have availed to persuade
Mlle. Smith to consent to the publication of her photograph, in
connection with

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prof. Flournoy's
account of the phenomena manifested by her.

She shrinks from the publicity which her possession of these strange
powers has thrust upon her. She dislikes extremely the notoriety given
to her mysterious faculties, and refuses to be interviewed concerning
them, or to discuss Prof. Flournoy's book.

The name Helene Smith is, as the reader will doubtless guess, merely a
pseudonym. The individuality designated by that name, however, is held
in highest esteem—in veneration even—by a very large circle of friends
and acquaintances in the city on the shores of Lake Leman, in which she
has passed her life from infancy, for whose benefit she is always ready
to exercise her mysterious gifts and to give her services freely to such
as seek her aid, refusing always to accept any pecuniary compensation
for her services. Attaching, as she does, a religious significance to
her powers, she would deem it a sacrilege to traffic in them.

DANIEL B. VERMILYE.       

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Columbia University, New
York</span>,  
          *July*, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Introduction](ipm03.md)
