[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Mars](../mars/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipm04)  [Next](ipm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691001014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From India to the Planet Mars*, by Théodore Flournoy; tr. Daniel B.
Vermilye, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### MLLE. SMITH SINCE HER INITIATION INTO SPIRITISM

HAVING endeavored in the preceding chapter to reconstruct in its chief
characteristics the history of Mlle. Smith up to the time when spiritism
begins to be mixed up with it, I would have preferred in the present
chapter to make a detailed study of her psychological life during these
last years, without however, as yet, touching upon the content, properly
so called, of her automatisms. Not having been able to accomplish this
design to my satisfaction, for want of time and patience, I shall
endeavor at least to systematize my notes somewhat by grouping them
under four heads. I shall trace the birth of Hélène's mediumship as far
as it is possible for me to do so from the meagre accounts I have been
able to procure concerning a time at which I was not acquainted with
her. Then, passing to facts with which I am more familiar, I will
describe rapidly her normal state as I have been able to see it for the
last five years. This would have been the place for a study of
individual psychology, but I have been compelled to abandon the idea on
account of multiple difficulties. Finally, I will offer a few remarks on

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

the abnormal side of her existence, which it is convenient to divide
into two groups, namely, *the spontaneous*—that is to say, springing up
of themselves in the course of her ordinary life; or those *provoked* by
the voluntary seeking for favorable circumstances, and which constitute
the seances properly so called.

#### I. THE MEDIUMISTIC BEGINNINGS OF MLLE. SMITH

In the winter of 1891-92 Mlle. Smith heard spiritism spoken of by one of
her acquaintances, Mme. Y., who lent her Denis's book, *Après la Mort*.
The perusal of this work having vividly excited Hélène's curiosity, Mme.
Y. agreed to accompany her to her friend, Mlle. Z., who was interested
in the same questions, and who produced automatic writing. They then
decided to form a circle for regular experimentation. I take from the
notes which Mlle. Z. has had the kindness to furnish me, the account,
unfortunately very brief, of the seances at which Hélène's mediumistic
faculties first made their appearance.

"It was on the 10th of February, 1892, that I made the acquaintance of
Mlle. Smith. She was introduced to me by Mme. Y., for the purpose of
endeavoring to form a spiritistic group. She was then altogether a
novice in spiritism, never having attempted anything, and did not
suspect the faculties that have since developed themselves in her.

"February 20.—First reunion: We seat ourselves at the table; we succeed
in making it oscillate. We regard Mme. Y. as the medium upon whom we can

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

reckon. We try for writing. We receive through me encouragements to
proceed.

"February 26.—Progress; the table moves itself considerably, salutes one
by one all the members of the group, and gives us certain names, of
which only one is recognized . . . Writing: Mlle. Smith, who tries for
the first time, writes mechanically, her eyes closed, some phrases, of
which we can decipher some words.

"March 11.—Nothing at this seance, except a communication written by
myself.

"March 18.—Progress; clear communication by the table. Attempt to
experiment in the darkness (which was not absolute, the hall outside
having some incandescent lights which diffused a feeble light; we could
distinguish each other with difficulty). Mlle. Smith sees a balloon, now
luminous, now becoming dark: she has seen nothing up to this time.
Writing: Mlle. Smith writes mechanically a quite long communication from
the father of M. K. \[a Bulgarian student present at the seance\];
advice to him."

At this point the sitters became so numerous that they broke up into two
groups, of which the one continuing to meet with Mlle. Z. does not
concern us. Mlle. Smith became a member of the other, which met at the
house of a lady named N., where weekly seances were held for a year and
a half (up to the end of June, 1893). The records of these meetings,
kept by Mme. N., are unfortunately very brief and obscure on many points
of interest to the psychologist. Those of the first months are in the
handwriting of Mlle. Smith, who acted as secretary of the group for

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

thirty seances. As she only took down at the time the headings of the
communications of the spirits and wrote out the remainder on the
following day, we cannot rely very strongly on the objective accuracy of
these accounts, which, however, have the advantage of presenting to us
the mediumship of Hélène, as related by herself. She speaks of herself
in the third person.

The following is a summary of the two first seances held in this new
environment:

"March 25, 1892.—Eleven persons around a large and heavy dining-table of
oak with two leaves. The table is set in motion, and several spirits
come and give their names (by raps), and testify to the pleasure it
gives them to find themselves among us. It is at this seance that Mlle.
Smith begins to distinguish vague gleams with long white streamers
moving from the floor to the ceiling, and then a magnificent star, which
in the darkness appears to her alone throughout the whole of the seance.
We augur from this that she will end by seeing things more distinctly
and will possess the gift of clairvoyance.

"April 1.—Violent movements of the table, due to a spirit who calls
himself David and announces himself as the spiritual guide of the group.
Then he gives way to another spirit who says he is Victor Hugo, and the
guide and protector of Mlle. Smith, who is very much surprised to be
assisted by a person of such importance. He soon disappears. Mlle. Smith
is very much agitated; she has fits of shivering, is very cold. She is
very restless, and sees suddenly, balancing itself above the table, a
grinning,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

very ill-favored face, with long red hair. She is so frightened that she
demands that the lights be lit. She is calmed and reassured. The figure
disappears. Afterwards she sees a magnificent bouquet of roses of
different hues being placed on the table before one of the sitters, M.
P. All at once she sees a small snake come out from underneath the
bouquet, which, crawling quickly, perceives the flowers, looks at them,
tries to reach the hand of M. P., withdraws for an instant, comes back
slowly, and disappears in the interior of the bouquet. Then all is
dissolved and three raps are given on the table, terminating the seance.
\[M. P. interprets the meaning of the vision of the bouquet and the
serpent as a symbolic translation of an emotional impression experienced
by Mlle. Smith\]."

Such was the birth of Hélène's mediumship. Scarcely anything happened on
the 10th of February, when the movements of the table were not
attributed to her (although in all probability she caused them); in the
following seances she appeared in two attempts at automatic writing
(unfortunately lost) in imitation of the writing medium with whom she
was sitting. The outcome of this second attempt leads us to suppose that
Hélène's faculties would have developed rapidly in that direction if she
had not abandoned it and changed her environment.

Her visual faculty, suggested by the experiments at obscure seances,
shows itself on the 18th and 25th of March in the form of elementary
hallucinations or vague figures having their point of departure probably
in the simple entoptical phenomena, the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

retina's own light, consecutive images, etc. Then, encouraged by the
predictions of the sitters, she attained on the 1st of April to visions
properly so called, having a varied content and a real or symbolic
signification. At the same time her typtological automatism was
perfecting itself. We recognize it in the name of Victor Hugo, coming
especially for Mlle. Smith, and suspect it to have been a name already
given at the second seance.

Auditive hallucinations follow closely upon the visual, but it is
impossible to know at just what date, as the records do not clearly
indicate whether the messages recorded had that origin or were rapped
out on the table. To these known forms of automatism must be added the
frequent phenomena of emotion, shiverings, sadness, restlessness, fear,
etc., which are experienced by Hélène without knowing why, and are
afterwards found to be in perfect conformity to, and in evident
connection with, the content of those emotional phenomena which they
generally precede by a few moments.

Thus, in a half-dozen weekly seances, the mediumship of Mlle. Smith was
invested with a complex psychological aspect, which from that time it
preserved intact for three years, and of which I was a witness after I
made her acquaintance. This rapidity of development is not at all
unusual; but there is this peculiarity about Hélène, that her
mediumistic faculties, after their first appearance, remained for a long
time stationary, and then underwent all at once, in the spring of 1895,
the enormous

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

transformation and tremendous expansion which I have described in the
first chapter, and to which I will not again refer.

#### II. MLLE. SMITH IN HER NORMAL STATE

I was about to say that in her normal state Mlle. Smith is normal.
Certain scruples restrain me, and I correct myself by saying that in her
ordinary state she seems just like anybody else. By this I mean that
outside of the gaps which the seances and the spontaneous eruptions of
automatism make in her life, no one would suspect, observing her
performance of her various duties, or in talking with her on all sorts
of subjects, all that she is capable of in her abnormal states, or the
curious treasures which are concealed in her subliminal strata.

With a healthy and ruddy complexion, of good height, well proportioned,
of regular and harmonious features, she breathes health in everything.
She presents no visible stigmata of degeneration. As to psychic defects
or anomalies, with the exception of her mediumship itself, I know of
none, the timidity of her youth having entirely disappeared. Her
physical strength is marvellous, as shown by the fact that she bears up
under the strain of a business which demands nearly eleven hours of her
time each day, nearly all of which she is compelled to stand on her
feet, and from which she takes only one week's vacation in summer.
Besides this confining work away from home, she assists her mother about
the house morning and evening, in the housekeeping duties,

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

and finds time besides to read a little, to practise at her piano, and
to make the lovely handiwork, which she designs and executes herself
with remarkable originality and good taste. To a life so full must be
added, besides, the spiritistic seances which she is generally willing
to give on Sunday, and sometimes on a weekday evening, very
disinterestedly, to persons who are interested in psychic questions or
who desire to consult Leopold on important subjects.

While hesitating to affirm that a person presenting phenomena so
extraordinary as those of mediumship is perfectly normal in other
respects, I am pleased to discover that as far as Mlle. Smith is
concerned, through my conversations with her and as the result of my
investigations concerning her, she does not present a single
abnormality, physical, intellectual, or moral, between the periods of
the irruptions of her automatisms. Her field of vision, which she has
permitted me to measure with a Landolt perimeter, is normal for white as
well as for colors, for which latter she has a very delicate perception.
There is no trace of tactile anæsthesia in her hands. There is no known
motor trouble. The tremor of the index-finger gives a line, of four
oscillations per second on an average, differing not at all from the
lines obtained from persons perfectly normal (see [Fig. 2](#img_fig02)).

It cannot be expected that I should paint a full moral and intellectual
portrait of Mlle. Smith, as I should be in danger of hurting her
feelings in case my attempt should come to her notice. I can only touch
on a few points. One of the most striking is her great

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

native dignity; her bearing, her manners, her language are always
perfect, and have a certain quality of noblesse and pride which accords
well with her somnambulistic rôles. On occasion she shows a stately and
regal hauteur. She is very impressionable, and feels little things very
keenly. Her antipathies as well as her sympathies are quick, lively, and
tenacious. She is energetic and persevering. She knows very well what
she wants, and nothing passes her by unperceived, nor does she forget
anything in the conduct of others towards her. "I see everything,
nothing escapes me, and I forgive but never forget," she has often said
to me. Perhaps a severe moralist would find in her a certain
exaggeration of personal sensibility, but that sort of self-love is a
very common characteristic of human nature, and is very natural in
mediums who are continually exposed to public criticism.

She is very intelligent and highly gifted. In conversation she shows
herself vivacious, sprightly, and sometimes sarcastic. Psychic problems,
and all questions connected with mediumistic phenomena, of which she is
herself so striking an example, occupy her mind a great deal and form
the principal subject of her private thoughts and of her conversations
with people in whom she is interested.

Her philosophical views are not wanting in originality or breadth. She
does not believe in spiritism, in the generally accepted sense of the
term, and has never consented, in spite of the advances which have been
made to her, to become a member of the Geneva Society (spiritistic) for
Psychic Studies, because, as

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

she says, she has no fixed ideas on subjects so obscure, does not care
for theories, and "does not work in the interest of any party." She
investigates, she observes, she reflects and discusses, having adopted
for her motto, "The truth in all things, for all things, and always."

There are two points in regard to which she is uncompromising—namely,
the objective reality of Leopold, and the supernormal content of her
automatisms. No one dares tell her that her great invisible protector is
only an illusory apparition, another part of herself, a product of her
subconscious imagination; nor that the strange peculiarities of her
mediumistic communications—the Sanscrit, the recognizable signatures of
deceased persons, the thousand correct revelations of facts unknown to
her—are but old forgotten memories of things which she saw or heard in
her childhood. Such suppositions being contrary to her inmost beliefs,
and seemingly false in fact, easily irritate her, as being in defiance
of good sense and an outrage on truth. But outside of these two subjects
she will examine and discuss coolly any hypothesis one chooses. The idea
that she should be the reincarnation of a Hindoo princess or of Marie
Antoinette, that Leopold is really Cagliostro, that the visions called
Martian are really from the planet Mars, etc., all seem to her to
conform fully to the facts; but these beliefs are not indispensable to
her, and she is ready, should they prove to be false, to change to other
theories—as, for example, telepathy, a mixture of occult influences, a
mysterious meeting in her of intuitions coming from some higher sphere,
etc.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

Undoubtedly the supposition of her pre-existences in India and on the
throne of France seems to her to explain in a plausible manner the
feeling, which has followed her from childhood, of belonging to a world
higher than that in which the chance of birth has imprisoned her for
this life; but she does not affirm a positive belief in that brilliant
past, is not wholly convinced of it, and remains in a sensible state of
expectancy of the true explanation of these ultimate mysteries of her
life.

There is another subject, also, which is close to her heart. She has
heard it said that in the eyes of scientists and physicians mediums are
considered to be fools, hysterical subjects, or insane, or, in any
event, abnormal, in the bad sense of the word. But, in the light of the
experience of every day of her life, she protests vigorously against
this odious insinuation. She declares emphatically that she is
"perfectly sane in body and mind, not in the least unbalanced," and
repels with indignation the idea there can be any serious abnormality or
the least danger in mediumship such as she practises. "I am far from
being abnormal," she wrote me recently, "and I have never been so clear
of vision, so lucid, and so apt to judge correctly as since I have begun
to develop as a medium."

Leopold, too, speaking through her voice during her trances, has more
than once solemnly testified as to her perfect health. He has also
returned to the subject by letter; we shall find farther on a very
interesting certificate of mental equilibrium dictated by him and
written by him with her hand, as if to

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

give more weight to his declarations (see [Fig. 8](ipm06.htm#img_fig08),
[p. 137](ipm06.htm#page_137).)

It is incontestable that Hélène has a very well-organized brain, as is
evidenced by the admirable manner in which she manages the important and
complicated department which is under her direction in the commercial
establishment in which she is employed. To accuse her of being insane,
simply because she is a medium, as some charitable souls (the world is
full of them) do not hesitate to do sometimes, is, to say the least, a
most inadmissible *petitio principii*.

The opinion which Mlle. Smith holds in her normal state concerning her
automatic faculties is altogether optimistic; and there is nothing to
prove her in the wrong. She regards her mediumship as a rare and
precious privilege, with which nothing in the world would induce her to
part. True, she also sees in it the reason for the malevolent and unjust
judgments, the jealousies, the base suspicions, to which the ignorant
multitude have in all ages subjected those who have succeeded in
elevating themselves above it through the possession of faculties of
this kind. But, on the whole, the disadvantages are more than
counterbalanced by gains of a high order, and the inward satisfaction
attached to such a gift. And here I desire to emphasize the statement,
once for all, that Hélène does not belong to the class of professional
mediums, nor to those who use their mediumship for the purpose of
coining money. Mlle. Smith, who earns her living in the position which
her intelligence and fitness have secured for her, and through which her
family enjoys a modest ease,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

never accepts any pecuniary compensation for her seances or
consultations. Such a traffic in faculties which have a sort of
religious signification in her eyes would be absolutely repugnant to her
feelings.

Hélène's spontaneous automatisms have often aided her in, without ever
having interfered with, her daily occupations. There is, happily for
her, a great difference in intensity between the phenomena of her
seances and those which break in upon her habitual existence, the latter
never having caused such disturbance of her personality as the former.

In her daily life she has only passing hallucinations limited to one or
two of the senses, superficial hemisomnambulisms, compatible with a
certain amount of self-possession—in short, ephemeral perturbations of
no importance from a practical point of view. Taken as a whole, the
interventions of the subliminal in her ordinary existence are more
beneficial to her than otherwise, since they often bear the stamp of
utility and appropriateness, which make them very serviceable.

Phenomena of hypermnesia, divination, lost objects mysteriously
recovered, happy inspirations, true presentiments, correct intuitions—in
a word, teleological automatisms of every sort—she possesses in so high
a degree that this small coin of genius is more than sufficient to
compensate for the inconveniences resulting from the distraction and
momentary absence of mind with which the vision is accompanied.

In the seances, on the contrary, she presents the most grave functional
alterations that one can imagine, and passes through accesses of
lethargy,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

catalepsy, somnambulism, total change of personality, etc., the least of
which would be a very disagreeable adventure for her if it should happen
to occur in the street or at her office.

But here I am obliged to leave Hélène's ordinary state to enter upon the
study of her automatisms.

#### III. SPONTANEOUS AUTOMATIC PHENOMENA

The automatisms which occur outside the seances in Mlle. Smith's
every-day life, those, at least, which she is able to recall and
narrate, are of a frequency very variable and utterly independent of any
known circumstances; sometimes presenting themselves two or three times
in the same day; at others, two or three weeks will elapse without a
single one. Extremely diverse in their form and content, these phenomena
may be divided into three categories, based upon their origin. The first
proceed from impressions received by Hélène in moments of special
suggestibility; the second are the fortuitous apparitions above the
ordinary level of her consciousness, the romances in process of
elaboration to which we are coming; the last, which differ from the two
preceding species (which are always useless, if not detrimental) by
their beneficial character and their adaptation to the needs of the
moment, are roused by those teleological automatisms to which I have
already called attention as having occurred in her childhood, and which
have shared in the general recrudescence of her subconscious life under
the lash of the spiritistic experiences.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Let us pass these different cases rapidly in review.

I. *Permanence of exterior suggestions*.—The spiritistic reunions are
naturally their principal source. I do not mean that she has there been
subjected to experiments in post-hypnotic suggestion. Justice to all
those who have attended the seances compels the statement that they have
never abused the suggestibility which she shows on such occasions, by
suggesting ideas of such a nature as to cause her annoyance on the
following days. The most that has been attempted has been the suggestion
of some small matters by way of harmless experiment, to be
[executed](errata.htm#0) by her a few moments after awaking from her
trance. There is no need of intentional suggestions to influence her in
a lasting manner; therefore we have avoided as far as possible
everything that might leave disagreeable traces behind, and have
suggested to her before the end of the seance that she have on the
morrow no headache, fatigue, etc.; but it sometimes happens that certain
incidents, often absolutely insignificant, are engraved on her memory in
a most unlooked-for manner and assail her as inexplicable obsessions
during the ensuing week. The following are some specimens of involuntary
suggestion, which generally linger for three or four days, but may
occasionally continue for twelve or fifteen.

Hélène told me one Sunday that she had been possessed several times
during the day by the hallucinatory image of a straw hat, the inside of
which was turned towards her, and-which remained vertically in the air
about three or four feet in front of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

her, without being held by any one. She had the feeling that this hat
belonged to me, and I happened finally to recollect that at the seance
of the preceding Sunday I happened to fan myself with this very hat
during her final trance, the image of which had been engraved on her
mind in one of the flashes in which she opened her eyes and closed them
again instantly before her final awaking. This obsession, said she, was
very strong on Monday and the following day or two, but lessened
somewhat towards the end of the week.

At another time she preserved during a whole week the sensation of the
pressure of my thumb on her left eyebrow. (Compression of the external
frontal and suborbital nerves is a means I often employ to hasten her
awaking, after a hint given by Leopold.)

There happened to her also twice in the same day an auditive and visual
hallucination of an aged person whom she did not recognize, but the
extremely characteristic description of whom corresponds so well with
that of a gentleman of Geneva who had been mentioned to her a few days
previously, immediately before the commencement of a seance (when she
was probably already in her state of suggestibility), that there is
scarcely any doubt but that these apparitions were the consequence of
that conversation.

'Following another seance where she had, at the beginning of a Hindoo
scene, made vain efforts to detach a bracelet from her left wrist, she
preserved for three days the feeling of something grasping that wrist,
without understanding what it could be.

In the same way, various feelings of sadness, anger,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

a desire to laugh or to weep, etc., the cause of which she was unable to
explain, have often followed her for a considerable length of time after
the seances of which these feelings were the manifest emotional echo.
This is often the effect of our dreams on our waking state: we forget
the dreams, but their influence remains, and is often more marked in the
dreams of a hypnotized person or a somnambulist than in those of
ordinary sleep.

The seances are not the exclusive source of the involuntary suggestions
which trouble Mlle. Smith in her daily life without any benefit to
herself. It is evident that on every occasion when she finds herself in
that particular condition of least resistance which we, in our ignorance
of its intrinsic nature, designate by the convenient name of "
suggestibility," she is exposed to impressions capable of returning to
assail her in the course of her daily occupations. Fortunately this
condition of suggestibility does not seem to develop itself readily in
her outside of the spiritistic reunions.

2\. *Irruptions of subliminal reveries*.—I shall have too many occasions
to cite concrete examples of visions, voices, and other spontaneous
outpourings of the work of imagination, which are continually going on
under the ordinary consciousness of Mlle. Smith, to dwell long on this
point. Some general remarks will suffice.

The connection which the unforeseen phenomena maintain with those of the
seances themselves is very varied. Sometimes we are able to recognize
them as reproductions, more or less incomplete, of episodes

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

which occurred at the preceding seances, and consider them simple echoes
or post-hypnotic repetitions of these last. Sometimes, on the contrary,
it appears that we have to deal with preparatory rehearsals of scenes
which will unfold themselves at length and will be continued at some
later seance. Finally, sometimes it is a question of tableaux, having no
connection with those which fill up the seances; they are like leaves,
flying away never to return, romances which are continually being
fabricated in the deep subliminal strata of Mlle. Smith's consciousness.

Hélène, in fact, does not long remember, nor in much detail, with a few
exceptions, those visions which take place in her ordinary state, and
which occur most frequently early in the morning, while she is still in
bed, or just after she has arisen and while working by the light of her
lamp; sometimes in the evening, or during the brief moments of rest in
the middle of the day, and, much more rarely, while in the full activity
of waking hours she is at her desk. If she had not long since, at my
request, and with great good will, acquired the habit of noting in
pencil the essential content of these apparitions, either during the
apparition itself (which she is not always able to do) or else
immediately afterwards, we should have still more deficiencies in the
plot of her romances to deplore. Hélène's psychological state, during
her spontaneous visions, is known to me only by her own descriptions.
She is fortunately a very intelligent observer and a good psychologist.

Her narratives show that her visions are accompanied by a certain degree
of obnubilation. For a

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

few moments, for instance, the room, the light of the lamp, disappear
from before her eyes; the noise of the wheels in the street ceases to be
heard; she feels herself becoming inert and passive, while a feeling of
bliss and ecstatic well-being permeates her entire individuality in the
presence of the spectacle which appears to her; then the vision, to her
great regret, slowly fades from her view, the lamp and the furniture
reappear, the outside noises again make themselves heard, and she is
astonished that the idea did not occur to her to put down in pencil the
strange words she has heard, or that she did not touch or caress, for
example, the beautiful birds of many-colored plumage flying and singing
around her. Sometimes she has maintained sufficient presence of mind to
scribble from dictation the words striking her ear; but the wretched
handwriting proves that her attention, all absorbed by the apparition,
could not follow the pencil, and that the hand directed it badly. At
other times the reverse is the fact. It appears in the course of the
vision as though some one took hold of her arm and guided it in spite of
herself; the result is splendid calligraphies, wholly different from her
own handwriting, executed without her knowledge, and during the
execution of which her mind was wholly absent, if we can judge from the
surprise she shows on awaking when she finds before her these strange
writings, and from analogous scenes which transpire at the seances.

The preceding is applicable especially to the more frequent cases—that
is, to the morning or evening visions which happen to her at home, in
that intermediate

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

condition between sleep and waking, always so favorable, as we know, to
the development of unconscious cerebration. But there are innumerable
shades and gradations between this middle type, so to speak, and its
opposite extremes; on the one hand is the fortunately very exceptional
case where she is seized with ecstasy while at her place of business;
and, on the other hand, that in which the automatism limits itself to
inscribing some unknown characters or words in another hand than her own
in her correspondence and writings—peculiar *lapsus calami*, which she
is not slow to perceive on coming to herself.

The following is an example of a case of ecstasy:

Having ascended one day to an upper story, to look for something in a
dark store-room, she had an apparition of a man in a turban and large
white cloak, whom she had the impression of recognizing, <span
id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3) and whose presence filled her with a
delightful calm and profound happiness. She could not recall the
conversation which passed between them, which, though in an unknown
language, she nevertheless had the feeling of having perfectly
comprehended. On the departure of the mysterious visitor she was
astonished to find herself brought back to sombre reality, and stupefied
on noting by her watch that the interview had lasted much longer than it
had seemed to do. She preserved all that day a delicious feeling of
wellbeing as the effect of the strange apparition.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

The phenomenon of mingling strange writing with her own is of relatively
frequent occurrence, and we shall see divers specimens of it in the
following chapters, apropos of the romances to which it especially
belongs. I will give here only one complex example, which will serve at
the same time as an illustration of a special kind of automatism, very
harmless, to which Hélène is also subject, and which consists in making
verses, not without knowing, but at least without intending to do so,
and in connection with the most trifling matters.

There are times when, in spite of herself, she feels compelled to speak
in distinct rhymes of eight feet, which she does not prepare, and does
not perceive until the moment she has finished uttering them. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4) In this particular case it is by a quatrain
(a very unusual occurrence) that she replies to some one who had
consulted her in regard to some blue

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

ribbon. But this quatrain, by its style, by the vision of the blond head
of a child which accompanies it, and by the manner also in which she
writes it, causes us to hazard the conjecture that it is an inspiration
depending on the underlying Royal cycle; while in the following letter,
in which she narrates the affair to M. Lemaître, her pen inscribes, all
unknown to her, strange characters evidently due to the cropping out of
the Martian cycle, of which she speaks in the letter (see [Fig.
1](#img_fig01), a passage of that letter making a Martian M and V in the
words *vers* and *rimait*):

<span id="img_fig01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 1. Fragment
of a letter (normal handwriting) of Mlle. Smith, containing two Martian
letters. (Collection of M. Lemaître.)](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg)  
Fig. 1. Fragment of a letter (normal handwriting) of Mlle. Smith,
containing two Martian letters. (Collection of M. Lemaître.)  
</span>

"I have heard some Martian words this afternoon, but have not been able
to retain them in my mind. I send you those heard a few days ago, when I
had the vision of which I am about to make you the design (Martian
lamp). Yesterday morning I for the first time spoke in verse, without
being aware of it; it was only on finishing the sentence that I
perceived that it rhymed, and I reconstructed it to assure myself of the
fact. A little later, on examining some ribbons, I began anew to speak
in verse, and I send those also:

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

they will amuse you. It is a curious thing that I had at that same
moment the vision of the blond curly head of a child bound with a blue
ribbon. The vision lasted more than a minute. What is still more
curious, I do not at all recollect having worn ribbons of that shade as
a child: I remember some rose-colored, some red, but I have no
recollection whatever of any blue ribbons. I really do not know why I
spoke these words; it is the more amusing. I was obliged to speak them,
I assure you, in spite of myself. I was eager to put them on paper, and
I noticed in writing them down that, for a moment, the handwriting was
not regular, that is, it was slightly different from mine."

Here is the quatrain, the pencil impression of which is too faint to
enable a fac-simile to be reproduced here, and in it I have indicated by
italics the words and syllables the calligraphy or orthography of which
differs from that of Hélène and becomes the style of automatic
handwriting called that of Marie Antoinette:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Les nuances de ces rubans  
 *Me* rappelent *mes* jeunes ans;  
 Ce bleu *ver*di, je m’en sou*vien*,  
 Sans mes cheveux *alloit* si bien!"</span>

</div>

The head of curly blond hair, ornamented with blue ribbons, also figures
in the visions of the Royal cycle, and appears to belong, as is here the
case, sometimes to Marie Antoinette herself, sometimes to one or other
of her children, especially the Dauphin.

While it is generally easy to connect these eruptions of the subliminal
volcano with the various dreams

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

from which they emanate, such is not always the case, and there are
visions the origin of which is doubtful and ambiguous. We must not
forget that, alongside of the grand cycles of Hélène which are better
known, there also float in her latent imagination innumerable small
accessory systems, more or less independent, which supply a large part
of the seances, such as revelations of former events connected with the
families of the sitters, etc.; it is not always possible to identify the
fragments coining from these isolated dreams.

3\. *Teleological automatisms*.—The spontaneous phenomena of this
category, possessing as a common characteristic a practical utility for
Hélène more or less marked, can be subdivided into two classes,
according to their direct attachment to the personality of Leopold, or
their not belonging to any distinct personality, and which only express
in a vivid manner the result of the normal working, although more or
less unconscious, of the faculties of memory and of reason. I confine
myself now to citing one case of each of these classes, of which we
shall see other examples in the chapters relating to Leopold and to
supernormal appearances.

One day Mlle. Smith, wishing to take down a large and heavy object from
a high shelf, was prevented from so doing by the fact that her uplifted
arms seemed as though petrified and incapable of being moved for some
seconds; she saw in this a warning and gave up her intention. In a later
seance Leopold said that it was he himself who had caused Hélène's arms
to become rigid, in order to prevent her from

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

attempting to lift the object which was too heavy for her and would have
caused some accident to befall her.

On another occasion a clerk who sought vainly for a certain pattern
asked Hélène if she knew what had become of it. Hélène replied
mechanically and without reflection, "Yes, it was sent to Mr. J." (a
customer of the firm); at the same time there appeared before her in
large black figures about eight or ten inches in height the number 18,
and she added, instinctively, "It was eighteen days ago." This statement
caused the clerk to smile, because of its improbability, the rule of the
house being that customers to whom patterns were lent for examination
must return them inside of three days or a messenger would be sent for
them. Hélène, struck by this objection, and having no conscious
recollection of the affair, replied, "Really, perhaps I am wrong."
Meanwhile, an investigation of the date indicated in the records of the
house showed that she was perfectly correct. It was through various
negligences, with which she had nothing at all to do, that the pattern
had not been sent for or recovered. Leopold, on being asked, has no
recollection of this circumstance, and does not appear to have been the
author of this automatism of cryptomnesia, nor of many other analogous
phenomena through which Hélène's subconscious memory renders her signal
services and has gained for her a well-merited and highly valued
reputation.

Thus we see that if the spontaneous automatisms of Mlle. Smith are often
the vexatious result of her moments of suggestibility, or the
tempestuous irruption

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

of her subliminal reveries, they also often assume the form of useful
messages. Such compensation is not to be despised.

#### IV. THE SEANCES

Mlle. Smith has never been hypnotized. In her instinctive aversion,
which she shares with the majority of mediums, to anything that seems
like an attempt to experiment upon her, she has always refused to allow
herself to be put to sleep. She does not realize that in avoiding the
idea she has actually accepted the reality, since her spiritistic
experiences in reality constitute for her an auto-hypnotization, which
inevitably degenerates into a hetero-hypnotization, as she is brought
under the influence of one or other of the persons present at the
seance.

All her seances have somewhat of the same psychologic form, the same
method of development running through their immense diversity of
content. She places herself at the table with the idea and the intention
of bringing into play her mediumistic faculties. After an interval,
varying from a few seconds to a quarter of an hour, generally in a
shorter time if the room is well darkened and the sitters are perfectly
silent, she begins to have visions, preceded and accompanied by very
varied sensory and motor disturbances, after which she passes into a
complete trance. In that state, it rarely happens, and then only for a
few moments, that she is entirely unconscious of the persons present,
and, as it were, shut up within her personal dream and plunged into
profound

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

lethargy (hypnotic syncope) . Ordinarily she remains in communication,
more or less close, with one of the sitters, who thus finds himself in
the same relation towards her as a hypnotizer towards his subject, and
able to take advantage of that *rapport*, by giving her any immediate or
future suggestions that he may desire. When the seance consists only of
waking visions, it lasts generally only a short time—an hour to an hour
and a half—and is ended quickly by three sharp raps upon the table,
after which Mlle. Smith returns to her normal state, which she scarcely
seems to have left. If the somnambulism has been complete, the seance is
prolonged to double that length of time, and often longer, and the
return to the normal state comes slowly through phases of deep sleep,
alternating with relapses into somnambulistic gestures and attitudes,
moments of catalepsy, etc. The final awakening is always preceded by
several brief awakenings, followed by relapses into sleep.

Each of these preliminary awakenings, as well as the final one, is
accompanied by the same characteristic movements of the features. The
eyes, which have been for a long time closed, open wide, stupidly
staring into vacancy, or fix themselves slowly on the objects and the
sitters within their range of vision, the dilated pupils do not react,
the face is an impassive and rigid mask, devoid of expression. Hélène
seems altogether absent. All at once, with a slight heaving of the
breast and raising of the head, and a quick breath, a gleam of
intelligence illumines her countenance, the mouth is gracefully

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

opened, the eyes become brilliant, the entire countenance lights up with
a pleasant smile and gives evidence of her recognition of the world and
of her return to herself. But with the same suddenness with which it
appeared, that appearance of life lasts but a second or two, the
physiognomy resumes its lifeless mask, the eyes becoming haggard and
fixed close again, and the head falls on the back of the chair. This
return of sleep will be followed by another sudden awaking, then perhaps
by several more, until the final awaking, always distinguished, after
the smile at the beginning, by the stereotyped question, "What time is
it?" and by a movement of surprise on learning that it is so late. There
is no memory of what has transpired during the seance.

A complete description of the psychological and physiological phenomena
which present themselves, or which might be obtained in the course of
the seances, would detain me too long, since there is absolutely nothing
constant either in the nature or in the succession of the phenomena, and
no two seances are evolved exactly in the same manner. I must confine
myself to some striking characteristics.

Three principal symptoms, almost contemporaneous generally, announce
that Mlle. Smith is beginning to enter into her trance.

There are on the one side emotional or cœnæsthetic modifications, the
cause of which is revealed a little later in the subsequent messages.
Hélène is, for instance, seized by an invincible desire to laugh, which
she cannot or will not explain; or she complains

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of sadness, fear, of different unpleasant sensations, of heat or of
cold, of nausea, etc., according to the nature of the communications
which are approaching and of which these emotional states are the
forerunners.

There are, on the other hand, phenomena of systematic anæsthesia
(negative hallucinations), limited to those sitters whom the coming
messages concern. Hélène ceases to see them, while continuing to hear
their voices and feel their touch; or, on the contrary, she is
astonished to no longer hear them, though she sees their lips moving,
etc.; or, finally, she does not perceive them in any manner, and demands
to know why they are leaving when the seance is hardly begun. In its
details this systematic anæsthesia varies infinitely, and extends
sometimes to but one part of the person concerned, to his hand, to a
portion of his face, etc., without it always being possible to explain
these capricious details by the content of the following visions; it
would seem that the incoherence of the dream presides over this
preliminary work of disintegration, and that the normal perceptions are
absorbed by the subconscious personality eager for material for the
building up of the hallucinations which it is preparing.

Systematic anæsthesia is often complicated with positive hallucinations,
and Hélène will manifest her surprise at seeing, for example, a strange
costume or an unusual coiffure. This, in reality, is the vision which is
already being installed.

The third symptom, which does not manifest itself clearly in her, but
the presence of which can be often

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

established before all the others by investigation, is a complete
allochiria, <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5) ordinarily accompanied by
various other sensory and motor disturbances. If, at the beginning of
the seance, Hélène is asked, for example, to raise her right hand, to
move the left index-finger, or to close one eye, she begins straightway
to carry into effect these different acts; then all at once, without
knowing why and without hesitation, she deceives herself in regard to
the side, and raises her left hand, moves her right index-finger, closes
the other eye, etc. This indicates that she is no longer in her normal
state, though still appearing to retain her ordinary consciousness, and
with the liveliness of a normal person discusses the question of her
having mistaken her right hand or eye for her left, and vice versa. It
is to be noted that Leopold, on such occasions of pronounced allochiria,
does not share this error in regard to the side. I have assisted at some
curious discussions between him and Hélène, she insisting that such a
hand was her right, or that the Isle Rousseau is on the left as one
passes the bridge of Mont Blanc or coming from the railway station, and
Leopold all the while, by means of raps upon the table, giving her
clearly to understand she was wrong. <span id="fr_6"></span>[†](#fn_6)

A little after the allochiria, and sometimes simultaneously with it, are
to be found various other phenomena, extremely variable, of which I here
cite only

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

a few One of her arms is contractured as it rests upon the table, and
resists the efforts of the sitters to lift it up, as though it were a
bar of iron; the fingers of the hand also participate in this rigidity.
Sometimes this contracture does not exist before, but establishes itself
at the same instant that some one touches the forearm, and increases in
proportion to the efforts which are made to overcome it. There is no
regularity in the distribution of the anæsthesia (changing from one
instant to another), the contractures, or convulsions which the hands
and arms of Hélène exhibit. It all seems due to pure caprice, or to
depend only on underlying dreams, of which little is known.

Certain analogous and likewise capricious phenomena of anæsthesia,
paralysis, sensations of all sorts, of which Hélène complains, often
appear in her face, her eyes, her mouth, etc. In the midst of all these
disturbances the visions announce themselves, and the somnambulism is
introduced with modifications, equally variable, of other functions,
evidenced by tears, sobbings, sighs, repeated hiccoughs, various
changing of the rhythm of respiration, etc.

If Hélène is experimented upon and questioned too long, the development
of the original visions is obstructed, and she easily reaches a degree
of sensibility where she falls into the standard class of public
representations of hypnotism—a charmed and fascinated state in which she
remains riveted before some brilliant object, as, for example, the ring,
trinkets, or cuff-button of one of the sitters; then

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

precipitates herself in a frenzy upon the object, and tries to secure
it; or assumes emotional attitudes and poses under the influence of
joyous airs upon the piano; experiences suggested hallucinations of all
kinds, sees terrible serpents, which she pursues with a pair of pincers;
beautiful flowers, which she smells with deep respirations and
distributes to the sitters; or, again, bleeding wounds which have been
made on her hand, and which cause her to shed tears. The common-place
character of these phenomena causes their long continuance to be
deprecated, and the ingenuity of all is exercised in endeavoring by
different means, none of which is very efficacious or very rapid, to
plunge her into profound and tranquil sleep, from which she is not long
in passing of her own accord into complete somnambulism and in taking up
the thread of her personal imaginations.

If all these disturbing investigations have been successfully avoided,
the spontaneous development of the automatisms is effected with greater
rapidity and fulness. It is possible then to behold, in the same seance,
a very varied spectacle, and to listen, besides, to certain special
communications made in a semi-waking state to one or other of the
sitters; then, in complete somnambulism, a Hindoo vision is presented,
followed by a Martian dream, with an incarnation of Leopold in the
middle, and a scene of Marie Antoinette to wind up with. Ordinarily two
of these last creations will suffice to fill up a seance. One such
representation is not performed without the loss of considerable
strength by the medium, which shows itself by the final sleep being
prolonged sometimes

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

for an hour, interrupted, as I have said, by repetitions of the
preceding somnambulistic scenes, easily recognizable by certain gestures
or the murmuring of characteristic words. Passing through these diverse
oscillations and the ephemeral awaking, of which I have spoken above,
Hélène finishes by returning to her normal state; but the seances which
have been too long continued or too full of movement leave her very much
fatigued for the rest of the day. It has also sometimes happened to her
to re-enter the somnambulism (from which she had probably not completely
emerged) during the course of the evening or on returning home, and only
to succeed in recovering her perfectly normal state through the
assistance of a night's sleep.

As to the real nature of Hélène's slumbers at the end of the seances,
and her states of consciousness when she awakes, it is difficult for me
to pronounce, having only been able to observe them under unfavorable
conditions—that is, in the presence of sitters more or less numerous and
restless. The greater part certainly consist of somnambulisms, in which
she hears all that passes around her, since although she seems
profoundly asleep and absent, the suggestions then given her to be
carried out after awaking are registered and performed wonderfully—at
least when Leopold, who is almost always on hand and answers by
movements of one finger or another to questions put to him, does not
make any opposition or declare that the suggestion shall not be carried
out I There are also brief moments when Hélène seems to be in a profound
state of coma and kind of syncope

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

without trace of psychic life; her pulse and respiration continue to be
regular, but she does not react to any excitation, her arms, if raised,
fall heavily, no sign of Leopold can be obtained, and suggestions made
at that instant will not be acted upon.

These lethargic phases, during which all consciousness seems to be
abolished, are generally followed by cataleptic phases in which the
hands and arms preserve every position in which they may be placed, and
continue the movements of rotation or of oscillation which may be forced
upon them, but never for more than one or two minutes.

In default of more complete experiments, I submit the following
comparison of Hélène's muscular force and of her sensibility to pain
before and after a seance lasting nearly three hours, the second half
being in full somnambulism. At 4.50 o'clock, on sitting down at the
table three dynamometric tests with her right hand gave kilos. 27.5, 27,
25—average, 26.5. The sensibility to pain measured on the back of the
median phalanx of the index-finger with the algesiometer of Griesbach,
gave for the right, grs. 35, 40, 20, 20—average, 29; for the left, 35,
20, 20, 15—average, 22.5 grs. (Sensibility slightly more delicate than
that of another lady present at the seance, not a medium and in perfect
health.)

At 7.45 o'clock, some minutes after the final awaking: dynamometer,
right hand, 8, 4.5, 4.5—average, 5.7; algesiometer, complete analgesia
both as to right and left, on the whole of the back of the index as well
as the rest of the hand and wrist, the maximum of the instrument (100
grs.) was attained

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

and passed without arousing any painful sensation but only an impression
of contact.

One hour later, after dinner: dynamometer 22, 22, 19—average, 21;
algesiometer, 20, 18 for the right: 15, 20 for the left. It is possible,
then, to say that her muscular force and sensibility to pain, both
normal immediately before her entrance upon the seance, are still
abolished in the first fifteen minutes after awaking, but are found to
be restored in about an hour. Perception of colors, on the contrary,
appeared to be as perfect immediately after awaking as before the
seance. The tremor of the index-finger; normal before the seance, is
very much exaggerated in its amplitude for a certain time after awaking
and reflects sometimes the respiratory movements, as can be seen by the
curves of [Fig. 2](#img_fig02). This denotes a great diminution of
kinesthetic sensibility and of voluntary control over the immobility of
the hand.

The state in which Mlle. Smith carries out the post-hypnotic suggestions
made to her in the course of her somnambulisms, when they do not come
into collision with either the pronounced opposition of Leopold or the
states of lethargy of which I have spoken, is interesting on account of
its varied character, which seems to depend upon the greater or less
ease with which the hallucination or the act suggested can be reconciled
with Hélène's normal personality. Their execution in the full waking
state seems to be confined to suggestions of simple acts, free from
absurdity, the idea of which would be easily accepted and carried out by
the normal self when the desired moment arrived. If, on the contrary, it
is a

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

question of more complicated and difficult things, compatible, however,
with the rational points of view of the normal waking state, Hélène
falls momentarily into somnambulism for the execution of the order
given, unless she has permanently remained in that state, in spite of
her apparent awaking, in order not

<span id="img_fig02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig. 2. Tremor of
right index-finger.](tn/fig02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig02.jpg)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 2. Tremor of right index-finger. A, B, C, fragments of curves taken in the normal state before the seance (A and C with closed eyes; B, with open eyes looking at the index-finger); D, E, F, fragments of curves received in succession a quarter of an hour after the seance. The curve F reflects the respiratory oscillations. The curves go from right to left, and the interval between the two vertical lines is ten seconds.</span> |

</div>

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

to re-enter definitely and completely upon her ordinary state until
after the execution of the order, of which there then remains to her no
recollection whatever.

From the foregoing facts we may conclude that little or nothing of that
which goes on around her escapes her subconscious intelligence, and it
is from this source that her somnambulistic romances are nourished
afresh.

A word more as to the preparation for the seances. I do not refer to a
conscious preparation, but to a subliminal incubation or elaboration,
unknown by her, showing itself on the level of her ordinary personality
in the form of fugitive gleams and fragmentary images during her sleep
at night or the moments of awaking in the morning. Mlle. Smith, in
reality, has no hold, possesses no influence, upon the nature of her
visions and somnambulisms. She is able, undoubtedly, up to a certain
point, to aid their appearance in a general way, by cultivating
tranquillity of mind, securing darkness and silence in the room, and by
abandoning herself to a passive attitude of mind; or to hinder it, on
the other hand, by movement, or distraction of attention; but with the
fixed and concrete content itself of her automatisms she has nothing to
do and no share in the responsibility for it. So far as her great cycles
or her detached messages are concerned, they are fabricated in her in
spite of herself, and without her having a word to say about their
production, any more than one has in the formation of his dreams. When
it is recollected, on the other hand, that the phenomena of incubation,
of subliminal preparation,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

or unconscious cerebration, are universal facts, playing their rôle in
the psychology of every human being, we can rely upon finding them also
among the mediums, and upon their holding a place with them much more
important than with others, owing to the fact that their subconscious
life is so much more fully developed.

With each one of us the expectation or the simple perspective of any
event—a departure, a visit, an errand, or undertaking to do anything, a
letter to write, in short, all the more insignificant incidents of daily
existence, when they are not absolutely unforeseen—promote a
psychological adaptation more or less extended and profound.

Alongside of and underneath the conscious expectancy, certain physical
or mental attitudes, voluntarily assumed in view of the event, always
effect an underlying preparation of an inward kind, a change which we
may regard, according to the side from which we consider the individual,
as a peculiar psychical orientation or cerebral adjustment, a
modification in the association of ideas or in the dynamics of the
cortical nerves. But everything points to the fact that in persons
gifted with mediumship this underlying preparation is capable of
assuming on occasion a greater importance than is the case with ordinary
mortals, a much more complete independence of the ordinary consciousness

To return to Mlle. Smith, when she knows some time in advance who will
be present at her next seance, and what people she will almost surely
meet there, it would be altogether natural that such previous

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

knowledge of the environment and of the sitters would influence her
subliminal thoughts and in some degree direct the course of the latent
incubation. It may well be asked, therefore, whether the varied
spectacle which the seances furnish is really always impromptu and has
its birth on the spur of the moment like ordinary dreams, or whether it
has been subconsciously thought out, the seance being only the
performance of an arrested programme, the representation *coram populo*
of scenes already ripened in the deep subliminal strata of the medium.

Neither of these two hypotheses, held to exclude the other, answers to
the facts, but there is some truth in both of them.

The *menu* of the seances—if the expression is permissible—is always
composed of one or two *plats de résistance*, carefully prepared in
advance in the subliminal laboratories, and of various *hors d’oeuvres*
left to the inspiration of the moment. To speak more exactly, the
general plot, the chief lines and more striking points of the scenes
which unfold themselves are fixed according to a previous arrangement,
but the details of execution and accessory embellishments are entirely
dependent upon chance circumstances. The proof of this is found, on the
one hand, in the suppleness, the perfect ease, the appropriateness with
which Hélène's automatisms—if we can still apply the word automatism to
those cases in which spontaneity, self-possession, free use of all the
faculties constitute the dominant characteristics—often adapt themselves
to unexpected situations in the environment or capricious interruptions
on

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the part of the sitters; on the other hand, in the fact that Leopold,
interrogated at the beginning of the seance, ordinarily knows very well
and announces the principal vision or incarnations which are about to
make their appearance, provided, at least, the spectators do not hinder
their unfolding by their tempestuous clamor for something else.

The animated conversations, sometimes full of spirited repartee, between
Leopold or Marie Antoinette and the sitters, could not have been
prepared in advance, and are altogether opposed to the stereotyped
repetition which is generally expected of automatic phenomena. But, on
the other hand, such repetition, almost entirely mechanical and devoid
of sense, presents itself on frequent occasions. I have, for instance,
seen somnambulistic scenes presented which were entirely misplaced, and
constituted at the time veritable anachronisms, which would have
perfectly fitted the situation eight days previously in another
environment, and for which the aforesaid scenes had been evidently
intended; but, having been withheld until the last moment by unforeseen
circumstances, the following seance gets the benefit of these postponed
messages.

Here is proof that Hélène's subliminal imagination prepares up to a
certain point her principal productions, in view of the conditions and
surroundings under which the seance will probably take place, and also
that these products, once elaborated, must be eliminated and poured
forth with a sort of blind necessity, at the right or the wrong time,
whenever the entrance of Hélène into a favorable hypnoid state furnishes

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

them an opportunity so to do. It follows also that her normal
personality has nothing whatever to do with the preparation of the
seances, since she can neither suppress nor change scenes badly adapted
to the actual environment, the appearance of which sometimes greatly
annoys Mlle. Smith when they are recounted to her after the seance; nor
can she provoke the messages, the production of which she desires and
vainly hopes for—as, for example, a medical consultation with Leopold,
the incarnation of a deceased parent, or a scene from one cycle rather
than from the others, for the benefit of a sitter who particularly
desires it, and whom she is very desirous to please.

Much more could be said concerning the psychological side of the seances
of Mlle. Smith, but I must limit myself. It will be possible to gain a
more complete idea of this subject by studying the illustrations in the
following chapters on the chief cycles of her brilliant subliminal
fantasy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[54:\*](ipm05.htm#fr_3) Vision relating to the
Oriental cycle; the man was the Arab sheik, the father of Simandini.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[55:\*](ipm05.htm#fr_4) The following are some of
these impromptu rhymes, surely up to the level of the circumstances
which inspired them, but by which we ought not to judge the *conscious*
poetic faculties of Mile. Smith:

To a little girl proud of her new shoes:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Marcelle est là, venez la voir,  
 Elle a ses petits souliers noirs."

</div>

In a "culinary" discussion:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Vous détestez les omelettes,  
 Autant que moi les côtelettes."

</div>

To a person slightly vain:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Vos richesses, ma chère amie,  
 Ne me font point du tout envie!"

</div>

<span id="fn_5"></span>[64:\*](ipm05.htm#fr_5) The confusion of
sensations in the two sides of the body, as when a person locates in the
right leg a touch upon the left leg.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[64:†](ipm05.htm#fr_6) See, on allochiria, P.
Janet, *Stigmates mentaux des hysteriques*, pp. 66-71; and *Nevroses et
ideés fixes*, vol. i. p. 234.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Personality of Leopold](ipm06)
