[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index.md) 
[Mars](../mars/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipm09)  [Next](ipm11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691001014/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*From India to the Planet Mars*, by Théodore Flournoy; tr. Daniel B.
Vermilye, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### THE HINDOO CYCLE

WHILE the Martian romance is purely a work of fantasy, in which the
creative imagination was able to allow itself free play through having
no investigation to fear, the Hindoo cycle, and that of Marie
Antoinette, having a fixed terrestrial setting, represent a labor of
construction which was subjected from the start to very complex
conditions of environments and epochs. To keep within the bounds of
probability, not to be guilty of too many anachronisms, to satisfy the
multiple demands of both logic and æsthetics, formed a particularly
dangerous undertaking, and one apparently altogether beyond the powers
of a person without special instruction in such matters. The
subconscious genius of Mlle. Smith has acquitted itself of the task in a
remarkable manner, and has displayed in it a truly wonderful and
delicate sense of historic possibilities and of local color.

The Hindoo romance, in particular, remains for those who have taken part
in it a psychological enigma, not yet solved in a satisfactory manner,
because it reveals and implies in regard to Hélène, a knowledge relative
to the costumes and languages of the

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Orient, the actual
source of which it has up to the present time not been possible to
discover. All the witnesses of Mlle. Smith's Hindoo somnambulisms who
are of the same opinion on that subject (several refrain from having
any) unite in seeing in it a curious phenomenon of cryptomnesia, of
reappearances of memories profoundly buried beneath the normal waking
state, together with an indeterminate amount of imaginative exaggeration
upon the canvas of actual facts. But by this name of cryptomnesia, or
resurrection of latent memories, two singularly different things are
understood. For me it is only a question of memories of her present
life; and I see nothing of the supernormal in that. For while I have not
yet succeeded in finding the key to the enigma, I do not doubt its
existence, and I will mention later certain indications which seem to me
to support my idea that the Asiatic notions of Mlle. Smith have a wholly
natural origin.

For the observer inclined towards spiritism, on the contrary, the
sleeping memory which is awakened in somnambulism is nothing less than
that of a previous existence of Mlle. Smith, and that piquant
explanation, which was first given by Leopold, profits in their eyes
from the impossibility which I find in proving that it is anything else.

Doubtless, if one was familiar with all the incidents of Hélène's life
from her earliest childhood, and if it were absolutely certain that her
knowledge of India had not been furnished her from the outside, through
the normal channel of the organs of sense, it would be necessary to seek
elsewhere for the solution of the

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

riddle, and to choose between the hypothesis of an atavic memory,
hereditarily transmitted across fifteen generations, and actual
telepathic communication with the brain of some Indian savant, or a
spiritistic reincarnation. But we do not find ourselves in that
position. There is nothing less known, in its details, than the daily
life of Mlle. Smith in her childhood and youth. But, when all the feats
of which the subconscious memory of our present life is capable are
considered, it is not scientifically correct to have recourse to a
pretended "anteriority," of which the only guarantee is the authority of
Leopold, in order to explain the somnambulistic apparitions of facts of
which Mlle. Smith in her waking state has no remembrance, I admit, but
the origin of which may well have been hidden in the unknown recesses of
her past life (reading, conversation, etc.) .

The plot of the Hindoo romance, which I have already briefly hinted at
on divers occasions, is as follows:

Hélène Smith was, at the end of the fourteenth century of our era, the
daughter of an Arab sheik, possibly named Pirux, whom she left in order
to become, under the name of Simandini, the eleventh wife of Prince
Sivrouka Nayaka, of whom I have the honor to be the actual
reincarnation. (I pray the reader once for all to pardon me the immodest
rôle which has been imposed upon me in this affair against my will.)

This Sivrouka, who reigned over Kanara, and built there, in 1401, the
fortress of Tchandraguiri, does not seem to have been a very
accommodating person;

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

although not bad at heart, and quite attached to his favorite wife, he
had a wild humor and very uncouth manners. More could not be expected of
an Asiatic potentate of that epoch. Simandini, nevertheless,
passionately loved him, and at his death she was burned alive on his
grave, after the fashion of Malabar.

Around these two principal personages are grouped some secondary
figures, among others a faithful domestic named Adèl, and a little
monkey, Mitidja, which Simandini had brought to India with her from
Arabia; then the fakir Kanga, who occupies a much more important place
in the Martian romance, in which we have seen him reincarnated as
Astané, than in the Hindoo cycle.

Some other individuals, all masculine—Mougia, Miousa, Kangia,
Kana—appear in obscure rôles, concerning which nothing certain can be
said.

The hypnoid states, in which this romance has manifested itself with
Hélène, present the greatest variety and all degrees, from the perfect
waking state (apparently), momentarily crossed by some visual or
auditive hallucination, the memory of which is preserved intact and
allows a detailed description, up to total somnambulism, with amnesia
upon awakening, in which the most striking scenes of ecstasies or
incarnations are unfolded. We shall see divers examples in the following
pages.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

#### I. APPARITION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE ORIENTAL CYCLE

Without recurring to the strange and little-known visions which already
haunted the childhood and youth of Mlle. Smith (see pp.
[20](ipm04.htm#page_20)-[25](ipm04.htm#page_25).md), I will retrace the
principal stages of her Asiatic romance from the birth of her
mediumship.

During the three first years there were but few manifestations of this
sort, in the seances, at least, while as to the automatisms which
developed at other times, especially at night, or in the hypnagogic
state, we know nothing.

In November, 1892, two seances of the N. group are occupied with the
apparition of a Chinese city—Pekin, according to the table—in which a
disincarnate spirit, a parent of one of the group, is found performing a
mission to a sick child.

In her seances of 1894, Hélène had on several occasions detached visions
belonging to the Orient, as appeared from their content, or hints
dictated by the table. She also saw Teheran; then the cemetery of the
missions at Tokat (June 12th); a cavalier with a white woollen cloak and
a turban bearing the name of Abderrhaman (September 2d); and, finally,
an Oriental landscape, which depicted a ceremony of Buddhist aspect
(October 16th). This latter vision, more especially, seemed to be a
forerunner of the Hindoo romance, since the records of the seances of
that period show an *ensemble* of characteristic traits which will be
again met with in the later Hindoo

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

scenes—*e.g.*, an immense garden of exotic plants, colonnades, rows of
palm-trees, with enormous stone lions at the head; rugs of magnificent
design, a temple surrounded by trees, with a statue, apparently that of
Buddha; a procession of twelve women in white, who kneel, holding
lighted lamps; in the centre another woman, with very black hair,
detaches herself from the procession, balances a lamp, and burns a
powder which expands into a white stone (the continuation of the romance
shows this woman to be Simandini, of whom this was the first appearance)
.

February 17, 1895.—At the end of a rather long seance, the table
dictates *Pirux sheik*, and replies to our questions that it refers to
an Arab sheik of the fifteenth century. At this moment Hélène awakes,
saying that she had seen a man with a black mustache and curly hair,
wearing a cloak and a turban, who seemed to be laughing at and mocking
her. The spelling out of Pirux was not very clear, and Leopold, when
interrogated later, neither affirmed categorically, nor did he deny,
that this name was that of the sheik, father of Simandini.

March 3.—Seance with six persons present, all having their hands upon
the table. After a brief waiting, Hélène is surprised at no longer being
able to see my left middle finger, while she can see all my other
fingers quite clearly. My bunch of keys, which I then place upon my
middle finger, likewise disappears from her view. This very limited,
systematic, visual anæsthesia authorizes the prediction, following
numerous examples of former seances,

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

that the phenomena about to appear will concern me. Presently begins a
long vision, consisting of scenes which Hélène believes she has already
partially seen before.

She describes a pagoda, which she draws with her left hand, with a few
strokes of her pencil; then an avenue of palms and statues, a
procession, and ceremonies before an altar, etc.

The principal rôles are played by a personage in sandals, a great yellow
robe, a helmet of gold, ornamented with precious stones (first
appearance of Sivrouka) and by the woman with black hair and white robe,
already seen on the 12th of October (Simandini).

In the first part of the vision, Hélène, who follows that woman with
ecstatic gaze, describing her to us, sees her coming towards me, but at
that moment the invisibility of my finger was extended to my entire
person, and Hélène neither sees nor hears me. While she was fully
conscious of the other sitters, she was astonished at seeing this woman
make "on the empty air" certain gestures of laying-on of hands and
benediction, which were made upon my head. On several occasions I change
my place, and seat myself in different parts of the room. Each time,
after a few seconds, Hélène turns towards me, and, without perceiving
me, sees the woman with black hair place herself behind my seat and
repeat her gestures of benediction in space, at a height corresponding
to that of my head.

As the vision continues, I do not play any further rôle, but it has to
do with a ceremony during which

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

the Hindoo woman with a diadem on her head burns incense in the midst of
her twelve companions, etc.

During all this time the table, contrary to its custom, gave no
explanation; but Hélène, having herself asked some questions, remarks
that the imaginary woman replies to her by certain signs of her head and
reveals to her many things that she had known in a former existence. At
the moment of the disappearance of the vision, which had lasted more
than an hour, Mlle. Smith hears the words ("Until presently"). The
continuation, in fact, was not long delayed.

March 6.—Repetition and continuation of the preceding seance, with this
degree of progress—viz., that the visual hallucination of the woman with
the black hair was changed into a total cœnæsthetic
hallucination—*i.e.*, instead of a simple vision an incarnation was
produced. After a very impressive scene of benediction, Hélène gave
herself up to a succession of pantomimes in which she seemed to take
part in a fearful spectacle and to struggle with enemies (scene of the
funeral pile). She ended by seating herself on the divan when she
recovered her normal state, after a series of psychical oscillations,
various attitudes, etc. The last of her phases of mimicry was to tear
off and throw away all the ornaments which an Asiatic princess could
wear—rings on all her fingers, bracelets on her arms and wrists, a
necklace, diadem, ear-rings, girdle, anklets. Once awake, she had no
recollection of the scene of benediction, but recalled quite distinctly
the dreams corresponding to the other pantomimes. She saw again the
black-haired

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

woman, the Oriental landscape of the preceding seance, etc. In the
course of her description the passage of the simple vision into the
scene of incarnation was reflected in a change of the form of her
narrative; she spoke to us of the woman in the third person, then
suddenly adopted the first person, and said "I" in recounting among
other things that she—or the black-haired woman—saw a corpse on the
funeral pile, upon which four men, against whom she struggled,
endeavored to force her to mount. When I drew her attention to this
change of style, she replied that, in fact, it seemed as though she
herself was that woman.

Independently of the Hindoo romance, these two seances are interesting
from a psychological point of view, because the change from a visual,
objective hallucination into total cœnæsthetic and motor hallucination
occurs in it, constituting a complete transformation of the personality.
This generalization of partial automatism at the beginning, this
subjugation and absorption of the ordinary personality by the subliminal
personality, does not always produce amnesia with Hélène, that unique
impression which she might describe on awakening as being herself and
some one else at the same time. (Compare, [p. 119](ipm06.htm#page_119)..md)
It must be noted that in the particular case of the identification of
the black-haired Hindoo woman with Mlle. Hélène Smith of Geneva, the
problem of the causal connection is susceptible of two opposite
solutions (and the same remark will be equally appropriate in the case
of Marie Antoinette).

For the believing spiritist it is because Mlle. Smith

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

is the reincarnation of Simandini—that is to say, because these two
personages, in spite of the separation of their existences in time and
space, are substantially and metaphysically identical—that she really
again becomes Simandini, and feels herself to be a Hindoo princess in
certain favorable somnambulistic states. For the empirical psychologist
it is, on the contrary, because the visual memory of a Hindoo woman (her
origin is of no importance) grows like a parasite and increases in
surface and in depth like a drop of oil, until it invades the whole
impressionable and suggestible personality of the medium—this is why
Mlle. Smith feels herself becoming this woman, and concludes from it
that she formerly actually was that person (see p.
[28](ipm04.htm#page_28)-[30](ipm04.htm#page_30).md). But we must return
from this digression to the Hindoo dream.

March 10.—After various waking visions relating to other subjects,
Hélène enters into somnambulism. For twenty minutes she remains seated
with her hands on the table, by means of raps struck upon which Leopold
informs us that a scene of previous existence concerning me is being
prepared; that I was formerly a Hindoo prince, and that Mlle. Smith,
long before her existence as Marie Antoinette, had then been my wife,
and had been burned on my tomb; that we should ultimately know the name
of this Hindoo prince, as well as the time and place of these events,
but not this evening, nor at the next seance. Then Hélène leaves the
table, and in a silent pantomime of an hour's duration, the meaning of
which, already quite clear, is confirmed by Leopold,

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

she plays, this time to the very close, the scene of the funeral pile as
outlined in the preceding seance.

She goes slowly around the room, as if resisting and carried away in
spite of herself, by turns supplicating and struggling fiercely with
these fictitious men who are bearing her to her death.

All at once, standing on tiptoe, she seems to ascend the pile, hides,
with affright, her face in her hands, recoils in terror, then advances
anew as though pushed from behind. Finally she falls on her knees before
a soft couch, in which she buries her face covered by her clasped hands.
She sobs violently. By means of her little finger, visible between her
cheek and the cushion of the couch, Leopold continues to reply very
clearly by yes and no to my questions. It is the moment at which she
again passes through her agony on the funeral pile: her cries cease
little by little; her respiration becomes more and more panting, then
suddenly stops and remains suspended during some seconds which seem
interminable. It is the end! Her pulse is fortunately strong, though a
little irregular. While I am feeling it, her breathing is re-established
by means of a deep inspiration. After repeated sobs she becomes calm,
and slowly rises and seats herself on a neighboring sofa. This scene of
fatal *dénouement* lasted eight minutes. She finally awakens,
remembering to have seen in a dream the dead body of a man stretched on
a funeral pile, and a woman whom some men were forcing to ascend the
pile against her will.

There was nothing Oriental in the succeeding seances,

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

and the Hindoo dream did not appear again until four weeks later.

April 7.—Mlle. Smith went quickly into a mixed state, in which the
Hindoo dream was mingled and substituted, but only so far as concerns
me, for the feeling of present reality. She believes me absent, asks
other sitters why I have gone away, then rises and begins to walk around
me and look at me, very much surprised at seeing my place occupied by a
stranger with black curly hair and of brown complexion, clothed in a
robe with flowing sleeves of blue, and with gold ornaments. When I speak
to her she turns around and seems to hear my voice from the opposite
side, whither she goes to look for me; when I go towards her she shuns
me; then, when I follow her, she returns to the place I had just left.
After some time occupied in these manœuvres she ceases to be preoccupied
with me and my substitute in the blue robe, and falls into a deeper
state. She takes on the look of a seeress, and describes a kind of
embattled château on a hill, where she perceives and recognizes the
before-mentioned personage with the curly hair, but in another costume
and surrounded by very ugly black men, and women "who are good looking."

Interrogated as to the meaning of this vision, Leopold replies: "*The
city of Tchandraguiri in Kanaraau*" (*sic*); then he adds, a moment
later, "*There is a letter too many in the last word*," and ends by
giving the name *Kanara*, and adding the explanation "*of the fifteenth
century*." Upon awaking from this somnambulistic state, which lasted two
hours, Hélène recalls

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

having had a dream of a personage with curly hair, in a blue robe,
richly ornamented with precious stones, with a cutlass of gold, bent
backward, suspended from a hook. She recollects having held a long
conversation with him in a strange language which she understood and
spoke very well herself, although she no longer knows the meaning of it.

April 14.—Very soon passing into a deep sleep, Mlle. Smith leaves the
table and gives herself up to a silent pantomime, at first smiling, then
finishing in sadness and by a scene of tears.

The meaning of this is explained by Leopold as follows: Hélène is in
India, in her palace of Tchandraguiri, in Kanara, *in 1401*, and she
receives a declaration of love from the personage with the curly hair,
who is the Prince Sivrouka Nayaka, to whom she has been married for
about a year. The prince has flung himself upon his knees, but he
inspires in her a certain fright, and she still regrets having left her
native country in order to follow him. Leopold affirms that she will
remember, on awaking, in French, all that the prince has said to her in
Sanscrit, and that she will repeat to us a part of it, but not all,
because it is too private. After awaking she seems in reality to recall
clearly her entire dream, and tells us that she found herself on a hill,
where they were building . that it was not exactly a city, nor even a
village, since there were no streets; that it was rather an isolated
place in the country, and that which was being built was not in the form
of a house; it had holes rather than windows (a fortress and
loop-holes).

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

She found herself in a fine palace, very beautiful as to its interior,
but not its exterior. There was a great hall, decorated with greens,
with a grand staircase at the end, flanked by statues of gold. She held
a long conversation there, not in French, with the swarthy personage
with the black curly hair and magnificent costume; he finally ascended
the staircase, but she did not follow him.

She appeared to recall well the meaning of all that he said to her in
their conversation in a foreign language, but seemed embarrassed by
these memories, and would not consent to relate them to us.

May 26.—In the course of this seance, as Hélène, in a silent
somnambulism, incarnates the Hindoo princess, I hand her a sheet of
paper and a pencil in the hope of obtaining some text or drawing. After
divers scribblings she traces the single word *Simadini* in letters
which are not at all like her usual hand (see [Fig. 34](#img_fig34).md).

<span id="img_fig34"></span> ![Fig. 34.](img/fig34.jpg.md)

Then taking a fresh sheet, she seems to write on it with a happy smile,
folds it carefully and thrusts it in her corsage, takes it out again,
and rereads it with rapture, etc. Leopold informs us that Simadini is
the name of the Hindoo princess, and that she is reading a love-letter
from Sivrouka. On awaking

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

she remembers having been "in such a beautiful palace," and of having
received there a very interesting letter, but the contents of which she
refused to disclose to us, being evidently too confidential.

I intercalate here two remarks apropos of the name Simadini, which is
one of the first known examples of a handwriting of Mlle. Smith other
than her own normal hand.

First: When, four months later, Leopold began to communicate in writing
(pp. [98](ipm06.htm#page_98)-[103](ipm06.htm#page_103).md), a certain
analogy in the formation of the letters, and the identical way of
holding the pencil, caused us to believe that it was he who had already
traced the word in [Fig. 34](#img_fig34.md). But he has always denied it,
and we have never been able to discover the author of it. Secondly: I
said above, ([p. 204](ipm08.htm#page_204).md), that there had been
divergences in the orthography of this name. Here, in substance, is a
fragment of a letter which Mlle. Smith wrote me in the winter following
(February 18, 1896), depicting to me the vexatious impressions which she
still had concerning it.

". . . I am very sad, and I cannot tell why. I have a heavy heart, and
for what reason I do not know myself. It came to such a pass to-day (you
are going to laugh) that it seemed to me as though my left cheek had
grown perceptibly thinner. I am sure that at this moment you would not
recognize Simadini, so piteous and discouraged is her countenance!
Think, that at the very moment in which I trace these words, I hear a
voice speaking to me in my right ear: "*Not Simadini, but Simandini!*
What do you think that can be? It is very strange, is it not?

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Have we
misunderstood that name? Or, perhaps, may it not be I who have
misunderstood it? . . . "

Mlle. Smith here forgets that the name did not come to her on the first
occasion by auditive hallucination, in which case it might be that she
had misunderstood it, but by writing in somnambulism, which excludes any
mistake of her ordinary consciousness. We must confine ourselves to
registering as a fact, inexplicable hitherto, this correction of a
graphic automatism by an auditive automatism at the end of several
months. Between the two orthographies, I have adopted the second, which
has undergone no further changes, and figures only in the Martian texts
([10](ipm08.htm#an_text10), [16](ipm08.htm#an_text16).md).

June 16.—Fuller repetition of the scene of the letter of the Hindoo
prince. Impossible to learn the contents of it. I suggest to her to
remember and to relate them to us upon awakening, but Leopold replies:
"*She will not reveal it. Why have you not gained her confidence
sufficiently, that she may tell you everything without fear?*" and the
suggestion had no effect.

June 30.—Somnambulism with silent pantomime, the meaning of which is
given by Leopold: It is the scene of the betrothal of Simandini and
Sivrouka at Tchandraguiri. There is first a phase of oppression, with
sighs and gestures as of a struggle against various pretenders who wish
to seize her; then laughter and ecstasy, provoked by the arrival of
Sivrouka, who delivers her and drives off his rivals; finally, joy and
admiration on accepting the flowers and jewels which he offers her.

I have reported, too much at length perhaps,

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

though still greatly abridged, these first appearances of the Oriental
romance, because they form a continuous series, in the reverse of . the
chronological order, conformably to a spiritistic theory which holds
that in these memories of previous existences the mediumistic memory
goes back and recovers the "images" of the more recent events before
those which are more remote. During this first period of four months,
the Hindoo cycle made irruption into eight seances. (about one-twentieth
of those at which I have been present since I have had knowledge of
them), and has manifested itself somewhat like the panorama of a magic
lantern, unfolding itself in successive tableaux.

This whole history can be summed up by a few principal tableaux: there
was the scene of the death on the funeral pile, prepared in vision in
the seance of the 6th of March and executed on the 10th; then the scene
of the interior of the palace and the fortress in process of
construction (7th and 14th of April); that of the love-letter (26th of
May and 16th of June); finally, the betrothal (30th of June). There must
be added to these the grand tableau at the beginning, first presented in
vision the 3d of March, then realized three days later with the
astonishing exclamation Atièyâ Ganapatinâmâ. The meaning of this scene
has never been explained by Leopold, but seems to be quite clear. A
species of prologue can be seen in it, or even apotheosis, inaugurating
the entire romance; it is the Hindoo princess of four centuries ago
recognizing her lord and master in flesh and blood, under the unexpected
form of a university

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

professor, whom she greets with an emphasis wholly Oriental in blessing
him, very appropriately, in the name of the divinity of science and of
wisdom—since Ganapati is an equivalent of Ganesâ, the god with the head
of an elephant, patron of sages and savants.

It can be easily conceived that these two words of Oriental resonance,
spoken aloud at a period at which the Martian was not yet born—and
followed by all the conversations unfortunately unheard by us, which at
the waking at the subsequent seances Hélène recalled having held in a
strange language (in *Sanscrit*, according to Leopold) with the Hindoo
prince of her dreams—would excite a lively curiosity and a desire to
obtain longer audible fragments of this unknown idiom. It was only in
September, 1895, that this satisfaction was afforded us, during a seance
at which the Oriental romance, which had given no further sign of life
since the month of June, made a new outbreak. Starting from that moment,
it has never ceased during these four years to reappear irregularly,
and, suffering some eclipses, accompanied on each occasion by words of a
*Sanscritoid* aspect. But the plot of the romance has no longer the same
clearness that it showed at the beginning. In place of tableaux linking
themselves in a regular chronological order, they are often no more than
confused reminiscences, memories, without precise bonds between them,
which gush forth from the memory of Simandini. As the fragments of our
youthful years surge up incoherent and pell-mell in our dreams, Mlle.
Smith, too, finds herself easily assailed in her somnambulisms by
visions connected

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

with certain episodes, and not forming an entire continuation of
supposed Asiatic pre-existence.

Some of these scenes concern her life as a young Arab girl. One sees her
there, for example, playing joyously with her little monkey, Mitidja; or
copying an Arab text (see [Fig. 35](#img_fig35), [p. 312](#page_312).md),
which her father, the sheik, surrounded by his tribes, furnishes her; or
embarking on a strange boat, escorted by black Hindoos, for her new
country, etc. But much the larger number of her somnambulistic trances
and her spontaneous visions have reference to her life in India and to
the details of her daily existence. Her bath, which the faithful
domestic Adèl prepares for her; her walks and reveries in the splendid
gardens of the palace, all full of a luxurious vegetation and rare birds
of brilliant colors; her scenes of tenderness and of affectionate
effusions—always stamped, this is to be noted, with the most perfect
propriety—towards the Prince Sivrouka, when he is kindly disposed;
scenes of regret also and abundant tears for the memory of her far-off
native land, when the capricious and brutal humor of the Oriental despot
makes itself too severely felt; conversation with the fakir Kanga;
devotions and religious ceremonies before some Buddhist image, etc., all
this forms an *ensemble* extremely varied and full of local color. There
is in the whole being of Simandini—in the expression of her countenance
(Hélène almost always has her large eyes open in this somnambulism), in
her movements, in the quality of her voice when she speaks or chants
Hindoo—a languishing grace, an abandon, a melancholy

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

sweetness, a something of languor and of charm, which corresponds
wonderfully with the character of the Orient, as the spectators conceive
it to be, who, like me, have never been there, etc. With all this a
bearing always full of *noblesse* and dignity conforms to that which one
would expect of a princess; there are no dances, for example, nothing of
the *bayadère*.

Mlle. Smith is really very wonderful in her Hindoo somnambulisms. The
way in which Simandini seats herself on the ground, her legs crossed, or
half stretched out, nonchalantly leaning her arms or her head against a
Sivrouka, who is sometimes real (when in her incomplete trance she takes
me for her prince), sometimes imaginary; the religious and solemn
gravity of her prostrations when, after having for a long time balanced
the fictitious brazier, she crosses her extended hands on her breast,
kneeling and bowing herself three times, her forehead striking the
ground; the melancholy sweetness of her chants in a minor key, wailing
and plaintive melodies, which unfold themselves in certain flute-like
notes, prolonged in a slow decrescendo, and only dying away at the end
of a single note held for fully fourteen seconds; the agile suppleness
of her swaying and serpentine movements, when she amuses herself with
her imaginary monkey, caresses it, embraces it, excites it, scolds it
laughingly, and makes it repeat all its tricks—all this so varied
mimicry and Oriental speech have such a stamp of originality, of ease,
of naturalness, that one asks in amazement whence it comes to this
little daughter

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

of Lake Leman, without artistic education or special knowledge of the
Orient—a perfection of play to which the best actress, without doubt,
could only attain at the price of prolonged studies or a sojourn on the
banks of the Ganges.

The problem, as I have already stated, is not yet solved, and I am
obliged still to endeavor to discover whence Hélène Smith has derived
her ideas in regard to India. It seems that the more simple method would
be to take advantage of the hypnotic state of the seances to obtain a
confession from Hélène's subconscious memory, and persuade it to
disclose the secret; but my efforts in that direction have not as yet
succeeded. It is doubtless incompetency on my part, and I will end,
perhaps—or some one better qualified than I—in finding the joint in the
armor. The fact is that hitherto I have always run up against Leopold,
who will not allow himself to be ejected or ridiculed, and who has never
ceased to affirm that the Sanscrit, Simandini, and the rest are
authentic. All the trails which I have thought I have discovered—and
they are already numerous—have proved false. The reader must pardon me
for not going into the details of my failures in this regard.

If it was only a question of the Hindoo pantomime the mystery would not
be so great: some recitations at school, newspaper articles concerning
the incineration of the widows of Malabar, engravings and descriptions
relative to the civil and religious life of India, etc.—in short, the
varied sources of information which, in a civilized country and at our
epoch

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

of cosmopolitanism, inevitably meet some time or other the eyes or ears
of every one of us and form part of the equipment (conscious or
unconscious) of every individual who is not altogether uncultured, would
more than suffice to explain the scene of the funeral pile, the
prostrations, and the varied attitudes. There are, indeed, some
well-known examples showing how small a thing a cunning intelligence,
furnished with a good memory and a fertile and plastic imagination,
needs in order to reconstruct or fabricate out of nothing a complex
edifice, having every appearance of authenticity, and capable of holding
in check for a considerable length of time the perspicacity even of
skilled minds. But that which conscious and reflecting labor has
succeeded in accomplishing in the cases referred to, the subliminal
faculties can execute to a much higher degree of perfection in the case
of persons subject to automatic tendencies.

But two points remain, which complicate the case of the Hindoo romance
and seem to defy—thus far, at least—all normal explanation, because they
surpass the limits of a simple play of the imagination These are the
precise *historical* information given by Leopold, some of which can be,
in a certain sense, verified; and the Hindoo *language* spoken by
Simandini, which contains words more or less recognizable, the real
meaning of which is adapted to the situation in which they have been
spoken. But, even if Hélène's imagination could have reconstructed the
manners and customs and scenes of the Orient from the general
information floating in some way in cosmopolitan

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

atmosphere, still one cannot conceive whence she has derived her
knowledge of the language and of certain obscure episodes in the history
of India. These two points deserve to be examined separately.

#### II. SIVROUKA AND M. DE MARLÈS

When Kanara, Sivrouka, Simandini, etc., successively made their
appearance, slowly spelled out by Leopold, with the date of 1401, my
companions of the seance and I hastened to investigate Brouillet, who
brought to mind the province of Malabar in connection with the first of
these names, but left us in utter darkness as to the others. The
geography of Vivien Saint-Martin revealed the existence of no fewer than
three Tchandraguiris—a hill, a river, and a small town in the district
of Arcot-Nord (Madras). The latter—or rather its citadel on the summit
of the hill—answered quite well to the description given by Hélène in
her visions of the 7th and 14th of April, but the construction of this
fortress dates back only to 1510, and this locality is very far removed
from the Kanara where Leopold locates this entire story (see pp.
[286](#page_286)-[288](#page_288).md).

As to Sivrouka and his surroundings, neither biographical dictionaries
nor encyclopædias were able to furnish me the least hint on this
subject. Living historians or Orientalists to whom I addressed myself
were of a discouraging unanimity in replying that they did not recognize
even the names, the historic correctness of which they regarded as
doubtful, and

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

they did not at all remember having met with them in works of fiction.

"I have there," said a learned professor of history, showing me a
good-sized bookcase, "numerous works on the history of India; but they
relate only to the north of the peninsula; and as to what transpired in
the south during the period to which you refer, we know almost nothing.
Your names are unknown to me and do not recall to my mind any personage,
real or fictitious."

"The very name of Sivrouka seems to me improbable as a Hindoo name"
replied another, who was unable to give me any more information on the
subject.

"I greatly regret," wrote a third, on receipt of Hélène's texts, "not to
have succeeded in getting upon the trail of the recollections of your
medium. I cannot think of any book which would be likely to furnish the
information. Tchandraguiri and Mangalore (where several scenes of the
Hindoo cycle are located) are correct, but Madras (*id*.) did not exist
in 1401. Its name and foundation do not go further back than the
seventeenth century. That region was then a dependency of the kingdom of
Vijayanagara, and a naïk in the service of those princes resided
successively at Tchandraguiri and at Mangalore. I can make nothing of
Sivrouka; the king of Vijayanagara, in 1402, was Bukkha II., or Bukkha
called Siribukkha, Tiribukkha. But the naïk who so often changed his
residence was evidently not a ruling prince. Was it a romance? Certain
details caused me to doubt it. A romancer

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

so careful in regard to local coloring as to introduce into his
narrative Indian words, would not have given the title of the prince
under the Sanscrit form *Nayaka*, but would have used the vulgar form
naïk; he would not have made the wife, in speaking to her husband, call
him by his name Sivrouka (as Hélène constantly does in this
somnambulism). I have no recollection of having read anything of this
kind, and I know of no work of fiction from which the story might have
been taken."

It will be readily understood that I was annoyed at not being able to
establish clearly my presumed Asiatic previous existence. However, while
professional science was administering to me these cold douches, I
continued, on my own account, to search the libraries at my disposal,
and here one fine day I accidentally came across, in an old history of
India, in six volumes, by a man named De Marlès, the following passages:

"Kanara and the neighboring provinces on the side towards Delhi may be
regarded as the Georgia of Hindustan; it is there, it is said, that the
most beautiful women are to be found; the natives, however, are very
jealous in guarding them, and do not often allow them to be seen by
strangers."

"Tchandraguiri, which signifies *Mountain of the Moon*, is a vast
fortress constructed, in 1401, by the rajah Sivrouka Nayaka. This
prince, as also his successors, belonged to the sect of the Djaïns."

At last! With what a beating heart did I fasten my eyes on that
irrefutable historic evidence that my preceding incarnation, under the
beautiful skies of

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> India was not a
myth! I felt new life in my veins. I reread twenty times those blessed
lines, and took a copy of them to send to those pretended savants who
were ignorant even of the name of Sivrouka, and allowed doubts to be
cast upon his reality.

Alas! my triumph was of brief duration. It seems that the testimony of
De Marlès is not of the highest order. This author is held in slight
esteem in well-informed circles, as may be seen from the following
passage in a letter of M. Barth, which merely expresses, in a vigorous
and lively manner, an opinion which other specialists have
confirmed: <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21.md)

"It is through a letter of M. Flournoy that I learn that there has
existed since 1828 in Paris, printed in Roman characters, a history of
India by De Marlès containing a statement that the fortress of
Candragiri was built in 1401, and that its founder was Sivrouka Nayaka.
What new facts there are in books one no longer consults! And that of De
Marlès is, indeed, one of those that are no longer consulted. I found it
yesterday at the library of the Institute. It would have been impossible
to have done worse, even in 1828. But sometimes we find pearls in a
dung-hill, and perhaps this Sivrouka Nayaka is one of them.
Unfortunately, the author gives no hint as to the
[sources](errata.htm#5.md) of his information; and later, in his fourth
volume, in which he narrates the history of the twelfth to the sixteenth
centuries,

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

he does not say a word more either of Candragiri or of Sivrouka."

Here was a terrible blow to my Hindoo existence, which poor M. de Marlès
had so well established for me.

Nevertheless, the hope still lingers that his information, although not
reproduced by later writers more highly esteemed, may perhaps still be
correct. This is quite possible, since science has not yet spoken its
last word in this department, hardly even its first, if men still more
competent may be believed, beginning with M. Barth himself.

"Up to the present moment," says he, "there is no trustworthy history of
the south of the peninsula. . . . The Dravidian languages of India is a
domain very unfamiliar to the majority of Indian scholars. . . . There
is nothing to draw upon but some works and monographs on the aboriginal
chronicles and legendary traditions; and it would be necessary to know
the Dravidian languages on the one hand and Arabic on the other, to be
able to examine or even consult them with profit. The only works which
we are able to follow are those which undertake to make this history by
epigraphic documents, but these, thus far, say nothing of Simandini, of
Adèl, of Mitidja, or even of Sivrouka."

This silence of epigraphy is certainly to be regretted; but who knows
whether it will not some day enlighten us by proving De Marlès to be
right—and also Leopold—by narrating to us the true story of the Hindoo
princess, the Arabian monkey, and the slave Adèl! It costs nothing to
hope! Already,

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

thanks again to M. Barth, I have gained information concerning another
Tchandraguiri than the one of the District of North Arcot mentioned by
Vivien de Saint-Martin—*i.e.*, a Tchandraguiri, situated in South
Kanara, and in the citadel of which a hitherto unknown inscription has
been discovered which must date back to the time of King Harihara II.,
of Vijayanagara, who reigned at the beginning of the fifteenth
century. <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22.md) Here is something
approaching the somnambulistic revelations of Mlle. Smith. While
awaiting their definite confirmation by new archæological discoveries,
traces of Sivrouka may be sought for in the earlier works upon which De
Marlès must have drawn. Unfortunately these works are not easy to find,
and are inconvenient to consult. Professor Michel, of the University of
Liège, has had the kindness to run through those of Buchanan <span
id="fr_23"></span>[†](#fn_23.md) and of Rennell <span
id="fr_24"></span>[‡](#fn_24.md) but without result.

If De Marlès did not invent Sivrouka out of whole cloth, which is hardly
supposable, it was very probably in the translation of Ferishta by
Dow, <span id="fr_25"></span>[§](#fn_25.md) that he

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

found his facts. I have, unhappily, not yet been able myself to consult
that very rare work, which is not to be found in Geneva, so far as I am
aware, nor to obtain accurate information regarding its contents.

The uncertainty which hovers over the historical problem extends,
naturally, to the psychological problem also. It is clear that if
certain inscriptions, or even some old work, should come some day to
tell us not only of Sivrouka, but of Simandini, of Adèl, and the other
personages who figure in Hélène's Hindoo romance, but of whom De Marlès
does not whisper a word, we should no longer care about the latter
author, and the question would then be as follows: Could Mlle. Smith
have had cognizance of these early works, and if not, how do their
contents reappear in her somnambulism? But in the actual condition of
things, and all allowance made for possible surprises in the future, I
do not hesitate to regard as the more probable and more rational
supposition, that it was really the passage of De Marlès, quoted above,
which furnished he subliminal memory of Hélène the precise date of
1401—and the three names of the fortress, the province, and the rajah.

Various other traits of the visions of Mlle. Smith betray likewise the
same inspiration. The scene in which she sees them engaged in building,
and her description of that which is being built, suggest clearly the
idea of a fortress furnished by the text. The translation *Mountain of
the Moon* contributed to

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

causing her to locate the scene upon a hill. The beauty of the women of
the country, on which De Marlès dwells, has its echo in the remark of
Hélène that the women whom she sees are "good looking." Finally, the
princely character of Sivrouka, mentioned by De Marlès, is found
throughout the length of the entire romance, and displays itself in the
splendor of his costume, of the palace, of the gardens, etc.

It is possible that the names and the nationality of the other
personages—Simandini, Adèl, the monkey, the sheik, etc.—may have been
borrowed from some unknown work, which would be, for the Arabian portion
of the narrative, the pendant to De Marlès for the Hindoo past.

This may be, but it is not necessary. It is permissible to regard,
provisionally, the imaginations built up around Sivrouka, as an
ingenious expedient, by means of which Hélène's imagination finds a way
of binding to that central figure, and also of blending in a single
whole, her other Oriental memories not specifically Hindoo.

The hypothesis which I am about to assume, which connects directly with
De Marlès the data of Hélène's Asiatic dream, contained likewise in the
work of that author, arouses, nevertheless, two objections. The first is
drawn from the slight differences of orthography between the text of De
Marlès and the words spoken by Leopold. This difficulty is only
insurmountable by elevating the inerrancy of the subliminal memory to
the plane of absolute infallibility, though the latter must be admitted
to be ordinarily very much superior to that of the conscious

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

memory. But the favorite comparison of the forgotten memories,
reappearing in somnambulisms, to unchangeable, absolutely true
photographic impressions, causes us readily to exaggerate the fidelity
of the unconscious memory-images. The example of certain dreams—in which
memories of childhood sometimes return with a startling clearness, but,
nevertheless, altered or distorted in some details, conformably to later
experiences or to recent events—suffices to show that automatisms of the
memory are not always sheltered by influences of the imagination, nor
absolutely free from error.

In this particular case there are two divergences between De Marlès and
Leopold: the latter has substituted a *k* for the *c* in Nayaca, and has
omitted the *n* in Tchandraguiri (compare pp. [286](#page_286.md) and
[288](#page_288).md). Another mistake, which he immediately corrected,
consisting in dictating first *Kanaraau*, was evidently a confusion such
as frequently occurs in writing, occasioned by a too rapid passing from
the word *Kanara* to the information following, and already about to
come—"*au* fifteenth century." The spelling Nayaka, instead of Nayaca,
is attributable to the termination of the word *Sivrouka*, which
precedes it. Identity of pronunciation has produced identity of
orthography.

The second objection is of a negative character. It consists in the
impossibility of showing where, when, or how Mlle. Smith obtained
cognizance of the text of De Marlès.

I admit frankly that I know nothing about it, and I give full credit to
Hélène for the indomitable and

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

persevering energy with which she has never ceased to protest against my
hypothesis, which has the faculty of exasperating her in the highest
degree—and one readily understands that it would naturally do so. For it
is in vain that she digs down to the very bottom of her memories; she
does not discover the slightest trace of this work. And not only that,
but how can one seriously suppose that she has ever had the slightest
intimation of it, since she never studied the history of India, has
neither read nor heard anything on the subject, the very name of De
Marlès having been utterly unknown to her up to the day on which she
learned that I suspected that author of being the source of the Hindoo
romance? It must-indeed, be admitted that the idea of the passage in
question having come before the eyes or ears of Mlle. Smith through any
ordinary channel seems a trifle absurd. I only know in Geneva of two
copies of the work of De Marlès, both covered with dust—the one
belonging to the Société de Lecture, a private association of which none
of the Smith family nor any friend of theirs was ever a member; the
other in the Public Library, where, among the thousands of more
interesting and more modern books, it is now very rarely consulted. It
could only have happened, therefore, by a combination of absolutely
exceptional and almost unimaginable circumstances that the work of De
Marlès could have found its way into Hélène's hands; and how could it
have done so and she not have the slightest recollection of it?

I acknowledge the force of this argument, and that the wisest thing to
do is to leave the matter in suspense.

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But if the
question must be decided, though there is scarcely any choice,
extravagance for extravagance, I still prefer the hypothesis which only
invokes natural possibilities to that which appeals to occult causes.

Possibly the work of De Marlès may have been heard of by Mlle. Smith
without her normal consciousness taking note of it. Either when among
her friends or acquaintances, or with her parents, she might have heard
some passages read in her young days, etc. The fact that she has no
conscious recollection of it proves nothing against such a supposition
to any one who is at all familiar with the play of our faculties.

It goes without saying that my method of reasoning is the inverse of
that which generally prevails in spiritistic circles. Witness the
celebrated Aksakoff, as a single example, who, discovering that a
curious typtological message was found already in print in a book which
could not readily have come to the knowledge of the medium, and
recognizing the fact that the message came from that book, says: "But in
what way could the brain of the medium have been made aware of the
contents of the book? There is the mystery. *I refuse to admit that it
could have been through natural means. I believe it was by some occult
process*."

Very well! this is plain language, and the frankness of the declaration
charms me to such a degree that I cannot resist the temptation to
appropriate it for myself in the case of Mlle. Smith and M. de Marlès,
transposing only two words: "*I refuse to admit that it* 

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

*could have been through occult means. I believe it was by some natural
process*." Evidently, in doubtful cases (which are in an enormous
majority), in which the natural and the occult explanations are in
direct opposition, without the possibility of a material demonstration
as to which is true in fact, a decision must be reached in accordance
with personal taste and feeling. Between these two methodological points
of view a reconciliation is scarcely possible. The reader may think what
he will. But, right or wrong, I claim the first of these as my opinion,
and regard the tendency of the supernatural and occult to substitute
themselves, on account of the insufficiency of our knowledge, for the
acquired rights of natural hypothesis, as an unjustifiable reversal of
rôles.

To those who shall find my hypothesis decidedly too extravagant—or too
simple—remains a choice between the multiple forms of occult hypothesis.
Shall it be Leopold who, in his all-powerful state of disincarnation,
has read in the closed volume of De Marlès? Or has there, indeed, been a
telepathic transmission of this passage from the brain of some unknown
terrestrial reader to that of Mlle. Smith? Shall it be with her a case
of clairvoyance, of lucidity, of intuition in the astral body; or,
again, of trickery on the part of some facetious spirit? And if, taking
the reincarnationist theory seriously, it is admitted that Sivrouka,
1401, and Tchandraguiri, are indeed really reminiscences of the past
life of Simandini, how explain that curious coincidence in their choice
and their spelling with precisely the designations used by M. de Marlès?

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

Verily my brain reels in the midst of all these alternatives, and I
hasten to pass to another subject.

#### III. THE ARAB ELEMENTS OF THE ORIENTAL CYCLE

Here is a problem for the partisans of the Oriental pre-existence of
Mlle. Smith: How comes it that, recovering in her trances the use of the
Hindoo which she formerly spoke at the court of Sivrouka, she has
totally forgotten Arabian, which, however, had been her mother-tongue in
that same previous existence, and which she was accustomed to use
exclusively up to the time of her departure from her native land, in her
eighteenth year?

If the emotions caused by her royal marriage had destroyed all memory of
the past, one could understand how the idiom might have become obscured
along with the rest in that loss of memory of her life as a young girl.

But such was not the case. She preserved very vivid memories of her
father the sheik, of his tents gleaming in the sunlight, of the people,
of the camels and landscapes of Arabia. In many seances and spontaneous
visions she finds herself carried back to that first half of her Asiatic
existence. But then she narrates in French that which is unfolded before
her eyes, or gives herself up to a silent pantomime. She has never
spoken or written anything at all resembling Arabian. Can it be supposed
that already in her Hindoo life she had assimilated the language of her

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

adopted country to the point of losing even the latent memories of her
maternal language? That would be contrary to all known psychological
analogies.

However, in saying that Hélène has never written or spoken Arabian I
exaggerate. On one occasion she spoke four words of it. It is the
exception which proves the rule. In fact, not only did she fail to
accompany that single text with any pronunciation, but she executed it
as a drawing, and apparently copied, without comprehending, a model
which an imaginary person presented to her.

Here is a review of that incident:

October 27, 1895.—Shortly after the beginning of the seance Mlle. Smith
has an Arabian vision: "Look at those tents! There are no stones here—it
is all sand . . . \[she counts the tents one by one\]. There are twenty
of them. That one is beautiful. Don't you find it so, M. Lemaître—that
largest one? It is fastened by cords and small stakes. . . ." etc. Then
she describes the personages: The one who is smoking, seated in a
corner, with his legs crossed; others all black (the table says they are
negroes, and that the scene takes place in Arabia); then a man clothed
in white, whom Hélène has the feeling of knowing without being able to
recognize him; she places her finger upon her forehead, in the attitude
of a person trying to remember, and the table (on which she has her left
hand) informs us then that she lived in Arabia in her life as Simandini,
and that she is trying to recollect those far-distant times. A quite
long scene follows, in which her Arab reminiscences alternate and mingle
with the consciousness of the

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

real environment, though she neither sees nor hears us. At this point a
state of mental confusion ensues, which seems to be very painful to her.

". . . M. Lemaître! M. Flournoy! are you there? Answer me, then. Did I
not come here this evening? If only I could . . . however, I am not *en
voyage*. . . . I really believe it is Sunday at last . . . I understand
nothing more about it. I think my brain is so tired that all my ideas
are mixed up . . . however, I am not dreaming. . . . It seems to me that
I have also lived with them . . . \[the sitters at the table\], and with
them \[the Arabs of her vision\]. . . . But I know them—all those men.
Tell me, then, who you are! Did you arrive in Geneva lately? \[They are,
says the table, Arabs who lived five centuries ago, among them the
father of Simandini.\] Come nearer, then, come here. I want you to speak
to me! M. Lemaître! Oh, that pretty little sketch! What is that sketch?
\[The table having said that it is a drawing which her father is
presenting to her, and that she can copy it, a pencil and a sheet of
paper are placed before her, the latter of which seems to be transformed
into papyrus in her dream.\] That green leaf is pretty. Of what plant is
it the leaf? I think I have a pencil; I am going to try to make this
sketch. . . ."

After the usual struggle between the two methods of holding the pencil
(see pp. [100](ipm06.htm#page_100)-[102](ipm06.htm#page_102).md), she
yields to Leopold's manner of holding it, saying, "So much the worse";
then traces, slowly and with great care, [Fig. 35](#img_fig35.md), from
left to right, often raising her eyes to her imaginary model, as if
copying a drawing. After

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

which she goes profoundly asleep; then other somnambulisms come.

On awaking she recollects the state of confusion through which she had
passed. "Wretched evening," said she. "I was unhappy. I felt that I was
living here, as I always have, and I saw some things as though I were a
foreigner. I was with you, but I was living elsewhere," etc.

This whole scene gives the distinct impression that the Arab phrase only
existed in Hélène's recollection as a visual memory, without meaning or
any verbal images. It was for her an incomprehensible piece of writing,
a simple drawing, like Chinese or Japanese characters would be for us.
Evidently it was a text which had come before her eyes at some
propitious moment, and, having been absorbed by the subliminal
imagination—always on the watch for matters of Oriental aspect—had been
incorporated in a scene of the Asiatic dream.

Such, at least, is the supposition which seems to me the most plausible.
For, to regard it as a fragment of Arabian, which Hélène could speak and
write fluently if she were in an appropriate state of somnambulism—as
Leopold pretended one day to be the fact—seems to me an hypothesis still
more

<span id="img_fig35"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
35](tn/fig35.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig35.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 35. Arabian text drawn from left to right by Mlle. Smith in hemisomnambulism: **elqalil men elhabib ktsir**, *the little from the friend* (*is*) *much*. Natural size."</span> |

</div>

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

arbitrary, and little in accord with the other trance phenomena of Mlle.
Smith.

Occasions have not been wanting to her in the five years during which
her exotic romances have been unfolding themselves to make use of her
supposed philological reserves by speaking and writing Arabian, if her
subliminal memory had so desired.

She has presented all degrees and kinds of somnambulism, and more
visions of Arabia than could have failed to awaken by association the
corresponding idiom, if it really was slumbering in her. The complete
and total isolation of the text given above, in the midst of this flood
of Oriental scenes, seems to me, therefore, to testify strongly in favor
of my supposition that it has to do with a visual flash, unique in its
kind, accidentally encountered and stored up, and that the Asiatic
secondary. personality of Mlle. Smith is absolutely ignorant of Arabic.

Concerning the other details of the Arab somnambulisms of Hélène, I have
nothing to say; they do not go beyond the ideas which she could
unconsciously have gathered from the surrounding environment; and to the
other sources of her knowledge must be added whatever she might have
heard from her father, who had at one time lived in Algeria.

The proper names connected with the Arab scenes, with the possible
exception of Pirux, awaken certain associations of ideas, without making
it possible to affirm anything with certainty as to their origin.

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

#### IV. THE HINDOO LANGUAGE OF MLLE. SMITH

The nature of the Hindoo language of Hélène is less easy to explain
clearly than that of the Martian, because it has never been possible to
obtain either a literal translation of it or written texts. Besides,
being ignorant of the numberless dialects of ancient and modern India,
and not believing it to be incumbent upon me to devote myself to their
study solely that I might be able to appreciate at their proper value
the philological exploits of an entranced medium, I am not in a
situation to allow myself any personal judgment in regard to this
matter.

There is not even left to me the resource of placing the parts of the
process as a whole before the reader, as I have done in the case of the
Martian, for the reason that our ignorance of Hélène's Hindoo, added to
her rapid and indistinct pronunciation—a real prattle sometimes—has
caused us to lose the greater part of the numerous words heard in the
course of some thirty Oriental scenes scattered over a space of four
years.

Even the fragments which we have been able to note down present for the
most part so much uncertainty that it would be idle to publish all of
them. I have communicated the best of them to several distinguished
Oriental scholars. From certain information which they have kindly given
me, it appears that the soi-disant Hindoo of Hélène is not any fixed
idiom known to these specialists; but, on the other hand, there are to
be found in it, more or less

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

disfigured and difficult to recognize, certain terms or roots which
approach more nearly to Sanscrit than any actual language of India, and
the meaning of which often very well corresponds with the situations in
which these words have been uttered. I proceed to give some examples of
them:

 

1\. The two words, **atiêyâ ganapatinâmâ**, which inaugurated the Hindoo
language on the 6th of March, 1895 (see [p. 282](#page_282).md), and which
were invested at that moment, in the mouth of Simandini, with the
evident meaning of a formula of salutation or of benediction, addressed
to her late husband, inopportunely returned, were articulated in a
manner so impressive and so solemn that their pronunciation leaves
scarcely any room for doubt.

It is all the more interesting to ascertain the accord of my scientist
correspondents upon the value of these two words; the first recalls to
them nothing precise or applicable to the situation, but the second is a
flattering and very appropriate allusion to the divinity of the Hindoo
Pantheon, which is more actively interesting to the professional world.

M. P. Oltramare, to whom I sent these words, without saying anything as
to their source, replied: "There is nothing more simple than the word
**ganapatinâmâ**; it means, '*who bears the name of Ganapati*,' which is
the same as *Ganesa*. . . . As to **atiêyâ**, that word has not a Hindoo
appearance; it might perhaps be **atreya**, which, it seems, serves as a
designation for women who have suffered an abortion, an explication
which, however, I do not guarantee. \[In order to

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

affirm more concerning these words, it would be necessary to know\]
whether they are really Sanscrit, since if they belong to the vulgar
languages, I excuse myself absolutely."

M. Glardon, who is more familiar with the vulgar languages and speaks
Hindustani fluently, did not hint to me of any other meaning for
**atiêyâ** and saw also in the other word "an epithet of honor,
literally, '*named Ganapati*,' familiar name of the god Ganesa."

M. de Saussure also found no meaning whatever for the first term, in
which he inclines now to see an arbitrary creation of the Martian order,
and he remarked that in the second, "the two words, **Ganapati**,
well-known divinity, and **nâmâ**, *name*, are constructed together, in
some inexplicable manner, but not necessarily false. It is quite
curious," adds he, "that this fragment, which is mixed up with the name
of a god, may be properly pronounced with a kind of solemn emphasis and
a gesture of religious benediction. This denotes, indeed, an intelligent
and intentional use."

According to this first brief specimen, therefore, Hélène's Hindoo
appears to be a mixture of improvised articulations and of veritable
Sanscrit words adapted to the situation. Later specimens only serve to
corroborate this impression.

 

2\. The next outbreak of Hindoo took place five months later (September
15, 1895), in the midst of a very long Oriental seance, in which I only
refer to points especially interesting to us—to wit, Hélène's supposed
Sanscrit, the French interpretation which

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Leopold gave of
it, and the curious evidences of agreement of these two texts.

In one tender scene, with sighs and tears, in connection with Sivrouka,
Hélène uttered in an exceedingly sweet voice the following words: **ou
mama priva** (or **prira**, **priya**)—**mama radisivou**—**mama sadiou
sivrouka**—**apa tava va signa damasa**—**simia damasa bagda sivrouka**.
During the various phases which precede the awaking, I ask Leopold the
meaning of these words. He at first refused to give it, saying, "Find it
out yourself"; then, as I insist, "I would have preferred that you found
it out yourself." I beg him to give at least the correct spelling of an
Oriental text furnished us in so uncertain a manner, but he disappeared,
saying he was ignorant of Sanscrit. By means of later questions which he
answers by "yes" and "no," it is discovered that they are words of love
from Simandini to her husband, who was about to leave her for a voyage
to his principality. Then suddenly, as the awaking seems to be
approaching, Leopold moves the index-finger feverishly, and commences to
dictate impatiently: "*Hasten* \[to spell\] . . . My good, my excellent,
my dearly loved Sivrouka, without thee where to find happiness?" His
answers to our questions lead us to understand that this is the
substantial meaning of all the Sanscrit spoken that evening (and given
above), that it is not he, Leopold, who speaks this language to Hélène,
because he does not understand it, but that it is indeed he who gives us
the French equivalent for it, not by a literal translation of the words
themselves, since he does not understand them, but by interpreting

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

the inmost feelings of Mlle. Smith, with which he is perfectly familiar.
Shortly afterwards Hélène awakes without recollection.

According to M. de Saussure there are certainly in this text some
Sanscrit fragments answering more or less to the interpretation of
Leopold. The most clear are **mama priya**, which signifies *my dear*,
*my dearly loved*, and **mama sadiou** (corrected to **sâdhô**), *my
good*, *my excellent*. The rest of the phrase is less satisfactory in
its present condition; **tava** could well be *of thee*, but **apa
tava** is a pure barbarism, if it is intended for *far from thee*. In
the same way the syllable **bag** in **bagda** seems to mean,
independently of the translation of Leopold, **bhâga**, happiness, but
is surrounded by incomprehensible syllables.

 

3\. In a subsequent seance (December 1, 1895), Hélène gave herself up to
a varied series of somnambulistic pantomimes representing scenes in the
life of Simandini, which were thought to be located at Mangalore, and in
the course of which several Hindoo words escaped her, of which,
unhappily, no interpretation could be obtained from Leopold. But here
again, if one is not too difficult to satisfy, a meaning more or less
adapted to the pantomime is finally discovered.

In the midst of a playful scene with her little monkey, Mitidja, she
tells him in her sweetest and most harmonious tones (A), **mama kana
sour** (or **sourde**) **mitidya . . . kana mitidya** (*ter*). Later,
answering her imaginary prince, who, according to Leopold,

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

has just given her a severe admonition (the reason for which is not
known), and to which she listened with an air of forced submission, and,
almost sneeringly, she tells him (B), **adaprati tava sivrouka . . . .
nô simyô sinonyedô . . . on yediô sivrouka**. Returning to a better
feeling and leaning towards him, she murmurs with a charming smile (C)
**mama plia . . . mama naximi** (or **naxmi**) **sivrouka . . . aô laos,
mi sivrouka**.

In the fragment (A), one may suppose the **mama kana** to be a term of
affection, taking the **kana** to be equivalent to the Sanscrit *kânta*,
"beloved," or *kanistha*, "darling," unless it be translated, as M.
Glardon does, **kana** (corrected to **khana**) **mitidya** *to eat for
Mitidja*.

In the phrase (B), according to M. de Saussure, "the last words might,
with some show of reason, make us think of the word **anyediuh**, *the
following day*, or, *another day*, repeated twice; and, on the other
hand, the first word might be transformed into **adya-prabhrti**,
*starting from to-day;* which, combined with other syllables, themselves
conventionally triturated, might give something like: **adya-pra-bhrti
tava, sivruka . yôshin . . . na anyediuh, anyediuh**: *from to-day, of
thee, Sivrouka, that I am . . . wife . . . not another day, another
day*—which, besides (if it has any meaning at all,) has scarcely any
connection with the scene."

In the phrase (C) the words **mama plia** evidently mean the same as the
words above, **mama priya**, *my beloved;* **naxmi** might be
**lakshmî**, *beauty and* 

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

*fortune;* and the last words might contain **asmi**, *I am*.

While, therefore, recognizing some words of pure Sanscrit, the whole
appearance of these first texts presents, on the other hand, certain
matters quite suspicious, from the point of view of construction, of the
order of the words, and possibly also the correctness of the forms.

"*E.g.*," observes M. de Saussure, "I do not remember that one can say
in Sanscrit, 'my Sivrouka,' nor 'my dear Sivrouka.' One can well say
**mama priya**, *my well beloved*, substantively; but **mama priya
Sivruka** is quite another thing: but it is *my dear Sivrouka* which
occurs most frequently. It is true," adds my learned colleague, "that
nothing can be affirmed absolutely, especially concerning certain epochs
at which much bad Sanscrit was made in India. The resource always
remains to us of assuming that, since the eleventh wife of Sivrouka was
a child of Arabia, she had not had time to learn to express herself
without error in the idiom of her lord and master, up to the moment at
which the funeral pile put an end to her brief existence."

The misfortune is, in assuming by hypothesis the point of view of the
romance, one exposes himself to another difficulty. "The most surprising
thing," remarks M. de Saussure, "is that Mme. Simandini spoke Sanscrit,
and not Pracrit (the connection of the first with the second is the same
as that between Latin and French, the one springing from the other, but
the one is the language in which the savants write, while the other is
the spoken language).

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> While in the
Hindoo drama the kings, the brahmins, and the personages of high degree
are observed habitually to use Sanscrit, it is questionable if such was
constantly the case in real life. But, under all circumstances, all the
women, even in the drama, speak Pracrit. A king addresses his wife in
the noble language (Sanscrit); she answers him always in the vulgar
language. But the idiom of Simandini, even though it be a Sanscrit very
hard to recognize, is not in any case the Pracrit."

The numerous Hindoo speeches of Mlle. Smith during these latter years
give rise to certain analogous observations, and do not throw any new
light on their origin. I shall confine myself to a few examples, which I
have chosen less for the sake of the Sanscritoid texts themselves, which
are also always defective and distorted, than for the reason that the
varied circumstances in which they have been produced afford a certain
psychological interest.

 

4\. Scene of Chiromancy. In the course of a long Arab seance, then
Hindoo (February 2, 1896), Hélène knelt down by the side of my chair,
and, taking me for Sivrouka, seized and examined my hand, all the while
carrying on a conversation in a foreign language (without seeming to
notice my actual words). It seems that this conversation contained some
expression of anxiety in regard to my health, which had inspired several
somnambulisms of Mlle. Smith during the preceding months (an example
will be found on pp.
[121](ipm06.htm#page_121)-[122](ipm06.htm#page_122).md).

At the same time at which she attentively examines

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

the lines of my hand, she pronounces the following fragmentary
sentences, separated by silences corresponding to the hallucinatory
replies of Sivrouka: "**Priya sivrouka . . . nô** \[signifying No,
according to Leopold\] **. . . tvandastroum sivrouka . . . itiami adia
priya . . . itiami sivra adia . . . yatou . . . napi adia . . . nô . . .
mama souka, mama baga sivrouka . . . yatou**." Besides **sivra**, which,
Leopold says, is an affectionate name for Sivrouka, we can divine in
this text other terms of affection: **priya**, *beloved;* **mama soukha,
mama bhâga**, *Oh, my delight, oh, my happiness!*" M. Glardon also calls
attention to the word **tvandastroum**, which approaches the Hindustani
*tandarast* (or *tandurust*), "who is in good health"—*tandurusti*,
"health," coming from the two words *tan*, "physical condition," and
*durust*, "good, true," of Persian origin. But he adds that it is
possibly only a coincidence, and seems to me doubtful whether he would
have thought of the connection if it were not found in a scene of
chiromancy.

 

5\. The Hindoo cycle, like the others, makes numerous irruptions into
the ordinary life of Mlle. Smith, and affects her personality in most
varied degrees, from the simple waking vision of Oriental landscapes or
people up to the total incarnations of Simandini, of which Hélène
preserves no memory whatever. One frequent form of these spontaneous
automatisms consists in certain mixed states, in which she perceives
personages who seem to her objective and independent, while continuing
to have the feeling of a subjective implication or identification in
regard to them, the

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

impression of an indefinable *tua res agitur*. It then easily happens
that the conversations she has with them are a mixture of French and a
foreign language which she is wholly ignorant of, though feeling the
meaning of it. The following is an example:

March 1, 1898.—Between five and six in the morning, while still in bed
but wide awake, as she affirms, Hélène had "a superb Hindoo vision."
Magnificent palace, with a huge staircase of white stone, leading to
splendid halls furnished with low divans without cushions, of yellow,
red, and more often of blue materials. In a boudoir a woman (Simandini)
reclining and leaning nonchalantly on her elbow; on his knees near her a
man with black curly hair, of dark complexion (Sivrouka), clothed in a
large, red, embroidered robe, and speaking a foreign language, not
Martian, which Hélène did not know, but which, however, she had the
feeling of comprehending inwardly, and which enabled her to write some
sentences of it in French after the vision. While she *listened* to this
man speaking, she *saw* the lips of the woman open, without hearing any
sound come from her mouth, in such a way that she did not know what she
said, but Hélène had at the same time the impression of answering
*inwardly, in thought*, to the conversation of the man, and she noted
his reply. (This means, psychologically, that the words of Sivrouka
gushed forth in auditive images or hallucinations, and the answers of
Simandini-Hélène in psychomotor-spoken images of articulation,
accompanied by the usual representation of Simandini effectuating the
corresponding labial movements.) Here is a

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

fragment of conversation noted by Hélène in pencil at the outset of the
vision, in her ordinary handwriting, but very irregular, attesting that
she had not yet entirely regained her normal state.

(Sivrouka.) "My nights without repose, my eyes red with tears,
Simandini, will not these touch at last thy **attamana?** Shall this day
end without *pardon, without love?*" (Simandini.) "Sivrouka, no, the day
shall not end without pardon, without love; the **sumina** has not been
launched far from me, as thou hast supposed; it is there—dost thou see?"
(Sivrouka.) "Simandini, my **soucca, maccanna baguea**—pardon me again,
always!"

This little scrap of conversation, it may be remarked in passing, gives
quite correctly the emotional note, which is strong throughout the whole
length of the Hindoo dream in the relationship of its two chief
personages. As to the Sanscritoid words which are there mingled with the
French, they have not an equal value. "**Sumina**," says M. de Saussure,
"recalls nothing. **Attamana**, at most **âtmânam** (accusative of
**âtmâ**), *l’âme*, 'the soul'; but I hasten to say that in the context
in which **attamana** figures one could not make use of the Sanscrit
word which resembles it, and which at bottom only signifies (*âme*)
'soul' in philosophical language, and in the sense of '*l’âme
universelle*,' or other learned meanings."

 

6\. The apparition of isolated Hindoo words, or words incorporated in a
non-Hindoo context, is not very rare with Hélène, and is produced
sometimes

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

in auditive hallucinations, sometimes in her writings (see, *e.g.*,
[Fig. 37](#img_fig37), [p. 333](#page_333).md); sometimes, again, in the
course of words uttered in hemisomnambulism more or less marked. The
list which has been collected of these detached terms shows the same
mixture of pure Sanscrit and unknown words, which can only be connected
with that language by some transformation so arbitrary or forced as to
destroy altogether the value of such comparison.

To this second category belong, for example, **gava**, **vindamini**,
**jotisse**, also spelled by Mlle. Smith. These terms, of whose
signification she is absolutely ignorant, struck her ear in the course
of a Hindoo vision which occurred in the morning when she first awoke.
The last of these words recalls to M. de Saussure the Sanscrit *jyôtis*,
"a constellation"; but then he would pronounce it *djiôtisse*, which
hardly corresponds to the manner in which Hélène heard and wrote it.
There must be added to these examples certain Hindoo words which have
made irruptions into some Martian texts.

These are *Adel*, a proper name, and *yestad*, "unknown," in [text
13](ipm08.htm#an_text13); and (in [text 31](ipm08.htm#an_text31).md)
*vadasa*, which, according to the rest of the sentence, seems to
designate some divinities or some powers, and in which MM. de Saussure
and Glardon suspect a mangled reminiscence of the Sanscrit term
*dévâ-dâsa*, "slave of the gods."

 

7\. To crown these specimens of the Sanscrit of Hélène, let us cite her
"Hindoo chant," which has made half a dozen appearances in the last two
years,

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

and of which Leopold deigned, on a single occasion, to outline the
translation.

The utterances consist essentially of the Sanscrit word *gaya* "chant,"
repeated to satiety, with here and there some other terms, badly
articulated and offering discouraging variations in the notes taken by
the different hearers. I will confine myself to two versions.

<span id="img_fig36"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
36](tn/fig36.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig36.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 36. Modulation of a Hindoo song. The final *G* of the three variations was held with perfect steadiness during fourteen seconds. The series A was often doubled and trebled before the continuation.</span> |

</div>

One of them is by Hélène herself. In a spontaneous vision (May 18, 1898,
in the morning, upon awaking), she perceived a man, richly dressed in
yellow and blue (Sivrouka), reclining upon beautiful cushions near a
fountain surrounded by palm-trees; a brunette woman (Simandini) seats
herself on the grass, sings to him in a strange language a ravishing
melody. Hélène gathers the following fragments of it in writing, in
which may be recognized the disfigured text of her ordinary song, "**Ga
haïa vahaïyami . . . vassen iata . . . pattissaïa priaïa**."

The other version is that of M. de Saussure, very much better qualified
than we are to distinguish the Hindoo sounds. He was quite near Hélène,
who

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

sang seated upon the ground, whose voice for the moment articulated so
badly that several words escaped him, and he does not vouch for the
accuracy of his text, which is as follows, as he wrote it to the
measure: "**Gaya gaya naïa ia miya gayä briti . . . gaya vaya yâni
pritiya kriya gayâni i gâya mamatua gaya mama nara mama patii si gaya
gandaryô gâya ityami vasanta . . . gaya gaya yâmi gaya priti gaya priya
gâya patisi. . . .**"

It was towards the end of this same seance that Leopold, undoubtedly
with the idea of doing honor to the distinguished presence of M. de
Saussure, decided, after a scene of Martian translation ([text
14](ipm08.htm#an_text14), by Esenale.md), to give us, in Hélène's voice,
his interpretation of the Hindoo chant, which follows, *verbatim*, with
its mixture of Sanscrit words: "Sing, bird, let us sing! **Gaya!** Adèl,
Sivrouka, sing of the spring-time! Day and night I am happy! Let us
sing! Spring-time bird, happiness! **ityâmi mamanara priti**, let us
sing! let us love! my king! Miousa, Adèl!"

In comparing these translations of the Hindoo text, certain points of
resemblance are discovered between them. Outside the two perfectly
correct words, **gâya**, *song*, and **vasanta**, *spring-time*, the
idea of "*let us love*" is discovered in **priti** and **briti**
(Sanscrit *prîti*, the act of loving), and an approximate equivalent of
"*my king*" in **mama patii**, recalling the Sanscrit *mama patê*, "my
husband, my master."

It is, unfortunately, hardly possible to carry the identification
further, except perhaps for *bird*, which, with some show of reason,
might be suspected in

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

**vayayâni**, vaguely recalling **vâyasân** (accusative plural of
**vâyasa** bird).

As to the melody of this plaintive ditty, M. Aug. de Morsier, who heard
it at the seance of the 4th of September, 1898, has kindly noted it as
exactly as possible (see [Fig. 36](#img_fig36).md).

The preceding examples suffice to give an idea of Hélène's Hindoo, and
it is time to conclude.

It apparently does not belong to any actually existing dialect. M.
Glardon declares that it is neither ancient nor modern Hindustani, and,
after having put forth at the beginning, by way of simple hypothesis,
the idea that it might be Tamil, or Mahratta, he now sees in it a
*mélange* of real terms, probably Sanscrit and invented words. M.
Michel, likewise, is of the opinion that the grotesque jargon of
Simandini contains fragments of Sanscrit quite well adapted to the
situation. All my correspondents are, on the whole, of exactly the same
view, and I could not better sum up their opinion than by quoting the
words of M. de Saussure:

"As to the question of ascertaining whether all this really represents
Sanscrit, it is evidently necessary to answer, *No*. One can only say:

"First: That it is a medley of syllables, in the midst of which there
are, incontestably, some series of eight to ten syllables, constituting
a fragment of a sentence which has a meaning (especially exclamatory
phrases—*e.g.*, **mama priya**, *mon bien-aimé* ("my well-beloved");
**mama soukha**, *mes délices* ("my delight").

"Secondly: That the other syllables, of unintelligible aspect, never
have an anti-Sanscrit character—

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

*i.e.*, do not present groups materially contrary or in opposition to
the general figure of the Sanscrit words.

"Thirdly and finally: That the value of this latter observation is, on
the other hand, quite considerably diminished by the fact that Mlle.
Smith seldom launches out into complicated forms of syllables, and
greatly affects the vowel *a;* but Sanscrit is a language in which the
proportion of the *a*’s to the other vowels is almost four to one, so
that in uttering three or four syllables in *a*, one could hardly avoid
vaguely encountering a Sanscrit word."

It follows from this last remark of M. de Saussure that it ought not to
be very difficult to fabricate Sanscrit after the mode of Simandini, if
only one is possessed of some veritable elements which can serve as a
model and give tone to the remainder. And there is no need to know very
much of it, either, as M. Barth remarks:

"Has Mlle. Smith been in communication with any person from whom she
could have taken some scraps of Sanscrit and of history? That would
suffice, in this case, for the original germ, even though it were but
slight. Imagination would do the rest. Children are very frequently
*onomatopoioi*."

But it is, naturally, Mlle. Smith herself who furnishes us, in her own
Martian, the fact most likely to throw light upon her Hindoo. It
evidently is not difficult for a subconscious activity capable of
manufacturing a language out of whole cloth to make another by imitation
and by spinning out some real data. Also, as to the beginning of the
Martian (a year later, as we have seen, to that of the Hindoo),

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> M. de Saussure
does not hesitate to make this comparison, and explains, *e.g.*, the
initial Sanscritoid text, the famous phrase of benediction, **atiêyâ
ganapatinâmâ**, by the same process of fabrication which shone forth in
the words of Esenale or Astané.

I am not convinced that the general process of replacing word for word
the French terms by terms of Oriental aspect, which is certainly the
process employed in the fabrication of the Martian, has been made use of
in the case of Hélène's Oriental words. Leopold, who has laid so much
stress on procuring us a quasi-magical means of obtaining the literal
translation of the Martian, has never condescended to do the same thing
for the Hindoo, but has confined himself to outlining for us some free
and vague interpretations, which scarcely add anything to that which the
pantomime permits us to divine. This leads us to think that an entire
precise translation of the Hindoo is impossible—in other terms, that
Hélène does not fabricate her *pseudo*-Sanscrit by following step by
step a French plot, and by maintaining in her neologisms the meaning
which has been once adopted, but that she improvises and leaves the
result to chance, without reflection (with the exception of some words
of true Sanscrit, the meaning of which she knows and which she applies
intelligently to the situation).

It is not, then, to the Martian texts proper, in my opinion, that we
must compare Hélène's Hindoo, but to that *pseudo*-Martian jargon spoken
with volubility in certain seances, and which have never been noted with
certainty nor translated by Esenale.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

It is understood, too, that while Hélène's subliminal self can safely
give itself up to the creation of a definite language in the freedom
which the planet Mars affords, where there is no pre-existing system to
be conformed to nor any objective control to fear, it would be very
imprudent and absurd to repeat the process in connection with India: the
few words of pure Sanscrit which were at its disposal kept it from
inventing others, the falseness of which would be evident at the first
attempt at a literal and verbatim translation. It, therefore, contented
itself with these veridical elements, insufficient in themselves alone
for the construction of complete sentences, being a jargon devoid of
meaning, but in harmony through their dominant vowels with the authentic
fragments.

Now how could these authentic fragments have come into the possession of
Mlle. Smith, who has no recollection whatever (nor has her family) of
ever having studied Sanscrit, or of having ever been in communication
with Oriental scholars? This is the problem which my researches have
encountered hitherto, and as a solution of which I can think of nothing
more likely than that of a fortunate chance, analogous to that which
enabled me to discover the passage of De Marlès. I am, for the time
being, reduced to vague conjectures as to the extent of Mlle. Smith's
latent knowledge of Sanscrit, and the probable nature of its manner of
acquisition.

I had long thought that Hélène might have absorbed her Hindoo
principally by *auditive* means, and that she had, perhaps, in her
infancy lived in the same house with some Indian student, whom she had
heard,

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

across the street or through an open window, speaking aloud Sanscrit
texts with their French translation. The story of the young domestic
without education is well known, who, seized with a fever, spoke both
Greek and Hebrew, which had been stored up in her mind, unknown to her,
while she was in the service of a German savant. *Se non è vero è ben
trovato*. In spite of the just criticisms of Mr. Lang, apropos of its
poorly established authenticity, this standard anecdote may be
considered as a type of many other facts of the same kind which have
since been actually observed, and as a salutary warning to distrust
subconscious memories of auditive origin. But Indian scholars are rare
in Geneva, and this trail has yielded me nothing.

I am really inclined to admit the exclusively *visual* origin of
Hélène's Sanscrit. First, it is not necessary for her to have heard that
idiom. Reading of texts printed in French characters coincides very well
with a pronunciation so confused and badly articulated as hers; and,
further, it alone can account for certain inexplicable errors of
pronunciation if Mlle. Smith had acquired that language by ear.

The most characteristic of her errors is the presence in Hindoo of the
French sound *u*, which does not exist in Sanscrit, but is naturally
suggested by reading if it has not been previously ascertained that that
letter is pronounced *ou* in the Sanscrit words in which it appears.

Other observations militate in favor of the same supposition. Never in
the seances has Simandini

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

<span id="img_fig37"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
37.](tn/fig37.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig37.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 37. Fragment. Final sentence of a letter of Mlle. Smith, finished (or rather remaining unfinished), during the irruption of a spontaneous access of Hindoo somnambulism. Note foreign words, *boulboul* (Persian name for nightingale), *Kana* (Hindoo slave of Simandini), and *radyiva* (Sanscrit name for blue lotus); also the Sanscrit letters *a*, *e*, *i*, *d*, *r*, taking the place of the French initials. Note also the change of form of the *t*’s.</span> |

</div>

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

ventured to *write* Sanscrit, and it is in French letters that her name
was given (see [p. 288](#page_288).md).

Still, Hélène subconsciously possesses a part, at least, of the
Devanagari alphabet, since sometimes certain characters belonging to it
slip into her normal writing. But it is to be noted that her knowledge
of this kind does not seem in any way to go beyond that which might have
resulted from a rapid glance at a Sanscrit grammar.

In certain cases this irruption of foreign signs (altogether analogous
to that which has been seen in the case of the Martian) is connected
with an access of spontaneous somnambulism and makes part of a whole
troop of images and of Oriental terms.

An interesting example is found in [Fig. 37](#img_fig37.md), which
reproduces the end of a letter which Hélène wrote me from the country.
All the rest of this six-page letter is perfectly normal, both as to
handwriting and content, but suddenly, tired by her effort of prolonged
attention, she begins to speak of her health, sleep overcomes her, and
the last lines show the invasion of the Oriental dream.

Kana, the slave, with his tame birds, and the brilliant plants of the
tropics, substitute themselves little by little for the actual room. The
letter reached me unfinished and without signature, as is shown in [Fig.
37](#img_fig37.md); Hélène closed it mechanically during her somnambulism,
without knowledge of this unusual termination, at which she was
surprised and annoyed when I showed it to her later.

Examination and comparison of all these graphomotor automatisms show
that there are in Hélène's

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

subconsciousness some positive notions, albeit superficial and
rudimentary, of the Sanscrit alphabet. She knows the exact form of many
isolated characters, and their general value, in the abstract, as it
were, but she does not seem to have any idea of their concrete use in
connection with other letters.

In a word, these fragments of graphic automatisms betray a knowledge of
Hindoo writing such as a curious mind might be able to acquire by
perusing for some moments the first two or three pages of a Sanscrit
grammar. It would retain certain detached forms; first, the a and the e,
which, striking the eye at the commencement of the two first lines
(containing the vowels, and usually separated from the following lines
containing the consonants) of the standard arrangement of the Hindoo
letters in ten groups; then the series of ciphers, occupying a line by
themselves and easy to retain; finally, some other simple signs gleaned
at hazard; but there will probably not be retained any of the too
complicated figures resulting from the union of several characters in
order to form words. This supposed genesis entirely corresponds with the
extent of the notions as to Sanscrit writing of which Mlle. Smith's
subconsciousness gives evidence.

It will suffice in summing up, to account for Mlle. Smith's Hindoo
language, that perhaps in the N. group, or in some other spiritistic
environment of which I am ignorant, some one, for the sake of curiosity,
may have shown her and allowed her to glance over a Sanscrit grammar or
lexicon, immediately after a seance, during that state of suggestibility
in

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

<span id="img_fig38"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
38](tn/fig38.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig38.jpg.md)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 38. Examples of Sanscrit characters, automatically substituted for French words and ciphers, in words and figures appearing in the normal writings of Mlle. Smith (*la*me, *ru*bis, 1*6*6, *pli*s, 2*86*5, 15*4*). Natural size.</span> |

</div>

which the exterior suggestions are registered very strongly in her case,
often without leaving traces in her conscious memory. The fact will also
be explained that Hélène has no memory whatever of it, is absolutely
convinced that she never saw or heard the least fragment of Sanscrit or
any other Oriental language.

I ought also to add that the information which I have up to the present
time been able to gather has furnished me with no positive indication of
the truth of my supposition, while, on the other hand, it has not tended
to establish its falsity.

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

#### V. THE SOURCES OF THE HINDOO DREAM

This paragraph will have no meaning whatever for those who hold the
Oriental cycle to be in reality the reappearance in Mlle. Smith's
somnambulistic states, of memories belonging to an anterior existence in
which she was an Asiatic princess, and I myself naik of Tchandraguiri,
Professor Seippel, an Arab slave, etc.

I shall confine myself in this case to an expression of regret that the
chance which has united us afresh, after five centuries of separation,
did not leave us in the midst of those tropical splendors instead of
transporting us to the banks of the Rhône just where the fog is densest
in winter. It is a severe punishment for our past misdeeds. But when one
pushes his skepticism so far as only to see in the entire Hindoo dream a
fantastic product elaborated out of certain scattered facts, as I have
done in the preceding paragraphs, one is likewise punished for his want
of faith by the obscure problems which are met with on the subject of
the sources of this dream. I would say also that it is difficult to
understand why the hypnoid imagination of Mlle. Smith gave itself up to
such pranks, and distributed as it did the rôles of this comedy.

It is easy to understand how a nature given to subconscious reveries,
and such as I have described in the first chapters of this book, has
taken pleasure in the fiction of the tragic destiny of Simandini, and

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

also that she felt specially attracted towards the career of Marie
Antoinette.

But M. Seippel, whom I quoted above, has nothing about him of the Arab,
and still less of the slave, neither in outward appearance nor in
character; and as to myself, let us say here, M. F.—if I may be
permitted to substitute harmless initials for the always odious "I"—as
for M. F., there is generally to be met with in him, under some
diffidence, a certain mildness of manner and disposition which would
scarcely seem to predestinate him to the energetic and wild rôle of a
violent, whimsical, capricious, and jealous Oriental despot.

As to the psychological origins of the Hindoo dream—considered not so
much in its Oriental decoration, but in its essential note, which is the
relation of Simandini to Sivrouka (the pretended anteriority of M.
F.)—two hypotheses can be framed, between which it is difficult to
choose.

First. From the point of view of psychopathology I should be tempted to
cause this entire somnambulistic romance to be included in that which
Freud calls *Abwehrpsychosen*, resulting from a sort of
[autonomy](errata.htm#6.md) which frees the normal self from an affective
idea incompatible with it; which idea revenges itself by occasioning
very diverse perturbations, according to the subjects, from disorders of
innervation, coming to disturb the daily life (hysteria by somatic
conversion of the affective coefficient of the repulsed idea), up to the
case in which the self only escapes the intolerable contradiction
between the given reality and the idea which besets it by plunging
itself entirely

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

into the latter (mental hallucinatory confusion, delirium, etc.).

Between these varied results may be found that in which the idea
excluded from the consciousness becomes the germ of hypnoid
developments, the point of departure of a secondary consciousness
unknown to the ordinary personality, the centre of a somnambulistic life
in which the tendencies which the normal self has driven far away from
it may take refuge and give themselves free play.

This is, perhaps, the happiest solution, from a practical and social
point of view, since it leaves the individual in a state of perfect
equilibrium and free from nervous troubles, outside of the very limited
moments in which the underlying processes break out in accesses of
somnambulism.

Such may be the case of the Hindoo dream and the origin of the
attributing of the rôle of Sivrouka to M. F. Nothing, assuredly, in the
normal life or being of Mlle. Smith would cause the suspicion that she
had ever consciously felt towards the latter the absurd sentiments which
good sense would have condemned in advance; but divers hints of her
subliminal life, independently of the Hindoo cycle itself (certain
dreams, etc.), have sometimes seemed to betray a latent conflict, which
the sane and reasonable self would have quickly gotten rid of by the
banishment from the ordinary personality of the affective idea,
inadmissible in the given conditions of reality. Hence, with a
temperament accustomed to mediumistic doubling of personality and imbued
with spiritistic doctrines, the birth and development, underneath

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

the level of the normal consciousness, of this romance of a former
existence, in which emotional tendencies incompatible with the present
life have found on occasion a sort of theoretic justification and a free
field for expansion.

Secondly: It may also be presumed, and I prefer to admit, that the
sentiments of Simandini towards her fictitious rajah, far from being the
reflection and somnambulic transposition of an impression really felt by
Mlle. Smith in regard to some one real and determined, are only a
fantastic creation—like the passion with which juvenile imaginations are
sometimes inflamed for an ideal and abstract type while awaiting the
meeting with a concrete realization more or less like it—and that the
assimilation of Sivrouka to M. F. is only a coincidence due to the
simple chance of Mlle. Smith having made the acquaintance of M. F. at
the time when the Hindoo dream was about to begin. Two points strengthen
this hypothesis of a contingent and superficial confusion between M. F.
and Sivrouka. First, the Hindoo dream was evidently begun by a
characteristic vision in which Simandini appeared, almost two months
before the admission of M. F. to the seances (see pp.
[279](#page_279)-[281](#page_281).md). Instead of supposing that the
subconsciousness of Mlle. Smith foresaw already the probable arrival of
this new spectator, and reserved for him in advance a leading rôle in
the romance of former existence which she was in process of elaborating
(which is not altogether impossible, it is true), it hardly seems as
though M. F. could have stood for anything

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

in the dream-personage of Sivrouka. In the second place, it is only in
the light somnambulisms and her mixed or crepuscular states that Mlle.
Smith happens to take M. F. for the Hindoo prince and to seat herself at
his feet in attitudes of tenderness and abandon (without otherwise ever
departing from the bounds of perfect propriety); as soon as the trance
becomes profound and the Hindoo somnambulism complete, M. F. ceases to
exist for her, as well as the others present, and she then is concerned
only with an absolutely hallucinatory Sivrouka. This is the place to
state that Hélène has never presented any phenomenon similar to—far from
it—certain cases in which have been seen the awakening in the hypnotic
subject of gross and more or less bestial tendencies, for which the
subjects would have blushed in their waking state. There is nothing of
that nature in Mlle. Smith. Somnambulism does not detract in any way
from the elevation of her moral sense. The same is true of her deepest
trances or when she "incarnates" personages very different from her
ordinary character—she never departs from that real dignity which is a
trait of her normal personality.

To sum up—the hypothesis of a purely accidental identification, a kind
of association by simple contiguity between the Hindoo prince and M. F.,
seems to me, on the whole, the most natural. It releases the latter,
besides, from all responsibility (altogether involuntary, however) for
the sentiments so profound, so disinterested, so worthy of a less tragic
fate, which the imaginary personage of Sivrouka Nayaka inspires in the
poor Princess Simandini.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[300:\*](ipm10.htm#fr_21.md) De Marlès’ *General
History of India, Ancient and Modern. from the Year 2000 B.C. to our Own
Time*s. Pp. 268-269. Paris, 1828.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[302:\*](ipm10.htm#fr_22.md) Robert Sewell. *Lists
of Antiquarian Remains in the Presidency of Madras*. Vol i. p. 238
(1882.) Citation by M. Barth. I have not been able to consult this work.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[302:†](ipm10.htm#fr_23.md) Buchanan. *A Journey
from Madras through the Countries of Mysore, Canara, and Malabar*, etc.
3 vols. 4to. London, 1807.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[302:‡](ipm10.htm#fr_24.md) James Rennell.
*Description Historique et Géographique de l’Indostan*. Translated from
the English. Paris, an. <span class="smallcaps">viii</span>. (5800). 3
vols., 8vo and atlas 4to.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[302:§](ipm10.htm#fr_25.md) Dow. *History of
Hindustan*. Translated from the Persian of Ferishta. London, 1803. M.
Michel suggests Wilks's *Historical Sketches of the South of India*
(London, 1810) as having possibly served as a source of information for
De Marlès. If some <span id="page_303">p. 303</span> learned reader may
discover any traces of Sivrouka antecedent to De Marlès, I shall be
under great obligation to him if he will communicate the information to
me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Royal Cycle](ipm11.md)
