[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Mars](../mars/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipm10)  [Next](ipm12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691001014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From India to the Planet Mars*, by Théodore Flournoy; tr. Daniel B.
Vermilye, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

### CHAPTER IX

#### THE ROYAL CYCLE

IF I were obliged to give this cycle a place proportioned to that which
it occupies in the [somnambulic](errata.htm#7) life of Mlle. Smith, a
hundred pages would not suffice. But permit me to pass rapidly over
facts concerning which I should only be obliged to repeat the greater
part of the observations called forth by the preceding romances, which
apply equally well, *mutatis mutandis*, to the personification of Marie
Antoinette by Hélène.

The choice of this rôle is naturally explained by the innate tastes of
Mlle. Smith for everything that is noble, distinguished, elevated above
the level of the common herd, and by the fact that some exterior
circumstance fixed her hypnoid attention upon the illustrious queen of
France in preference to the many other historic figures equally
qualified to serve as a point of attachment for her subconscious
megalomaniac reveries.

In default of absolutely certain information on this point, I strongly
suspect the engraving from the *Memoirs of a Physician*, representing
the dramatic scene of the decanter between Balsamo and the Dauphiness,
of having given birth to this identification

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

of Hélène with Marie Antoinette, as well as to that of her secondary
personality of Leopold with Cagliostro.

We have, in fact, seen that this engraving (pp.
[94](ipm06.htm#page_94)-[95](ipm06.htm#page_95)), so well calculated to
impress the imagination, was shown to Mlle. Smith by Mme. B. at the end
of a seance—that is, at a moment when one is never sure that Hélène's
return to her normal state is complete, and in which her hypnoid
personality, still on a level with consciousness, so to speak, is very
prone to absorb the interesting suggestions which the environment may
furnish. It was several months—a year and a quarter, possibly—after this
incident (the precise date of which, in 1892 or 1893, it is impossible
to determine) that announcement was made by the table, on the 30th of
January, 1894, that Hélène was the reincarnation of Marie Antoinette. It
is to be recollected that in the interval she had for some time believed
herself to be the reincarnation of Lorenza Feliciani; it is, however, to
be noted that these two successive identifications did not have the same
guarantee or psychological signification. In fact, it was Mlle. Smith,
in the waking state—that is, in her normal personality—who accepted the
supposition of Mme. B., that she was the reincarnation of Lorenza; but
the table—*i.e.*, her subconsciousness—always remained silent on this
point. On the contrary, the idea of having been Marie Antoinette does
not seem to have occurred to Hélène's ordinary consciousness up to the
time at which Leopold revealed this secret by the table. If any
conclusion may be drawn from this, it is that, under the multiple
suggestions of the

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

engraving from Dumas’ works and the suppositions of Mme. B., the hypnoid
imagination of Mlle. Smith at first preferred to the rôle of Lorenza
that of Marie Antoinette, which is undoubtedly more flattering and more
conformable to Hélène's temperament, and then elaborated and matured it,
very slowly, it is true, but not excessively so, in comparison with
other examples of subliminal incubations of Mlle. Smith.

From the point of view of its psychological forms of manifestation, the
Royal cycle from that time followed an evolution analogous to that of
its congeners described in the preceding chapters. After some months,
during which it unfolded itself in visions described by Hélène and
accompanied by typtological explanations dictated by the table, the
trance became more profound. Mlle. Smith began to personate the queen in
pantomime, of which Leopold gave the exact signification by digital
indications. Speech was added the year following, at a date which I
cannot fix, but the first occasion on which I was a witness to it was on
the 13th of October, 1895. Handwriting only made its appearance, as far
as I am aware, two years later (November 1, 1897, see [Fig.
39](#img_fig39)), when the royal incarnation attained its apogee and
Hélène was in the habit of retaining in memory the somnambulistic rôle
of Marie Antoinette for several hours. Since then the rôle has
maintained itself at a very remarkable level of perfection, but it
scarcely seems to me progressing, and seems likely to become
stereotyped. The objectivity of the general type of queen must be
distinguished in this brilliant personality, or at least

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

<span id="img_fig39"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure
39.](tn/fig39.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig39.jpg)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 39. First known example of automatic irruption of the orthography and handwriting called that of Marie Antoinette among the normal writings of Mlle. Smith. Fragments of a letter of Helen of November 1, 1897, narrating a seance during which she had successfully incarnated the queen of France and the Hindoo princess. \[Collection of M. Lemaître.\] See also p.</span> |

</div>

that of a lady of great distinction, as well as a realization of the
individual characteristics of Marie Antoinette of Austria. As to the
first point there is almost nothing left to be desired. Mlle. Smith
seems by nature to possess all that this rôle demands, and hypnoid
autosuggestion finds no lack of material upon which to work.

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

When the royal trance is complete no one can fail to note the grace,
elegance, distinction, majesty sometimes, which shine forth in Hélène's
every attitude and gesture.

She has verily the bearing of a queen. The more delicate shades of
expression, a charming amiability, condescending hauteur, pity,
indifference, overpowering scorn flit successively over her countenance
and are manifested in her bearing, to the filing by of the courtiers who
people her dream. The play of her hands with her real handkerchief and
its fictitious accessories, the fan, the binocle with long handle, the
scent-bottle which she carries in a pocket in her girdle; her
[curtseying](errata.htm#8), the movement, full of grace and ease, by
which she never forgets at each turning around, to throw back her
imaginary train; everything of this kind, which cannot be described, is
perfect in its ease and naturalness. Special personification of the
unhappy Austrian wife of Louis XVI. is of a less evident, and moreover
doubtful, accuracy. To judge of it from the only objective point of
comparison at our disposal, the handwriting (see Figs. [39](#img_fig39)
to [41](#img_fig41)), the Marie Antoinette of Hélène's somnambulisms
little resembles her supposed prototype, for there is less of difference
between the autographs of Cagliostro and of Leopold (see [p.
109](ipm06.htm#page_109)) than there is between that of the real queen
and that of her pretended reincarnation in Mlle. Smith, the latter
having a rounded, inclined calligraphy, much more regular than in her
normal state, instead of the angular and illegible writing which was
characteristic of the queen of France, to say nothing of the glaring
differences in formation

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

<span id="img_fig40"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
40](tn/fig40.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig40.jpg)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 40. Writing of Mlle. Smith incarnating Marie Antoinette. Seance of November 7, 1897. Beginning of a letter, written in ink and addressed to Philippe d’Orléans (M. Aug. de Morsier, who was not present at the seance). After the ink-stains of the last line, Hélène threw down her pencil, then began again and finished her letter in pencil in a still more regular and slanting hand than the above.</span> |

</div>

<span id="img_fig41"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
41](tn/fig41.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig41.jpg)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 41. Writing and signature of Marie Antoinette. Fragment of a letter written from the Temple to General de Jarnayes, and reproduced in the *Isographie des Hommes célèbres*. \[Collection of fac-similes published under the direction of Duchesne, Sr., Paris, 1827-30.\]</span> |

</div>

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

of many letters. Some orthographic analogies (Hélène writes *instans*,
*enfans*, *étois*, etc.) have nothing specific about them, and simply
recall the general habits of the last century (see [p.
112](ipm06.htm#page_112)).

Not having discovered any indication as to Marie Antoinette's manner of
speaking, I do not know whether the hypnoid imagination of Hélène has
succeeded better than with the handwriting in adopting in her royal
incarnations certain intonations and a pronunciation which have nothing
of German in them, and would rather recall the English accent. The
timbre of her voice does not change, but her speech becomes trailing,
with a slight rolling of the *r*’s, and takes on something precise and
affected, very pretty, but slightly irritating by its length. We already
know that there is not an absolute wall of separation between Hélène's
various trances. Just as is the case with the Martian and the Hindoo,
the handwriting or the spelling of the queen sometimes slips into the
correspondence of Mlle. Smith (see [Fig. 39](#img_fig39)), and she also
sometimes assumes the accent of Marie Antoinette, if not in the ordinary
waking state (I do not know whether that is ever the case), at least
outside her Royal cycle, especially in the phases of transition in which
she begins or ends by incarnating Leopold, the Martians, etc. (see, for
example, [p. 56](ipm05.htm#page_56)).

From the point of view of its content, the Royal cycle forms a
collection of scenes and varied tableaux, like the Martian dream,
lacking any continuous plot, and in which marked historic events
scarcely hold a place—*e.g.*, in it the queen is never seen to mount the
scaffold

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

as Simandini ascends her funeral pile. One does not always even know
whether the spectacle before our eyes is supposed to be the repetition,
the exact recollection, of unknown but real episodes in the life of
Marie Antoinette, or indeed whether it has to do with new, actual
incidents passing now between the reincarnated queen and her old
acquaintances whom she discovers in the persons present at the seance or
in the disincarnate spirits in mediumistic relationship with her. That
depends on the case—*e.g.*, on the 25th of December, 1896, Mlle. Smith,
entranced, addresses touching exhortations to a lady present whom she
took for the Princess Lamballe, which, according to Leopold, is a
reproduction of the last evening which the unhappy queen, sustained by
her companion in captivity, passed in this world. (It is true that at
Christmas, 1792, the princess had already, three months previously,
fallen a victim to the massacres of September.) Again the Abbé Grégoire
dictates by the table, which bows significantly to Hélène, "*I desired
to save you, but I was not able*"; or the sinister Hébert says to her by
the same process, "*I was the cause of your death . . . I suffer; pray
for me*." Ought we to consider real the homage and the posthumous
remorse which these two disincarnate spirits bring after the lapse of a
century to their sovereign, finally recognized in the person of Mlle.
Smith?

Generally it is impossible to decide whether the incident transpiring
pretends simply to republish the past or constitutes a new fact.

The location of the royal scenes and visions is

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

often undetermined. Many are located in the gardens or the apartments of
the Petit Trianon, and the furniture which Hélène describes there is,
indeed, always pure Louis XVI. More rarely Marie Antoinette is found at
the Temple, or at certain rendezvous—innocent, but very imprudent—in
some secret abode in Paris. She is never seen in Austria, since, unlike
the Hindoo princess still filled with her Arab memories, she seems to
have completely lost sight of her past as a young girl.

In the surroundings of the queen, the king is conspicuous by his
absence; very rarely she makes some allusions to him with a marked
indifference. The greater part of the personages known to that epoch,
whom I refrain from enumerating, figure in it incidentally, but there
are three who continually reappear and hold the first rank. There is,
first, the Count of Cagliostro, "*mon sorcier*," or "*ce cher sorcier*,"
as the queen familiarly calls him, who never has enough of his visits
and his conversations, which are very varied, including the discussion
of philosophic subjects, such as the future life and the existence of
God as well as the gossip of the last *fête* at Versailles. There is,
secondly, Louis Philippe d’Orléans (Equality); while the third is the
old Marquis de Mirabeau; all of whom, especially the first, have served
as hallucinatory interlocutors towards Hélène in numerous scenes—up to
the time at which, to the great amusement of the sitters, the
somnambulistic monologue was transformed into real and lively
conversation, in consequence of the introduction into the seances of M.
Eugène

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Demole, then of M.
Aug. de Morsier, in whom Marie Antoinette immediately recognized the two
personages last above mentioned.

Since this unexpected meeting with her two contemporaries, reincarnated,
like herself, the somnambulistic queen freely permits herself, on
occasion, the pleasure of renewing the little suppers and joyous
evenings of long ago. When a seance which has lasted from four o'clock
until seven in the afternoon seems to have come to an end, and Mlle.
Smith, after having awakened from a long series of Hindoo, Martian, and
other scenes, has been invited to dine and refresh herself before taking
up her household duties, it often happens that, perceiving M. Demole or
M. de Morsier among the persons present, she gives a slight start, with
a change of countenance, sometimes barely perceptible, but which there
is no mistaking; then, in her very characteristic accent of Marie
Antoinette, exclaims, "Oh, marquis, you have been here, and I had not
noticed you before!" And then follows a somnambulistic vigil which may
be prolonged until nearly ten o'clock in the evening, maintained by
means of the suggestive amiability of her improvised companions in
sustaining their rôles of Mirabeau or Philippe d’Orléans.

They descend to the dining-room. The queen takes her place at the table
alongside of the marquis (or of Philippe). She has eyes and ears for him
alone, the other guests and the servants remaining shut out from her
dream. She eats and drinks only that which he sets before her, and it is
no sinecure to supply the wants of this august neighbor, since

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

she possesses a truly royal appetite. The amount of food which she
devours and the goblets of wine which she drinks off one after another,
without suffering any inconvenience, are astounding, as in her normal
state Mlle. Smith is sobriety itself and eats very little. After dinner
they pass into the salon, with many compliments and obeisances, and
Marie Antoinette takes coffee. On the first occasions of this kind, she
also accepted a cigarette from Philippe and smoked it—Mlle. Smith never
smokes in her waking state—but the remarks of the persons present upon
the historical untruthfulness of this feature must have been registered,
and bore fruit, since at the following seances she did not seem to
understand the use of tobacco in that form; she accepted, on the other
hand, with eagerness, a pinch of imaginary snuff, which almost
immediately brought about by autosuggestion a series of sneezes
admirably successful.

The evening passes in most varied conversation, until, evidently feeling
fatigue, the queen becomes silent, closes her eyes, and goes to sleep in
an easy-chair. At that instant Leopold, who gives no sign of life, and
from whom no response can be obtained during the royal somnambulism,
reappears and answers by the fingers or manifests himself in spontaneous
gestures. Hélène's hand, *e.g.*, is raised, and makes passes on her
forehead to accentuate the restorative sleep which is about to bring her
back to her normal state. At the end of some time—half an hour or
more—she awakes without any recollection of the evening, believing that
she

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

has not yet dined, and complaining of hunger and thirst, as if her
stomachic sensibility participated in the amnesia and other
modifications which accompany the change of personality. Nevertheless,
at such times I have never seen her accept anything more than a couple
of glasses of water, after which she feels wide awake.

In escorting her home, I was witness on one occasion to a return of the
royal somnambulism. She was exceedingly desirous of going to the house
of a well-known personage (whom she had perceived in her vision during
the seance), who had been received at the court of Marie Antoinette, and
who died in Geneva in the first quarter of this century; it was only
upon arriving before the house in which he had lived, and as she was
upon the verge of entering it, that I finally succeeded in awakening and
restoring her to herself, without memory of the incident, and very much
astonished at the unaccustomed streets in which we found ourselves.

It is useless to give a more circumstantial narration of these dinners
and *soirées* of Marie Antoinette. They are very entertaining for the
spectators, but lose much of their interest when related in their
entirety. Their details are exactly what might be expected of a lively
subliminal imagination, alert and full of verve, abundantly supplied, on
account of the illustrious queen, with notions still more easily
explicable, thanks to the intellectual atmosphere of France, than those
of the Hindoo cycle.

Numerous anachronisms, however, slip into them, and her Majesty
sometimes falls into the snares

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

which the marquis or Philippe take a malicious pleasure in setting for
her. She often escapes them when they are too clumsy, and, with a most
comical display of temper, is at first confused, then curiously
questions, or manifests uneasiness in regard to the mental state of her
interlocutors when they introduce the telephone, the bicycle,
steamships, or the modern scientific vocabulary into their
eighteenth-century conversation. But, on the other hand, she herself
employs terms still more malapropos, such as, "to derail"
(figuratively), "metre" and "centimetre," etc. Certain words, such as
"tramway" and "photography," have occasioned serious conflicts. Marie
Antoinette first allows the treacherous word to pass unnoticed, and it
is evident that she perfectly understood it, but her own reflection, or
the smile of the sitters, awakens in her the feeling of incompatibility;
she returns to the word just used, and pretends a sudden ignorance and
astonishment in regard to it. Spiritism explains these blunders by
accusing the [Machiavellian](errata.htm#9) companions of the queen of
grossly abusing the suggestibility attached to the trance state by
jumbling her ideas and throwing her into confusion. Psychology is not
surprised that the subliminal imitation, however remarkable it may be,
presents some little defects, and every one is in accord in regard to
her thoughtless manner of expressing herself, in attributing these
anachronisms to an accidental mingling of the memories of her ordinary
personality and of the present life with those of the royal personality
revived during the somnambulism. In her rôle as

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

queen, Mlle. Smith gives evidence of a great deal of ingenuity. She is
full of witty repartees, which disconcert her interlocutors, the style
of which is sometimes perfectly after the manner of the epoch.

This ease and readiness of dialogue, excluding all reflective or
calculating preparation, denote a great freedom of mind and a wonderful
facility for improvisation. There are mixed with these, on the other
hand, some witticisms and episodes which are not at all impromptu, but
are the evident result of a preliminary elaboration in the course of the
subconscious reveries and various automatisms which the royal romance
causes to surge up in Hélène's ordinary life.

There are some scenes whose development or repetition can be followed in
a series of seances and spontaneous visions as it passes through the
other cycles. The following is one example among many:

At the end of a seance at which M. de Morsier was present (October 10,
1897), Mlle. Smith enters into her dream of Marie Antoinette. During
dinner she makes several allusions to her son, the Dauphin, speaks of
her daughter, tells of having demanded of her sorcerer the sex of her
next child, etc.—matters all foreign to the conversation of Philippe,
and which seem to announce some underlying scene ready to break forth.
In fact, in the middle of the *soirée* the queen becomes absorbed and
distrait, and finally falls on her knees in a dark corner of the
*salon;* her monologue indicates that she is before the cradle where the
little Dauphin and his sister are lying asleep. Presently she returns to
seek Philippe and

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

to conduct him to admire the sleeping children, to whom, in a very soft
voice, she sings an unknown nursery rhyme ("Sleep in peace," etc.) of a
plaintive melody analogous to that of the Hindoo chant; the tears gush
from her eyes; tender kisses upon the imaginary cradle and a fervent
prayer to the Virgin terminate this extremely touching maternal scene.

Several weeks after (the 1st of December), a new romance makes its
appearance in a spontaneous access of visual, auditive, and graphic
automatism, the recital of which Hélène sent me the following day. That
evening, while alone with her mother, she had interrogated Leopold upon
an affair in which she was greatly interested, and had obtained from him
an answer: "As soon as his communication was ended, I saw everything
disturbed around me; then at my left, at a distance of about thirty
feet, a Louis XVI. *salon*, not very large, was outlined, in the middle
of which was a square piano, open. Before this piano was seated a woman,
still young, the color of whose hair I could not distinguish. Whether it
was blond or gray I could not clearly see. She played and sang at the
same time. The sounds of the piano, the voice even, reached me, but I
could not catch the words of the song. A young girl and a boy stood on
either side of the piano. Not far from them was seated a young lady
holding an infant on her lap. <span id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26) This
charming vision lasted a very short time, not longer than ten minutes."

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

After the disappearance of the vision, Hélène had the idea of taking up
her pencil. " With pencil in hand, I was asking myself what I should
write, when all at once I heard again the melody; then, this time very
distinctly, the words, but without any vision. The whole passed into my
head, into my brain, and instinctively I pressed my hand to my forehead
in order to hear and understand better. I felt myself compelled to hold
the pencil in a manner different from my habitual way of holding it.
Here are the words of the song heard and traced at that instant. As you
see, the handwriting is not like mine; there are also some very glaring
errors of orthography.

<span class="small">"Approchez-vous approchez-vous \| enfans chéris
approchez-vous \| quand le printemps sur nous ramène \| ses frais
parfums ses rayons d’or \| venez enfans sous son haleine \| gazouiller
bas mes doux trésors \| approchez-vous approchez-vous \| enfans chéris
approchez-vous \| êtres chéris enfans bénis—approchez-vous de votre mère
\| son doux baiser petits amis \| calme et guérit toutes misères \|
approchez-vous approchez-vous \| enfans chéris approchez-vous." <span
id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27)</span>

Some months later the two preceding scenes were reproduced, with
variations of detail, on the same evening, during which Marie Antoinette
first conducts Philippe towards the fictitious cradle of her cherubs and
sings to them her first song: "Sleep in

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

peace," etc. Then she leads him to the piano, and, displaying an
imaginary sheet of music beneath his eyes, obliges him to accompany her
while she sings the "Song of Elizabeth."

M. de Morsier, who, fortunately, is not easily embarrassed, improvised
an accompaniment to which the queen accommodated herself after some
criticism, and to which she sings in a very sweet, pure voice some words
which were found to be, word for word, identical with those
automatically written by Hélène on the preceding 1st of December. In
this example is seen the mixture of preparation, of repetition, and of
impromptu, which are inferred from the varied incidents which constitute
the royal *soirées*.

It is probable that if it were possible to be a witness of, or if Mlle.
Smith could remember all the spontaneous automatisms which aid in
nourishing the royal romance, nocturnal dreams, hypnagogic visions,
subconscious reveries during the waking state, etc., there would be
presented interminable imaginary conversations with the marquis,
Philippe, Cagliostro, and all the fictitious personages who occasionally
make their appearance in the somnambulistic scenes of Marie Antoinette.

It is by this underlying and unknown work, perhaps never interrupted,
that the personality of the queen of France is slowly prepared and
elaborated, and which shines forth and displays itself with so much of
magnificence in the soirées with Philippe d’Orléans and the Marquis de
Mirabeau.

I have stated that, except these two gentlemen, who always form part of
the royal dream when they

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

are present (and even sometimes when absent), the others present at the
seances are excluded. It is understood that they do not pass unperceived
on this account.

In the same manner as in the negative hallucinations or systematic
anæsthesia of hypnotized subjects, that which seems to be not felt is
nevertheless registered; so, in like manner, it is altogether probable
that nothing of that which passes around her escapes the fundamental
individuality of Mlle. Smith. The royal personality which occupies the
foreground of the scene and finds itself in an elective rapport, limited
to Philippe and the marquis, merely causes the other personalities to be
relegated to the background without breaking their connection with the
environment. There are many proofs of this. For example, in walking,
Marie Antoinette never runs against any of the others present. The
remarks and criticisms of the latter are not lost upon her, since very
frequently her conversation betrays their influence after some minutes.
At the same time, if any one pinches her hand or tickles her ear, her
lips, her nostrils, she seems anæsthetic; still, at the end of a few
seconds she turns her head away, and if the tickling is persisted in,
she experiences a kind of agitation accommodated to the circumstances of
her dream, changes her position on some pretext, etc.

It is manifest, in short, that the excitations to which she seems to be
insensible at the moment, far from having no effect, are stored up and
produce, by their sum total, reactions which are retarded for some
minutes and which are intelligently adapted to the

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

somnambulistic scene, but with an intensity much more exaggerated than
diminished by this period of latency.

Music also affects her, precipitating her out of the dream of Marie
Antoinette into a common hypnotic state, in which she assumes passionate
attitudes, which have in them nothing of the regal, and which conform to
the varied airs which follow each other upon the piano.

In her phases as Marie Antoinette, Hélène has an accent characteristic
of it; she recognizes me vaguely; she has some allochiria, a complete
insensibility of the hands, and a large appetite; she does not know who
Mlle. Smith is; if she is asked to give the actual date, she replies
correctly as to the month and day, but indicates a year of the last
century, etc. Then all at once her state changes; the royal accent gives
way to her ordinary voice, she seems wide awake, all mental confusion
has disappeared, she is perfectly clear as to persons, dates, and
circumstances, but has no memory of the state from which she has just
emerged, and she complains of a sharp pain in her finger (where I had
pinched it while in her preceding phase). I took advantage one day of
these alternations to offer her a pencil, and dictated to her the
sentence of [Fig. 42](#img_fig42). In her normal moments she holds the
pencil in her accustomed manner, between the index and middle fingers,
and writes in her usual hand; during the returns of the royal
somnambulism she holds it between the thumb and index-finger and assumes
her handwriting and orthography known as that of Marie Antoinette,

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

exactly as her voice is invested with the accent. It is to be presumed
that all her other functions, if one could examine them, would show
parallel analogous variations, the changing of the personality being
naturally accompanied by connected changes not only of the memory and
the sensibility, but of motility of the emotional disposition—in brief,
of all the faculties of the individuality.

I must add that in each of her states Hélène has the memory of preceding
periods of the same kind, but not of another state: it was, for example,
necessary to dictate anew, for the second test, the sentence of , which
she did not remember having heard or written a few minutes previously.
This separation into distinct memories is not, however, absolute, nor
very profound: the personality of Marie Antoinette

<span id="img_fig42"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
42](tn/fig42.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig42.jpg)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 42. Differences of handwriting of Mlle. Smith at the end of an incarnation of Marie Antoinette, according to whether she is in her normal state (upper lines, in her usual handwriting), or in a return of the royal dream (lower lines; note the word *foisoit*). Natural size. The tremor of some of the strokes is not in the original, but occurred in the reproduction in ink.</span> |

</div>

 

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

is, in short, a modification—of an intensity and extent which vary
greatly with the seances—of the ordinary personality of Mlle. Smith,
rather than an alternating and exclusive personality, of which so many
striking cases have been observed.

For the mere spectators, the royal somnambulism is perhaps the most
interesting of all of Hélène's cycles, on account of the brilliancy and
life of the rôle, the length of time during which it may be sustained,
the unexpected happenings which the presence of other real persons
brings into it. It is truly a comedy.

But for the lovers of the supernormal it is the least extraordinary of
the subliminal creations of Mlle. Smith, because the general
environment, being in France, is so imbued with historic or legendary
memories of the illustrious and unfortunate queen that there is nothing
surprising in the hypnoid reconstruction of a personage so well known.

Finally, the psychologist and moralist who undertakes to reflect on the
inner meaning of things cannot escape the impression of sharp contrast
as compared with reality which this sparkling romance affords.

In themselves, Mlle. Smith's royal somnambulisms are almost always gay
and joyous; but, considering their hidden source, in so far as they are
the ephemeral and chimerical revenge of the ideal upon the real, of
impossible dreams upon daily necessities, of impotent aspirations upon
blind and crushing destiny, they assume a tragic signification. They
express the sensation lived through, felt, of the bitter

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

irony of things, of futile revolt, of fatality dominating the human
being. They seem to say that all happy and brilliant life is only an
illusion soon [dissipated](errata.htm#10). The daily annihilation of the
dream and the desire by implacable and brutal reality cannot find in the
hypnoid imagination a more adequate representation, a more perfect
symbol of an emotional tonality, than her royal majesty whose existence
seemed made for the highest peaks of happiness and of fame—and ended on
the scaffold.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[356:\*](ipm11.htm#fr_26) It will be readily
understood that this vision represents Marie Antoinette with her three
children and Madame Elizabeth.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[357:\*](ipm11.htm#fr_27) I have respected the
orthography as well as the complete absense of punctuation of this bit
of automatic writing, confining myself to marking by vertical bars its
evident separation into verses of eight feet. It is written in the
inclined and regular hand called that of Marie Antoinette (like that of
Fig. [40](#img_fig40)), but with a pencil too pale to permit its
reproduction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Supernormal Appearances](ipm12)
