[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [UFOs](../index) 
[Mars](../mars/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ipm11)  [Next](ipm13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691001014/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*From India to the Planet Mars*, by Théodore Flournoy; tr. Daniel B.
Vermilye, \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

### CHAPTER X

#### SUPERNORMAL APPEARANCES

THE mediumship of Mlle. Smith is full of facts supernormal in
appearance, and the question which offers itself for our solution is
that of determining to what extent they are supernormal in reality.

The title of this chapter, I must assert, is not to be understood in a
partisan sense. The term "appearances" is not used in its unfavorable
acceptation, as meaning that they are deceptive, and that there is
nothing behind them. It is taken in a frank and impartial sense, to
designate simply the exterior and immediate aspect of a thing, without
prejudging its real nature, in order, by the very force of this
neutrality, to provoke investigation destined to separate the true from
the false, the pure gold from the dross. It is precisely this
investigation which constitutes my present task.

A rather difficult task, for it is always risky to touch upon a subject
which is an apple of discord among psychologists, and which has even
been considered the "Dreyfus case of science." The matter is
complicated, too, in this particular case, by the absolute faith of
Mlle. Smith and her friends in the

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

supernormal character of her phenomena; a state of mind extremely worthy
of respect, but which is not calculated to facilitate research, all
desire of ordinary analysis and explanation being resented by them as an
unjustifiable suspicion, interpreted as being an indication of
invincible skepticism.

#### I. THE STUDY OF THE SUPERNORMAL

The term "supernormal" has been used for some years by the investigators
of the Society for Psychical Research to take the place of the old word
"supernatural," which has become impracticable on account of interloping
connections, which finally caused its use to be limited to theological
and philosophical environments. Mr. Meyers, to whom the credit is due,
if I am not mistaken, of coining this as well as many other new terms
used to-day in the psychical vocabulary, applies it to every phenomenon
or faculty which passes beyond ordinary experience, and reveals either a
degree of higher evolution not yet attained by the mass of humanity, or
an order of transcendental things superior to the world of sense. In
these two cases one finds one's self, indeed, in the presence of facts
which are above the normal, but which are by no means to be taken as
foreign or contrary to the true laws of human nature (as the word
"supernatural" would imply).

It is to be observed that the definition of Mr. Meyers lays stress upon
the character of superiority of supernormal phenomena. I shall, however,
separate this character from it in the present chapter, and in

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

spite of the etymology, and for lack of any better term, shall simply
use the word "supernormal" to designate facts which come within the
actual framework of the science of to-day, and the application of which
would necessitate principles not yet admitted—without occupying myself,
however, with endeavoring to ascertain whether these facts are
messengers of a superior economy or forerunners of a future evolution
rather than the survival of a condition of things which has disappeared,
or whether they are purely accidental, *lusus naturae*, denuded of
signification.

It goes without saying that in treating of the supernormal we must admit
theoretically its possibility, or—which amounts to about the same
thing—fail to believe in the infallibility and perfection of present-day
science. If I consider it, *à priori*, absolutely impossible for an
individual to know, some time before the arrival of a telegram
containing the news, of an accident by which his brother at the
antipodes has been killed, or that another can voluntarily move an
object at a distance without having a string attached to it, and
contrary to the laws of mechanics and physiology, it is clear that I
will shrug my shoulders at every mention of telepathy, and I shall not
move a step to be present at a seance of Eusapia Paladino. What an
excellent means of enlarging one's horizon and of discovering something
new, by being satisfied with one's ready-made science and preconceived
opinion, quite convinced beforehand that the universe ends at the wall
opposite, and that there is nothing to be obtained beyond that which the
daily routine has accustomed us to look upon as the limit of the Real!
This

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

philosophy of the ostrich, illustrated formerly by those grotesque
monuments of erudition—over whom Galileo did not know whether to laugh
or weep—who refused to put their eyes to the glass for fear of seeing
something that had no official right to existence; and, again, that of
many brains petrified by the unseasonable reading of works of scientific
vulgarization, and the unintelligent frequenting of universities—these
are the two great intellectual dangers of our time.

If, on the other hand, the philosophical doubt degenerates in the
presence of these scientific impossibilities into blind credulity; if it
suffices that a thing be unheard of, upsetting, contrary to common-sense
and to accepted truths, in order to be immediately admitted, practical
existence, without speaking of other considerations, becomes unbearable.
The convinced occultist ought never to allow the creaking of a piece of
furniture to pass without assuring himself that it is not the desperate
call of some great-grandaunt trying to enter into conversation with him;
nor to complain to the police when he finds his house upset during his
absence—for how is he to know that it is not some "elementals" from the
world beyond who have done the deed? It is by the fortunate failure of
consequences alone, and a continual forgetting of the doctrine, that one
can continue to live in a universe constantly exposed to the capricious
incursions of the "invisibles."

These opposite turns of the mind—the invincible fatuity of some and the
silly superstition of others—inspire many people with an equal
repugnance. The need of a happy medium between these opposed excesses

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

has been felt for some time. Here are, for example, a few lines, which
have lost nothing after the lapse of two centuries:

"What are we to think of magic and witchcraft \[to-day we would say
'occultism' and 'spiritism'\]? Their theory is obscure, their principles
vague, uncertain, approaching the visionary; but—they are embarrassing
facts, affirmed by grave men, who have seen them, or who have heard of
them from persons like themselves; to admit them all, or to deny them
all, seems equally embarrassing, and I dare to assert that in this, as
in all extraordinary things which depend upon customary rules, there is
a happy medium to be found between credulous souls and strong minds."

It is the voice of reason itself that the sagacious author of *Les
Caractères* permits us to hear. We must, however, add that this "happy
medium to be found" would not consist in a theory, a doctrine, a
ready-made and entire system, from the height of which, as from a
tribunal of arbitration, we would judge the "embarrassing cases" which
reality places in the path of the seeker; for this system—however
perfect it might be—would again be one more infallibility added to all
those which already encumber the road to truth. The "happy medium"
dreamed of by La Bruyère can be but a "method" always perfectible in its
application and prejudging in nothing the results of investigation which
go against the grain of the dogmatic points of view, equally
authoritative and sterile, which characterize the two extremes of the
"credulous souls" and "strong minds."

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

To develop here this methodology of psychical research which might guide
the investigator struggling with the apparent or real supernormal, would
take me too far from Mlle. Smith. But I will briefly indicate its
essence and general spirit, of which an excellent summary may be found
in the following passage of Laplace:

"We are so far from knowing all the agents of nature and their divers
modes of action that it would not be philosophical to deny phenomena
solely because they are inexplicable in the actual state of our
knowledge. But we ought to examine them with an attention all the more
scrupulous as it appears more difficult to admit them."

In writing these words Laplace hardly thought of telepathy, of the
spirits, or the movements of objects without contact, but only of animal
magnetism, which represented the supernormal of his time. This passage
remains none the less the rule of conduct to be followed concerning all
the possible manifestations of this multiform subject. Two inseparable
facts, completing each other, as the faces of a medal, may be
distinguished in it; but it is advisable, in order to place them the
better in the light, to formulate them separately into two propositions
representing the governing principles, the axioms of all investigations
of the supernormal. The one, which I shall call "<span
class="smallcaps">Principle of Hamlet</span>," may be condensed in these
words: *All is possible*. The other, to which it is but just to leave
the name of "<span class="smallcaps">Principle of Laplace</span>," is
susceptible of many forms of expression. I shall express it thus: *The
weight of the* 

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

*evidence should be proportioned to the strangeness of the facts*.

The forgetfulness of the "Principle of Hamlet" makes the "strong minds,"
for whom the limits of nature would not exceed those of their system,
the simpleton popes of all times and of all kinds, from the burlesque
adversaries of Galileo to the poor Auguste Comte, declaring that the
physical constitution of the stars would never be known, and to his
noble rivals of the learned societies, denying the aërolites or
condemning railroads beforehand. In its turn, the ignorance of the
"Principle of Laplace" makes the "credulous souls," who have never
reflected that, if all is possible to the eyes of the modest seeker, all
is, however, not certain, or even equally possible, and that some
evidence would yet be necessary in order to suppose that a stone falling
on the floor in an occult reunion arrived there through the walls by the
aid of a dematerialization, rather than to admit that it came there in
the pocket of a joker.

Thanks to these axioms, the investigator will avoid the doubly signalled
danger, and will advance without fear into the labyrinth of the
supernormal in advance of the monsters of the occult. However fantastic
and magical the things may be which will spring up before his eyes or
which will fill his ears, he will never be taken unawares, but,
expecting all in the name of the "Principle of Hamlet," he will not be
astonished at anything, and simply say: "Be it so! Why not? We shall
see." On the other hand, he will not allow the wool to be pulled over
his eyes, and he will not easily be satisfied in the matter of

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

evidence; but, firmly intrenched behind the "Principle of Laplace," he
will show himself all the more exacting as to the proofs, in proportion
to the degree in which the phenomena or the conclusion, which they may
wish him to accept, may be extraordinary, and he will oppose a merciless
*non liquet* to every demonstration which still seems suspicious or
lame.

I wish to speak a word here of the inevitable rôle which the personal
coefficient of the turn of mind and character plays in the concrete
application of the "Principle of Laplace." This latter is of a vagueness
and a deplorable elasticity which opens the door to all divergences of
individual appreciation. If we could express in a precise manner and
translate in ciphers, on the one hand, the *strangeness* of a fact,
which makes it improbable; on the other hand, the *weight of evidence*
which tends to make it admissible; and, finally, the demandable
*proportion* between these two contrary factors, so that the second may
counterbalance the first and secure assent—that would be perfect, and
everybody would soon come to an agreement. Unhappily, the means to
accomplish this result is not yet perceived.

We must pass now to the weight of the evidence. We may, up to a certain
point, submit it to an objective judgment and to an impartial estimation
by following the rules and methods of logic, in the broadest sense of
the term. But the strangeness of the facts, or, as Laplace said, the
difficulty in admitting them! Who, then, is to be the judge of them, and
by what universal standard can we measure them?

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

We must recognize that we are here in presence of an eminently
subjective and emotional factor, changeable from one individual to
another.

It is necessary to take some stand. In the matter of the supernormal
there are too many interior and personal factors (intellectual
idiosyncrasies, aesthetic temperaments, moral and religious sentiments,
metaphysical tendencies, etc.) tending to determine the quality and
intensity of the characteristic of the strangeness in the facts in
litigation, to enable one to flatter himself upon a disinterested,
objective, and *quasi*-scientific verdict upon their degree of
probability or improbability. It is only when, after the accumulation of
cases and evidences of similar character, a tacit agreement shall
finally have been reached by those who have studied the subject, that
the problem can be said to be solved, either by the relegation of
pretended supernormal phenomena to the domain of vanished illusions and
abandoned superstitions, or by the recognition of new laws and forces in
nature. The phenomena considered till then as supernatural will cease to
be so; they will form a part of established science, they will have
nothing more in them that is strange, and will be admitted by everybody.
As long as this mile-post is not reached, as long as the supernormal
phenomenon is discussed as such, there are but individual opinions on
this subject, subjective certitudes or probabilities, verdicts in which
reality is only reflected as closely welded to the personality of their
authors.

Two suggestions seem to me to spring from this.

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> First, authors who
take it upon themselves to give their advice upon the extraordinary
facts coming to their knowledge ought always to begin by making their
confession, so that the reader may the better distinguish the intimate
factors which may have influenced them. It is true that we are not
always thoroughly acquainted with ourselves, but it would be something
to say frankly what we believe we have discovered in ourselves as to the
position involuntarily taken by us, obscure inclinations for or against
the hypothesis involved in the phenomena in question. This is what I
shall try to do here, by confining myself to the problems raised by the
mediumship of Mlle. Smith, and without entering upon the boundless
domain of "psychical research." I shall, therefore, begin each of the
following paragraphs by giving my personal advice and my subjective
sentiment on the point upon which Hélène's supernormal appearances
touch.

It seems to me, in the second place, that the only rational position to
take, concerning the supernormal, is, if not a complete suspension of
judgment, which is not always psychologically possible, at least that of
a wise probability, exempt from all dogmatic obstinacy. The fixed
beliefs, the unshakable opinions as to the reality and the meaning of
life, are certainly subjective conditions, indispensable to all properly
moral conduct, to all human existence truly worthy of this name—that is
to say, all that which pretends to be above the animal routine of
inherited instincts and social slavery. But these firm convictions would
be absolutely misplaced

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

on the objective ground of science, and consequently also that of
supernormal facts, which, though still situated outside of the
scientific realm, hope shortly to be received within its pale. Practical
necessities make us but too often forget that our knowledge of the
phenomenal world never attains absolute certitude, and as soon as one
passes beyond the brutal facts of the senses, the best-established
truths, as well as the most thoroughly refuted propositions, do not rise
above a probability which, however great or insignificant we may suppose
it to be, never equals infinity or zero. The intellectual attitude which
common-sense prescribes in the supernormal consists, for very strong
reasons, in never absolutely and irrevocably denying or affirming, but
provisionally and by hypothesis, as it were. Even in cases when, after
having examined everything scrupulously, one imagines he has finally
reached certitude, it must not be forgotten that this word is but a mode
of expressing one's self; because, in point of fact, one does not rise
above a probable opinion, and the possibility of an unsuspected error,
vitiating the most apparently evident experimental demonstration, is
never mathematically excluded.

This reserve is particularly indicated in cases of phenomena like those
of Mlle. Smith, which often leave much to be desired concerning
accessory information, which would be necessary in order to express
one's self categorically on their account. My appreciation of these
phenomena, far from pretending to an infallible and definite character,
demands, therefore, from the start, the right of modification

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

under the influence of new facts which may be produced subsequently.

For the sake of clearness I shall set off again in four groups the
supernormal appearances with which I shall have to occupy myself in this
chapter—viz., so-called physical phenomena, telepathy, lucidity, and
spirit messages. The boundaries of these three last categories are but
poorly defined and might easily be fused into one. But my division is
but a kind of a measure of order, and not a classification.

#### II. PHYSICAL PHENOMENA

This designation again covers several rather diverse categories of
strange facts. I shall only speak of the two kinds of which Mlle. Smith
has furnished samples (and which I have never personally witnessed)—that
is to say, "apports" and "movements of objects without contact."

1\. *Apports*. <span id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28)—Besides the unknown
causes presiding over their aërial transportation, the arrival of
exterior objects in a closed space, often coming from a considerable
distance, implies, in order that they may pass through the walls of the
room, either the subterfuge of a fourth dimension of space, or the
penetration of the matter—that is to say, the passage of the molecules
or atoms of the object (its momentary *dematerialization*) between the
molecules or atoms of the wall. All these impediments to our vulgar

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

conception as to the stability of matter, or, what is worse, to our
geometrical intuition, seem to me so hard to digest that I am tempted to
apply to them the words of Laplace: "There are things that are so
extraordinary that nothing can counterbalance their improbability." This
is not to declare as false, *à priori*, all the stories of this kind,
for we know that the true is not always the probable; but assuredly,
even in the case of the good Mr. Stainton Moses, the weight of the proof
does not, in my opinion, equal the strangeness of the facts.

So far as concerns the *apports* obtained at the seances of Mlle. Smith,
they all took place in 1892-93, in the reunions of the N. group, where
the obscurity favored the production of marvellous things in close
relation with the visions and typtological messages.

I will cite from memory certain acoustic phenomena mentioned in the
reports: The piano sounded several times under the touch of the favorite
disincarnate spirits of the group; the same happened to a violin and to
a bell; once we also heard metallic sounds that seemed to come from a
small musical box, although there was none in the room. As to the
*apports*, always received with delight by the members of the group, who
are ever anxiously wishing for them and asking their spirit friends for
them, they were frequent and varied enough. In midwinter roses showered
upon the table, handfuls of violets, pinks, white lilacs, etc., also
green branches; among other things there was an ivy leaf having engraved
upon it in letters, as though by a punching-machine, the name of one of
the principal disincarnate

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

spirits at play. Again, at the tropical and Chinese visions sea-shells
were obtained that were still shining and covered with sand, Chinese
coins, a little vase containing water, in which there was a superb rose,
etc. These last objects were brought in a straight line from the extreme
East by the spirits, in proof of which they had the honor of a public
presentation at a seance of La Société d’Études Psychiques de Genève,
and were placed upon the desk of the president, where all, myself
included, could satisfy themselves at their leisure as to their reality.

2\. *Movements of objects without contact*.—The displacing, without
contact and in the absence of all known mechanical processes, of objects
situated at a distance (telekinesis), is very strange. However, it only
upsets physiological notions, and does not, as is the case with the
*apports*, go as far as to overthrow our conceptions in regard to the
constitution of matter or our spatial intuitions. It only supposes that
the living being possesses forces acting at a distance, or the power of
putting forth at intervals a species of invisible supernumerary
prehensile organs, capable of handling objects, as our hands do (ectenic
forces of Thury, ectoplasms of Richet, dynamic members of Ochorowicz,
etc.). Such are the ephemeral but visible pseudopodes that the amœba
puts forth in all directions.

It may be conceived that, as the atom and the molecule are the centre of
a more or less radiating influence of extension, so the organized
individual, isolated cell or colony of cells, is originally in
possession of a sphere of action, where it concentrates at times

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

its efforts more especially on one point, and again on others *ad
libitum*. Through repetition, habit, selection, hereditary and other
principles loved by biologists, certain more constant lines of force
would be differentiated in this homogeneous primordial sphere, and
little by little could give birth to motor organs. For example—our four
members of flesh and blood, sweeping the space around us, would be but a
more economic expedient invented by nature, a machine wrought in the
course of better adapted evolution, to obtain at the least expense the
same useful effects as this vague primitive spherical power. Thus
supplanted or transformed, these powers would thereafter manifest
themselves only very exceptionally, in certain states, or with abnormal
individuals, as an atavic reapparition of a mode of acting long ago
fallen into disuse, because it is really very imperfect and
necessitates, without any advantage, an expenditure of vital energy far
greater than the ordinary use of arms and limbs. Unless it is the cosmic
power itself, the amoral and stupid demiurge, the unconsciousness of M.
de Hartman, which comes directly into play upon contact with a deranged
nervous system, and realizes its disordered dreams without passing
through the regular channels of muscular movements.

But enough of these vapory [metaphysical or](errata.htm#11)
pseudo-biological speculations to give an account of a phenomenon for
which it will be time enough to find precise explanation when its
authenticity shall be beyond dispute, if that time shall ever arrive.

Three groups of proofs, of a diverse nature, have

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

gradually brought me to look upon the reality of these phenomena—in
spite of the instinctive difficulty of admitting them—as an infinitely
more probable hypothesis than its opposite.

First: I was first unsettled by the reading of the too-much-neglected
memoir of Professor Thury, which seems to me to be a model of scientific
observations, the weight of which I could only overlook by rejecting, *à
priori*—in the name of their strangeness—the possibility itself of the
facts in question, which would have been against the Principle of
Hamlet. The conversations which it was my privilege to hold with M.
Thury have greatly contributed to arouse in me a presumption in favor of
these phenomena, which the book would evidently not have done in the
same degree if the author had not been personally known to me.

Secondly: Once created, my idea of the probability of these facts became
rather strengthened than weakened by a number of foreign works of more
recent date; but I doubt whether any, or all of these combined, would
have been sufficient to create it. The displacement of objects without
contact being once hypothetically admitted, it seems easier to me to
explain Crookes's observations on the modifications of the weight of
bodies in the presence of Home by authentic phenomena of this kind (in
spite of the well-deserved criticisms that Crookes's publications
brought upon him) than to suppose that he was simply Home's dupe. The
same is true with the cases of *Esprits tapageurs* (*Poltergeister*),
published by the Society for Psychical Research, the exclusive

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

hypothesis of the "*naughty little girl*," without the addition of any
trace of telekinesis, which seems to me a less adequate and more
improbable explanation than that of real phenomena, which would have
tempted fraud. Naturally all depends on the preconceived opinion one may
have as to the general possibility or impossibility of these facts, and
my feeling in regard to the matter would certainly be different without
the preceding or the following groups of evidence.

Thirdly: The probability of the movement of objects without contact has
reached with me a degree practically equivalent to certitude, thanks to
M. Richet, to whom I am indebted for my presence at his house last year
at several seances of Eusapia Paladino, under conditions of control
which gave no room for doubt—at least without challenging the combined
witness of the senses of sight, hearing, and touch, as well as the
average quantity of critical sense and perspicacity with which every
ordinary intelligence flatters itself it is endowed; or, again, of
suspecting the walls of M. Richet's study had been tampered with, and he
himself, with his attending colleagues, of being impostors, in collusion
with the amiable Neapolitan herself—a supposition which the most
elementary sense of propriety would absolutely forbid me to entertain.
From that moment I believed in telekinesis by constraint of the
perception, *sensata et oculata certitudine*, to borrow the expression
of Galileo, who certainly did not mean by that an unreflecting adhesion
to the evidences of the senses, like that of the casual onlooker at the
tricks of the prestidigitator, but rather the final crowning of

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

an edifice having for its rational framework the reasoned analysis of
the conditions of observation, and of the concrete circumstances
surrounding the production of the phenomenon.

In saying that I believe in these facts, I will add that there is no
question here of a conviction, in the moral, religious, or philosophical
sense of the term. This belief is for me devoid of all vital importance;
it does not move any essential fibre of my being, and I would not feel
the least inclination to submit to the slightest martyrdom in its
defence. Whether the objects move or do not move without contact is
absolutely indifferent to me. Should any one some day succeed in
unveiling the physical tricks or the fallacious psychological processes
which have led into error the best observers of telekinesis, from M.
Thury down to M. Richet, with a number of other witnesses, myself
included, I would be the first to laugh at the trick that art and nature
had played upon me, to applaud the perspicacity of the one who
discovered it, to congratulate myself, above all, in seeing supernormal
appearances returning to the ordinary course of things.

This is a disproportionally lengthy preamble to facts of which I shall
have to speak here, for they are reduced to a few displacements of
objects without contact (raising of tables, transporting or projecting
of flowers and diverse things placed out of reach), of which Hélène and
her mother were witnesses on several occasions at their house. I cannot
be accused of stubborn skepticism, since I admit the reality of
telekinesis. In the present case, however, all the stories which have
been told me leave much to be desired

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

from an evidential point of view. Without suspecting in any way the
perfect good faith of both Mme. and Mlle. Smith, it suffices to recall
the possibility of malobservation and errors of memory in the stories of
supernormal events in order not to attribute a great evidential value to
the absolutely sincere evidence of these ladies.

Incapacitated as I am from pronouncing judgment upon phenomena of which
I was not a witness, I shall, however, put forth a fact which might
militate in favor of their authenticity (their possibility having been
first hypothetically admitted)—namely, that these phenomena have always
been produced under exceptional conditions, at a time when Hélène was in
an abnormal state and a prey to a deep emotion. On the one side, this
circumstance increases the chances of malobservation, while, on the
other, the day on which it shall be well established that (as divers
observations cause us to think) certain abnormal and emotional states
set at liberty in the organism latent forces capable of acting at a
distance, it will be permitted us to suppose that perhaps something
analogous has taken place in Mlle. Smith's case. Here is, as an example
of these perplexing cases, a fact which happened to her during a period
of general indisposition. Abridging the story, I reproduce it as Hélène
sent it to me the following day:

"Last night I had a visit from M. H. I do not need to give you an
analysis of my impressions; you will understand them as well as I do. He
came to tell me that he had held a seance with a lady who

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

was a stranger to me, and that this lady had seen Leopold, who had given
her a remedy for the indisposition from which I was suffering. I could
not refrain from telling him that Leopold had assured me that he
manifested himself only to me, and that it would consequently be
difficult for me to admit his alleged utterances to others." But that is
not the most interesting part of the story.

"While M. H. spoke to me I felt a sharp pain in my left temple, and,
perhaps two minutes afterwards, my eyes, constantly directed towards the
piano, on which I had placed two oranges the evening before, were
entirely fascinated with I know not what. Then, suddenly, at the moment
when we least expected it—we were all three (M. H., my father, and
myself) seated at a reasonable distance from the piano—one of the
oranges displaced itself and rolled to my feet. My father maintained
that it had no doubt been placed too near the edge of the lid, and at a
certain moment had fallen in a natural way. M. H. saw immediately in
this incident the intervention of some spirit. I myself dared not pass
my opinion on it. Finally, I picked up the orange, and we spoke of other
things.

"M. H. remained about an hour; he went away exactly at nine. I went to
my mother's room to give her a few details of M. H.’s visit. I described
to her the fall of the orange, and what was my surprise when, on
returning to the drawing-room and stepping up to the piano to take the
lamp I had placed on it, I found the famous orange no longer there.
There was but one left; the one I had picked

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

up and replaced by the side of the other had disappeared. I looked for
it everywhere, but without success. I went back to my mother, and while
I spoke to her we heard something fall in the vestibule. I took the lamp
to see what might have fallen. I distinguished at the farthest end
(towards the door of the entrance to the apartment) the much-sought-for
orange!

"Then I asked myself quite frankly whether I was in presence of some
spiritistic manifestation. I tried not to be frightened. I took the
orange to show it to my mother. I returned to the piano to take the
second orange, so as not to be frightened in a similar way. But it, in
its turn, had disappeared! Then I felt a considerable sensation of
trembling. I returned to my mother's room, and, while we discussed the
matter, we heard again something thrown with violence, and, rushing out
to see what had happened, I saw the second orange placed in exactly the
same spot where the other had been, and considerably bruised. Imagine
how astonished we were! I took both oranges, and, without losing an
instant, went to the kitchen and put them in a cupboard, where I found
them again the following morning; they had not moved. I did not go to
bed without some fear, but fortunately I quickly went to sleep. My
mother is sure that it is M. H. who brought some evil spirit into the
house, and she is quite uneasy. . . ."

From the oral explanations of Mile. Smith and her mother, and also from
the location of the places, it follows that the oranges had been thrown
at a distance

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

of ten yards from the piano, through the wide-open parlor door leading
to the vestibule, against the door of the apartment, as if to follow and
strike fictitiously M. H., who a few moments before had left by this
door.

One has undoubtedly always the right of discarding at the outset, as
presenting too little guarantee of genuineness, the extraordinary
stories of a person subject to hallucinations. In the present case, all
that I know of Mlle. Smith and her parents keeps me from doing so, and
persuades me that her story is thoroughly exact, which, however, does
not amount to saying that there is anything of the supernormal about it.
One has, in fact, the choice between two interpretations.

First: In the hypothesis of veritable telekinesis, the following is the
manner in which the adventure would be summed up: the emotion due to the
unexpected and unpleasant visit of M. H. had brought about a division of
consciousness. The feeling of irritation, anger, and repulsion against
him had condensed themselves into some secondary personality, which, in
the general perturbation of the entire psychophysiological organism, had
momentarily recovered the use of these primitive forces of action at a
distance, entirely removed from the will, and without the participation
of the ordinary self, and thus automatically accomplished outwardly the
instinctive idea of bombarding this ill-bred visitor. Notice is to be
taken of the painful *aura* at the temple and the fascination of gaze,
which, according to Hélène's story, preceded the first signs of the
phenomenon,

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

the orange falling and rolling at her feet.

Secondly: But the most natural supposition is certainly that Mlle.
Smith, by the ordinary use of her limbs, had taken and thrown these
projectiles in an access of unconscious muscular automatism. It is true
that this would not agree with the presence of her father, mother, or M.
H., who did not see her make the supposed movements. But an
absent-mindedness of even normal witnesses will seem easier to admit
than the authentic production of a supernormal phenomenon.

These episodes which have happened to Mlle. Smith and her mother since I
have known them are very few, amounting to half a dozen at the most, and
I will not dwell longer upon this subject. Hélène is not conscious of
possessing any faculty of movement at a distance, and she always
attributes these phenomena to spirit intervention. Leopold, on the other
hand, has never acknowledged that he is the author of them. He claims
that Hélène possesses within herself supernormal powers, and that, in
order to succeed, she would only have to set them to work, but that she
did not wish to do so. All my suggestions and repeated entreaties with
Leopold and Hélène—either awake or in a state of somnambulism—in the
hope of obtaining in my presence some physical phenomenon, have been in
vain up to the present time.

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

#### III. TELEPATHY

One may almost say that if telepathy did not exist one would have to
invent it. I mean by this that a direct action between living beings,
independent of the organs of the senses, is a matter of such conformity
to all that we know of nature that it would be hard not to suppose it *à
priori*, even if we had no perceptible indication of it. How is it
possible to believe that the foci of chemical phenomena, as complex as
the nervous centres, can be in activity without giving forth diverse
undulations, *x*, *y*, or *z* rays, traversing the cranium as the sun
traverses a pane of glass, and acting at a distance on their homologues
in other craniums? It is a simple matter of intensity.

The gallop of a horse or the leap of a flea in Australia causes the
terrestrial globe to rebound on its opposite side to an extent
proportional to the weight of these animals compared to that of our
planet. This is little, even without taking into account the fact that
this infinitesimal displacement runs the risk at every moment of being
neutralized by the leaps of horses and fleas on the other hemisphere, so
that, on the whole, the shocks to our terrestrial globe resulting from
all that moves on its surface are too feeble to prevent our sleeping.
Perhaps it is the same with the innumerable waves which coming from all
other living beings, shock at every moment a given brain: their efforts
are counterbalanced, or their resultant too slight to be perceived. But
they exist none the

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

less in reality, and I confess I do not understand those who reproach
telepathy with being strange, mystical, occult, supernormal, etc.

As to the knowledge whether this theoretical telepathy offers results
open to experimental demonstration—that is to say, whether this chain of
intercerebral vibrations into which we are plunged exercises any notable
influence on the course of our psychic life; and whether, in certain
cases, we happen to feel emotions, impulses, hallucinations, which the
psychological state of one or another of our own kind exercises directly
upon us, across the ether and without the ordinary intermediary of the
channel of our senses—that is a question of fact arising from
observation and experience. We know how much this question has actually
been discussed, and how difficult it is to solve it in a decisive way,
as much on account of all the sources of errors and illusions, to which
one is exposed in this domain, as on account of a probably always
necessary concurrence of very exceptional circumstances (which we do not
as yet know how to accomplish at will), in order that the particular
action of a determined *agent* should sweep away all rival influences,
and betray itself in a manner sufficiently marked and distinct in the
life of the *percipient*. Everything considered, I strongly lean towards
the affirmative. The reality of telepathic phenomena seems to me
difficult to reject in presence of the cluster of very diverse
evidences, entirely independent of each other, that militate in its
favor. Undoubtedly none of these evidences is absolutely convincing when
taken separately; but their striking convergence

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

towards the same result gives to their entirety a new and considerable
weight, which tips the scale, in my opinion, while awaiting an inverse
oscillation, which may some day destroy this convergence, or explain it
by a common source of error. Besides, I understand very well why those
to whom telepathy remains a mystic, and to our scientific conceptions
heterogeneous, principle, should obstinately resist it. But, seeing
nothing strange in it myself, I do not hesitate to admit it, not as an
intangible dogma, but as a provisional hypothesis, corresponding better
than any other to the condition of my certainly very incomplete
knowledge of this department of psychological research.

Although predisposed in favor of telepathy, I have failed in finding
striking proofs of it in Mlle. Smith, and the few experiments I have
attempted with her on this subject offered nothing encouraging.

I tried several times to make an impression upon Hélène from a distance
and to appear before her during the evening, when I thought she had
returned to her home, which is a kilometre distant from mine. I obtained
no satisfactory result. My only case of striking success, lost among a
number of nonsuccesses, can be explained by mere coincidence as well,
and, after taking all the accessory circumstances into consideration,
does not deserve a lengthy discussion.

As to spontaneous telepathy, a few indications would make me think that
Mlle. Smith sometimes involuntarily submits to my influence. The most
curious is a dream (or a vision) that she had one

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

night at a time when I had suddenly fallen ill during a stay in the
country some twenty leagues distant from Geneva. She heard the ringing
of a bell at her door, then saw me entering, so emaciated and apparently
so tired that she could not refrain from speaking to her mother on the
following morning of her uneasiness concerning me. Unfortunately these
ladies took no note of the exact date of this incident, and Hélène did
not speak of it to M. Lemaître until three weeks later, when he told her
about my illness, the beginning of which dated back to the approximate
time of the dream. The evidential value of this case is weak. On other
occasions Mlle. Smith announced to me that, to judge from her dreams or
vague intuition in a waking state, i was to have on a certain day an
unexpected vexation, a painful preoccupation, etc. But the cases in
which she was right were counterbalanced by those in which she was
wrong. It does not appear that Hélène's telepathic relations with other
persons are closer than with me, and among the cases known to me there
is not one that deserves the trouble of being related. An exception
must, however, be made on behalf of a M. Balmès (pseudonym), who was for
some time employed in the same business house as Mlle. Smith, and
concerning whom she had several really curious phenomena. This M. Balmès
was himself "a sensitive medium" of a very nervous and vibrating nature.
He was working in the story above that of Hélène, and stopped sometimes
to talk concerning spiritism with her. Their relations, which they did
not extend beyond

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

the office, ended there. There never seemed to be any personal sympathy
or special affinity between them, and it is not known how to account for
the telepathic bond that seemed to exist between them. The following are
examples:

 

1\. One morning M. Balmès lent a newspaper to Hélène in which there was
an article on spiritism. He himself had received this paper from one of
his friends, M. X., a Frenchman who had been in Geneva for some three
weeks only and who did not know Hélène even by name. This M. X. had
marked the interesting article in red and had added on the margin an
annotation in black. During her noon meal at home Hélène read the
article rapidly, but for lack of time did not read the annotation marked
in black. Having returned to her office she began again to work.
However, at a quarter-past three her eyes fell on the annotation of the
paper, and as she was taking up her pen to make some calculation in her
note-book, "I do not know," she wrote to me, "either how or why I began
to draw on this writing-tablet the head of a man entirely unknown to me.
At the same time I heard the voice of a man, of a high, clear, and
harmonious quality; but unfortunately I could not understand the words.
A great desire came over me to run and show this drawing to M. Balmès.
He examined it, and seemed astonished, for the head drawn in ink was no
other than that of his friend who had lent him the paper marked in
pencil. The voice and the French accent were, as it seems, entirely
correct also. How was it that at the sight

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

of an annotation I found myself in communication with a stranger? M.
Balmès, in presence of this curious phenomenon, hastened that very
evening to his friend and learned that at the time when I drew his
portrait there was a very serious discussion in progress concerning him
(M. Balmès) between M. X. and other persons."

Strictly speaking, this case may be normally explained by supposing:
First, that Mlle. Smith, without consciously noticing or remembering
him, had seen M. X. during his short stay in Geneva, walking in the
street with M. Balmès, and that the paper, which she knew had been lent
to M. Balmès by one of his friends, had, by means of a subconscious
induction, awakened the latent memory of the face and voice of the
stranger whom she had seen with him. Secondly, that there is but a
fortuitous coincidence in the fact that M. X. spoke of M. Balmès at
precisely the hour when Hélène traced the face and heard the voice of
the aforesaid M. X. in an access of automatism, set free at the sight of
his annotation on the paper.

In the telepathic hypothesis, on the contrary, the incident would have
been explained somewhat as follows: The conversation of M. X. concerning
M. Balmès (which was, as it appears, of an excited nature) had
telepathically impressed the latter and awakened in him subliminally the
remembrance of M. X. M. Balmès, in his turn, without consciously
suspecting it, had transmitted this remembrance to Mlle. Smith, who was
already predisposed to suggestion on that day by the loan of the paper,
and with whom the

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

said remembrance broke forth into a graphic, auditive, and impulsive
(the desire of showing her drawing to M. Balmès) automatism. The
subconscious strata of M. Balmès had thus served as a link between M. X.
and Mlle. Smith.

2\. "Some eight days after the preceding case, being a few minutes after
noon in an open streetcar, I saw before me this same M. Balmès talking
to a lady in a room apparently close to the street-car. The picture was
not very clear. A kind of mist seemed to extend over the whole, which
was, however, not strong enough to hide from me the personages. M.
Balmès, especially, was quite recognizable, and his somewhat subdued
voice made me overhear these words: 'It is very curious, extraordinary.'
Then I felt a sudden, violent commotion, and the picture vanished at the
same time. Soon I found myself again riding in the street-car, and,
according to the progress which it had made, I understood that the
vision had lasted but three minutes at the most. Notice must be taken of
the fact that during these few minutes I did not lose for a single
moment the consciousness of my situation; I knew and felt that I was
riding home, as I was in the habit of doing each day, and I felt
entirely like myself, without the slightest mental disturbance.

"Two hours later I went up to M. Balmès. Approaching him frankly—yes,
even a little abruptly—I said to him: 'Were you satisfied with the short
visit you made a few minutes after twelve, and would it be indiscreet to
ask what you found so curious, so extraordinary?' He seemed confused,
astonished,

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

pretended even to be vexed, and looked as if he wished to ask me by what
right I permitted myself to control his actions. This movement of
indignation passed as quickly as it came, to give way to a sentiment of
the greatest curiosity. He made me tell him in detail my vision, and
confessed to me that he really had gone at noon to call upon a lady, and
that they had discussed the incident about the newspaper. He had really
pronounced the words that I had heard: 'It is curious, extraordinary,'
and, strange to say, I also learned that at the end of these words a
violent ringing of the bell had been heard, and that the conversation
between M. Balmès and his friend had suddenly come to an end by the
arrival of a visitor. The commotion felt by me was, therefore, nothing
more than the violent ringing of the bell, which, putting an end to the
conversation, had also put an end to my vision."

3\. At the beginning of a seance one Sunday afternoon at a quarter to
four, I handed to Hélène a glass ball, of the kind used for developing
clairvoyance by means of gazing into a crystal. Shortly afterwards she
saw in it M. Balmès and his friend, and above their heads an isolated
pistol, but which seemed to have nothing to do with them. She told me
then that M. Balmès had received the day before at his office a telegram
which very much upset him, and which obliged him to leave Geneva that
very evening for S. She seemed to apprehend some misfortune about to
befall M. Balmès, but soon fell asleep. By his digital dictations
Leopold tells us that he sent her to sleep to save her some painful
visions seen

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

in the crystal, and that she, Hélène, has a mediumistic consciousness in
regard to all that is passing at S., and that the pistol is connected
with M. Balmès. It was impossible to learn more, and the remainder of
the seance was taken up with other matters.

M. Balmès, who returned to Geneva on the following Monday, and whom I
saw the same evening, was very much struck with Hélène's vision, for, on
Sunday afternoon he really took part in a scene which came near being
tragic, and in the course of which his friend X. had offered him a
pistol which he always carried with him. Mlle. Smith and M. Balmès did
not hesitate to see in this coincidence a highly characterized
supernormal phenomenon. This case offers, however, some difficulty—viz.,
that the incident of the pistol at S. did not take place till more than
two hours after Hélène's visions, and that M. Balmès, as he affirms, had
no premonition of the affair at the time when Hélène had her vision. It
follows from this that there was a kind of anticipated telepathy, a
premonition experienced by another than the interested principal, and
this raises the great question of the supernormal knowledge of future
events. I find it easier to admit that, although M. Balmès did not
consciously foresee the incident of the pistol, he foresaw
subconsciously the event, and that this idea passed telepathically to
Hélène. Perhaps this case might be explained without having recourse to
the supernormal at all. Mlle. Smith, knowing M. Balmès' character, and
up to a certain point his personal circumstances, having been present
the evening before when M. Balmès received the

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

telegram, and foreseeing (as she said at the seance), the gravity of the
situation, could easily imagine the intervention of a fire-arm in the
affair. Besides, no detail of the vision indicates that the pistol seen
in the glass ball corresponds to that of M. X.

How far the delicate sense of probabilities can go, and how often
spontaneous inferences, with people of a quick imagination, are correct,
one never knows. Undoubtedly we often see a supernormal connection where
there is, in reality, only a striking coincidence, due to a happy
divination and prevision, which is very natural. I ought to add that
this manner of evicting the supernormal and reducing the vision of the
pistol to a mere creation of the subliminal fantasy, seems inadmissible
to Hélène, who remains absolutely certain that this was a convincing
case of telepathy.

The above example, 2, which is the best of all, in my opinion, is still
not irreproachable.

#### IV. LUCIDITY

All the facts of lucidity (clairvoyance, second-sight, etc.) which are
attributed to Mlle. Smith may be explained by telepathic impressions
proceeding from living persons. This means that I not only admit from
the start the *possibility* of such phenomena by virtue of the "
Principle of Hamlet," but, since telepathy is not, in my opinion,
anything very strange, I shall feel no subjective difficulty in
accepting the reality of Hélène's supernormal intuitions, provided that
they present some serious guarantee of authenticity,

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

and do not explain themselves still more simply by normal and ordinary
processes.

Leopold, who appears in almost all of these veridical messages—whether
he recognizes himself as the author or whether he accompanies simply by
his presence their manifestation through Hélène—has never deigned to
grant me one under entirely satisfactory conditions, and he censures my
insistence as vain and puerile curiosity. As to the innumerable
phenomena with which others more fortunate than myself have been
gratified, they have always offered this singularity: when they appeared
to be really of a nature calculated to furnish a decisive and convincing
proof as to their supernormal origin, I never succeeded in obtaining a
written, precise, and circumstantial account, but only uncertain and
incomplete tales, too intimate and too personal to be divulged by those
interested in them; and, again, when my friends were quite willing to
write out a detailed account and to answer to my demand for exact
information, the fact reduced itself to such a small matter that it was
beyond my power to see anything of the supernormal in it.

Taking everything into consideration, I am inclined to believe that
Mlle. Smith, in truth, possesses real phenomena of clairvoyance, not,
however, passing beyond the possible limits of telepathy; only, in order
that they may be produced, it is necessary that Leopold—that is to say,
the special psychic state of Hélène which is necessary for the reception
and externalization of these telepathic impressions—be aided from the
outside by the influence of certain

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

favorable temperaments, more frequently met with among convinced
spiritists than among persons who are normal, and that he be not
impeded, on the other hand, by the paralyzing presence of hostile
temperaments, such as that of a critical observer. It is greatly to be
regretted that the naïve believers who inspire and succeed in obtaining
magnificent phenomena of lucidity usually care so little for the
desiderata of science, and, above all, refuse to submit themselves to an
examination which might explain the phenomena in a natural manner; while
the investigators in search of " convincing " proofs are not inspiring
arid obtain almost nothing.

However it may be, I shall give a few examples of Mlle. Smith's proofs
of lucidity, which are not very varied, and can be divided into the
three categories of the medical prescriptions and diagnoses, of lost
objects found again, and of retrocognitions of events more or less
remote.

1\. *Medical Consultations*.—In promising specimens of extraordinary
facts of this kind I have gone too far. Many such have been told me—as,
for instance, Leopold dictating an unknown and complicated recipe of a
hair tonic for a gentleman living abroad, a single bottle of which was
sufficient to bring forth a full growth of hair on a head which had
become bald before middle age; or, again, Leopold, being consulted about
the health of a lady living at a great distance from Geneva, revealing
both the veridical nature of her illness, which was unknown till then to
her physicians, and its origin, which was due to certain unsuspected but
perfectly true incidents

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

connected with her childhood, and, finally, the treatment, which was
crowned with success. But the absence of written testimony and precise
information as to the concomitant circumstances of these marvellous
cures reduce them to the rank of amusing stories, the value of which
cannot positively be estimated. As to better-attested episodes, it is
true I have been able to obtain authentic stories, but they are those in
which the probability of a supernormal element has been reduced to a
minimum—imperceptible to me. I will cite but one case.

M. and Mme. G. having invited Mlle. Smith during the month of August to
pass a day with them in the country, a few leagues distant from Geneva,
took advantage of the visit to hold a seance in order to consult Leopold
on the health of one of their children. I will tell the incident from a
written account sent me by Mme. G. soon afterwards:

"Our little girl was suffering from anæmia, and fell frequently into a
state of weakness, in spite of intervals of improvement. Dr. d’Espine
had been recommended to us for the time of our return to Geneva. The
medium \[Mlle. Smith\] knew nothing of this; we had taken the precaution
to keep it from her." The seance begins with a few kind words from
Leopold, whom M. G. then asks whether he would do well in consulting Dr.
d’Espine. "*And I*," replied Leopold, "*can I do nothing for you?
Ungrateful people!*" But when he was asked to indicate some treatment,
he replied: "*Wait till your return to Geneva*." Then, upon being asked
whether an egg mixed with brandy would be good for the

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

child, he replied that the egg would be good, but the brandy was not
necessary in her case. Then he recommended that the child be taken for
an hour's walk in the open air every day. As to the prescription
relating to her food, he repeated: "*I told you to wait till your return
to Geneva*."

On their return to Geneva in the middle of September, M. and Mme. G.
held a second seance. This time Leopold was more exact; he advised:
"*Not too much milk, but rather a few glasses of good pure wine at each
meal*." Then he added: "*Treat the anaemia first and you will triumph
over the throat trouble, which would finally weaken her too much. Her
blood is so weak that the least cold, the slightest emotion, I will go
so far as to say that the expectation of a pleasure even, would be
sufficient to bring the angina to a crisis. You ought to have foreseen
that*." " Leopold," M. G. notes here, "has enabled us to put our finger
upon such of the details as we did not know how to explain. At each
sentence my wife and I looked at each other with stupefaction." Leopold
ordered also many green vegetables, warm salt-water douches of three
minutes’ duration in the evening, and: "The principal thing now is five
drops of iron in half a glass of water twice a day before the meal. Do
this and you will see the result in a month." In two weeks’ time the
little girl was hardly recognizable.

I have cited this case because it is among those that have most struck
M. and Mme. G., and upon which they build their conviction of the
independent existence and supernormal knowledge of Leopold, and because
it shows how little is needed to kindle the

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

faith among spiritists. I forgot to say that the G. family was well
known by Mlle. Smith, and that during the whole winter and the preceding
spring she had held weekly seances at their home. There is but one thing
that astonishes me, and that is, that Leopold, at the time of the first
improvised consultation, should have been taken unawares up to the point
of postponing his orders until later, and adhering to such commonplace
things as a walk in the open air and the suppression of brandy. In the
second seance one sees the effect of a month's incubation. Leopold has
had time to recover in Hélène's memory the remembrance concerning the
little girl who was anæmic and subject to sore throat; also the
prescription which, in the given case, surely proved most efficacious,
but which hardly denotes a supernormal knowledge. One does not even need
here telepathy to explain messages which are amply accounted for by the
subconscious functions of Mlle. Smith's ordinary faculties.

Examples of this kind, drawn from Mlle. Smith's mediumship, might be
almost indefinitely multiplied; but *cui bono?* Once more, I do not
claim that Leopold has never given any medical consultation surpassing
Hélène's latent knowledge and implying supernormal powers of
clairvoyance. I only say that I have not yet succeeded in finding a
single case where the proofs reached the height of that conclusion.

2\. *Objects Recovered*.—I do not know any case in which Mlle. Smith has
indicated the situation of an object which had been hidden, and as to
the location of which she could have had no information through

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

natural channels. All her discoveries consist, so far as I have been
able to judge, in the return, under a spiritistic and with a dramatic
aspect, of memories either simply forgotten or properly subliminal,
which depended upon the incidents concerned having first belonged to the
ordinary consciousness, or their having always escaped it and having
been from their origin registered in the subconsciousness.

These are facts of cryptomnesia pure and simple—*i.e.*, explicable by a
normal psychological process very common in its essence, while the
picturesque embellishments added by the mediumistic imagination give to
these teleological automatisms a certain mysterious and supernormal
appearance which in other surroundings would certainly create for
Hélène—or rather for Leopold—a place alongside St. Anthony of Padua. I
confine myself to two examples. Mlle. Smith being charged with the duty
of making ready the merchandise sent out from her department, was handed
a telegram one day from a customer who asked that four yards of No.
13,459 be despatched to him immediately. "This brief order," said
Hélène, "was not calculated to hasten the forwarding of the goods. How
could I readily find this No. 13,459, in the midst of six or seven
thousand others in the store? Pondering, telegram in hand, I was
wondering how I could find it, when a voice outside of but very near me
said to me: '*Not there, but here*,' and involuntarily I turned round,
without knowing why, and my hand laid itself mechanically on a piece of
goods which I drew towards me, and which actually bore the No. 13,459."

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

It is not necessary to be a medium to know by experience these happy
reminiscences or inspirations which sometimes come to free us from
embarrassment by shining forth like a light at an opportune moment; but
that which in the case of ordinary persons remains in the feeble
condition of an idea or internal image, among mediumistic temperaments
assumes readily the fixed and vivid form of an hallucination. Instead of
simply "suddenly recollecting" in the case of the No. 13,459, as would
have happened to any one else, Hélène hears an exterior voice, and
perceives her hand moving involuntarily in a given direction. It is
noted that this automatism assumed an auditive and motor form which is
the pendant of the vocal and visual automatism which I have referred to
on pp. [58](ipm05.htm#page_58)-[59](ipm05.htm#page_59). It is to this
same class of facts, well known and almost common to-day, that the
following example likewise belongs, although the subliminal imagination
had surrounded it with the form of an intervention on the part of
Leopold.

One Sunday evening, on returning home, Mlle. Smith noticed that she had
lost a small breastpin which had been fastened to her corsage, and which
she greatly valued as a souvenir. The following day she returned to look
for it where she had been the evening before, but in vain, and a notice
which she caused to be inserted in the "lost" columns of a daily
newspaper gave no result. Here I leave the narration of the story to
her: "Persuaded that my pin was really lost, I did my best to think no
more about it, but this was a difficult matter, since one night I was
awakened suddenly by three raps struck against

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

my bed. Somewhat frightened, I looked around, but saw nothing. I tried
to go to sleep, but again many raps were struck, this time near my head.
I seated myself on my bed (I was agitated), trying to discover what was
happening, and hardly had I seated myself when I saw a hand shaking my
lost breastpin before my eyes. This vision lasted only a minute, but
that was long enough for it to make a deep impression upon me."

The following Tuesday evening (ten days after the loss of the trinket)
Hélène held a seance at the house of M. Cuendet, at which two other
persons were also present. She told of the loss of her pin and the
curious vision above described; then all seated themselves at the table.
After a typtological dictation upon an altogether different subject, the
following incident occurred, the account of which I have borrowed from
notes taken by M. Cuendet (it was in 1894, and I only knew Mlle. Smith
by reputation at the time):

"We notice that from the beginning of the seance Mlle. Smith describes
to us our familiar spirit \[Leopold\] as holding a lantern in his hand.
Why? The table is shaken anew, about to tell us something. The following
is then dictated to us by it: '*Arise. Take a lantern. Extend your walk
to the Municipal Building. Take the path which crosses the meadow, and
which ends at the Street of the Baths. In the middle of the path, to the
left, a few yards distant, a block of white stone will be found.
Starting from the block of stone, only one yard away from it, towards
the setting sun, the pin so much sought for will be found. Go, I
accompany you*.'

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

"I copy *verbatim* this communication, which was obtained letter by
letter. I add nothing, take nothing from it. General stupefaction! We
hesitate! Finally, we all four rise, we light a lantern and set out. It
was twenty minutes to ten o'clock.

"We walk slowly; we arrive at the Municipal Building, and take the path
which leads from it to the Street of the Baths. In the middle, to the
left, some yards distant, we, in fact, find the block of stone
indicated. We search for a moment without result, and begin to fear we
shall find nothing. Finally, towards the setting sun, a yard from the
block of stone, I find buried in the grass, covered with sand, and
consequently badly soiled, the pin indicated.

"Some one had evidently stepped on it, as it was slightly bent. Mlle.
Smith uttered an exclamation of surprise, and we all four returned to
the house, to recover from our very natural emotion."

This case has remained in the eyes of Mlle. Smith and her spiritistic
friends as one of the most striking and [irrefragable](errata.htm#12)
proofs of the objective and independent reality of Leopold. For the
psychologist it constitutes a very beautiful and interesting example of
cryptomnesia, well worthy to figure among the very instructive cases
collected by Mr. Myers, in which the memory of a subliminal perception
(*i.e.*, registered immediately without striking the normal personality)
appears as a revelation in a dream of ordinary sleep, or under some
other equivalent form of automatism. Here is "Leopold"—the
subconsciousness of Hélène—who, having felt the pin fall

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

and noticed where it rolled, first manifested himself in a passing
nocturnal vision, and then took advantage of the next spiritistic
gathering to restore completely her latent memories. It is not necessary
to see anything intentional in this restitution, the simple play of
association of ideas sufficing to explain that the memory of the
situation of the pin stored up in a subliminal stratum and stimulated by
a desire to recover the lost object might have mechanically reappeared
at the moment of the seance, thanks to mediumistic autohypnotization,
and gushed forth under the dramatic form, naturally appropriate to the
environment, of an apparently supernormal piece of information furnished
by Leopold.

3\. *Retrocognitions*.—The apparently supernormal revelations in regard
to the past, furnished at the seances of Mlle. Smith, can be divided
into two groups—namely, whether they concern universal history, or deal
with private interests relative to the families of the sitters.

First: The messages of the first group abound, under the form of visions
accompanied by typtological explanations, in Hélène's seances of 1894,
but have almost wholly come to an end since I made her acquaintance, and
I have never been witness of any. According to the reports which I have
seen, all these retrocognitions have reference to the history of
Protestantism, or that of the French Revolution—*i.e.*, to two classes
of facts which are among the best known in France to-day.

It goes without saying that the firmly convinced spiritistic group in
which these messages were received

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

have never had a doubt that the apparitions which Hélène perceived were
the veritable personages they asserted themselves to be, habited as they
were in the costume of the period to which they belonged, communicating
by means of the table, and speaking in the first person (except when
Leopold acted as showman and dictated in his own name the explanations
asked for).

But as the content of these messages is always the verbatim reproduction
or almost exact equivalent of information which is to be found in
historical and biographical dictionaries, I cannot avoid being inclined
to the impression that we here are concerned with common facts of
cryptomnesia.

If the intervention of the supernormal be absolutely insisted upon in
this case, it can only be manifested under the form of a telepathic
transmission from the sitters to the medium. In favor of that
supposition two facts may be urged: first, that Mlle. Smith passed in
that group as devoid of all historical knowledge, and was very much
surprised at these revelations of facts totally unknown to her;
secondly, that there were regularly in attendance at these seances one
or more members of the teaching body, who by their general education
possessed, without any doubt whatever, either consciously or in a latent
manner, all the historical knowledge, which, after all, was not very
great, displayed by Leopold.

But these arguments are not of much weight in my opinion. To begin with
the second: as the sitters had their hands on the table at the same time
with the medium, according to the spiritistic custom, they could

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

themselves, without any telepathy, properly speaking, and simply by
their slight, unconscious muscular contractions, have directed, unknown
to themselves, the movements of that piece of furniture, Mlle. Smith
only augmenting these shocks proceeding from her neighbors.

As to the supposed ignorance of Mlle. Smith, it is not at all so great
as has been imagined, and the historical revelations obtained at her
seances do not in any degree surpass the level of that which she could
have absorbed, consciously or unconsciously, at school and in her
surroundings.

Moreover, the hypothesis which appears to me the most probable, and on
which I rest, is that the messages come essentially from Hélène
herself—I ought rather to say from her subliminal memory; that, however,
does not exclude a certain amount of cooperation on the part of the
sitters, whose conversation, on the one hand, and their unconscious
muscular action upon the table, on the other, have often maintained and
directed the course of the subconscious ideas of the medium and the
automatic unfolding of her latent memories.

Secondly: Retrocognition of family events, which are exhibited in Mlle.
Smith's seances, have generally the savor of the unknown for the
sitters, from the fact that they concern incidents of the past which
have never been printed save in the memories of certain aged persons or
of a few lovers of local anecdotes.

I do not hesitate to see in these stories of other days, gushing forth
in visions and in dictations by the table in course of Hélène's
hemisomnambulisms, narratives

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

heard in her childhood and long since forgotten by her ordinary
personality, but which reappear by the aid of mediumistic
autohypnotization, bringing the deepest strata to the surface; the
simple play of association, in an entirely natural manner, then causes
the memories relative to the families of the persons present at the
seance to be poured forth. There is nothing whatever of the supernormal
in all this, in spite of the dramatic form, the piquant and unexpected
art, the amusing embellishments, of which the subliminal imagination
bethinks itself—or I should rather say Leopold, in his rôle of
historiographer and scene-shifter of the past.

The judgment which I have pronounced is the result of a course of
inductive reasoning based on the retro-cognitions of Mlle. Smith
concerning my own family. I trust it may be allowable for me to enter
upon some details designed to justify my opinion.

I note first that all these retrocognitions with which Leopold honored
me took place in the first six seances which I had with Hélène, after
which there has not been a single one in the whole five years which have
since elapsed. This argues in favor of a limited group of latent
memories, which my introduction to the seances set free, a sort of
subliminal sac or pocket which was emptied once for all on the first
occasions of my presence.

In the second place, this knowledge only concerns outside details,
susceptible of striking the attention of the gallery and of being
carried from mouth to mouth. Since family histories have no great
interest for the ordinary reader, I will confine myself to citing,

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

by way of example, the vision which so astonished me at my first meeting
with Hélène ([p. 2](ipm03.htm#page_2)), and which has already been
published by M. Lemaître. I reproduce his narrative, giving real names:

"The medium \[Mlle. Smith\] perceives a long trail of smoke, which
envelopes M. Flournoy. 'A woman!' cries the medium, and, a moment after,
'Two women . . . quite pretty, brunettes . . . both are in bridal
toilet! . . . This concerns you, M. Flournoy!' \[The table approves by a
rap.\] They remain motionless; they have white flowers in their hair and
resemble each other a little; their eyes, like their hair, are black,
or, at all events, very dark. The one in the corner appears under two
different aspects; under both forms she is young—perhaps twenty-five
years old; on the one hand she remains with the appearance already
described (bridal toilet), and on the other she appears very luminous in
a great space, a little more slender of visage, and surrounded by a
number of pretty children, in the midst of whom she appears very happy;
her happiness manifests itself by her expression, but still more in her
surroundings. Both women seem ready to be married. The medium then hears
a name, which at first escapes her, then returns little by little.
**'An! . . . An! . . Dan . . . Ran . . . Dandi . . . Dandiran!'**

"'To which of these two women does this name belong?' demands M.
Flournoy—'to the one you see under two aspects, or to the other?'
Answer: 'To the one who is presented under two forms.' The medium does
not see the other woman as distinctly as

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

the first, but all at once distinguishes a tall man by her side, who
only passes by, when the table dictates: 'I am his sister; we will
return!' after which the scene changes and we pass to another subject."

This vision revolves altogether around the facts that my mother and her
sister were married on the same day; that they were brunettes, quite
pretty, and looked alike; that my father was tall; that my aunt married
M. Dandiran and died while still young, without children; all matters
which should have been of public notoriety in a small city like Geneva.
But the same is true of all the other retrocognitions of Mlle. Smith;
their content is always veridical, but at the same time is also such as
could not fail to be known to a host of people. This causes me to doubt
whether there is at the base of these phenomena a really supernormal
faculty of retrocognition.

A third striking feature is, that all Hélène's retro-cognitions
concerning me are relative to the family of my mother, and are connected
with two quite precise and brief periods, the first of which is many
years previous to Mlle. Smith's birth. This limitation as to times and
persons seems to me significant.

To clear up the matter, if possible, I addressed myself to the last
representative of the present generation of my family, Professor
Dandiran, of Lausanne, and laid the case before him. He did not
immediately remember whether my grandparents Claparède had any
communication, nearly half a century before, with the Smith family, but
on the following day he

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

wrote me that he distinctly recalled a young woman of that name in whom
his mother and aunt had been greatly interested, and who had been
employed by them as a dressmaker previous to her marriage to a
Hungarian.

One understands that I had a reason for not addressing myself first to
Mme. Smith herself; but I must do her the justice to state that when I
questioned her in turn, she very obligingly gave me all the information
I desired, and which was in perfect accord with the statements of M.
Dandiran.

Without entering into details wearisome to the reader, it will be
sufficient for me to state that all the retrocognitions in which I was
involved were connected with two periods in which Mme. Smith had
relations with my mother's family, periods separated by an interval
during which these relations were suspended by the fact' of M. and Mme.
Smith making a sojourn of several years in a foreign country. It would
have been possible for Hélène to know directly the facts of the second
period, at which time she was about five or six years of age. As to the
first period, which was many years prior to her birth (the time of the
double marriage of my mother and her sister in 1853), it is evident that
Mme. Smith has had many opportunities at a later date to narrate these
facts to her daughter; and it would have been altogether natural for her
to have done so.

*Ab uno disce omnes*. Although I am less familiar with the
retrocognitions of Mlle. Smith concerning other families, everything
contributes to prove to me that they are explicable in the same manner.
In

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

two cases, at least, proof has been obtained that the mother of Mlle.
Smith was found to have been in direct and personal communication with
the families concerned, exactly as was the case with my grandparents,
and this circumstance is sufficient to account for the knowledge, very
astonishing at first sight, contained in the revelations of Leopold.

To sum up—pure cryptomnesia seems to me to furnish a sufficient and
adequate explanation for Hélène's retrocognitions, both as to family
events as well as historic facts.

And no more in this domain of knowledge of the past than in those of
recovered objects and medical consultations have I thus far succeeded in
discovering in her the least serious indication of supernormal
faculties.

#### V. INCARNATIONS AND SPIRIT MESSAGES

The time having arrived to speak of spiritism, I feel ill at ease and
embarrassed by my surroundings, for divers reasons, some of which I will
set forth, without, however, endeavoring to explain them at length,
since my aim is simply, as has been seen above ([p. 373](#page_373)), to
indicate my subjective ideas as to the standing of that doctrine, in
order that the reader may share, if he pleases, in my appreciation of
the phenomena of this class presented by Mlle. Smith. I confess, in the
first place, that spiritism is a subject which has the faculty of
arousing my mirth, and develops a spirit of playfulness. I really do not
know why this should be the case, since that which

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

concerns the dead and the great beyond ought not to be a matter for
joking. Perhaps the cause is to be found in the nature of the
intermediaries, and the character of the messages with which the spirits
are accustomed to favor us. However it may be, I have ordinarily much
difficulty in preserving a serious countenance in the presence of
manifestations of "disincarnates."

But I reproach myself bitterly with this facetious humor when I reflect
that it is indulged in at the expense of conceptions and beliefs which
supported the first steps of our race on its painful ascent, the
survival or atavic reapparition of which is yet, even today, a source of
moral strength, of happy certitude, of supreme consolation for a host of
my contemporaries, many of whom I have learned to know, and who,
moreover, inspire me with respect as well as admiration by their
uprightness of life, their nobility of character, the purity and
elevation of their sentiments.

In the second place, I have often had the deceptive experience that,
when it comes to a discussion of it, spiritism possesses a great
advantage for its defenders, but which is most inconvenient for those
who would investigate it closely—of being fugitive and incapable of
being grasped on account of the fact of its double nature—a science and
religion at the same time—which never permits it to be wholly and
entirely the one or the other.

When we come to analyze and criticise, according to strict scientific
methods, the positive facts upon which it pretends to base its
fundamental argument

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —the reality of
communication with the spirits of the departed, through the intervention
of mediums—as soon as the adepts begin to unpack for you their stock of
theories (I was about to say their stock theories!) they are astonished
at the lack of ideal on the part of these terrible
materialist-scientists, who are intent upon searching for the "hidden
rat" in the demonstrations of spiritism, instead of falling on their
knees before the splendor of its revelations.

A third cause of my uneasiness whenever obliged to approach this subject
is the fear of being misunderstood or misinterpreted, thanks to the
naïve and simple classification which prevails in the environments which
the "disincarnates" frequent.

Spiritism or materialism—these are the brutal alternatives to which one
finds himself driven in spite of himself. If you do not admit that the
spirits of the dead reveal themselves by raps on the table or visions of
the mediums, you are, therefore, a materialist! If you do not believe
that the destiny of the human personality is terminated at the grave,
you are a spiritist! This mode of nomenclature and labelling is surely
puerile. Moreover, no one willingly consents to be thrust into the
company of those with whom, no matter how honorable they may be, he is
not in sympathy.

I also wish to state that I absolutely repudiate the above alternative.
There is greater variety of choice in the cabinet of human thought. In
the last century, for example, outside the spiritism of Swedenborg and
the materialism of Baron d’Holbach, there was yet the criticism of one
named

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kant, who made
some noise in the world and whose vogue is even now not absolutely
extinct. I should not fear to range myself among his followers. And in
our own times, if it was necessary for me to choose between Büchner and
Allan Kardec, as the spiritist seems sometimes to believe, I would not
hesitate to choose—in favor of M. Renouvier, or my deceased compatriot
Charles Secrétan.

I hold to no other philosophy, and it suffices me, in order to repulse
the whole of materialism and spiritism, to be the disciple—unworthy, but
convinced—of the Nazarene, who replied to the materialists of his time,
not by spiritistic evocations, but by the simple words, "God is not the
God of the dead but of the living, for all live unto Him." I am not sure
whether this argument convinced the Sadducees, but it pleases me by its
simplicity, and I have no desire for any other.

If God exists—I should say, if the supreme reality is not the
unconscious and blind force-substance of conventional monism, but that
sovereign personality (or *supra* personality) which in the clear
consciousness of Christ made its paternal presence to be continually
felt—if God exists, it is not, apparently, in order to play the rôle of
a perpetual undertaker of funereal pomp that he consents to exist, or to
allow to fall forever into nothingness the poor creatures who wait upon
Him.

They may disappear from before our eyes, but they do not disappear from
before His; for they are dead to us, but for Him, and, consequently, in
actual reality, they are living. Otherwise He would not be God.

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is all I
need. I see nothing clearly, it is true, as to the concrete conditions
of that other existence, of which the manner even, if it were revealed
to me, would probably remain a sealed book to my intelligence, hampered
by the bonds of space and time. But of what importance is it? That which
I am [ignorant](errata.htm#13) of, God knows; and while waiting for Him
to call me to rejoin those who have preceded me, He is great enough for
me to leave to Him the mysterious fate of our personalities. "Since all
live unto Him," I ask no more than that, and as for the pretended
demonstrations of spiritism, true or false, I do not care a farthing.

Or I would prefer them to be false. And if they are true, if it is
actually a law of nature that during long years to come, after this
terrestrial existence, we must drag ourselves miserably from table to
table and medium to medium, the best of us (not to speak of the others)
displaying without shame the proofs of our mental decrepitude in
pitiable nonsense and wretched verses—oh, so much the worse!

It is one misery and shame the more added to all those of which this
satanic world is made up, a new calamity coming to crown the physical
and moral ills of a world against which the Christian continually
protests as he repeats "*Thy kingdom come*," an additional scandal
condemned to disappear when " His kingdom shall have come."

There is nothing in common between the empirical, spatial, and temporal
survivals which spiritism pretends to establish and that "eternal life"
proclaimed by the Prophet of Nazareth. These things, said Pascal,

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

are not of the same order. That is why I am not a spiritist.

Here rises a last point, which worries me when I ought to speak my mind
in regard to spiritism in the presence of spiritists. "You do not
personally hold," it has been often objected to me, "to these
communications of the living with those who have gone before us into the
great unknown, and you cry out against spiritistic demonstrations. It is
all very well for you, who are a mystic, and to whom the existence of
God in Jesus Christ seems a sufficient guarantee of the destinies of
human personality and its ultimate palingenesis. But every one has not
the same temperament, and does not take so blithely his ignorance of the
kind of life which awaits him beyond the tomb. To believe in God, and to
abandon to Him with closed eyes the fate of those who leave us, carrying
away with them the best portions of our being, is all very well, but it
is very difficult. The times of the psalmist who could say '*Though He
slay me, yet will I trust Him*' are no more; and as for Christ, He was
certainly a very remarkable medium, but His simple affirmation would
scarcely be taken to-day for gospel words. The solid and the palpable
are necessary to the 'fools' of our epoch. They are not capable of
admitting a higher world than that of sense, unless they are enabled to
touch it with their finger by means of messages and the return of the
dead themselves. Whence it results that every attack, every hostile
attitude towards spiritism tends directly to break down the only rampart
which might henceforth be efficacious against materialism and its
disastrous consequences

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —infidelity,
egotism, vice, despair, suicide, and, finally, the destruction and
annihilation of the entire social organism. On the other hand, when
science at length shall recognize and consecrate spiritism officially,
thereupon, simultaneously with the tangible certainty of another life,
courage and strength will return to the hearts of individuals, devotion
and all virtues will begin to flourish once again, and an elevated
humanity will soon see heaven descend upon the earth, thanks to the
connection established and daily practised between the living and the
spirits of the dead."

My embarrassment is easily seen. On the one hand, I do not in any way
admit the foregoing objection. I do not think that the gospel has had
its day or is above the reach of "fools," since it was for them that its
author designed it. I believe, on the contrary, that the Christian
faith, the faith of Christ or faith in Christ, is, in its inmost
essence, a psychological reality, a personal experience accessible to
the most humble, a fact of consciousness which will survive when all
theological systems shall have been forgotten and all the clergy shall
have been abolished. That vital and regenerating power will save our
civilization (if anything can save it) by means of the individuals whom
it shall have regenerated, without owing anything to spiritistic
theories or practices. Inversely, I do not share the optimism of those
who would make of spiritism a social panacea, and who imagine that when
the moral consciousness on the one side and the religious consciousness
on the other have ceased to make themselves heard, the messages of the
"disincarnates" will have better

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

success. ("If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.")

But, on the other hand, there are individual cases which are interesting
and which certainly merit consideration. And for millions, and by a
hundred different titles—religious belief, moral consolation, solemn and
mysterious rites, old habit, etc.—spiritism is to-day the pivot around
which existence turns, and also its only support; would not the
destruction of it, then, be productive of more harm than good, and would
it not be better to let matters take their course? Why prevent man from
delighting in dreams, if he so pleases?

*All things are possible*, and was it not of the revenants that Hamlet
was thinking in his celebrated apostrophe, from which I have taken this
principle?

These are the things which perplex me: while waiting to find a way out
of them, and by way of summing up, it seems to me indispensable to
separate distinctly spiritism-religion, which is an assemblage of
beliefs and practices dear to many, from spiritism-science, a simple
hypothesis designed to explain certain phenomena arising from
observation. The first tells me nothing, or rather it amuses me or
repels me according to circumstances; but the more elevated sentiments,
and those worthy of all respect, which it inspires in its adepts, impose
upon me the duty of passing it by and ignoring it here. The second, on
the contrary, does not fail to interest me, as it does all who are
curious in regard to natural phenomena.

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

For the question, Do human or animal individualities continue to
intervene in an effective manner in the physical, physiological, or
psychological phenomena of this universe after the loss of their
corporeal and visible organism? is not an ordinary one. If there are
facts which peremptorily establish an affirmative answer, what problems
will arise, what an unexpected field of investigation will it not open
up to our experimental sciences! And even if the hypothesis is false,
how captivating the study of the singular phenomena which have been able
to give it birth, which simulate the return of the dead to our
observable world! It is understood, therefore, that, even despoiled of
all the emotional accessories in which it so easily wraps itself in the
heart and imagination of men, the empirical question of immortality and
spiritistic interventions, apparent or real, preserves its scientific
importance, and merits being discussed with the calm serenity,
independence, and strictness of analysis which belong to the
experimental method.

It goes without saying that, *à priori*, the hypothesis of *spirits* to
explain the phenomena of mediums has in it nothing of the impossible or
the absurd. It does not even necessarily contradict, as is sometimes
imagined, the directing principle of physiological psychology—the
psychological parallelism—which demands that every mental phenomenon
shall have a physical correlative. For, in spite of our habit of
considering the molecular or atomic phenomena of the brain, the
katabolism of the nerves, as the true concomitant of conscious
processes, it

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

may well be—it is even very probable—that these molecular movements do
not constitute the ultimate physical term immediately paralleling the
mental world, but that the real physical correlatives (spatial) of the
(non-spatial) psychological phenomena should be sought for in the
vibrations of imponderable matter, the ether, in which the ponderable
atoms and molecules are plunged somewhat like grains of dust in the
atmosphere, in order to make a sensible though somewhat inaccurate
comparison.

The ethereal body, perispiritistic, astral, fluid, etc., of the
occultists, and of many thinkers who are not believers in occultism, is
only a notion scientifically absurd when it is made to be an equivocal
and cloudy intermediary between the soul and the body, an un-assignable
*tertium quid*, a plastic mediator of which nothing is known as to its
being material or spiritual or something else. But conceived as a system
of movements of the ether, it contains nothing absolutely anti- or
extra-scientific in its nature; the connection between the subjective
facts of consciousness and the objective, material facts, remains
essentially the same whether one considers the material world under the
imponderable form of ether or under the ponderable form of chemical
atoms, of physical molecules, and of anatomical elements. Nothing, then,
would be radically opposed, from the point of view of the natural
sciences, to the existence of disincarnate spirits wandering through
space.

The foregoing will doubtless please my spiritistic friends. Here are two
facts which will please them less. First: I separate myself from them
when they

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

pass prematurely from mere abstract possibilities to the affirmation of
actualities. Perhaps the outcome will prove them right some day; perhaps
in the near future, but we have not yet reached that point. I freely
admit that never have circumstances been so favorable for the
spiritistic doctrines as at present. The authentic return of George
Pelham and other deceased persons, through Mrs. Piper entranced, as
intermediary, seems to be admitted by so many acute observers, the
phenomena observed for fifteen years past in the case of this
incomparable medium are at times so marvellous and surrounded with such
solid scientific guarantees—the case is, in a word, so unheard of and
astounding in all respects, that those who are only acquainted with it
from a distance, by printed reports and oral narratives of immediate
witnesses, feel themselves in a poor position for formulating their
doubts and reservations upon this subject.

I fear, in the second place, for mediums and practical spiritists, that
when their hypothesis shall have been scientifically demonstrated the
result may be very different from that which they now imagine it will
be.

It might well happen that the cult of the table, mechanical writing,
seances, and all other mediumistic exercises, may receive their
death-blow from the official recognition of spirits by science. Suppose,
in fact, that contemporaneous researches should at last have proved
clearly that messages actually come from the disincarnate; it has
already followed from the same researches that in the most favorable
cases

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

the veritable messages are very difficult to distinguish from those
which are not authentic. When people come to understand that this
sorting of messages is almost always beyond their power, they will,
perhaps, be put out of conceit with experiments in which they have
ninety-nine chances against one of being dupes of themselves or others,
and in which—a still more vexatious matter—if they should even be so
fortunate as to light upon the hundredth chance, they would have no
certain means of knowing it.

This subject, decidedly, is fatal to me. I lose myself in digressions
when discussing it—very useless they are, too, since the verdict which
the future will pronounce upon the theory of spirits, with or without an
ethereal body, matters little as far as the actual examination of the
messages furnished by Mlle. Smith is concerned. Even having become
scientifically verified, spiritism will never absolve us from bringing
to the analysis of the pretended communications less care and rigor than
while it was only an undemonstrated hypothesis; each particular case
will always demand to be scrutinized by itself, in order to make the
distinction between that which in all probability only arises from many
non-spiritistic causes, and the residue eventually proceeding from the
disincarnate.

I ought to state at the outset that, as far as Hélène's mediumistic
phenomena are concerned, their careful analysis has not revealed to me
in them any evident vestige of the other world, not even of traces of a
telepathic transmission on the part of the living. I have only succeeded
in perceiving in them very beautiful and instructive examples of the
well-known

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

tendency of the subliminal imagination to reconstruct the deceased and
to feign their presence, especially when the favorable suggestions of
the surrounding environment incites them to do so. Not being infallible,
and bearing in mind Hamlet's principle, I will guard myself well from
affirming that these subliminal imitations and simulacra are absolutely
free from any spirit collaboration; I content myself with repeating that
I have not discovered any, and that it seems to me in the highest degree
improbable, and with leaving it to others to demonstrate its reality, if
they think they are able to do so. Some examples taken from the
principal incarnations of Mlle. Smith will enable me to show after a
more concrete fashion my manner of regarding them.

1\. *Case of Mlle. Vignier*.—This case has no evidential value whatever,
since (as has been seen, [p. 411](#page_411)), there were formerly
relations between the Vignier family and Mme. Smith which suffice to
explain the veridical knowledge manifested by Hélène in this
incarnation.

I give an abridged recital of it, nevertheless, for the sake of certain
points of psychological interest. None of the spectators had any
suspicion of these relations at the time of this scene, which was
absolutely enigmatical to all of them.

In a seance at my house (on March 3, 1895, after a Hindoo vision,
described [p. 280](ipm10.htm#page_280)), Mlle. Smith saw an unknown lady
appear, of whom she gave the following description: "A nose bent and
hooked like the beak of an eagle; small gray eyes, very close together;
a mouth with three teeth only; a wicked smile, mocking

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

expression; simple dress; a collar not of the fashion of to-day; she
draws near to this portrait, <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_29) and
gazes at it not ill-naturedly."

The name of this person is asked, and the table (Leopold) commences to
spell: "*Mademoiselle*"—but refuses to go further, while Hélène sees the
apparition laughing, "with a sly air"; as the name is insisted on, the
table dictates: "*That does not concern you*," then she begins to jump
and skip as though glad of an opportunity to mock us.

Presently Hélène falls asleep and enters into somnambulism; she leaves
the table and moves towards the portrait in question, before which she
remains fixed, completely incarnating the unknown lady of her vision. I
take down the portrait and place it in its frame upon an easy-chair;
immediately she kneels before it and contemplates it with affection;
then, taking the frame in her right hand, while the left, very much
agitated, plays with the cord, she ends, after many vain attempts, by.
saying with a great stammering, "*J—j—je l’aimais b—b—beaucoup: je
n’aime pas l’autre—j—j—je ne l’ai jamais aimée l’autre—j’amais bien mon
neveu—adieu!—je le vois*." ("I liked it very much: I do not like the
other one: I never liked the other one. I was very fond of my nephew.
Adieu! I see him.)

It was impossible to obtain any explanation of this incomprehensible
scene, until, having slipped a pencil and a writing-tablet into Hélène's
hand, she scribbled feverishly, in a hand not her own, these

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

two words "*Mademoiselle Vignier*"; then she fell into a cataleptic
phase, from which she awakened without memory at the end of half an
hour.

This name of Vignier evoked in me far-off memories and vaguely recalled
to my mind the fact that Professor Dandiran (who had married, as we have
seen, my mother's sister) had an ancestress of that name; was it she who
returned to express to me by means of Mlle. Smith her affection for my
mother, whose portrait she had so attentively regarded, and her regrets,
perhaps, that her nephew had not been preferred to my aunt?

On the other hand, M. Cuendet recollected a Mlle. Vignier who had been a
friend of his family, but who did not correspond at all with the
description of Hélène's visions; he promised to obtain information, and,
in fact, wrote me on the following day: "Dear Sir,—Here is some
information on the subject of our seance of yesterday. This morning I
asked my mother: Did you ever know another Mlle. Vignier than the one
who was your friend?' After an instant of reflection: 'Yes,' replied
she; 'I did know another. She was M. Dandiran's aunt, of Lausanne, his
mother's sister. She stammered, and was not always very good-natured;
she had three large teeth which projected, and a hooked nose.' It is
useless to state to you that this was the first time I had heard her
spoken of."

This information, coinciding with my remembrances and Hélène's vision,
was later confirmed by M. Dandiran, who gave me the following
information: "Your aunt, Mlle. Vignier, who died about

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

thirty-five or forty years ago, loved her nephew very much; but she was
made very angry by his marriage, and the sentence uttered before my
mother's portrait could not have referred to a difference of sentiment
in regard to the two sisters, for whom she always had an equal
affection. This sentence, on the contrary, is wonderfully well explained
by the following facts: My mother and her sister having become betrothed
at the same time, oil-paintings of both, of natural size, were made by
the same painter. These portraits were not of equal merit, and Mlle.
Vignier, who was herself something of an artist, always considered that
of my mother excellent, while the other, that of my aunt, she did not
like at all. Mlle. Vignier was very lively, and M. Dandiran finds that
the epithet 'sly' and the table dictating '*That does not concern you*,'
very well express her character; she was, however, not at all malicious
or mocking at heart, but it is true that persons who knew her slightly
could easily have gained that impression of her. She had three or four
prominent teeth and stammered badly. In her photograph she wears a white
collar, has a nose long and arched, but the eyes are rather large and
wide apart. She always wore gold eye-glasses, of which the medium did
not speak."

If the reader has had patience to read these details, he will have
remarked that the distinctive traits of Mlle. Vignier in the vision and
her incarnation by Hélène (the stammering, the teeth, the shape of the
nose, the ill-natured air) coincide with those spontaneously indicated
by M. Cuendet, who had known

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

her slightly; and that while M. Dandiran, better posted as to his aunt's
character, finds the note of maliciousness or want of good-nature false,
he acknowledges that people outside of her family could have been
deceived concerning it. That is to say, has not the imagination of Mlle.
Smith produced the exterior memory, the description according to public
notoriety, as it were, which Mlle. Vignier left behind her? And if it be
recalled that at the period at which the two *fiancées* were painted,
Mme. Smith was in communication with my maternal grandparents through
the only sister of Mlle. Vignier, there would be a probability amounting
almost to a certainty that these are contemporary remembrances, narrated
some time or other to Hélène by her mother, and which furnished the
material for this somnambulic personification.

In this example, to which I might add several analogous ones, the
apparent *spirit control* is reduced to latent memories of recitals
formerly heard by Hélène.

In other cases, in which, for lack of information, it has hitherto been
impossible to discover this wholly natural filiation of facts, simple
analysis of the circumstances and of the content of the communications
indicates that, in all probability, they proceed from reminiscences and
impressions appertaining to living individuals much rather than from
disincarnates. In other words, these messages and personifications too
evidently reflect the point of view of the medium or other living
persons for it to be permissible to regard them as due to the
intervention of deceased persons,

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

whose attitude towards them would, in all probability, be wholly
different.

2\. *Case of Jean the Quarryman*.—We have here to deal with a very
curious spirit message concerning Mme. Mirbel, in which I cannot fail to
see actual memories of the latter—transmitted I know not how (but not
necessarily in a supernormal manner) to Mlle. Smith—rather than an
authentic communication from a pretended disincarnate.

In a seance at which Mme. Mirbel was not present, Hélène had the
hallucination of a very strong odor of sulphur; then the vision of a
quarryman from the foot of Salève, in which she perceived and described
in detail an unknown man, who, by the dictations of the table, was
declared to be *Jean the Quarryman*, and charged the sitters with an
affectionate message for Mme. Mirbel. The latter, interrogated on the
following day, recognized in the very circumstantial description of this
man, and under all the features of Hélène's vision, perfectly correct
facts connected with her childhood, and which had passed away from the
habitual circle of her ideas for more than twenty years. It concerned a
workman employed in her father's quarries, and who, when she was a
little girl, had always evinced a special affection for her.

Let us suppose—in the absence of all proof that Mlle. Smith had ever
heard these remembrances of Mme. Mirbel's childhood mentioned—that
recourse must be had to the supernormal in order to explain the case. It
still would not amount to an intervention of the deceased quarryman; and
M. Lemaître was perfectly right, in my opinion, in clinging to telepathy

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

and in hazarding the idea of an etheric influence, to which Hélène was
subjected by Mme. Mirbel, who at the hour of this seance happened to be
half a kilometre distant from the place of the seance. Without going out
of the domain of telepathy, I still would prefer the hypothesis of a
previous transmission in the course of one of the seances at which Mme.
Mirbel was present to that of telepathy at a great distance at the time
of the seance. It is, in fact, not contrary to that which is believed to
be known of mental suggestion, to admit that Hélène's subliminal, in the
state of Esenale, for example, could in some way draw from Mme. Mirbel's
subliminal the latent memories which there lay buried for some time
before being ready to reappear at a seance at which she had some reason
to think Mme. Mirbel would again be present.

Whatever the mode of its transmission may have been, the content of this
vision seems to me to indicate clearly that it has its origin in the
personal memories of Mme. Mirbel rather than in the posthumous memory of
Jean the Quarryman. All the presumptions in this case are, to my mind,
in favor of a memory of Mme. Mirbel, and not of a veritable
communication from the other world. The personal aspect of the messages
supposed to be dictated by the quarryman do not constitute an obstacle
to my interpretation or a guarantee of spiritistic authenticity, this
aspect being the form that the automatisms habitually assume among
mediums.

3\. *Case of the Syndic Chaumontet and of the Curé Burnier*.—The
following case is the last. It is a

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

very recent one, in which the spiritistic and the cryptomnesiac
hypotheses exist face to face, apropos of signatures written by Mlle.
Smith in somnambulism which do not lack similarity to the authentic
signatures of the deceased persons to whom they are supposed to belong.

In a seance at my house (February 12, 1899), Mlle. Smith has a vision of
a village on a height covered with vines; by a rocky road, she sees
descending from it a little old man, who has the air of a quasi
gentleman; he wears shoes with buckles, a large felt hat, the collar of
his shirt is unstarched, and has points reaching up to his cheeks, etc.
A peasant in a blouse, whom he meets, makes reverences to him, as to an
important personage; they speak a patois which Hélène-does not
understand She has the impression of being familiar with the village,
but vainly searches her memory to discover where she has seen it.
Presently the landscape fades away, and the little old man, now clothed
in white and in a luminous space (*i.e.*, in his actual reality of a
disincarnate), appears to draw near to her. At this moment, as she leans
her right arm upon the table, Leopold dictates by the index-finger:
"*Kiss her arm*." I execute the order; Hélène's arm at first resists
strenuously, then yields suddenly. She seizes a pencil, and in the midst
of the customary struggle relative to the manner of holding it (see [p.
100](ipm06.htm#page_100)), "*You are holding my hand too tightly*," says
she to the imaginary little old man, who, according to Leopold, wishes
to make use of it in order to write. "*You hurt me very badly; do not
hold it so firmly. . . . What difference does it make whether* 

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

*it is a pencil or a pen?*" At these words she throws away the pencil
and takes up a pen, and, holding it between the thumb and index-finger,
slowly traces in an unknown hand: "*Chaumontet, syndic*" (see [Fig.
44](#img_fig44)).

Then the vision of the village returns; at our desire to know the name
of it she ultimately perceives a sign-post on which she spells
"*Chessenaz*," a name which is unknown to us. Then, having by my advice
asked the little old man, whom she still sees, at what period he was
syndic, she hears him answer, "1839."

It is impossible to learn more; the vision vanishes and gives way to a
total incarnation of Leopold, who, in his deep Italian voice, speaks to
us at length of various matters. I take advantage of it in order to
question him upon the incident of the unknown village and syndic; his
replies, interrupted by long digressions, may be summed up about as
follows: "I am searching. . . . I traverse in thought the ascent of this
great mountain pierced through at its foot by something, the name of
which I do not know; I see the name of Chessenaz, a village on a height,
and a road which ascends to it. Search in this village; you will
certainly find the name (Chaumontet); seek to examine his signature;
this proof you will find there; you will find that the handwriting was
that of this man.

To my question whether he sees this in Hélène's memories and whether she
has ever been at Chessenaz, he replies in the negative as to the first
point and evasively as to the second: "Ask her; she has a

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

good memory for everything. I have not followed her in all her
wanderings."

Awakened, Hélène could not furnish us any information. But the following
day I found on the map a little village called Chessenaz, in the
Department of Haute-Savoie, twenty-six kilometres, in a straight line,
from Geneva, and not far from the Crédo. As the Chaumontets are not rare
in Savoy, there was nothing unlikely in the fact of a person of that
name having been syndic there in 1839.

Two weeks 'later I made a visit to Mme. and Mlle. Smith—there was no
seance held—when Hélène suddenly assumed the voice and accent of
Leopold, without being aware of the change, and believing me to be
joking when I sought to cause her to notice it. Presently the
hemisomnambulism becomes accentuated; Hélène sees the vision of the
other day, the village and then the little old man (the syndic)
reappear, but the latter is accompanied this time by a *curé* with whom
he seemed on good terms and whom he called (which she repeats to me all
the while with Leopold's Italian accent), "*My dear friend Burnier*." As
I ask whether this *curé* could not write his name with Hélène's hand,
Leopold promised me by a digital dictation that I should have that
satisfaction at the next seance; then he begins to talk to me of
something else by Hélène's mouth, she being now entirely entranced.

At the following seance at my house (the 19th of March), I remind
Leopold of his promise. He answers at first by the finger: "*Do you very
much desire that signature?*" and it is only upon my insisting

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

that he consents. Hélène then is not long in again seeing the village
and the *curé*, who after divers incidents takes hold of her hand as the
syndic had done, and traces very slowly with the pen these words,
"*Burnier greets you*" ([Fig. 44](#img_fig44)); then she passes into
other somnambulisms. The moment had arrived to clear up the matter. I
wrote at hazard to the mayor's office at Chessenaz. The mayor, M.
Saussier, had the kindness to answer without delay: "During the years
1838-39," stated he to me, "the syndic of Chessenaz was a Chaumontet,
Jean, whose signature I find attached to divers documents of that
period. We also had as *curé* M. Burnier, André, from November, 1824, up
to February, 1841; during this period all the certificates of births,
marriages, and deaths bear his signature. . . . But I have discovered in
our archives a document bearing both signatures, that of the syndic
Chaumontet and that of the *curé* Burnier. It is an order for the
payment of money. I take pleasure in transmitting it to you." I have
caused to be reproduced in the middle of [Fig. 44](#img_fig44) the
fragment of this original document (dated July 29, 1838), bearing the
names of these two personages; the reader can thus judge for himself in
regard to the quite remarkable similarity which there exists between
these authentic signatures and those automatically traced by the hand of
Mlle. Smith.

My first idea was, as may be supposed, that Mlle. Smith must some time
or other have seen some certificates or documents signed by the syndic
or by the *curé* of Chessenaz, and that it was these forgotten

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

visual flashes, reappearing in somnambulism, which had served her as
inner models when her entranced hand retraced these signatures. One may
likewise imagine how angry such a supposition would make Hélène, who has
no recollection whatever of having ever heard the name of Chessenaz nor
of any of its inhabitants, past or present. I only half regret my
imprudent supposition, since it has availed to furnish us a new and more
explicit manifestation of the *curé*, who, again taking hold of Mlle.
Smith's arm at a later seance (May 21st, at M. Lemaître's) comes to
certify to us as to his identity by the attestation, in due and proper
form, of [Fig. 43](#img_fig43). As is there seen, he makes it twice;
being deceived as to the signature, he incontinently, with disgust,
crosses out that which he had so carefully written, and recommences on
another sheet; this second draft, in which he has omitted the word
"*soussigné*" ("undersigned") of the first, took him seven minutes to
trace, but leaves nothing to be desired as to precision and legibility.
This painstaking calligraphy is very like that of a country *curé* of
sixty years ago, and in default of another specimen for comparison, it
presents an undeniable analogy of hand with the authentic receipt of the
order for payment of money of Fig. 44.

Neither Mlle. Smith nor her mother had the least notion in regard to the
*curé* or the syndic of Chessenaz. They nevertheless informed me that
their family formerly had some relatives and connections in that part of
Savoy, and that they are still in communication with a cousin who lives
at Frangy, an

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

<span id="img_fig43"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
43](tn/fig43.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig43.jpg)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 43. Certificates written (May 21, 1899) by Mlle. Smith while in a trance. The one above was feverishly crossed out in finishing the faulty signature. The one below was afterwards written in seven minutes. Natural size. \[From the collection of M. Lemaître.\]</span> |

</div>

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

important town nearest the little village of Chessenaz. Hélène herself
made only a short excursion in that region, some dozen years ago; and
if, in following the road from Seyssel to Frangy, she traversed some
parts of the country corresponding well to certain details of her vision
of the 12th of February (which she had the feeling of recognizing, as we
have seen, [p. 432](#page_432)), she has not, on the other hand, any
idea of having been at Chessenaz itself, nor of having heard it
mentioned. "Moreover," says she, "for those who can suppose that I could
have been at Chessenaz without remembering it, I would affirm that even
had I gone there I would not have been apt to consult the archives in
order to learn that a syndic Chaumontet and a *curé* Burnier had existed
there at a period more or less remote. I have a good memory, and I
positively affirm that no one of the persons around me during those few
days while I was away from my family ever showed me any certificate,
paper—anything, in a word—which could have stored away in my brain any
such memory. My mother, at the age of fourteen or fifteen, made a trip
into Savoy, but nothing in her remembrances recalls her ever having
heard these two names uttered."

The facts are now presented, and I leave to the reader the privilege of
drawing such conclusion from them as shall please him.

This case seemed to me worthy to crown my rapid examination of the
supernormal appearances which embellish the mediumship of Mlle. Smith,
because it sums up and puts excellently in relief the irreconcilable

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

<span id="img_fig44"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
44](tn/fig44.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig44.jpg)  
  
</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Fig. 44. Comparison of the signatures of the syndic Chaumontet and of the curate Burnier, with their pretended signatures as disincarnates given by Mlle. Smith in somnambulism. In the middle of the figure, reproduction of a fragment of an order for payment of money of 1838. Above and below, the signatures furnished by the hand of Hélène. Natural size.</span> |

</div>

and hostile respective positions of the spiritistic circles and mediums
on the one side, perfectly sincere but too easily satisfied—and
investigators somewhat psychological on the other, always pursued by the
sacrosanct terror of taking dross for gold. To the first class, the
least curious phenomenon—an unexpected vision of the past, some
dictation of the table or the finger, an access of somnambulism, a
resemblance of handwriting—suffices to give the sensation of contact
with the unknown and

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

to prove the actual presence of the disincarnate world. They never ask
themselves what proportion there could well be between these premises,
however striking they may be, and that formidable conclusion. Why and
how, for example, should the dead, returning at the end of a
half-century to sign by the hand of another person in flesh and blood,
have the same hand-writing as when alive?

The same people who find this altogether natural, although they have
never seen any absolutely certain cases of it, fall from the clouds when
the possibility of latent memories is invoked before them, of which the
present life furnishes them, moreover, daily examples—which they have
not, it is true, ever taken the trouble to observe.

The psychologists, on the contrary, have the evil one in them in going
to look behind the scenes of the memory and the imagination, and when
the obscurity prevents them from seeing anything, they have the folly to
imagine that they will end by finding that which they are seeking—if
only a light could be had.

Between these two classes of temperaments so unlike, it will, I fear, be
very difficult ever to arrive at any satisfactory and lasting
understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[375:\*](ipm12.htm#fr_28) By this is meant the
bringing or conveying of material objects into a closed space—the
passage of one solid body through another.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[426:\*](ipm12.htm#fr_29) A small oil-portrait
of my mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Conclusion](ipm13)
