[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt081)  [Next](tmt083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 58. THE BOY WITH ARROWS ON HIS HEAD

A chief's daughter married her father's nephew and had a child by him
who was named WAts!<u>î</u>h<u>î</u>'tc<u>î</u>. He was not exactly a
human being, for he had sharp arrow points on his head. When his mother
began petting him and using endearing terms to him, he said to her,
"Don't pet me. I am no baby." And he ran the arrow points on his head
into his mother's breast and killed her. Afterward he ran off into the
woods and became a very bad person, killing everybody who went off
hunting or after wood.

At that time his mother's brother was out on the mountains hunting along
with his children. He knew that his nephew was killing people, so he
made his house very strong to keep him out. He also set around bundles
of dry straw shaped like human beings, and he even prepared a hole in
the mountains as a place of refuge.

How his nephew found out where he lived is not known, but one day he
suddenly walked right in. His uncle was sitting behind a bundle of straw
in the rear of the house, while his wife and children were in the hole
he had made in the mountain. The boy always had his arrows and spears,
the points of which were obsidian (<u>î</u>n), ready to use, but instead
of aiming at his uncle he pointed his arrow at a bundle of straw
opposite. While he was doing so his uncle shot him under the left arm,
and he was so badly hurt that he left his spear and ran out.

As his assisting spirit this boy had a bird called gus!iadû'~~l~~i of
about the size of a robin. This spirit now doctored him and took out of
him all of the poison his uncle had put on the end of his arrow. But,
while he was doing this, his uncle tracked him by the marks of blood
until he came to the place where the boy lived. When he entered that
place his nephew said, "Don't kill me, uncle. I have made a hole in the
ground over there and have filled it with goods. You may have them if
you do not kill me. If you let me go now I will never kill another
person." In spite of all his protestations, however, his uncle killed
him for having destroyed so many of the town people and for having
forced him to live back among the mountains. Then he burned his nephew's
body and went home with all of his family, leaving the ashes where they
lay. These ashes were driven about by the wind and became the minute
gnats that torment people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 59. GAmnâ'tck!<u>î</u>](tmt083)
