[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt086)  [Next](tmt088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 63. BEAVER AND PORCUPINE <span id="fr_118"></span>[a](#fn_118)

The beaver and the porcupine (~~l~~Ak!A'tc) were great friends and went
about everywhere together. The porcupine often visited the beaver's
house, but the latter did not like to have him come because he left
quills there. One time, when the porcupine said that he wanted to go out
to the beaver's house, the beaver said, "All right, I will take you out
on my back." He started, but instead of going to his house he took him
to a stump in the very middle of the lake. Then he said to him, "This is
my house," left him there, and went ashore.

While the porcupine was upon this stump he began singing a song, "Let it
become frozen. Let it become frozen so that I can cross to
Wolverine-man's place." He meant that he wanted to walk ashore on the
ice. So the surface of the lake froze, and he walked home.

Some time after this, when the two friends were again playing together,
the porcupine said, "You come now. It is my turn to carry you on my
back." Then the beaver got on the porcupine's back, and the porcupine
took him to the top of a very high tree, after which he came down and
left him. For a long time the beaver did not know how to get down, but
finally he climbed down, and they say that this is what gives the broken
appearance to tree bark.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[220:a](tmt087.htm#fr_118) See story 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 64. The Man who Entertained the Bears](tmt088)
