[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt046)  [Next](tmt048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

After the rich opponent of QonA~~l~~gî'c had lost all of his property,
his wife left him, and he went away from that town. He made a bow and
arrows and wandered about in the forest like a wild animal. Coming down
to the beach at a certain place, he found a fine bay and built his house
upon it. There he began to collect clams and fish which he dried for
himself. He was gone all winter, but in those times the Indians did not
care for foolish people, viewing them as though they were dead, so his
friends did not look for him.

While he lived in that place the chief heard a drum sounding from some
distant place, but he did not take the trouble to see what it was.
Finally he discovered that the noise was caused by a grouse and said to
it, "I see you now. I have been wondering what it was that I heard so
much." Then he said to the grouse, "You are a great dancer, are you
not?" "Yes, I dance once in a while when I am lonely." "Come along and
let us have a dance. I am pretty lonely myself." So that evening he saw
all kinds of birds, which were the grouse's friends, and they had a
dance. They danced so much that this man forgot all that he had been
grieving about and felt very happy. Therefore people always dance for
one who is mourning, to make him forget it. This is where the first
dance came from.

Then the chief said to the grouse, "How came you to know about dancing?"
"There is a person out on that island who knows a lot about medicine. He
knows how to make medicine for dancing and fighting." "You must let me
see him," said the man. The bird answered, "If you want to see this
great medicine-man you must fast to-morrow. This is the great person who
knows all about medicines." Now, after the chief had fasted, he went to
sleep and dreamed that a man came to him, showed him a certain leaf on
the marsh and said, "Take that leaf and put it into this sack. Then go
down toward the beach. As soon as you get down you will see an eagle
lying there. Take off its claws and feathers, and, after you have put
the leaf in them, draw the cords so as to pull its talons tight around
it. After that go down to where the waves are coming in, and at the
place the tide has left, stoop down, pretend to pick up something and
put it

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

into your sack. That will be the wave. Then take a feather from the back
of the head of an ayahî'ya (a solitary bird that continually flies about
on the beach) and put it with the rest. You will become a great dancer
like that bird. Finally take this medicine to a point running far out
into the ocean where the wind blows continually. Tie it there to the top
of a tree, where it will always be blowing back and forth."

The man did as he had been directed, and the day after began to think of
composing a song. On account of the medicine this was not hard for him.
He also felt that he could dance, and began dancing the same evening.
While doing so he was very light upon his feet. He was as if in a
trance, not knowing exactly what he was doing. Then he thought to
himself, "I am going to the next town." So he went there and began
singing, and it was soon noised about, "A man has come here who is a
great singer. He is going to dance to-night." Then all the people went
to that house where he was to dance. He danced and taught the women his
songs, which were very sad. He sang about the different clans \[among
the Haida\], picking out only good clans. So the young women of those
families began to bring him presents, and each thought, "I will give the
most." They gave him all kinds of things, robes, fur shirts, blankets,
leggings. He was becoming very rich through dancing.

In the same town was the young son of a chief who wanted very much to
learn to dance and said to him, "How did you come to learn to dance?" He
answered, "I have medicine for dancing." "You must show me how. I will
pay you well. I want very much to learn." Then he showed him how to make
the medicine. He said, "You have to fast. If you do that you will learn.
Fast to-morrow, and the next day I will take you up to the woods." When
they went up he said, "After you have learned how to do this, you must
think of composing a song, and you will see that you will be able to do
so at once. You will be so happy over it that you will feel as though
you were making a great fire." In the morning the young man sang and
found he could compose songs. Then he went up to the woods and danced
all alone by himself. Like the other, he felt light as if he were in a
dream. By and by it was reported all over town, "This chief's son can
compose fine songs." He danced for them, and, because he was a younger
person than the other, he danced far better. At this the youth's boy
friends said to him, "What makes you do, such a thing? It doesn't look
right for you to do it." They tried to make him believe he was above
dancing, because they were jealous of him. So he went to the man who had
instructed him, and the latter said, "People will do this (i. e., dance)
all over the world. You will soon hear of it. You and I will not be the
only ones doing it. They say this because they are jealous of

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

you." The youth had composed so many beautiful songs that all the girls
had fallen in love with him. That was why the other youths were jealous
of him. The first dancer also said to him, "It is not high-caste people
like yourself merely who will compose songs. Everybody will learn these
and compose others. Anybody that composes songs like this after having
made medicine will have his name become great in the world."

When this youth had told his father all he had learned, his father asked
all the people of that town to come to his house and repeated it to
them. Then he said, "I do not think it is well for a high-caste person
to compose songs and be a dancer. They say that a person's name will
become very high and be known everywhere if he composes songs and
becomes a dancer, but a chief's son's name is already high, and a
chief's name is known everywhere. Why should he compose songs and dance
to make it so? It is better that the poorer people should do this and
make their names known in the world." If the chief had not said this,
people that compose songs and dance would be very scarce among us. It is
because the chief said, "Let it be among the poorer people so that their
names may be known," that there are so many composers and dancers among
us. For no chief composes or dances without giving away a great deal of
property.

Thus it happens that there are two kinds of dances, a dance for the
chief and his sons and this common or Haida dance, (Dekî'na Al!ê'x). In
the latter, women always accompany it with songs, and, if the composer
sings about some good family, members of the latter give him presents.
When the chief is going to dance, he has to be very careful not to say
anything out of the way. He dances wearing a head dress with weasel
skins, a Chilkat blanket, and leggings and carrying a raven rattle. He
is the only one whose voice is heard, and he speaks very quietly.
Meanwhile, until it is time for them to start singing for him, the
people are very quiet and then only high-caste people sing. The Haida
dance, however, is always accompanied by noise. It is rather a dance for
pleasure, while the chief's dance is more of a ceremony. Although most
of the people who witness it are high-caste, anyone is welcome. All
watch the chief's actions and listen to his words very closely. If he
makes the least mistake, showing that he has not studied his words
beforehand very well, they have too much respect for him to say anything
to him at that time. Next day, however, after he has found it out, if he
does not take his words back, the people that had heard will disgrace
him by giving away a great deal of property. The Haida dance was done
away with years ago, while the chief's dance has been given up only in
very recent times.

After this the man that first taught dancing married in that town and
forgot all about the wealth he had lost. This shows that he was

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

not smart, for a smart man, when he loses a very little of his property,
thinks of it and next time tries to do better. One time he and his wife
went away in a canoe and upset. His wife was drowned, but he was
captured by the land otters who named him Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L, and he
has strength like that of a shaman among them. When anyone is drowned by
the upsetting of his canoe, they say "Tûts!îd<u>î</u>gû'L has him."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part XIV](tmt048)
