[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt028)  [Next](tmt030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 25. STORY OF THE PUFFIN

There is a place called <u>G</u>ânAxa' and a creek close by called
<u>G</u>ânAXa'hîn whither many people used to go to dry salmon and do
other work. One day some women went out from there at low tide to a
neighboring island to dig shellfish. They brought their canoe to a place
where there was a hole in the side of the island, but, when they
endeavored to land, a breaker came in, upset the canoe, and drowned all
of them except one. In former times, when this woman went by in her
father's canoe, she used to think the birds here looked pretty and was
in the habit of saying, "I wish I could sit among those birds." These
birds were the ones that saved her. They felt so happy at having gotten
her that they flew about all the time.

Meanwhile drums were beaten at the town to call people to the death
feast, for they thought that she was drowned.

One time a canoe from the village containing her father happened to pass
this place, and they said to him, "Look among those birds. Your daughter
is sitting there."

The puffin chief had ordered the ~~l~~Agw<u>â</u>'tc!, a bird which
lives on the outer islands and is the puffin's slave, to braid the
woman's hair, and she always sat on the edge of the cliff.

Her father was very rich, so he filled many canoes with sea-otter,
beaver, and marten skins for the birds to settle on when they flew out.
When they reached the place, however, he could not see his

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

daughter, for they had taken her inside. Then he became angry. They
carried all sorts of things out there but in vain.

At last, about four days afterward, the girl's mother thought of the
white hair that had belonged to her grandfather. In the morning she said
to her husband, "We have that old hair in a box. What can we do with it?
We ought to try a strategem with it. Suppose we put boards on the
canoes, spread the hair all over them, and take it out." They did this,
and, when they got to the cliff where their daughter used to be, they
saw her sitting on the edge with her hair hanging over. They went close
in. Then all the birds flew out to them, and each stuck a white hair in
its head where you may see it at this day. The girl, however, remained
where she was.

Then these birds flew in to the puffin chief and told him about the
hair. They thought a great deal of it. Therefore the chief told them to
carry the girl back to her father. But before she went he said to her,
"If you are ever tired of staying with your father, come back to us." At
that time she had a nose just like one of these birds, because she had
wanted to be one of them.

The sea gull is also the slave of the puffin. Therefore the Huna people
say that when anyone goes to that place it calls his name, because it
was the slave of the puffin at the time when this woman was there.

Because some of their people were drowned at that island, all of the
T!A'q!dentân claim it. Later they built a house which they named after
it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[57:a](tmt028.htm#fr_38) See *Twenty-sixth
Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology*, p. 451.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. Story of the Wain-House People](tmt030)
