[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt043)  [Next](tmt045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

By and by this chief's daughter had a little boy who proved to be very
smart and became a great hunter. He used to hunt far up on the mountains
for mountain goats and other animals. One time he fell from the top of a
mountain and lost consciousness, and, when he came to, he saw many men
standing about him in a circle. They had cedar-bark rings around their
heads and necks. Then they said to him, "What kind of spirit do you
want, the Raven Spirit or the Wolf Spirit?" and he said "The Wolf
Spirit." So they held white rocks over his head, and he became
unconscious. That is how he got the spirit. Then he ran around
screaming, naked except for an apron, while all of the Cliff Spirits and
all of the Forest Spirits sang and pounded on sticks for him. They also
tied up his hair like a wolf's ears. This is the origin of the
~~L~~uqAna', or secret societies, and the one this man first started is
said to have been the Dog-eaters' society. He sang a song, too, only
employed nowadays by a high-caste person

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

when he is [initiated](errata.htm#5). It is called Cînâ'x~~l~~k!, and
goes this way, "I am above the world. I walk in high places. There is
nobody else after me. I am alone." Those who became ~~l~~uqAna's after
this were not like him, because he said, "I am alone. There is nobody
after me." They only imitate him.

There are many kinds of ~~l~~uqAna's. Some are dog-eaters and some
pretend to eat the arms of people. It is previously arranged between the
~~l~~uqAna' and his father what he is to do and whom he is to injure,
and, after the spirit has come out, the father has to pay a great deal
of money for damages. The luqAna's are always found at feasts, and
high-caste people stand around them. The people who learned from this
boy first are those in the direction of Victoria, and there they think
that a person who has performed many times is very high. It is only very
lately that we Alaskans have had ~~l~~uqAna's. ~~L~~uqAna' is a
Tsimshian word meaning yêk. <span id="fr_91"></span>[a](#fn_91) When
they perform up here, the southern Tlingit dance Tsimshian dances and
the northern Tlingit Athapascan dances.

After this youth had come back to his people from the woods and had
shown them all about the luqAna', he went to the Queen Charlotte islands
and came to the greatest chief there. Then the people at that place said
to him, "It is terrible the way things have been going on. We have
wizards (nuks!â't<u>î</u>), who kill men in a sly way. There is one very
high-caste person here who has taught himself to be a wizard. And they
told him this man's story.

He and his friend were very dissolute young men who wanted very much to
be wizards, and the former begged his slave to tell him what to do. "If
you want to become one very much," said he, "go down there and sleep
among the driftwood left by the tide. Then you will see what it is."
They did this, and a very nice looking woman came to them and taught
them witchcraft. This was the mouse (k!uts!î'n). They thought that it
was a fine thing. After a while the woman again appeared to them in a
dream and said, "Would you like to be among the geese and brants?" They
answered "Yes," one saying, "I will be a goose;" the other, "I will be a
brant." At once they flew off in those forms. They thought that it was a
fine thing to be wizards, and would spend all their nights going about
that way, never coming in till morning. For that reason the town people
began to suspect that something was wrong with them. Nowadays a person
among the natives who sleeps much is said to be of no account, for it
was through sleep that witchcraft started. They also say that a wizard
has no respect for anything and never speaks to his neighbors.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

Finally a certain man began to drink salt water and fast in order to
discover the wizards. He also made a medicine. Then he dreamt about
them, and went to them, telling them everything he know. The two young
men replied, "Don't tell about us. If you keep it to yourself we will
pay you ten slaves. We will let you win ten slaves from us in gambling."
And they did so.

This is the story that the ~~l~~uqAna' man told to his friends when he
came home, and wherever he told it there began to be wizards. Therefore
witchcraft came to Alaska through the sons of Ayâ'y<u>î</u> <span
id="fr_92"></span>[a](tmt046.htm#fn_92) and through the Haida. They also
learned from the Haida that witchcraft may be imparted by means of
berries. When women are gathering these, they do not pick up the ones
that are dropped accidentally, no matter how many they may be, because
that is what witches do.

The shamans say it is this way: A man claims that he sees a large creek.
It is witchcraft. A smaller creek flows into this. It is the lying
creek. Another creek comes into it. It is the stealing creek. Still
another creek comes into it. It is the profligates' creek. All these are
in witchcraft.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[133:a](tmt043.htm#fr_90) For another version of
this part, see story 89.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[134:a](tmt044.htm#fr_91) Actually it is from
the Kwakiutl word Lû'koala. Katishan calls it Tsimshian because the
Tlingit received their secret societies through them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. Raven, Part XI](tmt045)
