[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt095)  [Next](tmt097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 72. STORY OF THE NAN<u>Y</u>AÂ'<u>Y</u>Î CRESTS

At the time of the flood the Nan<u>y</u>aâ'<u>yî</u> were climbing a
mountain on the Stikine river, called Sêku'q~~l~~e-ca, and a grizzly
bear and a mountain goat went along with them. Whenever the people
stopped, these two animals stopped also, and whenever they moved on the
animals moved on. Finally they killed the bear and preserved its skin
with the claws, teeth, and so forth, intact. They kept it for years
after the flood, and, as soon as it went to pieces, they replaced it
with another, and that with still another up to the present time. This
is why they claim the grizzly bear. During the times when this bear skin
has been shown thousands of dollars worth of slaves and furs have been
given away. Shakes (Cêks), head chiefs of this clan, would go up to a
row of slaves and slap each one, upon which the slave would either have
to be killed or sent home. This is why they gave great names to their
children. They were very proud of owning this bear and did all kinds of
things toward it. That is why all Alaska speaks of the
Nan<u>y</u>aâ'<u>yî</u> as the chief ones owning the grizzly bear. Very
many songs were composed concerning it, with words such as these, "Come
here, you bear, the highest bear of all bears."

They also have the head of the mountain goat, but they do not value it
as highly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 73. Story of the Frog Crest of the K<u>î</u>ksA'd<u>î</u> Of
Wrangell](tmt097)
