[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt055)  [Next](tmt057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 32. KAKÊ'Q!<sup>u</sup>TÊ <span id="fr_99"></span>[a](#fn_99)

A Huna man named Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê and his wife were paddling along
in a canoe about midnight in search of seals, and he kept hearing a
noise around his head like that made by a bird. Finally he hit the
creature with his hand and knocked it into the canoe. It was shaped like
a bird, only with eyelids hanging far over, and its name is Sleep (TA).
He gave this to his wife saying, "Here, you can keep this for your own."
So she gave it to her relatives, who built a house called Sleep house
(TA hît). All the poles in it were carved to resemble this bird.

The man got very tired after that without being able to sleep, until at
last he ran away into the forest. He walked along there, came to a big
glacier, and walked along upon that. After he had traveled for some time
he came across a small creek in which he discovered

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

eulachon. He roasted some on sticks before the fire. After he had
thought over the problem for a while, he made a small fish trap with a
hole in it for the fish to enter. The trap was soon filled with a
multitude of fishes. Then he took all out, dug a hole in the ground, and
placed the fish there. He was glad to think that he could get something
to eat, so he remained in that place.

One day, while he was roasting fish, he saw eight Athapascans
(<u>G</u>o'nana), and knew from that that he was in the interior. These
men wore nice fur clothing and had their faces painted.
Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê became frightened and ran into the woods, leaving
his fish roasting by the fire. Afterward the. eight men acted as though
they were calling him, so he climbed up into a tree and watched them.
They did not know where he had gone. Then the men sat down and ate his
fish, after which they stuck a copper-pointed arrow into the ground
where each roasting stick had been. This was the first time a Tlingit
had seen copper.

Next day the same men came back. They were dressed much better, and two
nice-looking women were with them. Then they called to him saying, "You
have brought us good luck, so we want you to be our friend. If you will
come and stay with us you can have either of these sisters of ours." So
he came down from the tree where he had been hiding, went with them, and
married both of their sisters.

Now they took him to the place from which they got their fish and showed
him how they did it. It was by making deadfalls in the water, in which
they caught only one small fish at a time. Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê was
surprised to see how hard they worked to get a fish. If a man were lucky
he would get perhaps forty or fifty very small fishes. Now,
Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê ordered all in the village to procure young trees
that were very limber and to split them into long pieces. He told them
to whittle these down very, smooth, and sat in the middle to show them
how. Then he got some roots and tied the sticks together. The name of
this trap is t!ît<u>x</u>. It is shaped like a barrel with the inner
entrance just small enough for the fish to pass through. At the mouth of
this trap a weir is run across the stream.

The whole village worked with him fixing the traps. Finally they cut
posts to fasten them to and placed them at that point in the river which
the tide reaches. When the tide went down they went to look at them and
found them full of eulachon. Before they could never get enough of these
fishes but now there were plenty for the poor, who formerly could obtain
none. Even the old people were cutting and drying some to put in holes
and make oil out of. Some filled twenty boxes with oil, some thirty.
Some boxes of this kind weigh 150 pounds, some 100, some 50, some 20.
Before his time the people of that village could not sleep, because they
had to run down

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

to their traps very often to look at their deadfalls, but after he came
they had a very easy time. Therefore the whole village was pleased with
him, looked upon. him as a very high-caste person, and would do as he
told them.

By and by the salmon season came. The people there had copper-pointed
salmon spears (kAt) with handles of fine, thin wood, but the water was
so muddy that they could spear only by means of the ripple marks, and
often got but one or two a day. The most that any man obtained was
three.

Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê watched and knew that he could help them. He
always traveled around with his wives' brothers, and wherever they went
the people followed, for they thought that he knew how to get salmon. He
inquired if this were the only way they knew of to catch salmon, and
they said, "Yes, this is the only way except that when they get in a
shallow place we can club them." One of his brothers-in-law also said to
him, "The only time we can obtain salmon is when they are very old and
their flesh is turning white. Then the water is low, and they go near
the shore where we can see them. We can also get them at that time from
the little creeks that come into the river." Now Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê
took the spear from his brother-in-law and taught him how to feel along
the river for salmon and catch them on the barbs as soon as they were
felt. In half an hour he had six salmon. All the people of the village
were looking on. Then he said to his brother-in-law, "You can feel them
very easily. They are slippery. When you feel anything slippery, do not
be in too great hurry and be careful not to go under the salmon. When
you first put your spear into the water you will feel the ground and you
will raise it up from the ground and move it along. I know how to make a
salmon trap, too. I will show you that to-morrow. To-day we can not do
it."

Next day the whole village went to work making salmon traps. Again he
asked them to get young trees and split them. All did as he told them.
They made eighteen traps that day. They got roots and split them, and
all worked taking the bark off. The whole village imitated
Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê, watching his every movement. Next day they put
the traps into the water, and all were very anxious about them, even the
women sitting along the shore watching. Some of the poor people, who
knew that they would result similarly to the first traps he had made,
were so anxious to see them that they could not sleep. The day before
all of the women sat down to make ropes in the manner he showed them,
and each went to the traps next morning provided with one. When they got
there they found every one of them loaded with salmon. All the people in
the town, old and young, went to see these traps. While they were
emptying the traps and stringing some of the salmon, others would be
coming in,

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

and it made the whole village happy. Then Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê
distributed the salmon, for everyone thought that it belonged to him. He
gave to the poor people, who had never before tasted salmon, and he said
to the wealthy, "Don't feel offended that I give them as much as you for
they need it as much. To-morrow and the day after we will have it."

At this time of the year they never got any salmon to dry. If one got a
salmon he ate it at once. Only when the salmon was old did they dry it.
Each man had a place where he speared salmon, and no one dared go there.
Those spots were all named. When they got salmon from the traps they
were all rich, and they were glad to have a supply so early in the
season. Before they had these traps they ate every part of the salmon,
all the insides, the heart, etc., but after they had had the traps for a
few days you could see along the beach various parts of the fish, as the
beads, and even some good parts, where they had been thrown away. After
they were through drying their salmon they had enough for a year, and
they stored them all away in boxes.

That fall the Athapascans went up among the valleys for ground hogs,
each man having his own place, where no one else was allowed to intrude.
That day only one came from the very best spots and in the whole village
there were but three. Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê watched how they got them.
Ground hogs were valued even by the coast people on account of the
blankets made of their skins. Then he asked them, "Is this the only way
you get your ground-hog meat?" "Yes," they said, "this is the only way."
Then he sat right down and began carving some pieces of wood, while
everybody watched him, believing that whatever he did would succeed. He
asked the women to make hide thongs. All sat down to do it, and with
them he made slip-nooses to be placed at the mouths of the ground-hog
burrows. Then he said, "I don't want anyone to go over there. Keep away
from the traps." So they did, and the morning after he went out among
his traps accompanied by all of the people, In each trap was a ground
hog, and he gave every man in the village five. Even when they had
killed three, the meat was distributed so that all had at least a taste
of the broth. They remained in this place just three days, and he killed
them off so in that time they had to move to another. Each valley was
claimed by some man, who had a special tree there on which his dried
meat was hung, and every time they moved to a new valley they left the
meat hanging on the limbs of the tree in the place abandoned.

Then the people started for home, carrying their meat along with them.
They would carry part of it a certain distance and go back for more, and
repeat the process until all was down on the beach. After that he told
them how to prepare their food to keep it over winter. He told them to
get their cooking baskets and cook their meat well.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

\[paragraph continues\] After it was cooked, he told them to put it on
sticks high up in the house and dry it in the smoke. When it was dried,
he asked them to take it down and put it in oil for the winter. One
family would have from four to six boxes of such dried meat. Before this
man came they did not know how to do that. They ate everything as soon
as it was procured, and it was very hard for them to get enough.
Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê also saw the women going after berries and eating
them at once. If they kept any very long they would spoil on their
hands. Then he said, "Don't you know how to preserve berries for
winter?" No, they replied. So he showed them how to dry these and how to
cook the different kinds of berries and preserve them in grease.

Before his time the Athapascans did not know how to put up their winter
food. They would stay on the spot where they had killed a moose until it
was eaten up. That was why they were always in want. The Athapascans
were very wild and did not seem to have any sense. Before
Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê came among them these people were always hunting,
but now they stayed in one place and had an easy time. A person went
hunting only for amusement in case he got tired of staying in doors.
Before this, too, they did not have a taste of berries after the berry
season. They ate them on the bushes like the birds. Now, however, they
have plenty all the year round. They used to live in winter on dried
salmon and what meat they could get. If they could get nothing while
hunting, many died of starvation.

When spring came on, Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê also showed them a certain
tree and said, "Don't you know how to take off the bark of this tree and
use it?" They replied that they never knew it could be eaten. So he took
a limb from a hemlock, sharpened it, and showed them how to take off the
hemlock bark. After that he took big mussel shells (yîs!) from his sack
and said, "Do you see these. This is the way to take it off." After he
had obtained quite a pile of bark, he showed them how to eat it, and
they thought that it was very nice, because it was so sweet. Then he
sharpened some large bear bones on a rough rock, gave one to each woman
and said, "Use it as I have used the shell." Each woman's husband or son
stripped the bark off of the tree, and the women sat down with their
daughters to help them and separated the good part. He was teaching the
people there to live as do those down on the ocean.

Next Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê collected a lot of skunk cabbage, dug a hole
in the ground, and lined it with flints, while all stood about watching
him. Then he made a fire on top of these rocks to heat them, and
afterwards threw a little water upon them, filling up the remainder of
the pit with successive layers of skunk cabbage and hemlock bark. Over
all he spread earth and made a fire above. He left just so much fire

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

on it all night. All the village people were looking on and getting wood
for him.

Now the people felt very happy to see how well they had gotten through
the winter and that they were learning to put up more food. The younger
people would dance all day. In the morning they were asked to go out and
uncover the hole. He uncovered his own first. It was so savory that the
whole village was scented with it. Then he tasted it, found it sweet,
and asked the rest of the village to taste it. The rumor of its
excellence spread all over town, and so many came to try it that before
he knew it half of his bark was gone. All the people of the village were
burying bark as he had done.

After he had taken the bark out a quantity of water was left, which they
poured into their dishes. Then he put the cooked bark in, to a dish and
pounded it with a masher. After that he pressed the cakes very hard and
made a hole in one corner of each in order to hang it up. The cakes
dried very quickly. Some cakes they put away dry, and some that were
dried very hard they put into oil. After they had been in oil for
several months he took them out and ate them. They tasted very good. He
also showed how to use those that had been put away dry. He took them
out and boiled some water for them, after which he soaked some in it.
They tasted altogether different from those that had been in the oil.

Next Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê showed the people how to put up a certain
root (ts!êt) found on sand flats and taken before tops come upon it.
Geese also live upon this root. He collected a lot of this and brought
it to his wives, asking them whether they ate it. They said they did
not, and when they had tasted it they found it very sweet. This root
tastes like sweet potatoes. Then the people took their canoes and went
to get these roots for their winter's food. Each carried a hardwood
stick with sharpened ends. He said, "This is women's work or for boys
and girls. It is easy. Where I come from the women do that." After they
had dug many roots he showed them how to dry these. He tied up a bunch
of them and on top another until he had made a long string. Then he hung
them up where they could dry quickly. He cooked them in pots. After the
water is poured off from them they move around as if alive, and for that
reason Tlingit widows do not eat them, fearing that they will make them
nervous. After being cooked in pots they taste just as if fresh.

He also showed them how to put up a root called s!în, which he pounded
up and pressed into cakes like the bark. They are soaked like the others
and also eaten with oil. He showed them as well how to kill seals and
prepare their flesh. For the next winter they prepared more than for the
winter preceding. That fall, after the food was all put away, they went
into the interior after furs. He showed them how to catch animal s by
means of deadfalls with fat as bait.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Before his time the only way they had gotten
their furs was with bow and arrow. They used to chase bears with dogs
and shoot them after hours spent in pursuit. Now they obtained very many
furs and made numbers of blankets out of them.

After he had shown the Athapascans all these things
Kakê'q!<sup>u</sup>tê said, "Now I want to go to my native town." At
first they were not willing to have him leave, but he asked so
persistently that they finally consented. Before they sent him away,
however, they took him away and obtained some small coppers for him.
After that they got everything ready and set out the following winter.
As they paddled on they could see the places where he had camped during
the hard time he had had after he left his own village. He asked the
people to go up with him along the same trail he had taken through the
woods. By that route they came to Grass creek (Tcû'kAn-hîn), to the
place he had left, but, when they came down, the people of that village
were afraid of them. These were the TcûkAne'd<u>î</u>, Kâ'gwAntân,
Wuckitâ'n, Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u>, T!A'q!dentân, L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>, and
Q!At!kaâ'<u>yî</u>.

By and by one of the TcûkAne'd<u>î</u> came out right opposite them and
said, "What are you coming here for, you land-otter people? We are not
the people who have been making medicine for you." When they saw that
those people did not care to receive them they went back through the
woods to the town of the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>. The L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>
saw that they had coppers, and took them away. Then the
L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> said, "You are going to be our people." Each man
took a man out of the canoe and said, "You will be my friend." That was
the way they used to do. They would take away a person's goods and then
give him just what they wanted to. The Athapascans were foolish enough
to allow it. Afterward the TcûkAne'd<u>î</u> felt that they were unlucky
in not having taken the visitors in themselves. Therefore, when a person
is unlucky nowadays, they say of him, "He sent the Athapascans away."
Because they did this the TcûkAne'd<u>î</u> are below all other Tlingit
families. That was what brought them bad luck, and that is also how the
L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> became very rich. They got a claim on the place
where the copper plates come from.

Next spring the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> went right to the mouth of Copper
river. They made a village there at once and called it Kos!ê'xka. One of
the mountains there they called TsA~~l~~xâ'n and another Mas!î'ca. All
along where they went they gave names. A certain creek was called
NA'gAk<sup>u</sup>-hîn, and they came to a lake which they named
~~L~~tû'a. Then they went to a river called A~~l~~sê'x, at the mouth of
which they established a town and named it Kos!ê'x. Afterward they went
to the river from which the copper came and called it Îq hî'n<u>î</u>
(Copper river). At Kos!ê'x they built a house called TA hît (Sleep
house). Then all of them were L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>, but some, from the
fact that they camped on an island, came to be called
Q!At!kaâ'<u>yî</u> 

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (Island people). The Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u>,
originally a part of the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>, used to encamp at a
certain place where they dug the root s!<u>î</u>n. This root pressed is
known as t!Aganîsk!êx, and the Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u> receive their name from
this word. <span id="fr_100"></span>[a](#fn_100) The Kosk!ê'd<u>î</u>
built a house and roofed it with moose hide. So they came to own the
Moose house (<u>X</u>âs! h<u>î</u>t).

The wives of the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> were Kâ'gwAntân. They (the
Kâ'gwAntân) were invited to Chilkat by a chief named Tailless-Raven
(Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~). In the same town they were about to fell a tree to
make a totem pole out of it, and just before they did so
Cqê<u>L</u>aqâ', a shaman, interviewed his spirits. When they struck the
tree with an ax he said, "The chip went toward Huna. How is it that it
went toward Huna?" And, when the tree fell, he said, "It fell toward
Huna. How is it that it fell toward Huna?" This spirit's name was
ÂnkA<u>x</u>wâ'<u>î</u>, and the pole was carved to resemble him. When
it was brought in he said, "How is it that there is something wrong with
these people we have invited. My spirit sees that there is something
wrong with them." Then they made a raven hat, and the spirit in the
shaman said, "The raven you made has been shot with an arrow. Many
arrows are sticking into its body and blood is coming from its mouth."

The people giving the feast gave a great deal of property away to the
Kâ'gwAntân. Each man in the family would give so many slaves and so much
in goods. On their way home from this feast the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> also
made a raven, and some time later they went to a feast at the Kâ'gwAntân
village of KAq!Anuwû'. Close to that place Q!onê', chief of the
L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>, put on the raven hat. Its tail and beak were made
of copper, and the wings were copper plates. It had a copper plate lying
in front of it at which it pecked. L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> also lived among
the Kâ'gwAntân in that town, and they said, "Where has that raven been?"
The canoe people answered, "Why! this raven has been at Chilkat." "What
did it eat at Chilkat?" "All that it ate at Chilkat was salmon skins."
By salmon skins they meant the furs and hides that had been given away.
Then they took the wings from this raven and the copper he had been
pecking at and threw them ashore for the Kâ'gwAntân. They said, "Those
are worth forty slaves." Before, when the <u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> (of
Chilkat) had feasted and used their own raven hat, they spoke so highly
of it that the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> had become jealous.

By and by news of what the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> had done reached Chilkat,
and the <u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> were very angry. They began to build
Whale house (Yâ'<u>î</u> h<u>î</u>t). Then they began to buy slaves in
all quarters. They bought some Dê'citân, some Tcû'kAned<u>î</u>, and
Some L!enê'dî, and,

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

when they invited people to the feast for these houses, they first gave
away the slaves they had been buying. The L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> felt very
badly at this, because--Flathead slaves not being esteemed very
highly--this amounted to more than they had given away. Then war broke
out between the two families, and the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> were badly
defeated, losing many people. After that the people whose friends had
been enslaved, purchased, and given away felt so badly that they also
made war on the <u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> with no better result.

One of the <u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> chiefs was named Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk.
In those times people were afraid of a high-caste person who was rich,
strong, and brave and did not want to have anything to do with him. This
man's father-in-law was a L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> chief at
~~L~~axa<u>yî</u>'k named Big Raven (Yê~~l~~-Lên). Then
Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk told his slaves to take food and tobacco to his
father-in-law through the interior by Alsek river, and he did so. When
he arrived, the chief said to him, "What did you come for?" "Your
daughter has sent me with some tobacco." Big Raven was very fond of
tobacco. Before the slave started on this errand his master had said to
him, "Be sure to notice every word he says when you give him the
tobacco." Then the slave took away from the tobacco the cottonwood
leaves and a fine piece of moose hide in which it was wrapped. As soon
as he saw the leaves Big Raven said, "I feel as though I had seen
Chilkat now that I have seen these cottonwood leaves. Chilkat is a
respectable place. A lot of respectable people live there. They are so
good that they give food even to the people that were going to fight
them." This Big Raven was a shaman and a very rich one.

When the slave returned to Chilkat and told his master what Big Raven
had said, they held a council the same evening in Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~'s
house, Whale house, and Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk said to his slave, "Now you
tell these people what that father-in-law of mine has said to you." And
the slave said, "As soon as he saw me, he said, 'What are you doing
here?' and I told him that his daughter had sent me to him with tobacco.
After he had uncovered the tobacco and had seen the leaves he said,
'They are such respectable people in Chilkat that they feed even the
people who had come to fight them.' That was what Big Raven said." Then
Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk said, "I wonder if he thinks he has gotten even with
me for the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> I killed on Land-otter point. I wonder
whether he thinks he has gotten even with me for having killed all those
ÂnAk!-nû." He thought that Big Raven was a coward and was going to make
peace. Then he moved about very proudly, while the visitors from other
places watched him closely, and everything that he said or did was
reported to Big Raven.

A man among the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>, named Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc, was
bathing in order to acquire strength to kill the
<u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u>. Then the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> pounded on Big
Raven's house to have his spirits come

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

out. Big Raven said, "~~L~~A'kua has gotten up already. ~~L~~A'kua has
looked out now. My masters, which way is this ~~L~~A'kua going to go?"
The people said, "What are you saying, Big Raven? Go wherever you think
best." Then he told them to pound away on the sticks, and he shouted,
"Here, here is the camping place." After the spirit had been all over
their course it said, "Hô, hê, the Raven swinging back and forth."

For Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc's war hat they made a carving of a monster rat
which is said to live under the mountain Was!î'câ. His spear points they
made out of iron--taken probably from some wreck. They considered
themselves very lucky when they found this iron. They thought that it
grew in the timber and not that it belonged to a ship. This they called
<u>G</u>ayê's! hâ'wu (Log of Iron). <u>G</u>ayê's! was originally the
name given to black mud along the beaches to which people likened iron
rust.

Now the war canoes started from Kos!ê'x for Chilkat, drilling as they
went. When people do this they take out their drums and drill wherever
possible. There are certain songs called "drilling songs." When the
shaman said, "This is the place where ~~L~~A'kua camped," they camped
there. They thought that it would bring bad luck to go any farther than
to the place where he had camped. When on an expedition the war chief
never looked back in the direction in which they had come. At KAq!Anuwû'
they stopped long enough to get the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> there. Those
were the people of which so many had been killed by the Chilkat before.
The KîksA'd<u>î</u>, T!A'q!dentân, and other families also started with
them, and they paid these for their help with copper plates. All this
time the shaman's spirit sang the same song about "the raven swinging
back and forth."

At last the warriors reached Chilkat and stood in a row fronting the
river back of the Chilkat fort. Behind all stood Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc. Then
Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk came out on top of the fort and said, "Where is that,
Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc?" So Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc stepped out in front of his
party with the mouse war hat on his head, saying, "Here I am." Then
Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk said, "Where has that mouse (kuts!î'n) been? What has
he been doing?" He answered, "I have been in that great mountain that
belonged to my mother's uncle, and I have come out after you." After
this they heard a drum in the fort, which meant that those people were
about to come out. Then they came out in files, and Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk
and Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc went to meet each other with their spears. But the
Chilkat still had their spears pointed with bone and mountain-goat horn,
and when Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk speared Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc he did not seem to
hurt him. Câdis<u>î</u>'ktc, however, speared Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk through
the heart, and his body floated down the river on which they fought
until it struck against a log running out from the bank. The end of this
log moved

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

up and down with the current and Yê~~l~~-<u>x</u>âk's body moved up and
down along with it. Then the shaman said, "Now you see what my spirit
has been singing about. That is the raven moving back and forth. Now you
people are going to eat them all up. Don't be frightened any more, for
you have them all now that you have gotten him." At once they began to
wade across, while the Chilkat people, when they saw that their head man
was dead, ran past their fort up into the mountains. At that time the
L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> took the totem pole ânk<u>A</u>xwâ'<u>î</u>. That is
what the Chilkat shaman had meant by the chip flying toward Huna and the
tree falling toward it. And this is also why they had so great faith in
spirits at that time.

Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~ felt badly for the loss of his totem, so he took the
copper raven he had captured from the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> before and
started toward KAq!Anuwû' to make peace. His wife's father was head
chief of the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>. At this time the war had lasted for a
long time, perhaps five years. Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~ composed and sang a song
as he went along, as follows, "Why did you leave the Chilkat river as it
flows, you raven? Why didn't you take it all into your mouth?" He meant
to say, "If you are so strong, why didn't you make the river go entirely
dry?" The L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> had gathered many families against him,
but the river was as large as ever.

Just as Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~ came to the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u> town, a man ran
down toward the canoe, making believe that he was going to kill him, but
one of the Kâ'gwAntân caught him and said, "Why do you want to kill that
chief? You are not as high as he." He said, "It isn't because I am
anxious to kill him, but because I was always so afraid of him when he
was warring." <span id="fr_101"></span>[a](#fn_101)

Then they seized Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~ to make him a deer and took him into
Sleep house, the house of his father-in-law. When she saw him going in
there, his wife came out of the canoe, carrying the raven hat he had
captured. Eagle down was upon it. So they, in turn, brought out the
ânk<u>A</u>xwâ'<u>î</u> with eagle down upon it. They also painted the
face of the deer and the face on the corner post representing Sleep.
This was because they had so much respect for this post. The painting of
its face was the end of their troubles.

It was against the deer's rules to eat devilfish or any kind of fresh
fish, but they thought, "If he still feels badly toward us, he will
refuse to eat it." So he said to them, "Bring that devilfish here. I
will eat that devilfish." They did not want him to eat it, but they
wanted to see what he would say. As soon as he asked for it, therefore,
all shouted and put it back from him. They said, "It is so. He has come
to make peace." Then they danced for him.

After this all of the <u>G</u>ânAxte'd<u>î</u> came over and carried
away his father-in-law to be deer on the other side.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

They said to Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~, "Have you your canoe ashore with all of
your people in it?" He said, "I have it ashore." This was their way of
asking whether there would be any more war. Then they would say to the
deer again, "My deer, we are going to camp in a nice sunny place, are we
not; and we are going to come in in a sheltered place where there are no
waves, are we not?" He would say, "Yes, we are going to camp in a good
place." Then they would say to him, "You are going to sleep well
hereafter, are you not?" And he answered, "Yes." When they were moving
about, warring people could never sleep well. That is why they said this
to him. By the waves and wind they meant the troubles they had had, and
by saying that they were going to camp in a calm place they meant that
they were not going to war any more.

The opposite deer, taken from Sleep house, was asked similar questions.
If the deer did not have his mind fixed on making peace people knew it
by his songs, therefore they noticed every word he uttered. A high-caste
person was always selected as deer, because through him there would be a
certain peace. The man that came to another village to be taken up as
deer brought food with him on which to feast the people there. The other
side gave a feast in return.

After they had made peace Ckû'wu-yê~~l~~ danced on the beach just before
he set out. ~~L~~dahî'n, the owner of Sleep house, danced on the other
side. This is the only way in which people made up with each other after
having been enemies for years. It happened years and years ago, and to
this day those people are friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[154:a](tmt056.htm#fr_99) According to Katishan,
he belonged to the L!ûk!nAxA'd<u>î</u>. But see story 104.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[161:a](tmt056.htm#fr_100) Probably erroneous.
Cf. story 104.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[164:a](tmt056.htm#fr_101) See [p.
71](tmt032.htm#page_71).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 33. Origin of the <u>G</u>onaqAdê't](tmt057)
