[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt008)  [Next](tmt010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

### 5. KAKA' <span id="fr_18"></span>[a](#fn_18)

When KAka' was taken south, either to Cape Ommaney or farther, a woman
came to him and said, "I am in the same fix as you. We are both
saved <span id="fr_19"></span>[b](#fn_19) by the land otters." That is
how he found out what had happened to him. The woman also said, "I am
your friend, and I have two land-otter husbands who will take you to
your home." Then she called him to her and began to look over his hair.
Finally she said, "Your wife has put the sinew from a land-otter's tail
through your ear. That is what has caused you to become a land otter."

Then they took down what looked to him like a canoe, but really it was a
skate. The skate is the land-otter's canoe. When they set out, they put
him into the canoe, laid a woven mat over him and said, "You must not
look up again." He did look up, however, after a time and found himself
tangled among the kelp stems. These land otters were going to become his
spirits.

On their journey they started to cross a bay called Kên to an island
called Tê~~l~~nu', and, as daylight was coming on, they began to be
afraid that the raven would call and kill them before they reached the
other side. It was almost daylight when they came to land, so they ran
off at once among the bushes and rocks, leaving KAka' to pull up the
canoe. This was hard work, and while he was at it the skin was all worn
from his lower arm, so he knew that it was a skate.

Some people traveling in a canoe saw his shadow there and tried hard to
make him out clearly, but in vain. They did not want to have him turn
into a land otter, so they said, "KAka', you have already turned into a
ground hog."

By and by one of his friends heard him singing in the midst of a thick
fog at a place near the southern end of Baranoff island on the outside.
Each time he ended his song with the words, "Let the log drift landward
with me." Then it would drift shoreward with him. Meanwhile he was lying
on the log head down with blood running out of his nose and mouth and
all kinds of sea birds were feeding on him. It was his spirits that made
him that way. The real land otters had left him, but they had come to
him again as spirits.

Now the people sang a song on shore that could be heard where KAka! was
floating, but, although they heard the noise of a shaman's beating
sticks, they could not get at him. Then the friend who had first found
him went ashore and fasted two days, after which he went out and saw
KAka' lying on his back on the log. He was as well as when he had left
Sitka. Then his friend brought him ashore, but the land-otter spirits
remained with him, and he became a great shaman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[28:a](tmt009.htm#fr_18) See story 31, pp.
[87](tmt035.htm#page_87)-88.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[28:b](tmt009.htm#fr_19) So interpreters persist
in speaking of the capture of a human being by anthropomorphic animals
or other supernatural beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Land-Otter Sister](tmt010)
