[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt097)  [Next](tmt099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

### 74. STORY OF THE KÂ'GWANTÂN CRESTS

A man belonging to the Kâ'gwAntân was out camping, and saw a wolf coming
toward him, showing its teeth as though it were laughing. On looking
more closely, he saw that it had a bone stuck between its teeth. Then he
took the bone out and said, "Now you must show me what makes you so
lucky." The wolf turned right round and walked away, but next night the
man dreamed he had come to a very fine town. It was the wolf town, and
the wolf he had befriended came to him and told him something to make
him lucky, saying, "I am your friend." He was grateful for what the man
had done to him. Since then the Kâ'gwAntân have used the wolf.

Another time when some Kâ'gwAntân were getting herring at
Town-at-mouth-of-lake (L!uq!â'ce<u>î</u>k-ân), a bear came to the place
where they were, reached down through the smoke hole and took away the
herring they were drying. Then the people said, "Who is this thief that
is stealing all the fish?" For that he killed all of them. Then the
Kâ'gwAntân seized their spears and set out to kill the bears in that
neighborhood. When they discovered those bears they were lying in holes
they had dug for themselves, and the people said to them, "Come out here
and let us fight it out." Then the bears did so, and the people killed
them. They took the skins from the heads of the bears and preserved
them. The bears so killed were Kâts!'s children. This is how the
Kâ'gwAntân came to use the grizzly bear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 75. Migration of the <u>G</u>ânAxA'd<u>î</u> to Tongass](tmt099)
