[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt098)  [Next](tmt100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 75. MIGRATION OF THE <u>G</u>ÂNAXA'D<u>Î</u> TO TONGASS

At Klawak was a man of the <u>G</u>ânAxA'd<u>î</u> named Dancer (L!ê'Xe)
who was very fond of gambling but unable to win. Finally his wife said,
"If you gamble again we will leave each other. I don't want to be with
you any more. You are gambling too much." Her husband said that he would
stop, and for a little while he did so. One day, however, a great game
was in progress far out on the marsh, and his wife missed him. She knew
where he was and felt very badly. In the evening, when he came home, she
found out that he had lost everything in the house. Then she said to
him, "You have been gambling again." "Yes," he said. She said nothing
more, thinking it was of no use, until late in the evening. Then the men
that had won their property came after it, and Dancer got up and showed
them where the things were, but his wife did not speak a word. There was
nothing left for her except a blanket and pillow. Finally, after they
were gone, the woman sat down and began to cry. When she was through she
said to him, "The house belonged to you, but you must go out, for you
have gambled with all of my things. If you do not go I must. I married
against the wishes of my people

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

and they will not take me in if I leave here." Then her husband said,
"Do not feel badly if you should happen to hear of me," and he went
away.

This man had seven sisters, all of them very well off, but they would
not have anything to do with him. Very early in the morning he went to
their houses and awakened the boys. Without asking the permission of
their mothers he told them to get their bows and arrows quickly and come
along with him. Next morning, after he had walked with them for some
distance, they found a canoe, and he had them all get into it. In the
evening, when their uncle camped with them, the children began to feel
that something was wrong, and some cried, saying that they wanted to get
back to their fathers and mothers. Then he told them that they would
soon come to a fine town, and kept on going farther and farther away
until they reached a place called Sea-lion's-face (Tân-yeda') where
Tongass now stands. They kept on beyond this until they came to a large
rock some distance out at sea on which were sea otters; these they
clubbed.

Some of the boys were now quite large. Later they came to a long sandy
beach, and their uncle made a house there out of driftwood. He dried the
skins and made that place his permanent residence.

During the second night they spent there, Dancer heard the two dogs he
had brought along, barking. He told his sisters' children to get out of
bed to see what was the matter. They did so, and, on running out,
discovered a large animal coming along, as big as a black bear. At first
they thought that it was a bear, but it was of a different color, so
they concluded that it was medicine. His nephews shot at it, and the man
picked up their arrows and noticed that there was something like clay
upon them. Everyone pursued the animal and at last they saw it disappear
into a hole in a mountain. Meanwhile Dancer took the clayey substance
from all of the arrows, wrapped it in leaves, and put it into the bosom
of his shirt, giving the arrows back to the boys.

Now, Dancer made the place his town, and continued to live there with
his nephews who were grown up. The stuff he had taken from their arrows
he put behind the barbs of others so that they could use them in
hunting. He also put some of it on their eyebrows, their hair, and
around their mouths. He said it was to make the hair thick in those
places, and sure enough they came to have fine eyebrows, hair, and
mustaches. They became fine-looking men.

When they went out hunting with the medicine arrows he had made, and
shot at a seal, even if the arrow merely came close to the seal without
touching it, the seal would die. That was also a great place for sea
lions, and whenever they saw one of those animals, their uncle would go
out with a fan made from the tail of an eagle, anointed with this
medicine, and wave it toward the sea lion. Then the animal

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

came right up on the beach, and they clubbed it to death. They had all
kinds of food in their house and were continually drying meat and skins.
The house became so full, in fact, that they had to build a larger one.

By and by their uncle said that he wanted some eagles, and the boys, of
whom there were eleven, went out with their bows and arrows, and each
brought one in. Then each of them had an eagle's tail fan for himself
such as were formerly used in dancing. They also killed all kinds of
birds and secured plenty of marten skins and weasel skins. Of these
latter the uncle sewed together a marten-skin robe and a weasel-skin
shirt for each boy as well as one for himself.

One time Dancer and his nephews went a long distance beyond their
village and found a box, beautifully carved and painted, lying upon the
beach. They said to one another, "There must be people living over this
way." At that time they did not know anything about the Tsimshian.
Keeping on farther, they saw still more signs of people, and finally
they came to a Tsimshian town.

Then they returned to their own place, and afterward the uncle felt that
some people whom they knew were coming to see them. These people were
his brothers-in-law, who had been hunting for him continually and had
just started out once more. When their canoe came in sight, Dancer said,
"There is a canoe coming right along there in the direction we came
from." He had composed some songs while he was there, so he said, "You
boys must dress yourselves to dance for the people in that canoe." When
the canoe got closer he went outside and shouted, "That canoe must stay
out there. Don't come in right away." So the canoe stopped, and after a
while the boys came out and danced for the canoe people while he sang.
The men in the canoe recognized Dancer but not the boys, who had grown
up very quickly into fine-looking men. After that they invited the canoe
people up to the house. They entered, and all the time they were there
kept looking at one another and whispering, wondering what Dancer had
done with their children. But, though they camped there one night, they
did not ask for them.

Next morning, however, just before they got into their canoe, Dancer
said to each man in turn, "This is your boy. This is your boy."

Upon that his brothers-in-law said to him, "We will be right back to see
you again. We will come and live with you." Then they went back to their
village, and told the news, and the mothers, who had been mourning for
their children, felt very happy to know that they were alive. Dancer's
sisters, their husbands, and all their people came over to him. Dancer
and his nephews had been watching for them and counting the days until
they should return. Dancer's wife had not married again and was very
anxious to see her husband,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

but he did not look for her. The boys had drums made out of deer hide,
and, as soon as the canoes arrived, they told them to come close to the
beach and they would dance for them. So the canoes stopped, and they
came out and danced for the canoe people. Dancer's wife had thought that
he would take her in at once, but he would not have anything to do with
her.

Then the people were asked to come in and eat, and they were all fed by
the boys and their uncle. Afterward they built their houses all about
him and made the place their permanent village.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 76. The Woman Who Married the Frog](tmt100)
