[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt073)  [Next](tmt075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 50. THE MUCUS CHILD

From a certain village the men began to disappear. They would go up into
the woods behind after firewood and never come back. Finally all the
rest of the men went up there together, intending to kill whatever had
been destroying their friends, but they, too, never came back. Then the
women and children began disappearing in the same manner until not one
person remained except a woman and her daughter who refused to go out.

After that the younger woman walked back and forth in front of the
houses, crying and calling to each of the former house owners. One day
she cried very hard until the mucus ran down from her nose, and, wiping
this off, she threw it down near one of the doors. After a while she
noticed from the corner of her eye that it moved. She looked at it
closely and saw that it was like a bubble. Then she stooped down to
examine it and saw in it a little man. Before the bubble had disappeared
she picked it up and swallowed it and soon discovered that she was
pregnant. In a short time she gave birth to a boy.

This mucus child grew up very fast, and, when he was old enough to
shoot, his mother made him a bow and arrows with which to practise. When
he became somewhat larger he asked his mother, "Mother, why are these
houses empty? Where have the people that occupied them gone?" And his
mother answered, "We had many friends in this village. They would go
after wood and never return. The women and children did the same thing.
They followed their husbands and parents and never returned." This boy
grew up very fast, and meanwhile he kept thinking to himself, "I wonder
what happened to those people who went up after wood and did not come
back." After he had become still larger he made himself a bow and arrow
points, and his mother made him a quiver. With these he ventured a short
distance up into the woods. He was afraid to go far.

Finally he thought, "I am going a long distance up into the woods, but I
am not going to say a word about it to my mother." And so, early in the
morning, he went straight up from the house and, after traveling for
some time, reached a creek of black water which ran out from under a
glacier. There he met a large man who said to him,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Grandson, take off all of your clothes, get
into this creek until the water is up to your neck, and sit there no
matter how cold it is." The boy did so, and, after a long time, the big
man saw the water shake around him and thought, "The water is shaking
because he has sat in it so long that he is beginning to get cold." Then
the big man told him to come out, and, after he had done so, he said,
"Go and try to pull up that tree." This tree was a short one, and he
pulled it up easily by the roots. Then the big man told him to strike a
large round white rock near by to see if he could smash it, and he did
so. The rock was broken in pieces. But this rock was only a friable one
put there on purpose for the boy to break. Then the big man said to him,
"Put on your clothes now and go home. To-morrow come up again."

The next day the big man told him to get into the creek again, and, when
he saw him shivering, told him to come out and pull up a still larger
tree. He pulled it up easily. Then he took him to a still larger rock
that looked shiny and hard and told him to strike it. When he did so the
tree went into slivers, but the rock was intact. So he told the boy to
dress, run down home, and come up again very early. This time he was
told to pull up a big crab-apple tree. He succeeded, but, although it
looked easy to him to break the rock, only the tree was shattered.

The fourth time the boy came up very early before daylight. After he had
been in the stream long enough to shiver the big man said, "Run to that
tree standing over there. Try to break that." It was a wild maple, but
he broke it more easily than the crab apple. The big man was surprised.

Now the boy knew that he had great strength, and when the big man told
him to try to smash the rock again, the rock flew all about. Then the
big man took off his leggings, his shirt, and his moccasins, which were
beautifully worked with porcupine quills, and put them on the boy. The
moccasins were made to tie to the leggings and the sole of one of them
was a whetstone. Then the man told him that he was Strength and had come
to help him. He showed him a valley and said, "Go right up that valley,
making sure to walk in the middle of it. On one side is the glacier. As
soon as you reach the top of the mountain you will hear some one
calling. You will see a large town there. This village is where your
people went when they disappeared and those are the wolf people that
took them. As soon as they get within your reach hit them with your
club, and if it touches one of them it will kill him. Run up the hill.
If you run down the hill you will be caught. If you become tired, think
of me and you will become stronger."

Now the boy went up the hill as he had been directed until he reached
the end of the valley, where he heard some one call. He

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

looked down and saw a very large town. At once people came running
toward him, and he clubbed them. He could see them fall but did not feel
his club strike. He kept on running up the hill, clubbing his pursuers
as he went until he had destroyed all of them. Then he returned to his
benefactor.

When Strength heard what had happened, he said, "Go back, for there is
another village on the other side. Go there and call to them. They will
not see you as quickly as these first. Call to them, 'Give me my uncle's
life, my village people's life.' If they refuse, tell them that you are
going to strike their village with your club. If they allow you to have
it they will hand you a box." He gave the boy strict orders not to
strike unless they refused to give him the box of lives.

When the boy came to the first house in this village, he asked for the
lives of his town people, but they said, "We don't know where they are.
They might be in the next house." He went to that, and they said the
same thing there. They answered him in the same manner at all of the
houses. By the time he reached the last he was discouraged, thinking
that he had undertaken all of that labor for nothing. He went in there,
however, and said, "Give me my village people's lives. If you don't give
them tome, I will strike your village." This was the town chief's house,
however, and he said, "Don't strike our village. I will give you the
lives of your village people." These people were also wolf people. Then
the wolf chief handed him the box of lives and said, "Take it back to
your village and leave it in each house for four days. At the end of
four days go into the house and see what has happened."

After this the boy returned to his native village and left the box of
lives four days in the house of his uncle, the chief. Early on the,
morning of the day following he heard noises there, jumped up and went
over to it. There were all of his people walking about and looking very
happy. He left the box in every house in town for the prescribed period
until all the absent ones had come to life, and all of their houses were
filled as before. All the time this boy was away among the wolves his
mother and grandmother were worrying about him, but after the people had
been restored they were very happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 51. The Salmon Chief](tmt075)
