[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt079)  [Next](tmt081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 56. THE BOY WHO SHOT THE STAR

Two very high-caste boys were chums. The father of one was town chief
and had his house in the middle of the village, but the house of the
other boy's father stood at one end. These boys would go alternately to
each other's houses and make great quantities of arrows which they would
play with until all were broken up.

One time both of the boys made a great quantity of arrows to see which
could have the more. Just back of their village was a hill on the top of
which was a smooth grassy place claimed by the boys as their playground,
and on a certain fine, moonlight night they started thither. As they
were going along the lesser chief's son, who was ahead, said, "Look
here, friend. Look at that moon. Don't you think that the shape of that
moon is the same as that of my mother's labret and that the size is the
same, too?" The other answered, "Don't. You must not talk that way of
the moon." Then suddenly it became very dark about them and presently
the head chief's son saw a ring about them just like a rainbow. When it
disappeared his companion was gone. He called and called to him but did
not get any answer and did not see him. He thought, "He must have run up
the hill to get away from that rainbow." He looked up and saw the moon
in the sky. Then he climbed the hill, and looked about, but his friend
was not there. Now he thought, "Well! the moon must have gone up with
him. That circular rainbow must have been the moon."

The boy thus left alone sat down and cried, after which he began to try
the bows. He put strings on them one after the other and tried them, but
every one broke. He broke all of his own bows and

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

all of his chum's except one which was made of very hard wood. He
thought, "Now I am going to shoot that star next to the moon." In that
spot was a large and very bright one. He shot an arrow at this star and
sat down to watch, when, sure enough, the star darkened. Now he began
shooting at that star from the big piles of arrows he and his chum had
made, and he was encouraged by seeing that the arrows did not come back.
After he had shot for some time he saw something hanging down very near
him, and, when he shot up another arrow, it stuck to this. The next did
likewise, and at last the chain of arrows reached him. He put a last one
on to complete it.

Now the youth felt badly for the loss of his friend and, lying down
under the arrow chain, he went to sleep. After a while he awoke, found
himself sleeping on that hill, remembered the arrows he had shot away,
and looked up. Instead of the arrows there was a long ladder reaching
right down to him. He arose and looked so as to make sure. Then he
determined to ascend. First, however, he took various kinds of bushes
and stuck them into the knot of hair he wore on his head. He climbed up
his ladder all day and camped at nightfall upon it, resuming his journey
the following morning. When he awoke early on the second morning his
head felt very heavy. Then he seized the salmon berry bush that was in
his hair, pulled it out, and found it was loaded with berries. After he
had eaten the berries off, he stuck the branch back into his hair and
felt very much strengthened. About noon of the same day he again felt
hungry, and again his head was heavy, so he pulled out a bush from the
other side of his head and it was loaded with blue huckleberries. It was
already summer there in the sky. That was why he was getting berries.
When he resumed his journey next morning his head did not feel heavy
until noon. At that time he pulled out the bush at the back of his head
and found it loaded with red huckleberries.

By the time he had reached the top the boy was very tired. He looked
round and saw a large lake. Then he gathered some soft brush and some
moss and lay down to sleep. But, while he slept, some person came to him
and shook him saying, "Get up. I am after you." He awoke and looked
around but saw no one. Then he rolled over and pretended to go to sleep
again but looked out through his eyelashes. By and by he saw a very
small but handsome girl coming along. Her skin clothes were very clean
and neat, and her leggings were ornamented with porcupine quills. Just
as she reached out to shake him he said, "I have seen you already."

Now the girl stood still and said, "I have come after you. My
grandmother has sent me to bring you to her house." So he went with her,
and they came to a very small house in which was an old woman. The old
woman said, "What is it you came way up here

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

after, my grandson?" and the boy answered, "On account of my playmate
who was taken up hither." "Oh! "answered the old woman, "he is next
door, only a short distance away. I can hear him crying every day. He is
in the moon's house."

Then the old woman began to give him food. She would put her hand up to
her mouth, and a salmon or whatever she was going to give would make its
appearance. After the salmon she gave him berries and then meat, for she
knew that he was hungry from his long journey. After that she gave him a
spruce cone, a rose bush, a piece of devil's club, and a small piece of
whetstone to take along.

As the boy was going toward the moon's house with all of these things he
heard his playmate screaming with pain. He had been put up on a high
place near the smoke hole, so, when his rescuer came to it, he climbed
on top, and, reaching down through the smoke hole, pulled him out. He
said, "My friend, come. I am here to help you." Putting the spruce cone
down where the boy had been, he told it to imitate his cries, and he and
his chum ran away.

After a while, however, the cone dropped from the place where it had
been put, and the people discovered that their captive had escaped. Then
the moon started in pursuit. When the head chief's son discovered this,
he threw behind them the devil's club he had received from the old
woman, and a patch of devil's club arose which the moon had so much
trouble in getting through that they gained rapidly on him. When the
moon again approached, the head chief's son threw back the rose bushes,
and such a thicket of roses grew there that the moon was again delayed.
When he approached them once more, they threw back the grindstone, and
it became a high cliff from which the moon kept rolling back. It is on
account of this cliff that people can say things about the moon nowadays
with impunity. When the boys reached the old woman's house they were
very glad to see each other, for before this they had not had time to
speak.

The old woman gave them something to eat, and, when they were through,
she said to the rescuer, "Go and lie down at the place where you lay
when you first came up. Don't think of anything but the playground you
used to have." They went there and lay down, but after some time the boy
who had first been captured thought of the old woman's house and
immediately they found themselves there. Then the old woman said, "Go
back and do not think of me any more. Lie there and think of nothing but
the place where you used to play." They did so, and, when they awoke,
they were lying on their playground at the foot of the ladder.

As the boys lay in that place they heard a drum beating in the head
chief's house, where a death feast was being held for them, and the head
chief's son said, "Let us go," but the other answered,

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "No, let us wait here until that feast is over."
Afterward the boys went down and watched the people come out with their
faces all blackened. They stood at a corner, but, as this dance is
always given in the evening, they were not seen.

Then the head chief's son thought, "I wish my younger brother would come
out," and sure enough, after all of the other people had gone, his
younger brother came out. He called to his brother saying, "Come here.
It is I," but the child was afraid and ran into the house instead. Then
the child said to his mother, "My brother and his friend are out here."
"Why do you talk like that?" asked his mother. "Don't you know that your
brother died some time ago?" And she became very angry. The child,
however, persisted, saying, "I know his voice, and I know him." His
mother was now very much disturbed, so the boy said, "I am going to go
out and bring in a piece of his shirt." "Go and do so," said his mother.
"Then I will believe you."

When the boy at last brought in a piece of his brother's shirt his
mother was convinced, and they sent word into all of the houses, first
of all into that of the second boy's parents, but they kept both with
them so that his parents could come there and rejoice over him. All of
the other people in that village also came to see them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 57. The Boy and the Giant](tmt081)
