[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt064)  [Next](tmt066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 41. THE IMAGE THAT CAME TO LIFE

A young chief on the Queen Charlotte islands married, and soon
afterwards his wife fell ill. Then he sent around everywhere for the
very best shamans. If there were a very fine shaman at a certain village
he would send a canoe there to bring him. None of them could help her,
however, and after she had been sick for a very long time she died.

Now the young chief felt very badly over the loss of his wife. He went
from place to place after the best carvers in order to have them carve
an image of his wife, but no one could make anything to look like her.
All this time there was a carver in his own village who could carve much
better than all the others. This man met him one day and said, "You are
going from village to village to have wood carved like your wife's face,
and you can not find anyone to do it, can you? I have seen your wife a
great deal walking along with you. I have never studied her face with
the idea that you might want some one to carve it, but I am going to try
if you will allow me."

Then the carver went after a piece of red cedar and began working upon
it. When he was through, he went to the young chief and said, "Now you
can come along and look at it." He had dressed it just as he used to see
the young woman dressed. So the chief went with him, and, when he got
inside, he saw his dead wife sitting there just as she used to look.
This made him very happy, and he took it home. Then he asked the carver,
"What do I owe you for making this?" and he replied, "Do as you please
about it." The carver had felt sorry to see how this chief was mourning
for his wife, so he said, "It is because I felt badly for you that I
made that. So don't pay me too much for it." He paid the carver very
well, however, both in slaves and in goods.

Now the chief dressed this image in his wife's clothes and her
marten-skin robe. He felt that his wife had come back to him and treated
the image just like her. One day, while he sat mourning very close to
the image, he felt it move. His wife had also been very fond of him. At
first he thought that the movement was only

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

his imagination, yet he examined it every day, for lie thought that at
some time it would come to life. When lie ate he always had the image
close to him.

After a while the whole village learned that he had this image and all
came in to see it. Many could not believe that it was not the woman
herself until they had examined it closely.

One day, after the chief had had it for a long, long time, he examined
the body and found it just like that of a human being. Still, although
it was alive, it could not move or speak. Some time later, however, the
image gave forth a sound from its chest like that of crackling wood, and
the man knew that it was ill. When he had some one move it away from the
place where it had been sitting they found a small red-cedar tree
growing there on top of the flooring. They left it until it grew to be
very large, and it is because of this that cedars on the Queen Charlotte
islands are so good. When people up this way look for red cedars and
find a good one they say, "This looks like the baby of the chief's
wife."

Every day the image of the young woman grew more like a human being,
and, when they heard the story, people from villages far and near came
in to look at it and at the young cedar tree growing there, at which
they were very much astonished. The woman moved around very little and
never got to talk, but her husband dreamed what she wanted to tell him.
It was through his dreams that he knew she was talking to him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 42. Djîyî'n](tmt066)
