[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt108)  [Next](tmt110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 85. THE FAITHLESS WIFE

A man of the Anq!a'kitân at Killisnoo lost his wife. When she was dying
she said to her husband, "When I die, don't bury me. Keep me out of the
ground." Bodies of common people used to be put into the ground for a
little while before they were burned, those of

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

high-caste persons being put into a house. So, when she died, instead of
burying her, he placed her body up on a high place. This woman knew,
however, that she was not going to die. She spoke as she did because she
was in love with the son of the chief. The chief's son was also in love
with her, and, when he knew that she was put away, he went there at
midnight when her husband was asleep, took her out, and carried her to
his own house where he kept her in the bedroom at the rear. The chief
was so fond of his son that he did everything the latter asked of him.
This was the only house in that town that had a fire in it at midnight,
and the people wondered what was the matter. The chief had his slaves
get breakfast for the young couple before others were up.

The man whose wife had left him had a little girl whom he would humor
very much, and she was in the habit of roaming from house to house
throughout the village. One morning very early he said to the little
girl, "Run out and get some fire." As the chief's house was the only one
in which she could see smoke, she ran there after some, and, as soon as
she entered, saw her mother sitting with the chief's son. As soon as her
mother saw her she hid her face, but the girl watched her closely. She
walked directly out with the fire, however, without speaking.

When the little girl reached home with it she said, "Father, my mother
is at that chief's house." "Which chief's house?" said her father. "The
chief that lives up on the hill." Then her father said, "What makes you
say that, child? Your mother has been dead for sometime." Then he took
her hand and said pityingly, "Poor child, your mother is dead." He began
to cry as he held the child's hand and then said, "I will go and see the
place where I put her." So he got another to accompany him, and they
brought the box down. It felt very light. When he opened it it was
empty. Then he thought to himself, "I am going to make certain of this."
About midnight he saw a fire at the chief's house. Then he climbed up on
top of it, looked down through the smoke hole, and saw his wife sitting
there playing with the chief's son. She looked very happy.

When the man got home he said to himself, "What can I do?" He thought,
"How can I become a wizard?" So he did everything to turn himself into a
wizard. He went among the graves, and played with the bodies and bones,
but could not become a wizard. Then he went out to an island in front of
the village and played with the bones of the dead people that were
there. Finally he got hold of two shoulder blades with which he fanned
and rubbed himself and all at once he fainted. Then he thought he would
try working them like wings, and sure, enough he began flying along very
rapidly. Now he determined to go to the place where his wife was living.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

First the man went up into the woods, procured very hard limbs and began
to split them. He made the points very sharp. Then he stuck them into
grease and burned it off in order to harden them. He took these along
with him and crawled up on top of the house. Then he flew down through
the smoke hole. He bewitched everyone in the house so that all slept
soundly, passed into the rear bedroom, and stuck the sticks into the
hearts of his wife and her lover so that they died.

Early next morning, when the slaves got up as usual to wait upon the
young people, they were kept waiting so long that they were surprised.
They thought that they were sleeping very late. Finally they went to see
what was the matter and saw them lying in each others' arms with the
blood flowing from their mouths. The news was soon all over the village.

Early that same morning the woman's former husband took his gambling
sticks and came out to gamble. He pretended that he knew nothing about
what had happened. When persons came to gamble with him he shouted out
as people do when they are gambling, "These are the sharp sticks. These
are the sharp sticks." People wondered why he said it, and much
whispering went on while they gambled. The man looked very happy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 86. The Woman Who Married the Dead Man](tmt110)
