[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmt103)  [Next](tmt105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 80. ORPHAN

An orphan girl in the Tlingit country named SAhâ'n (Orphan) was adopted
by some high-caste people so that she might be a companion to their only
daughter. She was very fond of going to the creek to get water, and the
chief's daughter always accompanied her. Every time they went the
chief's daughter would drink water from this creek against the protests
of her foster sister, and it made her very unlucky. When she married
into another high-caste family her husband became very poor on account
of her and finally abandoned her. Then he married Orphan, who was very
bright and knew how to take care of things, and she made him rich. She
was quiet and paid a great deal of attention to her husband. The village
people were also very much pleased with her, for after her husband
married her, they lived off of him.

Everything that this girl had was good, her dishes and spoons being all
set with abalone shell. She had four adopted brothers, of whom the elder
two were rich but the younger two very poor and unlucky. The former she
would always treat well because she knew that they were bright and able
to take care of things, and she always gave them food in her fine
dishes. When she invited her poor brothers her husband would say, "Go
and get your dishes now and let your brothers eat off of them," but she
always answered, "No, I don't want to let them use my good dishes. They
might leave the marks of poverty on them."

After Orphan had lived some time in luxury, however, her husband died,
and, as was customary, her husband's relations took the property all
away from her. She became as poor as. she had been before. Luck went
against her because she had treated her poor brothers so meanly. That is
why, nowadays, when a rich person has a poor brother he always treats
him just as well as the rich one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 81. The Dead Basket-Maker](tmt105)
