[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](elpg02)  [Next](elpg04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PIONEER IMMIGRANTS WERE FARMERS AND TRADESMEN

Farmers Were Kept Poor.--The Pennsylvania German farmers were good
farmers by practically all standards. They were descended through thirty
generations of tillers of the soil. All things being equal in their Old
World haunts they would have been on the average well-to-do. But the
wars kept them poor, or, if they were on the wrong side of the political
or religious "fence" they again were likely to be mulct of what they
had.

Travel, being what it was in those days, was expensive, and the more so
because unscrupulous ship owners found they could get the price, either
from the pioneer or some one who would pay for this passage.

Those who undertook to pay off their passage under a bond which
sometimes took twenty years to redeem, would be termed "redemptioners."
This took on a form of "white servitude" in the early days, and much of
interest may be read about the subject.

Fine Soil Ready in Pennsylvania.--It has been pointed out that the
situation greeting the newcomers was pretty nearly made to order. There
was little barrenness; fertilization was not necessary in the same
degree that it was in Germany, where tilling for many years required
more attention.

The farmers were smart enough to rotate their crops; they grazed cattle
for fattening and got back fertilizer quite precious. They fed their
horses well, so that they could do twice as much work in a day as horses
underfed; they were kept warm in winter, and were excused from doing
extra work, such as dragging logs, or pleasure driving.

"Swiss Barns" Erected.--The early pioneers first cleared sufficient land
to get a start on farming; then came an immense barn, well built, of the
"Swiss" type. The first barns were built of logs. Later there were some
of stone, then frame or brick. Interesting features of some of the barns
included the stars on the sides and ends; also the ventilator designs
obtained by omissions of bricks which formed the designs, or cut-outs in
the odd shapes of hearts, diamonds, quarter-moons, clubs, etc.

Most barns were double-deckers, and allowed for threshing-floors, mows
and lofts for storing hay. The complete barns had a granary on the upper
floor, a cellar under the drive-way, in addition to the usual stalls for
horses and cattle. They ranged from 50 to 60 feet wide, and 60 to 120
feet long, with an overhang of 8 to 10 feet beyond the stable doors.

Originally barns and houses had thatched roofs; in later years they were
shingled, slated, or tinned. If painted, it generally was of deep red,
for lasting qualities.

Lumber could be obtained on the spot; likewise good building stone might
be found nearby, needing but the blows of the stone mason to dress them
for use. But it might be a decade or two until they got around to the
building of a substantial house.

Houses built by the pioneers were generally of logs, if the builder was
pioneering some miles away from centers of population. These could be
built in a few days after a clearing was made.

Two-story houses were the general rule at the outset, with the familiar
two-and-a-half-story to follow. The first with pitched roof, and with
cornices run across the gables and around the first story.

Types of Construction.--The English and Scotch fashion was to build the
chimney at the gable-end, but the German style was to bring it right up
through the center of the house. Most of them seemed to be spacious,
with open fire-places in most rooms, and with deep-set window and door
frames. Window weights were used quite early.

Travelers usually note on these older houses the odd inscriptions,
verses, dates or initials found well up on the gable wall. This is a
hangover from customs in Germany and Switzerland.

There are many variations held by people today as to the meanings of the
decorations on barns, certain markings found here and there on houses
and necessary outbuildings; even on cooking utensils, etc.

Gaudy Colors and Designs.--It will hardly suffice to say that the farmer
liked to have his barn look attractive, and to be in good state of
repair, as a sign of his progress and success; nor that his wife was
odd, in that she had a lot of dishes with gaudy decorations of birds,
flowers, alphabets, scenes and verses painted thereon; nor that the good
housewife had these same decorations on her bed linens, and her
furniture as well.

Most of the decorative schemes came from the Old World, a throw-off, or
hand-me-down from ancient Persian and Chinese ideas. We are informed
that German houses today have on their walls counterparts of many of the
ideas expressed by our own native artists with a slight touch or blend
of native instinct which do not in the least detract from the value or
interest of the items in question.

The farmers were not alone the great builders. We had the well-known
preachers and teachers; scientists and astronomers; inventors and many
others. A catalog of German firsts in Pennsylvania is an imposing array
of talent and accomplishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Language and Education at First Neglected, Then Promoted](elpg04)
