<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Dunsany](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](tbow08)  [Next](tbow10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002M3TLAI/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Wonder*, by Lord Dunsany, \[1912\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f07"></span>

MISS CUBBIDGE AND THE DRAGON OF ROMANCE

This tale is told in the balconies of Belgrave Square and among the
towers of Pont Street; men sing it at evening in the Brompton Road.

Little upon her eighteenth birthday thought Miss Cubbidge, of Number 12A
Prince of Wales' Square, that before another year had gone its way she
would lose the sight of that unshapely oblong that was so long her home.
And, had you told her further that within that year all trace of that
so-called square, and of the day when her father was elected by a
thumping majority to share in the guidance of the destinies of the
empire, should utterly fade from her memory, she would merely have said
in that affected voice of hers, "Go to!"

There was nothing about it in the daily Press, the policy of her
father's party had no provision for it, there was no hint of it in
conversation at evening parties to which Miss Cubbidge went: there was
nothing to warn her at all that a loathsome dragon with golden scales
that rattled as he went would have come up clean out of the prime of
romance and gone by night (so far as we know) through Hammersmith, and
come to Ardle Mansion, and then had turned to his left, which of course
brought him to Miss Cubbidge's father's house.

There sat Miss Cubbidge at evening on her balcony quite alone, waiting
for her father to be made a baronet. She was wearing walking-boots and a
hat and a lownecked evening dress; for a painter was but just now
painting her portrait and neither she nor the painter saw anything odd
in the strange combination. She did not notice the roar of the dragon's
golden scales, nor distinguish above the manifold lights of London the
small, red glare of his eyes. He suddenly lifted his head, a blaze of
gold, over the balcony; he did not appear a yellow dragon then, for his
glistening scales reflected the beauty that London puts upon her only at
evening and night. She screamed, but to no knight, nor knew what knight
to call on, nor guessed where were the dragons' overthrowers of far,
romantic days, nor what mightier game they chased, or what wars they
waged; perchance they were busy even then arming for Armageddon.

\* \* \* \* \*

Out of the balcony of her father's house in Prince of Wales' Square, the
painted dark-green balcony that grew blacker every year, the dragon
lifted Miss Cubbidge and spread his rattling wings, and London fell away
like an old fashion. And England fell away, and the smoke of its
factories, and the round material world that goes humming round the sun
vexed and pursued by time, until there appeared the eternal and ancient
lands of Romance lying low by mystical seas.

You had not pictured Miss Cubbidge stroking the golden head of one of
the dragons of song with one hand idly, while with the other she
sometime played with pearls brought up from lonely places of the sea.
They filled huge haliotis shells with pearls and laid them there beside
her, they brought her emeralds which she set to flash among the tresses
of her long black hair, they brought her threaded sapphires for her
cloak: all this the princes of fable did and the elves and the gnomes of
myth. And partly she still lived, and partly she was one with long-ago
and with those sacred tales that nurses tell, when all their children
are good, and evening has come, and the fire is burning well, and the
soft pat-pat of the snowflakes on the pane is like the furtive tread of
fearful things in old, enchanted woods. If at first she missed those
dainty novelties among which she was reared, the old, sufficient song of
the mystical sea singing of faery lore at first soothed and at last
consoled her. Even, she forgot those advertisements of pills that are so
dear to England; even, she forgot political cant and the things that one
discusses and the things that one does not, and had perforce to contend
herself with seeing sailing by huge golden-laden galleons with treasure
for Madrid, and the merry skull-and-cross-bones of the pirateers, and
the tiny nautilus setting out to sea, and ships of heroes trafficking in
romance or of princes seeking for enchanted isles.

It was not by chains that the dragon kept her there, but by one of the
spells of old. To one to whom the facilities of the daily Press had for
so long been accorded spells would have palled—you would have said—and
galleons after a time and all things out-of-date. After a time. But
whether the centuries passed her or whether the years or whether no time
at all, she did not know. If any thing indicated the passing of time it
was the rhythm of elfin horns blowing upon the heights. If the centuries
went by her the spell that bound her gave her also perennial youth, and
kept alight for ever the lantern by her side, and saved from decay the
marble palace facing the mystical sea. And if no time went by her there
at all, her single moment on those marvellous coasts was turned as it
were to a crystal reflecting a thousand scenes. If it was all a dream,
it was a dream that knew no morning and no fading away. The tide roamed
on and whispered of master and of myth, while near that captive lady,
asleep in his marble tank the golden dragon dreamed: and a little way
out from the coast all that the dragon dreamed showed faintly in the
mist that lay over the sea. He never dreamed of any rescuing knight. So
long as he dreamed, it was twilight; but when he came up nimbly out of
his tank night fell and starlight glistened on the dripping, golden
scales.

There he and his captive either defeated Time or never encountered him
at all; while, in the world we know, raged Roncesvalles or battles yet
to be—I know not to what part of the shore of Romance he bore her.
Perhaps she became one of those princesses of whom fable loves to tell,
but let it suffice that there she lived by the sea: and kings ruled, and
Demons ruled, and kings came again, and many cities returned to their
native dust, and still she abided there, and still her marble palace
passed not away nor the power that there was in the dragon's spell.

And only once did there ever come to her a message from the world that
of old she knew. It came in a pearly ship across the mystical sea; it
was from an old school-friend that she had had in Putney, merely a note,
no more, in a little, neat, round hand: it said, "It is not Proper for
you to be there alone."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Quest of the Queen's Tears](tbow10.md)

</div>
