[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pdm03) 
[Next](pdm05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1602063931/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pythagoras and the Delphic Mysteries*, by Edouard Shuré, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

### CHAPTER III

#### THE TEMPLE OF DELPHI—THE SCIENCE OF APOLLO—THEORY OF DIVINATION—THE PYTHONESS THEOCLEA

FROM the plain of Phocis the traveller mounts the smiling meadows
bordering the banks of the Pleistus to plunge into a winding valley shut
in between lofty mountains. At every step the way becomes narrower and
the country more sublime and deserted. Finally a circle of rugged
mountains, crowned with wild-looking peaks, a veritable storehouse of
electricity, over which storms often raged, is reached. Suddenly, far up
the sombre gorge appears the town of Delphi, like an eagle's nest, on a
rock surrounded by precipices and dominated by the two peaks of
Parnassus. From the distance the bronze Victories are seen sparkling in
the light, as well as the brazen horses, the innumerable statues of
gold, marshalled along the sacred path and arranged like a guard of
heroes and gods round the Doric temple of Phoebus Apollo.

This was the most sacred spot in Greece. Here,

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the Pythoness prophesied and the Amphictyons assembled; here, the
different Hellenic peoples had built round the sanctuary chapels
containing treasured offerings. Here, processions of men, women, and
children, coming from afar, mounted the sacred path to greet the God of
Light. From time immemorial religion had consecrated Delphi to the
veneration of the people. Its central situation in Hellas, its rock
sheltered from profane hands and easy to defend, had contributed to this
result. The place was calculated to strike the imagination, for a
singular quality gave it great prestige. In a cavern behind the temple
was a cleft in the rock from which issued a cold, vapoury mist,
inducing, it was said, a state of inspiration and ecstasy. Plutarch
relates that in by-gone times a shepherd, when seated by the side of
this cleft, began to prophesy. At first he was looked upon as mad, but
when his predictions became realized, people began to investigate. The
priests took possession of the spot and consecrated it to the divinity.
Hence the institution of the Pythoness, who was seated above the cleft
on a tripod. The vapours exhaling from the abyss occasioned convulsions
and strange crises, provoking in her that *second sight* noticed in
certain somnambulists. Eschylus, whose affirmation is not without
weight, for he was the son of a priest of

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eleusis, and an
initiate himself, tells us in his *Eumenides*, by the mouth of the
Pythoness, that Delphi had first been consecrated to the Earth, then to
Themis (Justice), afterwards to Phœbe (the interceding moon), and
finally to Apollo, the solar god. In temple symbolism each of these
names represents long periods, and embraces centuries of time. The fame
of Delphi, however, dates from Apollo. Jupiter, according to the poets,
wishing to find the centre of the earth, started two eagles in their
flight from east and west, and they met at Delphi. Whence comes this
prestige, this world-wide and unchallenged authority which constituted
Apollo as the god of Greece *par excellence*, and now makes the glory of
his name inexplicable to us?

History is dumb on this important point. Question orators, poets, and
philosophers, they will only give you superficial explanations. The real
answer to this question remained the secret of the temple. Let us try to
fathom it.

In Orphic thought, Dionysos and Apollo were two different revelations of
the same divinity. Dionysos represented esoteric truth, the foundation
and interior of things, open to initiates alone. He held the mysteries
of life, past and future existences, the relations between soul and
body, heaven and earth. Apollo personified the same truth applied to

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

life on earth and social order. The inspirer of poetry, medicine, and
laws, he was science by divination, beauty by art, peace among nations
by justice, and harmony between soul and body by purification. In a
word, to the initiate Dionysos signified nothing less than the divine
spirit in evolution in the universe; and Apollo, the manifestation
thereof to mankind on earth. The people had been made to understand this
by a legend. The priests had told them that, in the time of Orpheus,
Bacchus and Apollo had vied with one another for the tripod of Delphi.
Bacchus had willingly given it up to his brother, and withdrawn to one
of the peaks of Parnassus, where the Theban women were wont to celebrate
his mysteries. In reality the two sons of Jupiter divided between
themselves the empire of the world. The one reigned over the mysterious
Beyond, the other over the World of the Living.

So that we find in Apollo the solar Logos, the universal Word, the
mighty Mediator, the Vishnu of the Hindus, the Mithras of the Persians,
and the Horus of the Egyptians. The old ideas of Asiatic esoterism,
however, took on, in the legend of Apollo, a plastic beauty, and an
incisive splendour which made them penetrate the more deeply into human
consciousness, like the shafts of the God.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "White-winged
serpents springing forth from his golden bow," says Eschylus.

Apollo springs forth from the mighty night at Delos; all the goddesses
greet his birth; he walks and takes up his bow and lyre, his locks
stream in the air and his quiver rattles on his shoulder; the sea
quivers, and the whole island shines with his glory scattered abroad in
floods of golden flame. This is the epiphany of divine light, which by
its august presence creates order, splendour, and harmony, of which
poetry is the marvellous echo. The god goes to Delphi and pierces with
his arrows a monstrous serpent which was ravaging and laying waste the
land, he purifies the country and establishes the temple; the image of
the victory of this divine light over darkness and evil. In ancient
religions, the serpent symbolized at once the fatal circle of life and
the evil resulting therefrom. And yet, from this life once understood
and overcome, springs forth knowledge. Apollo, slayer of the serpent, is
the symbol of the initiate who pierces nature by science, tames it by
his will, and breaking the Karmic circle of the flesh mounts aloft in
spiritual splendour, whilst the broken fragments of human animality lie
writhing in the sand. For this reason Apollo is the master of expiation,
of the purification of soul and body. Bespattered with

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the monster's blood, he performed expiation, purified himself during an
eight years’ exile beneath the bitter, health-giving laurels of the vale
of Tempe.—Apollo, trainer of men, likes to take up his abode in their
midst, he is pleased to be in towns with the youths and young men, at
contests of poetry and the palaestra, though he remains only for a time.
In autumn he returns to his own land, the home of the Hyperboreans. This
is the mysterious people of luminous and transparent souls who dwell in
the eternal dawn of perfect felicity. Here are his true priests, his
beloved priestesses. He lives with them in strong, intimate communion,
and when he wishes to make mankind a royal gift, he brings back from the
country of the Hyperboreans one of those mighty, radiant souls who is
born on earth to teach and delight mortals. He himself returns to Delphi
every spring, when poems and hymns are sung in his honour. Visible to
none but initiates he comes in dazzling Hyperborean glory, in a chariot
drawn by sweetly-singing swans. Again he takes up his abode in the
sanctuary, where the Pythoness speaks forth his oracles, and sages and
poets listen. Then is heard the song of nightingales, the fountain of
Castalia scatters silver spray on every hand, dazzling light and
celestial music penetrate the heart of man and reach the very veins of
nature.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

In this legend of the Hyperboreans may be found much light thrown on the
esoteric basis of the Apollo myth. The land of the Hyperboreans is the
Beyond, the empyrean of victorious souls, whose astral dawns light up
its many-coloured zones. Apollo himself personifies the immaterial and
intelligible light of which the sun is merely the physical image, and
from which flows down all truth. The wonderful swans which bring him are
poets and divine geniuses, messengers of his mighty solar soul, leaving
behind them flashes of light and strains of glorious music. Hyperborean
Apollo, accordingly, personifies the descent of heaven on to earth, the
incarnation of spiritual beauty in flesh and blood, the inflow of
transcendent truth by inspiration and divination.

It is now the moment to raise the golden veil of legend and enter the
temple itself. How was divination practised therein? Here we touch upon
the secrets of Apollonian science and of the mysteries of Delphi.

In antiquity, a strong tie united divination to the solar cults, and
here we have the golden key to all the so-called magic mysteries.

The worship of Aryan humanity from the beginning of civilization was
directed towards the sun as the source of light, heat, and life. When,
however,

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

the thought of the sages rose from the phenomenon to the cause, behind
this sensible fire, this visible light, they formed the concept of an
immaterial fire, an intelligible light. They identified the form with
the male principle, the creative spirit or intellectual essence of the
universe, and the latter with its female principle, its formative soul,
its plastic substance. This intuition dates back to time immemorial. The
conception I speak of is connected with the most ancient mythologies. It
circulates in the Vedic hymns under the form of Agni, the universal fire
which penetrates all things. It blossoms forth in the religion of
Zoroaster, the esoteric part of which is represented by the cult of
Mithras. Mithras is the male fire and Mitra the female light. Zoroaster
formally states that the Eternal, by means of the living Word, created
the heavenly light, the seed of Ormuzd, the principle of material light
and material fire. For the initiate of Mithras the sun is only a rude
reflection of this light. In his obscure grotto, whose vault is painted
with stars, he invokes the sun of grace, the fire of love, conqueror of
evil, reconciler of Ormuzd and Ahriman, purifier and mediator, who
dwells in the soul of the holy prophets. In the crypts of Egypt, the
initiates seek this same sun under the name of Osiris. When Hermes asks
to be allowed to con-

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

template the origin of things, at first he feels himself plunged into
the ethereal waves of a delicious light, in which move all living forms.
Then, plunging into the darkness of dense matter, he hears a voice which
he recognizes as *the voice of light*. At the same time fire darts forth
from the depths, immediately all is light and chaos becomes order. In
the *Book of the Dead* of the Egyptians the souls journey painfully
towards that light in the barque of Isis. Moses fully adopted this
doctrine in Genesis: "Elohim said: Let there be light; and there was
light." Now the creation of this light precedes that of the sun and
stars. This means that, in the order of principles and cosmogony,
intelligible precedes material light. The Greeks, who moulded into human
form and dramatized the most abstract ideas, expressed the same doctrine
in the myth of Hyperborean Apollo.

Consequently the human mind, by inner contemplation of the universe,
from the point of view of the soul and the intelligence, came to
conceive of an intelligible light, an imponderable element serving as an
intermediary between matter and spirit. It would be easy to show that
natural philosophers of modern times insensibly draw somewhere near the
same conclusion along an opposite path, *i.e.* by searching for the
constitution of matter and seeing

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the impossibility of explaining it by itself. Even in the sixteenth
century, Paracelsus, whilst studying the chemical combinations and
metamorphoses of bodies, went so far as to admit of a universal occult
agent by means of which they are brought about. The natural philosophers
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, who conceived of the
universe as being a dead machine, believed in the absolute void of
celestial space. Yet when it was discovered that light is not the
emission of a radiant matter, but rather the vibration of an
imponderable element, one was obliged to admit that the whole of space
is filled by an infinitely subtile fluid penetrating all bodies and
through which waves of heat and light are transmitted. Thus a return was
made to the Greek ideas of natural philosophy and theosophy. Newton, who
had spent his whole life in studying the movements of the heavenly
bodies, went even farther than this. He called this ether *sensorium
Dei*, or the brain of God, *i.e.* the organ by which divine thought acts
in the infinitely great as well as in the infinitely small. In emitting
this idea, which he regarded as necessary to explain the simple rotation
of the heavenly bodies, the great natural philosopher had embarked on
the open sea of esoteric philosophy. The very ether Newton's thought
found in space Paracelsus had discovered

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

at the bottom of his alembics, and had named it astral light. Now this
imponderable fluid, which is everywhere present, penetrating all things,
this subtile but indispensable agent, this light, invisible to our eyes,
but which is at the bottom of all phosphorescence and scintillation, has
been proved to exist by a German natural philosopher in a series of
well-appointed experiments. Reichenbach had noticed that subjects of
very sensitive nerve fibre, when placed in a perfectly dark room in
front of a magnet, saw at its two ends strong rays of red, yellow, and
blue light. Sometimes these rays vibrated with an undulatory movement.
He continued his experiments with all kinds of bodies, especially with
crystals. Luminous emanations were seen, by sensitive subjects, round
all these bodies. Around the heads of men placed in the dark room they
saw white rays; from their fingers issued small flames. In the first
portion of their sleep somnambulists sometimes see their magnetizer with
these same signs. Pure astral light appears only in a condition of lofty
ecstasy, but it is polarized in all bodies, combines with all
terrestrial fluids and plays diverse *rôles* in electricity, in
terrestrial and animal magnetism. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) The

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

interest of Reichenbach's experiments is that they make precise the
limits and transition from physical to astral vision capable of leading
on to spiritual vision. They also enable us to obtain a faint glimpse of
the infinite subtilties of imponderable matter. Along this path there is
nothing to prevent our conceiving it as so fluid, so subtile and
penetrating, that it becomes in some way homogeneous with spirit,
serving the latter as a perfect garment.

We have just seen that modern natural philosophy, in order to explain
the world, has been obliged to recognize an imponderable, universal
agent, that it has even proved its presence, and, in this way, without
knowing it, has fallen in with the notions of ancient theosophies. Let
us now try to define the nature and function of cosmic fluid in
accordance with the philosophy of occultism in all ages. On this main
principle of cosmogony, Zoroaster is in agreement with Heraclitus,
Pythagoras with Saint Paul, the Kabbalists with Paracelsus. Cybele-Maïa
reigns everywhere, the mighty soul of the world, the vibrating and
plastic substance which the breath of the creative spirit uses at its
will. Her oceans of ether serve to cement together all the worlds. She
is the great mediator between the invisible and the visible, between
spirit and matter,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

between the within and the without of the universe. Condensed in
enormous masses in the atmosphere beneath the action of the sun, she
flashes forth in a thunderbolt. Absorbed by the earth she circulates in
magnetic currents. Subtilized in the nervous system of the animal she
transmits her will to the limbs, her sensations to the brain. More than
that, this subtile fluid forms living organisms similar to material
bodies. It serves as substance to the astral body of the soul, a garment
of light which the spirit is ever weaving for itself. The fluid becomes
transformed, it rarefies or densifies according to the souls it clothes
or the worlds it envelops. Not only does it embody spirit and
spiritualize matter in its living bosom, it reflects in a perpetual
mirage both things and the thoughts and wills of mankind. The strength
and duration of these images is in proportion to the intensity of the
will producing them. And, in truth, there is no .other means of
explaining thought suggestion and transmission at a distance, that
principle of magic now-a-days acknowledged and recognized by
science. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) Thus in the astral light the
past of the worlds trembles in vague images, and the future is there
also, with the living

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

souls inevitably destined to descend into flesh. This is the meaning of
the veil of Isis and the mantle of Cybele, into which all beings are
woven.

It is now seen that the theosophical doctrine of the astral light is
identical with the secret doctrine of the solar Word in the religions of
Greece and the East. It is also seen how closely allied this doctrine is
to that of divination. The astral light is there revealed as the
universal medium of the phenomena of vision and of ecstasy which it
explains. It is at once the vehicle which transmits the movements of
thought, and the living mirror in which the soul contemplates the images
of the material and spiritual world. Once transported into this element,
the spirit of the seer leaves corporeal conditions. For him the measure
of time and space is changed. In some way he participates in the
ubiquity of the universal fluid. For him opaque matter becomes
transparent, and the soul, disengaging itself from the body and rising
in its own light, penetrates, in a state of ecstasy, into the spiritual
world, sees souls clothed in their ethereal bodies and communicates with
them. All the initiates of former times had a clear notion of this
*second sight*, or direct spiritual vision. Witness Eschylus, who puts
into the mouth of the shade of Clytemnestra:

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Look at these
wounds, thy spirit can see them; when one is asleep, the spirit
possesses a more piercing vision; in broad daylight, the eyes of mortals
see but a little way."

Let me add that this theory of clairvoyance and ecstasy is in wonderful
agreement with the numerous experiments, scientifically carried out by
savants and doctors of modern times, on lucid somnambulists and
clairvoyants of every kind <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) From these
contemporary facts I shall endeavour briefly to characterize the
successive psychic conditions from simple clairvoyance to cataleptic
ecstasy.

The state of clairvoyance, as is seen by thousands

\(1\) *Letters on Animal Magnetism*, by William Gregory, London, 1850.
Gregory was a professor of chemistry at the University of Edinburgh. His
book is a profound study of the phenomena of animal magnetism, from
suggestion to vision at a distance and lucid clairvoyance, on subjects
observed by himself, in accordance with scientific method, and with
minute exactness.

\(2\) *Die mystischen Erscheinungen der menschlichen Natur*, von
Maximilian Perty, Leipzig, 1872. Perty is a professor of philosophy and
medicine at the University of Berne. His book presents an immense
repertory of all such occult phenomena as have historical value. The
extremely remarkable chapter on clairvoyance (Schlafwachen), Volume I.,
contains twenty accounts of female and five of male clairvoyants,
related by the doctors who treated the cases. That of Weiner, treated by
the author, is most curious. See also the treatises on magnetism by
Dupotet and Deleuze, and the very strange book, *Die Seherin von
Prévorst*, by Justinus Kerner.}

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of well-established facts, is a psychic one, differing as greatly from
sleep as from a waking condition. The intellectual faculties of the
clairvoyant, far from diminishing, increase in marvellous fashion. His
memory is more correct, his imagination more active, his intelligence
more alert. The main point, in a word, is that we have here developed a
new sense, which is no longer corporeal, but rather belongs to the soul.
Not only are the thoughts of the magnetizer transmitted to him as in the
simple phenomenon of suggestion, which itself is outside the physical
plane, but the clairvoyant even reads the thoughts of those present,
sees through walls, penetrates hundreds of miles into homes where he has
never been, and reads the private life of people he does not know. His
eyes are closed, incapable of seeing anything, but his spirit sees
farther and better than his open eyes and seems to travel about freely
in space. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) In a word, though
clairvoyance may be abnormal from the bodily point of view, it is a
normal and superior state from the point of view of the spirit. The
consciousness has become deeper, the vision wider. The ego remains the
same, but it has passed over to a higher plane, where the vision, freed
from the coarse organs of the body, embraces

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

and penetrates a vaster horizon. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) It is
to be noted that certain somnambulists, when submitting to the passes of
the magnetizer, feel themselves flooded with increasingly dazzling
light, whilst the awaking seems to them an unpleasant return to
darkness.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

Suggestion, thought reading, and distant vision are facts which already
prove the independent existence of the soul, and transport us above the
physical plane of the universe without making us leave it altogether.
Clairvoyance, however, has infinite varieties and a scale of different
states far wider than that of the waking condition. In proportion as the
scale is mounted the phenomena become rarer and more extraordinary. I
will mention only the principal stages. *Retrospection* is a vision of
past events preserved in the astral light and revived by the sympathy of
the seer. *Divination*, properly so called, is a problematical vision of
things to come either by introspection of the thoughts of the living
which contain future actions in germ, or by the occult influence of
superior spirits which unfold the future in living images before the
soul of the clairvoyant. In both cases they are projections of thoughts
into the astral light. Finally *ecstasy* is defined as a vision of the
spiritual world, where good or evil spirits appear to the seer in human
form and communicate with him. The soul seems really to be transported
out of the body, which life has almost left, and which stiffens into a
state of catalepsy resembling death. From what those who have been in a
condition of sublime ecstasy tell us, nothing in the universe can
express

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the beauty and splendour of these visions, or the sentiment of an
ineffable fusion with the divine essence which they bring back, a very
transport of light and music. The reality of these visions may be
doubted. It must, nevertheless, be added that if the soul, in the
average state of clairvoyance, has a correct perception of distant
places and of absent ones, it is logical to admit that, in its loftiest
exaltation, it may have the vision of a higher and an immaterial
reality.

In my opinion, it will be the task of the future to restore to the
transcendent faculties of the human soul their dignity and social
function, by reorganizing them under the control of science and on the
basis of a religion which is truly universal, open to all truths. Then
science, regenerated by real faith and the spirit of love, will, with
open eyes, mount aloft to those spheres in which speculative philosophy
gropes about with bandaged eyes. Yes, science will become clear-sighted
and redeeming in her mission, just in proportion as the consciousness
and love of humanity increase in her. Perhaps it is through "the gate of
sleep and dreams," as Homer said, that divine Psyche, banished from our
civilized life and weeping in silence beneath her veil, will regain
possession of her altars.

Anyhow, the phenomena of clairvoyance, studied

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

from every aspect by present-day savants and doctors, throw an
altogether new light on the *rôle* of divination in antiquity and on a
host of apparently supernatural phenomena, with which the annals of
every nation and people are filled. Of course, a distinction must be
made between legend and history, hallucination and real vision. Still,
the experimental psychology of our times teaches us not to reject, in a
body, facts which fall within human possibility, but rather to
investigate them from the point of view of well-ascertained laws. If
clairvoyance is a faculty of the soul, we may no longer simply consign
prophets, oracles, and sybils to the domain of superstition. Divination
has really been known and practised in temples of old, with fixed
principles and a social and religious end in view. The comparative study
of religions and esoteric traditions shows that these principles were
the same everywhere, although their application may have varied
infinitely. What has discredited the art of divination is that its
corruption has given rise to the worst abuses, and that its glorious
manifestations are possible only in beings of exceptional purity.

Divination, as practised at Delphi, was founded on the principles we
have just set forth, the inner organization of the temple corresponded
thereto.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As in the great
temples of Egypt, it consisted of an art and a science. The art
consisted in penetrating the far-away past and future by clairvoyance or
prophetic ecstasy; the science, in calculating the future in accordance
with the laws of universal evolution. Art and science checked one
another. All I will say of this science, called genethlialogy by the
ancients, and of which the astrology of the middle ages is only an
imperfectly understood fragment, is that it took for granted the
esoteric encyclopedia as applied to the future of peoples and
individuals. Though very useful in showing the direction things were
taking, it was always of very doubtful application. Only the very
loftiest minds knew how to use it. Pythagoras had thoroughly mastered it
in Egypt, but in Greece it was practised with a less thorough or clear
understanding. On the other hand, clairvoyance and prophecy had made
considerable progress.

It is well known that this art was practised in Delphi through the
agency of women, both young and old. They were called Pythonesses, and
played the passive *rôle* of clairvoyant somnambulists. Their oracles,
often obscure, were interpreted, translated, and arranged by the priests
in accordance with their own lights. Modern historians have seen in the
institution of Delphi scarcely anything

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

more than the exploitation of superstition by intelligent charlatans.
Besides the assent, however, given by the whole of philosophic antiquity
to the Delphic science of divination, several oracles related by
Herodotus, such as those regarding Croesus and the battle of Salamis,
speak in its favour. Doubtless their art had its beginning, its
condition of prosperity, and its decay. Charlatanism and corruption
exercised their demoralizing influence in the end, as we see in the case
of king Cleomenes, who bribed the high priestess of Delphi to deprive
Demaratus of his throne. Plutarch wrote a treatise inquiring into the
reasons for the decline and extinction of the oracles; this degeneracy
was felt to be a misfortune throughout all classes of antiquity. At
first, divination was practised with a degree of religious sincerity and
scientific thoroughness which raised it to the height of a real
ministration. On the pediment of the temple could be read the
inscription: "Know thyself," and another one above the entrance door:
"Let no one enter here with impure hands." These words explained to all
corners that earthly passions, falsehood and hypocrisy were not to pass
the threshold of the sanctuary, that within, in awe-inspiring solemnity,
reigned divine Truth.

Pythagoras reached Delphi only after having

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

visited all the temples of Greece. He had stayed with Epimenides in the
sanctuary of Idaean Jupiter; he had been present at the Olympic games,
and presided over the mysteries of Eleusis, where the hierophant had
given up his place to him. Everywhere had he been received as a master,
and now he was expected at Delphi. Here the art of divination was in a
languishing condition, and Pythagoras wished to restore its former
prestige and might. Accordingly he went there not so much to consult
Apollo as to enlighten his interpreters and revive their enthusiasm and
energy. Through them his influence would mould the soul of Greece and
prepare a future for the land.

Fortunately he found in the temple a marvellous instrument reserved for
him, to all appearance, by the hand of Providence.

Young Theoclea belonged to the college of the priestesses of Apollo. She
sprang from one of those families in which the priestly dignity is
hereditary. Her childhood had been fed on the mighty impressions
imparted by the sanctuary, the ceremonies, pæans, and *fêtes* of Pythian
and Hyperborean Apollo. Evidently she was one of those maidens born with
an instinctive abhorrence for the things which attracted others. They
love not Ceres and fear Venus, for the heavy atmosphere of earth

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

troubles them, and the vague glimpse they have obtained of physical love
seems to them the rape of the soul, the pollution of their undefiled,
virginal being. On the other hand, they are strangely sensitive to
mysterious currents, to astral influences. When the moon was shedding
her soft beams on the sombre groves near the fountain of Castalia,
Theoclea would see white forms gliding by. She heard voices in open
daylight. On exposing herself to the rays of the rising sun, their
vibration threw her into a kind of ecstasy, during which she heard the
singing of invisible choirs. At the same time she was quite indifferent
to popular superstition and idolatry; a feeling of horror overcame her
at the sacrifices of animals. She spoke to no one regarding the
apparitions which disturbed her sleep, feeling with clairvoyant instinct
that the priests of Apollo were not in possession of that supreme light
she needed. The latter, however, had fixed on her with the object of
persuading her to become Pythoness. She felt herself attracted by a
higher world to which she had not the key. What were these gods who
manifested themselves to her in vibrations which troubled her being, and
to whom she owed her inspiration? This she would know before giving
herself up to them, for great souls need to see clearly even in
abandoning themselves to divine powers.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

With what a deep thrill, with how mysterious a presentiment the soul of
Theoclea must have been stirred when she saw Pythagoras for the first
time, and heard his eloquent voice resound among the columns of the
sanctuary of Apollo! She felt the presence of the initiator for whom she
was waiting, she recognized her master. She wished to know; knowledge
would come by him; he would make this inner world speak, this world she
bore within herself!—He, on his side, must have recognized in her, with
sure and penetrating glance, the living, thrilling soul he was seeking,
to become the interpreter of his thoughts in the temple and instil
therein a new spirit. No sooner had their eyes met, their lips spoken,
than an invisible chain bound the sage of Samos to the young priestess,
who listened to him without a word, drinking in his utterances with
eager, attentive eyes. Some one has said that a profound vibration
enables poet and lyre to recognize one another as they approach. Thus
did Pythagoras and Theoclea recognize one another.

At sunrise, Pythagoras had long conversations with the priests of
Apollo, ordained saints and prophets. He requested that the young
priestess should be received by them, so that he might initiate her into
his secret teaching and prepare her for her mission. Accordingly she was
permitted to follow the lessons given daily in the sanctuary by

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

the master. Pythagoras was now in the prime of life. He wore a white
robe, girdled in Egyptian fashion; a purple band was wrapped round his
majestic brow. When he spoke, his grave, mild eyes were fastened on his
interlocutor, enveloping him in a warm, tender light. The very
atmosphere seemed to become lighter and electric with intelligence.

The conversations of the Sage of Samos with the highest representatives
of the Greek religion were of the utmost importance. It was not merely a
question of divination and inspiration, the future of Greece and the
destiny of the whole world were at stake. The knowledge, titles, and
powers he had acquired in the temples of Memphis and Babylon gave him
the greatest authority and influence. To those who inspired Greece he
had the right to speak as a superior and a guide. This he did with all
the eloquence of his genius and the enthusiasm of his mission. To
enlighten their minds, he began by telling them of his youthful days,
his struggles and Egyptian initiation. He spoke to them of Egypt, the
mother of Greece, old as the world itself, immovable as a mummy, covered
with hieroglyphs in the recesses of its pyramids, though possessing in
its tombs the secrets of peoples, languages, and religions. Before their
eyes he unfolded the mysteries of great Isis, goddess of earth and
heaven,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

mother of gods and men; then, relating his trials and ordeals, he
plunged them, with himself, into the light of Osiris. Afterwards came
the turn of Babylon, of the Chaldaean magi, their occult sciences, and
those deep solid temples where they call forth the living fire, the
abode of demons and gods.

As she listened to Pythagoras, Theoclea passed through wonderful
sensations. All he said was branded in letters of fire in her mind.
These things appeared to her both marvellous and yet well known. Instead
of hearing something new she seemed to be recalling what she had already
learned. The master's words set her turning over the pages of the
universe like those of a book. No longer did she see the gods in their
human image, but in their essence, forming things and spirits. With them
she flowed in space, rising and falling. At times there came the
illusion that she no longer felt the limits of her body, and was fading
away into infinity. Thus her imagination entered by degrees into the
invisible world, and the former traces she found of it in her own soul
told her that this was the true and only reality; the other was only
apparent. She felt that her inner eyes would soon open and read the
truth.

From these heights the master suddenly brought her back to earth by
relating the misfortunes of

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egypt. After
developing the greatness of Egyptian science, he showed how it was dying
away under the Persian invasion. He depicted the horrible atrocities
committed by Cambyses, the pillaged temples, the sacred books committed
to the flames, the priests of Osiris killed or dispersed, the monster of
Persian despotism collecting beneath his iron hand all the old barbaric
tribes of Asia, the half-savage nomad races of India, and the centre of
the continent, awaiting only a favourable opportunity to fall upon
Europe. Yes, this ever-increasing cyclone must burst upon Greece as
certainly as the thunderbolt, collecting in the sky, must flash forth
from the cloud. Was divided Greece prepared to resist this terrible
attack? She did not even suspect it. Nations cannot avoid their
destinies, which the gods precipitate upon them, unless they are ever
watchful. Had not Egypt, that wise nation of Hermes, crumbled to ruin
after six thousand years of prosperity? Greece, alas! and beautiful
Ionia will pass away even sooner! A time will come when the solar god
will abandon this temple, when barbarian tribes will overthrow its very
walls, and shepherds lead their flocks to pasture on the ruins of
Delphi.

Before such sinister prophecies the countenance of Theoclea became
transformed, assuming a terrified

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

expression. She sank to the ground, and, with arms clasped round a
column and eyes fixed as though plunged in thought, she resembled the
genius of Grief weeping over the tomb of Greece.

"Those are secrets," continued Pythagoras, "which must be buried in the
depths of the temples. The initiate attracts death or repels it at his
pleasure. By forming the magic chain of wills, initiates in this way
prolong the life of nations. It is for you to postpone the fatal hour,
to cause Greece to shine in splendour and beam forth with the word of
Apollo. Nations and peoples are what their gods make them, but the gods
reveal themselves only to such as appeal to them. What is Apollo? The
word of the one God manifesting himself eternally in the world. Truth is
the soul of God, his body is the light. Only seers, sages, and prophets
behold it; men see only its shadow. Legions of glorified spirits, whom
we call heroes and demi-gods, inhabit this light in spheres beyond
number. This is the real body of Apollo, the sun of initiates, without
his rays nothing great is done on earth. As the magnet attracts iron, so
by our thoughts, our prayers, and actions do we attract divine
inspiration. It is for you to hand over to Greece the word of Apollo,
and Greece shall be resplendent with immortal light!"

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

With such language Pythagoras succeeded in restoring to the priests of
Delphi the consciousness of their mission. Theoclea drank in every word
with silent, concentrated passion. She was visibly becoming transformed
beneath the thought and will of the master as by a slow incantation.
Standing in the midst of the astonished elders, she untied her r
raven-black locks and thrust them back from her head as though she felt
flames of fire playing in and about them. Her eyes, transfigured and
wide open, seemed to behold the solar and planetary gods in their
radiant, glowing orbs.

One day she fell into a deep, lucid sleep. The five prophets surrounded
her, but she remained insensible alike to their voice and touch.
Pythagoras drew near and said: "Rise and go where my thought sends thee.
For now thou art the Pythoness!"

On hearing the master's voice, a long vibrating thrill ran through the
whole of her body and she rose to her feet. Her eyes were closed, but
she saw from within.

"Where art thou?" asked Pythagoras.

"I am ascending—ascending all the time."

"And now?"

"I am bathing in the light of Orpheus."

"What seest thou in the future?"

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

"Great wars—men of might— Apollo returns to dwell in his sanctuary, and
I shall be his voice—! But thou, his messenger, thou art about to leave
me, alas! thou wilt bear the torch of his light into Italy."

Long did the seer speak, with closed eyes, in musical, panting, rhythmic
voice; then suddenly, with a sob, she fell to the ground like one dead.

Thus did Pythagoras pour a pure, undefiled stream of knowledge into
Theoclea's breast, tuning her like a lyre for divine inspiration. Once
exalted to these heights she became his torch, thanks to which he was
able to sound his own destiny, see into the possible future, and direct
his path along the strandless zones of the invisible. Such a striking
counter-verification of the truths he taught filled the priests with
admiration, aroused their courage and revived their faith. The temple
now possessed an inspired Pythoness, and priests initiated into the
divine sciences and arts; Delphi could once again become a centre of
life and action.

Pythagoras remained there for a whole year. It was only after imparting
to the priests all the secrets of his doctrine, and preparing Theoclea
for his ministry, that he took his departure for Greater Greece.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[42:1](pdm04.htm#fr_4) Reichenbach called this
fluid *odyle*. His work has been translated into English by Gregory:
*Researches on Magnetism, Electricity, Heat, Light, Cristalization and
Chemical Attraction*.—London, 1880.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[44:1](pdm04.htm#fr_5) See the Bulletin of the
Société de Pyschologie Physiologique. M. Charcot, president, 1885. See
more especially the fine book by M. Ochorowicz, *De la Suggestion
Mentale*, Paris, 1887.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[46:1](pdm04.htm#fr_6) There is a great deal of
literature on this subject, very unequal in value, in France, Germany
and England. I will here mention two books in which the subject is
treated scientifically by men of real worth.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[47:1](pdm04.htm#fr_7) Numerous examples in
Gregory's work: Letters XVI, XVII, and XVIII.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[48:1](pdm04.htm#fr_8) The German philosopher,
Schelling, has acknowledged the great importance of somnambulism in the
question of the immortality of the soul. He remarks that, in lucid
sleep, there is produced an elevation of the soul, and its relative
liberation with regard to the body, which does not take place in the
normal state. In somnambulists, everything indicates the loftiest
consciousness, as though their whole being were met in one luminous
focus, uniting together past, present and future. Far from losing all
memory of the past, it lies open before them, and even the veil of the
future is at times cast aside in a glorious ray of light. If this is
possible in earthly life, Schelling inquires, is it not certain that our
spiritual personality, which follows us in death, is at this very moment
present in us, that it is not born then but simply set free, and shows
itself when it is no longer bound by the senses to the outside world?
The post-mortem condition is accordingly more real than the earthly one.
For in this life, that which is accidental, mingling with the whole,
paralyzes in us that which is essential. Schelling calls the future
state quite simply, clairvoyance. The spirit liberated from everything
accidental in earthly life becomes stronger and more alive; the wicked
man becomes worse, the good better.

Quite recently Charles du Prel has advanced the same opinion, supporting
it with numerous facts and details in a well-written volume,
*Philosophie der Mystik* (1886). He starts from this fact: the
consciousness of the ego does not exhaust its object. "Soul and
consciousness are not two adequate terms; they do not cover one another
as they have not an equal scope. The sphere of the soul far surpasses
that of the consciousness." Consequently there is *a latent ego* in us.
This latent ego, which manifests itself in sleep and in dreams, is the
real ego, supra-terrestrial and transcendent, whose existence precedes
our terrestrial ego which is bound to the body. The terrestrial ego is
perishable, the transcendent ego is immortal. This is what St. Paul
meant when he said–"—the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile
body, so that it be fashioned like unto His glorious body."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Order and the Doctrine](pdm05)
