[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Sacred texts](../index)  [Thelema](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## {alpha} APOLOGIA

I have begotten thee, o my Son, and that strangely, as thou knowest,
upon the Scarlet Woman called Hilarion, as it was mysteriously foretold
unto me in *The Book of the Law*. Now therefore that thou art come to
the Age of Understanding, do thou give ear unto my Wisdom, for that
therein lieth a simple and direct Way for every Man that he may attain
to the End.

Firstly, then, I would have thee to know that Spiritual Experience and
Perfection have no necessary connection with Advancement in our Holy
Order. But for each Man is a Path: there is a Constant, and there is a
Variable. Seek ever therefore in thy Work of the Promulgation of the Law
to discover in each Man his own true Nature, that he may in due Season
accomplish it not only for himself, but for all who are bound unto him.
There are very many for whom in their present Incarnations this Great
Work may be impossible; since their appointed Work may be in
Satisfaction of some Magical Debt, or in Adjustment of some Balance, or
in Fulfilment of some Defect. As is written: *Suum Cuique*.

Now because thou art the Child of my Bowels, I yearn greatly towards
thee, o my Son, and I strive strongly with my Spirit that by my Wisdom I
may make plain thy Way before thee; and thus in many Chapters will I
write for thee those things that may profit thee. *Sis benedictus*.

## {beta} DE ARTE KABBALISTICA.

Do thou study most constantly, my Son, in the Art of the Holy Qabalah.
Know that herein the Relations between Numbers, though they be mighty in
Power and prodigal of Knowledge, are but lesser Things. For the Work is
to reduce all other conceptions to these of Number, because thus thou
wilt lay bare the very Structure of thy Mind, whose rule is Necessity
rather than Prejudice. Not until the Universe is thus laid naked before
thee canst thou truly anatomize it. The Tendencies of thy Mind lie
deeper far than any Thought, for they are the Conditions and the Laws of
Thought; and it is these that thou must bring to Nought.

This Way is most sure; most sacred; and the Enemies thereof most awful,
most sublime. It is for the Great Souls to enter on this Rigour and
Austerity. To them the Gods themselves do Homage; for it is the Way of
Utmost Purity.

## {gamma} DE VITA CORRIGENDA.

Know, son, that the true Principle of Self-Control is Liberty. For we
are born into a World which is in Bondage to Ideals; to them we are
perforce fitted, even as the Enemies to the Bed of Procrustes. Each of
us, as he grows, learns Repression of himself and his true Will. "It is
a lie, this folly against self.": these Words are written in *The Book
of the Law*. So therefore these Passions in ourselves which we
understand to be Hindrances are not part of our True Will, but diseased
Appetites, manifest in us through false early Training. Thus the Tabus
of savage Tribes in such matter as Love constrain that True Love which
is born in us; and by this Constraint come ills of Body and Mind. Either
the Force of Repression carries it, and creates Neuroses and Insanities;
or the Revolt against that Force, breaking forth with Violence, involves
Excesses and Extravagances. All these Things are Disorders, and against
Nature. Now then learn of me the testimony of History and literature as
a great Scroll of Learning. But the Vellum of the Scroll is of Man's
Skin, and its Ink of his Heart's Blood.

## {delta} LEGENDA DE AMORE.

The Fault, that is Fatality, in Love, as in every other Form of Will, is
Impurity. It is not the Spontaneity thereof which worketh Woe, but some
Repression in the Environment.

In the Fable of Adam and Eve is this great Lesson taught by the Masters
of the Holy Qabalah. For Love were to them the eternal Eden, save for
the Repression signified by the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil.
Thus their Nature of Love was perfect; it was their Fall from that
Innocence which drove them from the Garden.

In the Love of Romeo and Juliet was no Flaw; but family Feud, which
imported nothing to that Love, was its Bane; and the Rashness and
Violence of their Revolt against that Repression, slew them.

In the pure Outrush of Love in Desdemona for Othello was no Flaw; but
his Love was marred by his consciousness of his Age and his Race, of the
Prejudices of his Fellows and of his own Experience of Woman-Frailty.

## {epsilon} GESTA DE AMORE.

Now as Literature overfloweth with the Murders of Love, so also doeth
History, and the Lesson is ever the same.

Thus the Loves of Abelard and of Heloise were destroyed by the System of
Repression in which they chanced to move.

Thus Beatrice was robbed of Dante by social Artificialities; and Paolo
slain on account of Things external to his Love of Francesca.

Then, *per contra*, Martin Luther, being a Giant of Will, and also the
Eighth Henry of England, as a mighty King, bent them to overturn the
whole World that they might have satisfaction of their Loves.

And who shall follow them? For even now we find great Churchmen,
Statesmen, Princes, Dramamakers, and many lesser Men, overwhelmed
utterly and ruined by the conflict between their Passions and the
Society about them. Wherein which Party errs is no matter of Moment for
our Thought; but the Existence of the War is Evidence of Wrong done to
Nature.

## {digamma} ULTIMA THESIS DE AMORE.

Therefore, o my Son, be thou wary, not bowing before the false Idols and
ideals, yet not flaming forth in Fury against them, unless that be thy
Will.

But in this Matter be prudent and be silent, discerning subtly and with
acumen the nature of the Will within thee; so that thou mistake not Fear
for Chastity, or Anger for Courage. And since the fetters are old and
heavy, and thy Limbs withered and distorted by reason of their
Compulsion, do thou, having broken them, walk gently for a little while,
until the ancient Elasticity return, so that thou mayst walk, run, and
leap naturally and with Rejoicing.

Also, since these Fetters are as a Bond almost universal, be instant to
declare the Law of Liberty, and the full Knowledge of all Truth that
appertaineth to this Matter; for if in this only thou overcome, then
shall all Earth be free, taking its Pleasure in Sunlight without Fear or
Phrenzy. Amen.

## {zeta} DE NATURA SUA PERCIPIENDA.

Understand, o my Son, in thy Youth, these Words which some wise One, now
nameless, spake of old; except ye become as little Children ye shall in
no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This is to say that thou must
first comprehend thine original Nature in every Point, before thou wast
forced to bow before the Gods of Wood and Stone that Men have made, not
comprehending the Law of Change, and of Evolution Through Variation, and
the independent Value of every living Soul.

Learn this also, that even the Will to the Great Work may be
misunderstood of Men; for this Work must proceed naturally and without
Overstress, as all true Works. Right also is that Word that the Kingdom
of Heaven suffereth Violence, and the violent take it by Force. But
except thou be violent by Virtue of thy true Nature, how shalt thou take
it? Be not as the Ass in the Lion's Skin; but if thou be born Ass, bear
patiently thy Burdens, and enjoy thy Thistles; for an Ass also, as in
the Fables of Apuleius and Matthias, may come to Glory in the Path of
his own Virtue.

## {eta} ALTERA DE VIA NATURAE.

Sayest thou (methinks) that here is a great Riddle, since by Reason of
much Repression thou hast lost the Knowledge of thine original Nature?

My son, this is not so; for by a peculiar Ordinance of Heaven, and a
Disposition occult within his Mind, is every Man protected from this
Loss of his own Soul, until and unless he be by Choronzon disintegrated
and dispersed beyond power of Will to repair; as when the Conflict
within him, rending and burning, hath made his Mind utterly desert, and
his Soul Madness.

Give Ear, give Ear attentively; the Will is not lost; though it be
buried beneath a life-old midden of Repressions, for it persisteth vital
within thee (is it not the true Motion of thine inmost Being?) and for
all thy conscious Striving cometh forth by Night and by Stealth in Dream
and Phantasy. Now is it naked and brilliant, now clothed in rich Robes
of Symbol and Hieroglyph; but always travelleth it with thee upon thy
Path, ready to acquaint thee with thy true Nature, if thou attend unto
its Word, its Gesture, or its Show of Imagery.

## {theta} QUO MODO NATURA SUA EST LEGENDA.

Therefore deem not that thy lightest Fancy is insignificant. Thy most
unconscious Acts are Keys to the Treasure-Chamber of thine own Palace,
which is the House of the Holy Ghost. Consider well thy conscious
Thoughts and Acts, for they are under the Dominion of thy Will, and
moved in Accord with the Operation of thy Reason; this indeed is a
necessary work, enabling to comprehend in what manner thou mayst adjust
thyself to thine Environment. Yet is this Adaptation but Defence for the
most Part, or at the best Subterfuge and Stratagem in the Tactics of thy
Life, with but an accidental and subordinate Relation to thy true Will,
whereof by Consciousness and by Reason thou mayst be ignorant, unless by
Fortune great and rare thou be already harmonized in thyself, the Outer
with the Inner, which Grace is not common among Men, and is the Reward
of previous Attainment.

Neglect not simple Introspections, therefore; but give yet greater Heed
unto those Dreams and Phantasies, those Gestures and Manners
unconscious, and of undiscovered Cause, which betoken thee.

## {iota} DE SOMNIIS.

### *a*. CAUSA PER ACCIDENS.

As all diseases have two conjunct causes, one immediate, external and
exciting, the other constitutional, internal, and predisposing, so it is
with Dreams, which are Dis-Eases, or unbalanced States of Consciousness,
Disturbers of Sleep as Thoughts are of Life.

This exciting Cause is commonly of two kinds: *videlicet, imprimis*, the
physical Condition of the Sleeper, as a Dream of Water caused by a
shower without, or a Dream of Strangulation caused by a Dyspnoea, or a
Dream of Lust caused by the seminal Congestions of an unclean Life, or a
Dream of falling or flying caused by some unstable Equilibrium of Body.

*Secundo*, the psychic condition of the Sleeper, the Dream being
determined by recent Events in his Life, usually those of the Day
previous, and especially such Events as have caused Excitement of
Anxiety, the more so if they be unfinished or unfulfilled.

But this exciting Cause is of a superficial Nature, as it were a Cloke
or a Mask; and thus it but lendeth Aspect to the other Cause, which
lieth in the Nature of the Sleeper himself.

## {kappa} DE SOMNIIS.

### {beta}CAUSA PER NATURAM.

The deep, constitutional, or predisposing Cause of Dreams lieth within
the Jurisdiction of the Will itself. For that Will, being alway present,
albeit (it may be) latent, discovereth himself when no longer inhibited
by that conscious Control which is determined by Environment, and
therefore of times contrary to himself. This being so, the Will
declareth himself, as it were in a Pageant, and showeth himself thus
apparelled, unto the Sleeper, for a Warning or Admonition. Every Dream,
or Pageant of Fancy, is therefore a Shew of Will; and Will being no more
prevented by Environment or by Consciousness, cometh as a Conqueror. Yet
even so he must come for the most Part throned upon the Chariot of the
exciting Cause of the Dream, and therefore is his Appearance symbolic,
like a Writing in Cipher, or like a Fable, or like a Riddle in Pictures.
But alway does he triumph and fulfil himself therein, for the Dream is a
natural Compensation in the inner World for any Failure of Achievement
in the outer.

## {lambda} DE SOMNIIS.

### {gamma}VESTIMENTA HORRORIS.

Now then if in a Dream the Will be always triumphant, how cometh it that
a Man may be ridden of the Nightmare? And of this the true Explanation
is that in such a case the Will is in Danger, having been attacked and
wounded or corrupted by the Violence of some Repression. Thus the
Consciousness of the Will is directed to the sore Spot, as in Pain, and
seeketh comfort in an Externalisation, or shew, of that Antagonism. And
because the Will is sacred, such dreams excite an Ecstacy or Phrenzy of
Horror, Fear or Disgust. Thus the true Will of Oedipus was toward the
bed of Jocasta, but the Tabu, strong both by Inheritance and by
Environment, was so attached to that Will that his Dream concerning his
Destiny was a Dream of Fear and of Abhorrence, his Fulfilment thereof
(even in Ignorance) a spell to stir up all the subconscious Forces of
all the People about him, and his Realization of the Act a madness
potent to drive him to self-inflicted Blindness and fury-haunted Exile.

## {mu} DE SOMNIIS.

### {delta}SEQUENTIA.

Know firmly, o my son, that the true Will cannot err; for this is thine
appointed course in Heaven, in whose order is Perfection.

A Dream of Horror is therefore the most serious of all Warnings; for it
signifieth that thy Will, which is Thy Self in respect of its Motion, is
in Affliction and Danger. Thus thou must instantly seek out the Cause of
that subconscious Conflict, and destroy thine Enemy utterly by bringing
thy conscious Vigour as an Ally to that true Will. If then there be a
Traitor in the Consciousness, how much the more is it necessary for thee
to arise and extirpate him before he wholly infect thee with the divided
Purpose which is the first Breach in that Fortress of the Soul whose
Fall should bring it to the shapeless Ruin whose Name is Choronzon!

## {nu} DE SOMNIIS.

### {epsilon}CLAVICULA.

The Dream delightful is then a Pageant of the Fulfilment of the true
Will, and the Nightmare a symbolic Battle between it and its Assailants
in thyself. But there can be only one true Will, even as there can be
only one proper Motion in any Body, no matter of how many Forces that
Motion be the Resultant. Seek therefore this Will, and conjoin with it
thy conscious Self; for this is that which is written; "Thou hast no
right but to do thy Will. Do that, and no other shall say nay." Thou
seest, o my Son, that all conscious Opposition to thy Will, whether in
Ignorance, or by Obstinacy, or through Fear of others, may in the end
endanger even thy true Self, and bring thy Star into Disaster.

And this is the true Key to Dreams; see that thou be diligent in its
Use, and unlock therewith the secret Chambers of thine Heart.

## {xi} DE VIA PER EMPYRAEUM.

Concerning thy Travellings in thy Body of Light, or Astral journeys and
Visions so-called, do thou lay this Wisdom to thy Heart, o my Son, that
in this Practice, whether Things Seen and Heard be Truth and Reality, or
whether they be Phantoms in the Mind, abideth this Supreme Magical
Value, namely: Whereas the Direction of such Journeys is consciously
willed, and determined by Reason, and also unconsciously willed, by the
true Self, since without It no Invocation were possible, we have here a
Cooperation of Alliance between the Inner and the Outer Self, and thus
an Accomplishment, at least partial, of the Great Work.

And therefore is Confusion or Terror in any such Practice an Error
fearful indeed, bringing about Obsession, which is a temporary or even
it may be a permanent Division of the Personality, or Insanity, and
therefore a defeat most fatal and pernicious, a Surrender of the Soul to
Choronzon.

## {omicron} DE CULTU.

Now, o my Son, that thou mayst be well guarded against thy ghostly
Enemies, do thou work constantly by the Means prescribed in our Holy
Books.

Neglect never the fourfold Adorations of the Sun in his four Stations,
for thereby thou doest affirm thy Place in Nature and her Harmonies.

Neglect not the Performance of the Ritual of the Pentagram, and of the
Assumption of the Form of Hoor-pa-Kraat.

Neglect not the daily Miracle of the Mass, either by the Rite of the
Gnostic Catholic Church, or that of the Phoenix. Neglect not the
Performance of the Mass of the Holy Ghost, as Nature herself prompteth
thee.

Travel also much in the Empyrean in the Body of Light, seeking ever
Abodes more fiery and lucid.

Finally, exercise constantly the Eight Limbs of Yoga. And so shalt thou
come to the End.

## {pi} DE CLAVICULA SOMNIORUM.

And now concerning Meditation let me disclose unto thee more fully the
Mystery of the Key of Dreams and Phantasies.

Learn first that as the Thought of the Mind standeth before the Soul and
hindereth its Manifestation in consciousness, so also the gross physical
Will is the Creator of the Dreams of common Men, and as in Meditation
thou doest destroy every Thought by mating it with its Opposite, so must
thou cleanse thyself by a full and perfect Satisfaction of that bodily
will in the Way of Chastity and Holiness which has been revealed unto
thee in thy Initiation.

This inner Silence of the Body being attained, it may be that the true
Will may speak in True Dreams; for it is written that He giveth unto His
Beloved in Sleep.

Prepare thyself therefore in this Way, as a good Knight should do.

## {koppa} DE SOMNO LUCIDO.

Now know this also that at the End of that secret Way lieth a Garden
wherein is a Rest House prepared for thee.

For to him whose physical Needs of whatever Kind are not truly satisfied
cometh a Lunar or physical Sleep appointed to refresh and recreate by
Cleansing and Repose; but on him that is bodily pure the Lord bestoweth
a Solar or Lucid Sleep, wherein move Images of pure Light fashioned by
the True Will. And this is called by the Qabalists the Sleep of Shiloam,
and of this doeth also Porphyry make mention mention, and Cicero, with
many other Wise Men of Old Time.

Compare, o my Son, with this Doctrine that which was taught thee in the
Sanctuary of the Gnosis concerning the Death of the Righteous; and learn
moreover that these are but particular Cases of an Universal Formula.

## {rho} DE VENENIS.

My Son, if thou fast awhile, there shall come unto thee a second State
of physiological Being, in which is a delight passive and equable,
without Will, a contentment of Weakness, with a Feeling of Lightness and
of Purity. And this is because the Blood hath absorbed, in its Need of
Nutriment, all foreign Elements. Such also is the Case with the Mind
which hath not fed itself on Thought. Consider the placid and ruminent
Existence of such Persons as read little, are removed from worldy
Struggle by some sufficient Property of small and unexciting Value,
stably invested, and by Age and Environment are free from Passion. They
live, according to their own Nature, without Desire, and they oppose no
Resistance to the Operations of Time. Such are called Happy, and in
their Way of Vegetable Life it is so; for they are free of any Poison.

## {sigma} DE MOTU VITAE.

Learn then, o my Son, that all Phenomena are the effect of Conflict,
even as the Universe itself is a Nothing expressed as the Difference of
two Equalities, or, an thou wilt, as the Divorce of Nuit and Hadit. So
therefore every Marriage dissolveth a more material, and createth a less
material Complex; and this is our Way of Live, rising ever from Ecstasy
to Ecstasy. So then all high Violence, that is to say, all
Consciousness, is the spiritual Orgasm of a Passion between two lower
and grosser Opposites. Thus Light and Heat result from the Marriage of
Hydrogen and Oxygen; Love from that of Man and Woman, Dhyana or Ecstasy
from that of the Ego and the non-Ego.

But be thou well grounded in this Thesis corollary, that one or two such
Marriages do but destroy for a Time the Exacerbation of any Complex; to
deracinate such is a Work of long Habit and deep Search in Darkness for
the Germ thereof. But this once accomplished, that particular Complex is
destroyed, or sublimated for ever.

## {tau} DE MORBIS SANGUINIS.

Now then understand that all Opposition to the Way of Nature createth
Violence. If thine excretory System do its Function not at its fullest,
there come Poisons in the Blood, and the Consciousness is modified by
the conflicts or Marriages between the elements heterogeneous. Thus if
the Liver be not efficient, we have Melancholy; if the Kidneys, Coma; if
the Testes or Ovaries, loss of Personality itself. Also, an we poison
the Blood directly with Belladonna, we have Delirium vehement and
furious; with Hashish, Visions phantastic and enormous; with
Anhiolonium, Ecstasy of colour and what not; with diverse Germs of
Disease, Disturbances of Consciousness varying with the Nature of the
Germ. Also with Ether, we gain the Power of analysing the Consciousness
into its Planes; and so for many others.

But all these are, in our mystical Sense, Poisons; that is, we take two
Things diverse and opposite, binding them together so that they are
compelled to unite; and the Orgasm of each Marriage is an Ecstasy, the
Lower dissolving in the Higher.

## {upsilon} DE CURSU AMORIS.

I continue then, o my son, and reiterate that this Formula is general to
all Nature. And thou wilt note that by repeated Marriage cometh
Toleration, so the Ecstasy appeareth no more. Thus his half grain of
Morphia, which first opened his Gates of Heaven, is nothing worth to the
Self-poisoner after a Year of daily Practice. So too the Lover findeth
no more Joy in Union with his Mistress, so soon as the original
Attraction between them is satisfied by repeated Conjunctions. For this
Attraction is an Antagonism; and the greater this Antinomy, the more
fierce the Puissance of the Magnetism, and the Quality of Energy
disengaged by the Coition.

Thus in the Union of Similars, as of Halogens with each other, is no
strong Passion of explosive Force, and the Love between two Persons of
the like Character and Taste is placid and without Transmutation to
higher Planes.

## {phi} DE NUPTIIS MYSTICIS.

O my Son, how wonderful is the Wisdom of this Law of Love! How vast are
the Oceans of uncharted Joy that lie before the Keel of thy Ship! Yet
know this, that every Opposition is in its Nature named Sorrow, and the
Joy lieth in the Destruction of the Dyad. Therefore, must thou seek ever
those Things which are to thee poisonous, and that in the highest
Degree, and make them thine by Love. That which repels, that which
disgusts, must thou assimilate in this Way of Wholeness. Yet rest not in
the Joy of the Destruction of each complex in thy Nature, but press on
to that ultimate Marriage with the Universe whose Consummation shall
destroy thee utterly, leaving only that Nothingness which was before the
Beginning.

So then the Life of Non-Action is not for thee; the Withdrawal from
Activity is not the Way of the Tao; but rather the Intensification and
making universal every Unit of thine Energy on every Plane.

## {chi} DE VOLUPTATE POENARUM.

Go forth, o my Son, o Son of the Sun, rejoicing in thy Strength, as a
Warrior, as a Bridegroom, to take thy Pleasure upon the Earth, and in
every Palace of the Mind, moving ever from the crass to the subtle, from
the coarse to the fine. Conquer every Repulsion in thy self, subdue
every Aversion. Assimilate all Poison, for therein only is there Profit.
Seek constantly therefore to know what is painful and to cleave
thereunto, for by Pain cometh true Pleasure. Those who avoid Pain
physical or mental remain little Men, and there is no Virtue in them.
Yet be thou ware lest thou fall into the Heresy which maketh Pain, and
Self-sacrifice as it were Bribes to corrupt God, to secure some future
Pleasure in an imagined After-life. Nay, also of the other Part, fear
not to destroy thy Complexes, thinking dreadfully thereby to lose the
Power of creating Joy by their Distinction. Yet in each Marriage be thou
bold to affirm the spiritual Ardour of the Orgasm, fixing it in some
Talisman, whether it be Art, or Magick, or Theurgy.

## {psi} DE VOLUNTATE ULTIMA.

Say not then that this Way is contrary to Nature, and that in Simplicity
of Satisfaction of thy Needs is perfection of thy Path. For to thee, who
hast aspired, it is thy Nature to perform the Great Work, and this is
the final Dissolution of the Cosmos. For though a Stone seem to lie
still on a Mountain Top, and have no care, yet hath it an hidden Nature,
a Task Ineffable and Stupendous; namely, to force its Way to he Centre
of Gravity of the Universe, and also to burn up its Elements into the
final Homogeneity of Matter. Therefore the Way of Quiet is but an
Illusion of Ignorance. Whoever thou mayst be now, thy Destiny is that
which I have declared unto thee; and thou art most fixed in the true Way
when, accepting his consciously as thy Will, thou gathereth up thy
Powers to move thy Self mightily within it.

## {omega} DE DIFFERENTIA RERUM.

But, o my Son, although thine ultimate Nature be Universal, thine
immediate Nature is Particular. Thy Way to the Centre is not oriented as
that of any other Being, and thine elements are no kin, but alien, to
his. For Shame! Is it not the most transcendent of all the Wisdoms of
this Cosmos, that no two Beings are alike? Lo! This is the Secret of all
Beauty, and maketh Love not only possible, but necessary, between every
Thing and every other Thing. So then, lest thou in thine Ignorance take
the false Way, and divigate, must thou learn thine own particular and
peculiar Nature in its Relation to all others. For though it be
Illusion, it is by the true Analysis of Falsehoods that we are able to
destroy them, just as the Physician must understand the Disease of his
Patient if he is to choose the fitting Remedy. Now therefore will I make
yet more clear unto thee the Value of thy Dreams and Phantesies and
Gestures of thine unconscious Body and Mind, as Symptoms of thy
particular Will, and show thee how thy mayst come to their
Interpretation.
