[![](../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../index)  
[Sacred texts](../index)  [Thelema](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

LIBER LI  
THE LOST CONTINENT

## by Aleister Crowley

### FORWARD

"In particular there is a sort of novel, "The Lost Continent",
purporting to give an account of the civilization of Atlantis. I
sometimes feel that this lacks artistic unity. At times it is a
fantastic rhapsody describing my ideals of Utopian society; but some
passages are a satire on the conditions of our existing civilization,
while others convey hints of certain profound magical secrets, or
anticipations of discoveries in science."  
--- Crowley, writing of the Summer of 1913 e.v. from Confessions, p.
730.

### PREFACE

Last year I was chosen to succeed the venerable K-Z --- who had it in
his mind to die, that is, to join Them in Venus, as one of the Seven
Heirs of Atlantis, and I have been appointed to declare, so far as may
found possible, the truth about that mysterious lost land. Of course, no
more than one seventh of the wisdom is ever confided to one of the
Seven, and the Seven meet in council but once in every thirty-three
years. But its preservation is guaranteed by the interlocked systems of
"dreaming true" and of "preparation of the antinomy." The former almost
explains itself; the latter is almost inconceivable to normal man. Its
essence is to train a man to be anything by training him to be its
opposite. At the end of anything, think they, it turns out to be its
opposite, and that opposite is thus mastered without having been soiled
by the labours of the student, and without the false impressions of
early learning being left upon the mind.

I myself, for example, had unknowingly been trained to record these
observations by the life of a butterfly. All my impressions came clear
on the soft wax of my brain; I had never worried because the scratch on
the wax in no way resembled the sound it represented. In other words, I
observed perfectly because I never knew that I was observing. So, if you
pay sufficient attention to your heart, you will make it palpitate.

I accordingly proceed to a description of the country.

"Aleister Crowley"

### I

### OF THE PLAINS BENEATH ATLAS, AND ITS SERVILE RACE.

Atlas is the true name of this archipelago --- continent is an
altogether false term, for every "house" or mountain peak was cut from
its fellows by natural, though often very narrow waterways. The African
Atlas is a mere offshoot of the range. It was the true Atlas that
supported the ancient world by its moral and magical strength, and hence
the name of the fabled globe-bearer. The root is the Lemurian "Tla" or
"Tlas", black, for reasons which will appear in due course. "A" is the
feminine prefix, derived from the shape of the mouth when uttering the
sound. "Black woman" is therefore as near a translation as one can give
in English; the Latin has aendered of the Virgin ("L") and the Serpent
("S"). "THEOS" (root "O," first written "0") means the Sun in his
strength and also the Lingam-Yoni conjoined. "CHRISTOS" is "The love of
passion of the Rising Sun ("R") and the Serpent" ("S"). The "I" and "T"
indicate certain details which are foreign to the present discussion.
"NEUMA" (Atlantean "NM") is the "Arch of the Woman," "MARIA," the Woman
of the Sun.\[23\] The words "MEITHRAS" and "ABRAXAS" are again derived
from Atlas. "The woman entered, Lingam being conjoined with Yoni, bears
the Sun from her serpent womb" and "From the womb's mouth the Sun
(cometh seeking) a womb for his desire, even the womb of a serpent," the
course of the year being signified in this manner, as usualy with the
ancients. This plain of an idea corresponding to each letter was carried
out very strictly: thus "TLA," black, means the stigma or mark of the
virgin's womb, "IA" (Hail! Greeting!) "Face to Face," from the other
peculiarity described above. These few examples will suffice to indicate
the singular character of the language,\[24\] and the way in which its
essential dogmatic symbols have been incorporated by the heirs of Atlas
in the inmost sanctuaries of races which they deemed worthy of such
assistance.

I must not pass over in silence the question of sacrifice to the gods,
to which a passing reference has already been made. Such sacrifices were
not very frequent; the victims were the "failures," those who were
useless to the social economy.**\[25\]** As they represented capital
expenditure, the object was to recover this, at least, since no interest
could be expected. The victim was therefore handed over to a High Priest
or Priestess, who extracted the life by an instrument devised for and
excellently adapted to the purpose, so that it died of exhaustion. The
life thus regained was given to "the gods" in a manner too complex to be
described in this brief account.

The early age at which puberty occurred was due to design. The normal
period of gestation had also been shortened to four months. This was all
part of the scheme to economize time. Old age had been almost done away
with by the great readiness of the Atlanteans to "go and see" at the
first sign of failing power. No doubt, further improvements would have
been made but for the loss of interest in the matter, all generation
being regarded as "the old experiment," not likely to repay the trouble
of further research. In the 200 or 300 years of a man's full vigour,
only 8 years on the average was the wastage of childhood, and even this
was not all waste, since some time at least must be necessary for the
experts to discover and direct the tendencies of the mind. The body
ought therefore to be regarded as an engine, the theoretical limit of
whose efficiency had been reached.

So much I mention of the customs of the Atlanteans with regard to
marriage, education and religious sacrifices.

> \[\#23\] MAR is Atlantean (also Sanscrit) for die. This word throws
> light on their conception of death.
>
> \[\#24\] Note that no tautologies defile its linguistic wells. "As I
> have written" is never changed to "as I have observed, noted,
> described, said, indicated, remarked, pointed out" and so on.

> \[\#25\] I must revert for a moment to the language. OIK, Greek
> "OIKOS" meant the "House of the penetrating men." NOM, Greek "NOMOS",
> the "arch of the House of the Women," "i.e." that which roofed them in
> or protected them. Hence "the law."

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

### VIII

### OF THE HISTORY OF ATLAS, FROM ITS EARLIEST ORIGINS TO THE PERIOD IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING THE CATASTROPHE.

The origin of Atlas is lost in the obscurity of antiquity. The official
religious explanation is this: "We came across the waters on the living
Atla," which is pious but improbable. A mystic meaning is to be
suspected. The lay historian says "We came, escaping from destruction,
eight persons in a ship, bearing the living Zro." This reminds me one of
later legends of presumably equal value. Poets frankly claim "We
descended from heaven," and it has been seriously urged that seafarers
would have preferred the plains to the rocks. The law of contrariety to
Nature explains this away. Others maintain that the earliest settlers
came "by air," or "through air." This must mean balloons or airplanes,
as flying was not known until centuries after. What is definitely known
is that the earliest settlers were of a purely fighting race.

An Atlantean Homer, Ylo, has described the first battle in such detail
as to leave no doubt that he is retelling facts --- a marked
contradiction to his earlier books. There appear to have been but few
Atlanteans, unless the names given are those of chiefs, which internal
evidence contraverts. The natives were armed with every possible
instrument of precision, having cavalry and artillery in abundance, as
well as weapons that must have been as superior to the modern rifle
(unless Ylo exaggerates) as that is to the arquebus. In spite of this
the men of Atlas "smote them with rods" or "fell upon them with their
cones," and routed them utterly. This mention of rods and cones has
absurdly suggested to commentators that the Atlanteans used their eyes,
and hypnotized the enemy. To state such an opinion is sufficient to
expose its author to the contempt of the thoughtful. Altogether 86
battles were fought, extending over five years, before the natives were
reduced to sue for peace. This was granted on generous terms, which the
colonists broke, as soon as they dared to do so, in accordance with the
invariable rule of colonists, then as much as today. However, it was
nigh on an hundred years before the first college of Magic was
established. Previously the Atla had been carried about as occasion
demanded. It was now enshrined with some decency of ceremonial upon a
mountain. About three hundred years later we find ourselves face to face
with the first great Mystery of Atlas. This is a translation of the
record of that most strange event.

"Now it came to pass that all men turned black and died, and that the
living Atla abode alone, bearing Mercury, whereof the Sun knoweth. Thus
came again the true men of Atlas, and their women, bearing gods and
goddesses. And the void suffered nothing, and the earth was at peace.
Now then indeed arose Art, and men builded, being blind. And there was
light, and some of the light wrought mischief. Wherefore the wise men
destroyed them with their Magic, and there is no record because it is
written in that which is." A sort of "Si" "monumentum quaeris,
circumspice" seems here implied. In any case there were clearly two gaps
unbridgeable between the early struggles of the settlers, the period of
great buildings, and the modern period, which proved stable of "houses."
The "houses" were only made possible by the perfecting of Zro, and this
helps considerably to fix the date. The next 2500 years were years of
peaceable progress; the labour-mills were run without a hitch, and the
next event was the discovery of black phophorus. It had been the custom
to worship the Atla with lights, and these lights had been candles of
yellow phosphorus in golden sheathes. At that time the Atla was veiled.
At one festival of Spring the veils were burnt up, the lights
extinguished, and the yellow phosphorus was found to have been turned
into the black powder. The Magicians examined this, and brought Zro to
its ninth stage. This revolutionized the condition of things: old age
and disease were no more, and death voluntary. Strangely enough this led
directly to the Great Conspiracy.

At the end of this period of 2500 years the system of "houses" was well
established. There were over 400 such "houses," each of perhaps 1000
souls on an average. These were governed by 4 "houses of houses" whose
rulers took orders from the High House, at the head of which was the
living Atla. The plain principle of Atla was revolution; and like all
revolutionary bodies, was obliged to adopt the strictest form of
autocracy. A democracy is always soddenly conservative. The only hope is
to catch it in one of its moments of crazy enthusiasm, and crush it
before it has time to recover. Caesar and Napoleon both did this as far
as they could: Cromwell and Porfirio Diaz did the same within narrower
limits.

Now a certain sophist --- for philosopher one cannot call him --- tried
to enunciate a magical law to the effect that the present standard of
life was all that could be desired; that further progress would be
harmful, that Venus was not worth attaining, and that the sole endeavour
of the Magicians should be to preserve things as they were. That such a
proposition could be supposed a "law" reflects no credit on its author
or its supporters. Yet of these it found many. The ninth stage of Zro
was a leap calculated to unsettle the calmest mind. Its reality had
begared the optimist's daydream. Poets had thrown down their
stilettos.**\[26\]** High Priests who had spent decades in hopeful
experiment saw their results attained by an entirely different method.
In short, two thirds of the people were infected with the heresy, and
hoped to hear it promulgated as a Law of Magic.

It should here be explained that every Law of Magic had its turn as the
principal law of practical working, and the school supporting any law,
or insisting on it, became prominent with it. Every dominant law in all
history had always been made insignificant by a new discovery about Zro,
or other matter of practical importance, just as the "Peace with Honour"
battle-cry of Disraeli was drowned by the calculation of the cost of
warships, soldiers and patriotism. Each step in Zro had consequently
implied the rise to power of a new school; and the sophist was
ambitious, and yet the law he wished to establish was the ruling law of
the servile races.

The "law" was accordingly sent to the High House for approval. Some
opposition may have been forseen, but no one was prepared for the
blackness of disapproval which actually radiated, striking hearts cold.
A course without precedent, no answer was vouchsafed. On the contrary,
even normal communication was suspended. The houses which favoured the
innovation --- 333 in numbers --- took counsel, came to the decision
that it was useless to oppose the High House, and were about to
acquiesce, when a woman who had once been in the presence of "To Her"
rose and thought vehemently "The Living Atla is the head of our
conspiracy." In other words, they were the loyalists, the Magicians of
the High House the rebels. This was why they had cut themselves off,
because their own head was against them. It was instantly resolved to go
to the High House, and demand the custody of "To Her." Nearing the goal,
however, a remnant of the ancient reverence half cowed even the
ringleaders --- I may mention that five of every six of the heretics
were women --- when they saw a stern phalanx of Magicians, its point
threatening their centre. As they wavered, a woman cried "They are only
men such as we are." The ranks stiffened; on all sides the army closed
upon the tiny phalanx, which only numbered 66 all told. It was then that
the truth was known. Ere a blow could be struck, the attacking party
vanished;

> \[\#26\] Needle-sharp daggers of Zro in its seventh stage were used to
> write on the rock walls of Atlas.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

it was instantaneous and complete annihilation. From that moment it was
certain that the ruling power in Atlas was Something**\[27\]**
infinitely more awful than the Living Atla. In order to avoid any
possible repetition of such a disaster --- for the Magicians of the High
House knew that any manifestation of the Supreme must undo the work of
centuries --- they gave out that they had become too terrible to look
upon, and for the future they always appeared with heavy veils, or
rather masks, since for the most part they were carven fantastically by
the wearers in their leisure hours. A further alteration was made in the
system of government. The head of one of the "houses of houses" was made
supreme: the High House took no part in affairs of state. Thus the Atla
was to all intents and purposes deposed, although the same reverence and
sacrifice were paid to it as formerly. It became a "constitutional
monarch," in our modern jargon.

The next thousand years were years of serious trial in other ways. The
toil of repopulation was excessive, and there was a revolt or rather
strike of the servile races, which was ended by the substitution of
"bread from heaven" for those products of the earth on which they had
formerly been fed, a diet which proved so adapted to their natures that
no labour troubles ever recurred.

The Greek legends of the wars between Gods, giants, Titans are
traditional of a real war or series of wars which continued with
intervals over 200 years. The enemy had developed naval armament to an
extreme. Their tactics were these:

1\. To wipe out the servile races and so to interfere with the
production of Zro.

2\. To rush and destroy the High House.

The first of these met with a great deal of success, the floating rock
being struck with projectiles and sunk. This occurred chiefly on the
outlaying islands, where they were not too much afraid to make raids in
force. They also sent epidemic disease of many kinds. Atlas was reduced
to such extremity in these ways that at one time the waterways were
forced and the assault on the High House was actually carried out,
bombardment continuing day and night for months together. Through a
misunderstanding of well known magical law, Atlanteans at that time
considered themselves prohibited from employing any other defence than
the rods and the cones of their forefathers; and these, it appears, were
useless against machinery, or against men protected by fortification in
such a way that they could not be got at from any quarter. Thus the
sharklike submarines of the enemy were unassailable. The war was
therefore at first entirely one-sided. A certain youthful Magician,
however, resolving to die for his country if need were, decided to
retaliate. He had found that Zro in its nascent state ("i.e." between
the globes) had the power of bringing about endothermic reaction,
seawater for example, becoming caustic soda and hydrochloric acid; and
further that this acid thus produced was many thousand times more active
than in its normal state. For example, the rock basins in which he
conducted his first experiment dissolved as rapidly as butter under
boiling oil. He then prepared a number of pairs of receiver-globes, and
dropped them in the vicinity of the enemy's submarines by night. In this
manner he destroyed the hulls of almost the whole fleet in a single
night; and the remainder fled in panic at dawn. They returned the
following year, carrying out daylight raids only and devoting themselves
chiefly to destroying the labour-mills. The young magician had been
rewarded for his services by being presented to the Atla, and this
example encouraged others to find means of attacking the invaders.
Artificial darkness was therefore invented, and combined with the former
method; but this was only partially successful, the tremendous pace of
the "sharks" enabling them to evade any threatening clouds. They did
enormous

> \[\#27\] This matter is not for open discussion. Even at this distant
> date it would be dangerous to do so much even as indulge in
> speculation.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

damage, and the supplies of Zro were seriously curtailed. Things now
went from bad to worse, and culminated in the attack on the High House,
the besiergers keeping their battleships surrounded by rafts of fire, so
that attack was impossible even by night. It was then that the High
House called on the heorism of its sons. Armed with long swords of Zro,
they plunged into the sea, to perish under the tooth of the "Zhee-Zhou,"
but not before they had time to hack the invading battleships to shreds.
Their floating torch-rafts only assisted the attack by directing the
swimmers to their quarry. The attack on the High House had aroused Atlas
at last. A counter invasion was plotted and carried out with immediate
and complete success, the enemy being exterminated, and their country
not merely ravaged but destroyed by arousing the forces of earthquake.
All activity of this kind however was deprecable, a recurrence was
guarded against by removing the High House to the lofty mountain
previously described, and a "house" was chosen to cultivate the art of
war, and entrusted with the duty of destroying any living thing that
might approach within a hundred miles of Atlas.

Only one other adventure of historical importance remains to be
recorded. It is the attempt of some foolish Atlanteans to found an
"Empire," and so to be entirely distinguished from the missionary effort
referred to previously. The original settlement of Atlas, as has been
the case with all flourishing colonies, was made by a few hardy
pioneers, who strengthened themselves gradually by growth. But Atlas in
her momentary madness poured out blood and treasure in the fatuous
attempt to impose alien domination on lands utterly unsuited to the
genius of the people. The idea, of course, was to increase the supply of
labour and consequently of crude Zro. In the first place the adventure
was expensive. It was uneconomical (in the scientific sense) to send
ships with less than 1000 fighting men. The Zro required for these meant
the employment of at least 7000 serviles, and the naval construction was
therefore of a colossal order. But although little difficulty was found
in conquering the country in the military sense, the natives had to be
almost exterminated, and the labour of the survivors proved difficult to
enforce. It was even then not a tenth as efficient as that of the
serviles at home. The imported serviles moreover caught native diseases,
and died in hundreds; and though by prodigious sacrifices the West
African Empire was kept going for nearly 200 years, it had to end at
last no less ingloriously than the French adventure in Mexico, or the
English in India, and South Africa.**\[28\]**

The main causes were the impossibility of breeding children in a climate
so unsuitable, even of maintaining their own women, and above all the
fact that the crude Zro was not of a quality equal to that obtained in
Atlas, and that the Zro generated by the Atlanteans themselves was not
to be made at all outside their own country. The lesson was learnt.
Until the end no further attempt was made to advance in any but the true
direction. The great majority of the colonists returned to Atlas; but
many, degenerating as is the fashion with colonists of this conquering
kind, abandoned Zro for gross food, intermarried with the natives, and
have generally degenerated yet further to races inferior even to the
present descendants of those who were in those days the equivalents of
the serviles of Atlas.

> \[\#28\] I write a little, but not much, in advance of the events. To
> illustrate the theory here advanced I will ask the reader to compare
> the results of the attempts to colonize America by (a) the whole
> military power of Spain at her zenith, (b) the handful of exiles in
> the "Mayflower."

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

### IX

### OF THE CATASTROPHE, ITS ANTECEDENTS AND PRESUMED CAUSES.

In my remarks on Zro I have a necessarily somewhat diffuse account of
the properties of this remarkable substance. It must now be made clearer
that the crude Zro in its nine stages produced by the serviles, and
consumed in the "houses" was in each stage of inferior quality to that
of the same degree produced by the Atlanteans, and consumed by the High
House. For example, the crude Zro was made in a labour-mill with all
sorts of insulations. The first stage of the priest's Zro could be made
anywhere and at any time, and naturally directed itself to the
receptable for it without any precautions. It must, I think, be presumed
that the Zro generated in the High House was again of far greater purity
and potency. Very little of it can have been used in the experiments of
the Magicians, and it is therefore necessary to account for enormous
quantities, produced during many centuries of uninterrupted labour. I
have, however, no data of any kind for this investigation; the mysteries
of the High House have ever been inscrutable, and were not wholly
delivered to the Heirs of Atlas. They must be rediscovered by the
Magicians of the new race. It may be that in some form or other the Zro
had been made stable, and used to impregnate the column which is alleged
to have been driven "through the Earth"; perhaps, and less improbably,
only to the depth of a few hundred miles. This column, however long it
may have been, had certainly its top immediately beneath the reservoir
of the High House. It had been completed about 70 years before the
"catastrophe" but apparently no effort was made to utilize it in any
way. To me it appears probable that in some one mind the whole
"catastrophe" was brooding, that the column was part of the device, and
that the event which I shall now describe was the other part.

This event was the birth of a child in the High House, a child without
the distinguishing mark of the daughters of Atlas. That any child at all
should have been born there is so incredible that I am inclined to
suspect an improper use of the word "born." I think rather that a
Magician brought Zro to its eleventh stage, when it takes human form,
and lives! The alternative theory is that of the "Angel of Venus"
described in the chapter on the Underground Gardens of Atlas. The
supporters of this theory hold that the child was not born of a
Priestess, but of the Living Atla.

In any case, the whole country gave itself up to unbridled rejoicing.
Work was carried on at a greater speed than ever before: one might say a
delirium of labour. For eleven years this continued without cessation,
and then without warning came the order to repair to the High House ---
every man, woman and child of Atlas. What was then done, I know not, and
dare not guess; that same day seven volunteers, heroic exiles from the
reward of so many centuries of toil, voluntary maroons on the discarded
planet, the Heirs of Atlas, turned their faces from the High House, and
severally sought distant mountains, there each to guard his share of the
Secrets of the Holy Race, and in due time to discover and train up fit
children of other races of the Earth so that one day another people
might be founded to undertake another such task as that now ended.

Hardly had the pinnacle of Atlas melted into the sea behind them, than
the "catastrophe" occurred. The High House and the column beneath it,
with all the inhabitants of Atlas, shot from the Earth with the
vehemence of a million lightnings, bound for that green blaze of glory
that scintillated in the West above the sunset.

Instantly the Earth, its god departed, gave itself up to anguish. The
sea rushed unto the void of the column and in a thousand earthquakes
Atlas, "houses" and plains together were overwhelmed forever in the
ocean. Tidal waves rolled round the world; everywhere great floods
carried away villages and towns; earthquakes roocked and tempest roared;
tumult was triumphant. For years after the catastrophe the dying tremors
of the Event still shook mankind with fear.**\[29\]** And the eternal
waves of the great mother rolled over Atlas, save where Earth in her
agony thrust up gaunt pinnacles, bare masts of wreckage to mark the
vanished continent. Save for its heirs, of whose successors it is my
highest honour to be the youngest and the least worthy, oblivion fell,
like one last night in which the Sun should be forever extinct, upon the
land of Atlas and its people.  
Shall such high purpose fail of emulation, such achievement and example
not excite us to like striving? Then let Earth fall indeed from her high
place in heaven, and mankind be outcast forever from the Sun! Men of
Earth! Seek out the heirs of Atlas; let them order you into a phalanx,
let them build you into a pyramid; that may pierce that appointed which
awaits you, to establish a new dynasty of Atlanteans to be the mainstay
and mainspring of the Earth, the pioneers of their own path to heaven,
and to our lord and Father, the Sun! And he put his hand upon his thigh,
and swore it.

By the ineffable " ," "Tla," and the holy Zro, did he swear it, and
entered into the body of the new Atla that is alive upon the Earth.

> \[\#29\] The Legend of the Deluge is derived from this event.
