[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030658)  [Next](1030660.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.v.xvi-p1"></span> 15. The whole stress, then, of this
question comes to this; whether it be true universally that no sin of
another, committed upon thee, is to be imputed to thee, if, being able
to avoid it by a lighter sin of thine own, thou do it not; or whether
there be an exception of all bodily defilement. No man says that a
person is defiled by being murdered, or cast into prison, or bound in
chains, or scourged, or afflicted with other tortures and pains, or
proscribed and made to suffer most grievous losses even to utter
nakedness, or stripped of honors, and subjected to great disgrace by
reproaches of whatsoever kind; whatever of all these a man may have
unjustly suffered, no man is so senseless as to say that he is thereby
defiled. But if he have filth poured all over him, or poured into his
mouth, or crammed into him, or if he be carnally used like a woman; then
almost all men regard him with a feeling of horror, and they call him
defiled and unclean. One must conclude then that the sins of others, be
they what they may, those always excepted which defile him on whom they
are committed, a man must not seek to avoid by sin of his own, either
for himself or for any other, but rather he must put up with them, and
suffer bravely; and if by no sins of his own he ought to avoid them,
therefore not by a lie: but those which by being committed upon a man do
make him unclean, these we are bound to avoid even by sinning ourselves;
and for this reason those things are not to be called sins, which are
done for the purpose of avoiding that uncleanness. For whatever is done,
in consideration that the not doing it were just cause of blame, that
thing is not sin. Upon the same principle, neither is that to be called
uncleanness when there is no way of avoiding it; for even in that
extremity he who suffers it has what he may do aright, namely, patiently
bear what he cannot avoid. Now no man while acting aright can be defiled
by any corporal contagion. For the unclean in the sight of God is every
one who is unrighteous; clean therefore is every one who is righteous;
if not in the sight of men, yet in the sight of God, Who judges without
error. Nay, even in the act of suffering that defilement with power
given of avoiding it, it is not by the mere contact that the man is
defiled; but by the sin of refusing to avoid it when he might. For that
would be no sin, whatever might be done for the avoiding of it. Whoever
therefore, for the avoiding of it, shall tell a lie, sinneth not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 16](1030660.md)
