[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030381)  [Next](1030383) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—Of the Method to Be Pursued in
Catechising Those Who Have Had a Liberal Education.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p2"></span>12. But there is another case which
evidently must not be overlooked. I mean the case of one coming to you
to receive catchetical instruction who has cultivated the field of
liberal studies, who has already made up his mind to be a Christian, and
who has betaken himself to you for the express purpose of becoming one.
It can scarcely fail to be the fact that a person of this character has
already acquired a considerable knowledge of our Scriptures and
literature; and, furnished with this, he may have come now simply with
the view of being made a partaker in the sacraments. For it is customary
with men of this class to inquire carefully into all things, not at the
very time when they are made Christians, but previous to that, and thus
early also to communicate and reason, with any whom they can reach, on
the subject of the feelings of their own minds. Consequently a brief
method of procedure should be adopted with these, so as not to inculcate
on them, in an odious fashion <span id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380)
things which they know already, but to pass over these with a light and
modest touch. Thus we should say how we believe that they are already
familiar with this and the other subject, and that we therefore simply
reckon up in a cursory manner all those facts which require to be
formally urged upon the attention of the uninstructed and unlearned. And
we should endeavor so to proceed, that, supposing this man of culture to
have been previously acquainted with any one of our themes, he may not
hear it now as from a teacher; and that, in the event of his being still
ignorant of any of them, he may yet learn the same while we are going
over the things with which we understand him to be already familiar.
Moreover, it is certainly not without advantage to interrogate the man
himself as to the means by which he was induced to desire to be a
Christian; so that, if you discover him to have been moved to that
decision by books, whether they be the canonical writings or the
compositions of literary men worth the studying, <span
id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381) you may say something about these
at the outset, expressing your approbation of them in a manner which may
suit the distinct merits which they severally possess, in respect of
canonical authority and of skillfully applied diligence on the part of
these expounders; <span id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382) and, in the
case of the canonical Scriptures, commending above all the most salutary
modesty (of language) displayed alongside their wonderful loftiness (of
subject); while, in those other productions you notice, in accordance
with the <span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ix-Page_291"></span>characteristic faculty of each several
writer, a style of a more sonorous and, as it were more rounded
eloquence adapted to minds that are prouder, and, by reason thereof
weaker. We should certainly also elicit from him some account of
himself, so that he may give us to understand what writer he chiefly
perused, and with what books he was more familiarly conversant, as these
were the means of moving him to wish to be associated with the church.
And when he has given us this information, then if the said books are
known to us, or if we have at least ecclesiastical report as our warrant
for taking them to have been written by some catholic man of note, we
should joyfully express our approbation. But if, on the other hand, he
has fallen upon the productions of some heretic and in ignorance, it may
be, has retained in his mind anything which <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383) the true faith condemns, and yet
supposes it to be catholic doctrine, then we must set ourselves
sedulously to teach him, bringing before him (in its rightful
superiority) the authority of the Church universal, and of other most
learned men reputed both for their disputations and for their writings
in (the cause of) its truth. <span id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384)
At the same time, it is to be admitted that even those who have departed
this life as genuine catholics, and have left to posterity some
Christian writings, in certain passages of their small works, either in
consequence of their failing to be understood, or (as the way is with
human infirmity) because they lack ability to pierce into the deeper
mysteries with the eye of the mind, and in (pursuing) the semblance of
what is true, wander from the truth itself, have proved an occasion to
the presumptuous and audacious for constructing and generating some
heresy. This, however, is not to be wondered at, when, even in the
instance of the canonical writings themselves, where all things have
been expressed in the soundest manner, we see how it has happened,—not
indeed through merely taking certain passages in a sense different from
that which the writer had in view or which is consistent with the truth
itself, (for if this were all, who would not gladly pardon human
infirmity, when it exhibits a readiness to accept correction?), but by
persistently defending, with the bitterest vehemence and in impudent
arrogance, opinions which they have taken up in perversity and
error,—many have given birth to many pernicious dogmas at the cost of
rending the unity of the (Christian) communion. All these subjects we
should discuss in modest conference with the individual who makes his
approach to the society of the Christian people, not in the character of
an uneducated man, <span id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385) as they
say, but in that of one who has passed through a finished culture and
training in the books of the learned. And in enjoining him to guard
against the errors of presumption, we should assume only so much
authority as that humility of his, which induced him to come to us, is
now felt to admit of. As to other things, moreover, in accordance with
the rules of saving doctrine, which require to be narrated or discussed,
whether they be matters relating to the faith, or questions bearing on
the moral life, or others dealing with temptations, all these should be
gone through in the manner which I have indicated, and ought therein to
be referred to the more excellent way (already noticed). <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[290:1381](1030382.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p3"></span> Reading *odiose*, for which several
<span class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>mss</span>. give
*otiose* = idly.

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[290:1382](1030382.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p4"></span> *Utilium tractatorum*

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[290:1383](1030382.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p5"></span> Reading *exponentium*. Various codices
give *ad exponendum* = in expounding.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[291:1384](1030382.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p6"></span> Reading *quod*, with Marriott. But if we
accept *quod* with the Benedictine editors, the sense will = and in
ignorance it may be that the true faith condemns them, has retained them
in his mind.

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[291:1385](1030382.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p7"></span> *Aliorumque doctissimorum hominum et
disputationibus et scriptionibus in ejus veritate florentium*. It may
also be = bringing before him the authority of the Church universal, as
well as both the disputations and the writings of other most learned men
well reputed in (the cause of) its truth.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[291:1386](1030382.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p8"></span> *Idiota*

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[291:1387](1030382.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
12.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.ix-p9.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="iv.iii.ix-p9.2"></span>.
See also above, § 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1030383)
