[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030440)  [Next](1030442.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xv-p1"></span> 14. But now I will proceed with what I
have begun, if I can, and I will so treat with you, as not in the mean
while to lay open the Catholic Faith, but, in order that they may search
out its great mysteries, to show to those who have a care for their
souls, hope of divine fruit, and of the discerning of truth. No one
doubts of him who seeks true religion, either that he already believes
that there is an immortal soul for that religion to profit, or that he
also wishes to find that very thing in this same religion. Therefore all
religion is for the sake of the soul; for howsoever the nature of the
body may be, it causes no care or anxiety, especially after death, to
him, whose soul possesses that whereby it is blessed. For the sake of
the soul, therefore, either alone or chiefly, hath true religion, if
there be any such, been appointed. But this soul, (I will consider for
what reason, and I confess the matter to be most obscure,) yet errs, and
is foolish, as we see, until it attain to and perceive wisdom, and
perhaps this very \[wisdom\] is true religion. I am not, am I, sending
you to fables? I am not, am I, forcing you to believe rashly? I say that
our soul entangled and sunk in error and folly seeks the way of truth,
if there be any such. If this be not your case, pardon me, I pray, and
share with me your wisdom; but if you recognize in yourself what I say,
let us, I entreat, together seek the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 15](1030442.md)
