[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030148)  [Next](1030150.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—The Mind is an Image of the
Trinity in Its Own Memory, and Understanding, and Will.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.xii-p2"></span>19. Are we, then, now to go upward,
with whatever strength of purpose we may, to that chiefest and highest
essence, of which the human mind is an inadequate image, yet an image?
Or are these same three things to be yet more distinctly made plain in
the soul, by means of those things which we receive from without,
through the bodily sense, wherein the knowledge of corporeal things is
impressed upon us in time? Since we found the mind itself to be such in
its own memory, and understanding, and will, that since it was
understood always to know and always to will itself, it was understood
also at the same time always to remember itself, always to understand
and love itself, although not always to think of itself as *separate*
from those things which are not itself; and hence its memory of itself,
and understanding of itself, are with difficult discerned in it. For in
this case, where these two things are very closely conjoined, and one is
not preceded by the other by any time at all, it looks as if they were
not two things, but one called by two names; and love itself is not so
plainly felt to exist when the sense of need does not disclose it, since
what is loved is always at hand. And hence these things may be more
lucidly set forth, even to men of duller minds, if such topics are
treated of as are brought within reach of the mind in time, and happen
to it in time; while it remembers what it did not remember before, and
sees what it did not see before, and loves what it did not love before.
But this discussion demands now another beginning, by reason of the
measure of the present book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XI](1030150.md)
