[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030153)  [Next](1030155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—How This Unity Comes to
Pass.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iv-p2"></span>7. But if that will which moves to and
fro, hither and thither, the eye that is to be informed, and unites it
when formed, shall have wholly converged to the inward phantasy, and
shall have absolutely turned the mind’s eye from the presence of the
bodies which lie around the senses, and from the very bodily senses
themselves, and shall have wholly turned it to that image, which is
perceived within; then so exact a likeness of the bodily species
expressed from the memory is presented, that not even reason itself is
permitted to discern whether the body itself is seen without, or only
something of the kind thought of within. For men sometimes either
allured or frightened by over-much thinking of visible things, have even
suddenly uttered words accordingly, as if in real fact they were engaged
in the very midst of such actions or sufferings. And I remember some one
telling me that he was wont to perceive in thought, so distinct and as
it were solid, a form of a female body, as to be moved, as though it
were a reality. Such power has the soul over its own body, and such
influence has it in turning and changing the quality of its
\[corporeal\] garment; just as a man may be affected when clothed, to
whom his clothing sticks. It is the same kind of affection, too, with
which we are beguiled through imaginations in sleep. But it makes a very
great difference, whether the senses of the body are lulled to torpor,
as in the case of sleepers, or disturbed from their inward structure, as
in the case of madmen, or distracted in some other mode, as in that of
diviners or prophets; and so from one or other of these causes, the
intention of the mind is forced by a kind of necessity upon those images
which occur to it, either from memory, or by some other hidden force
through certain spiritual commixtures of a similarly spiritual
substance: or whether, as sometimes happens to people in health and
awake, that the will occupied by thought turns itself away from the
senses, and so informs the eye of the mind by various images of sensible
things, as though those sensible things themselves were actually
perceived. But these impressions of images not only take place when the
will is directed upon such things by desiring them, but also when, in
order to avoid and guard against them, the mind is carried away to look
upon these very thing so as to *flee* from them. And hence, not only
desire, but fear, causes both the bodily eye to be informed by the
sensible things themselves, and the mental eye (*acies*) by the images
of those sensible things. Accordingly, the more vehement has been either
fear or desire, the more distinctly is the eye informed, whether in the
case of him who \[sensuously\] perceives by means of the body that which
lies close to him in place, or in the case of him who conceives from the
image of the body which is contained in the memory. What then a body in
place is to the bodily sense, that, the similitude of a body in memory
is to the eye of the mind; and what the vision of one who looks at a
thing is to that appearance of the body from which the sense is
informed, that, the vision of a concipient is to the image of the body
established in the memory, from which the eye of the mind is informed;
and what the intention of the will is towards a body seen and the vision
to be combined with it, in order that a certain unity of three things
may therein take place, although their nature is diverse, that, the same
intention of the will is towards combining the image of the body which
is in the memory, and the vision of the concipient, that is, the form
which the eye of the mind has taken in returning to the memory, in order
that here too a certain unity may take place of three things, not now
distinguished by diversity of nature, but of one and the same substance;
because this whole is within, and the whole is one mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030155)
