[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030385)  [Next](1030387.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—Of the Remedy for the Third
Source of Weariness.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p2"></span>17. Once more, however, we often feel
it very wearisome to go over repeatedly matters which are thoroughly
familiar, and adapted (rather) to children. If this is the case with us,
then we should endeavor to meet them with a brother’s, a father’s, and a
mother’s love; and, if we are once united with them thus in heart, to us
no less than to them will these things seem new. For so great is the
power of a sympathetic disposition of mind, that, as they are affected
while we are speaking, and we are affected while they are learning, we
have our dwelling in each other; and thus, at one and the same time,
they as it were in us speak what they hear, and we in them learn after a
certain fashion what we teach. Is it not a common occurrence with us,
that when we show to persons, who have never seen them, certain spacious
and beautiful tracts, either in cities or in fields, which we have been
in the habit of passing by without any sense of pleasure, simply because
we have become so accustomed to the sight of them, we find our own
enjoyment renewed in their enjoyment of the novelty of the scene? And
this is so much the more our experience in proportion to the intimacy of
our friendship with them; because, just as we are in them in virtue of
the bond of love, in the same degree do things become new to us which
previously were old. But if we ourselves have made any considerable
progress in the contemplative study of things, it is not our wish that
those whom we love should simply be gratified and astonished as they
gaze upon the works of men’s hands; but it becomes our wish to lift them
to (the contemplation of) the very skill <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407.md) or wisdom of their author, and from
this to (see them) rise to the admiration and praise of the all-creating
God, with whom <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408.md) is the most
fruitful end of love. How much more, then, ought we to be delighted when
men come to us with the purpose already formed of obtaining the
knowledge of God Himself, with a view to (the knowledge of) whom all
things should be learned which are to be learned! And how ought we to
feel ourselves renewed in their newness (of experience), so that if our
ordinary preaching is somewhat frigid, it may rise to fresh warmth under
(the stimulus of) their extraordinary hearing! There is also this
additional consideration to help us in the attainment of gladness,
namely, that we ponder and bear in mind out of what death of error the
man is passing over into the life of faith. And if we walk through
streets which are most familiar to us, with a beneficent cheerfulness,
when we happen to be pointing out the way to some individual who had
been in distress in consequence of missing his direction, how much more
should be the alacrity of spirit, and how much greater the joy with
which, in the matter of saving doctrine, we ought to traverse again and
again even those tracks which, so far as we are ourselves concerned,
there is no need to open up any more; seeing that we are leading a
miserable soul, and one worn out with the devious courses of this world,
through the paths of peace, at the command of Him who made that
peace <span id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409.md) good to us!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[295:1408](1030386.htm#fr_1407.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p3"></span> Some editions read *arcem* =
stronghold, instead of *artem*.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[295:1409](1030386.htm#fr_1408.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p4"></span> Or = wherein: *ubi*.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[295:1410](1030386.htm#fr_1409.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p5"></span> Instead of *eam*, the reading *ea* =
those things, also occurs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1030387.md)
