[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030238)  [Next](1030240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Against Eunomius, Saying that
the Son of God is the Son, Not of His Nature, But of His Will. Epilogue
to What Has Been Said Already.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p2"></span>38. Wherefore the logic of Eunomius,
from whom the Eunomian heretics sprang, is ridiculous. For when he could
not understand, and would not believe, that the only-begotten Word of
God, by which all things were made is the Son of God by nature,—*i.e.*
born of the substance of the Father,—he alleged that He was not the Son
of His own nature or substance or essence, but the Son of the will of
God; so as to mean to assert that the will by which he begot the Son was
something accidental \[and optional\] to God,—to wit, in that way that
we ourselves sometimes will something which before we did not will, as
though it was not for these very things that our nature is perceived to
be changeable,—a thing which far be it from us to believe of God. For it
is written, “Many are the thoughts in the heart of man, but the counsel
of the Lord abideth for ever,” <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) for no other reason except that we
may understand or believe that as God is eternal, so is His counsel for
eternity, and therefore unchangeable, as He himself is. And what is said
of thoughts can most truly be said also of the will: there are many
wills in the heart of man, but the will of the Lord abideth for ever.
Some, again, to escape saying that the only-begotten Word is the Son of
the counsel or will of God, have affirmed the same Word to be the
counsel or will itself of the Father. But it is better in my judgment to
say counsel of counsel, and will of will, as substance of substance,
wisdom of wisdom, that we may not be led into that absurdity, which we
have refuted already, and say that the Son makes the Father wise or
willing, if the Father has not in His own substance either counsel or
will. It was certainly a sharp answer that somebody gave to the heretic,
who most subtly asked him whether God begat the Son willingly or
unwillingly, in order that if he said unwillingly, it would follow most
absurdly that God was miserable; but if willingly, he would forthwith
infer, as though by an invincible reason, that at which he was aiming,
*viz*. that He was the Son, not of His nature, but of His will. But that
other, with great wakefulness, demanded of him in turn, whether God the
Father was God willingly or unwillingly; in order that if he answered
unwillingly, that misery would follow, which to believe of God is sheer
madness; and if he said willingly, it would be replied to him, Then He
is God too by His own will, not by His nature. What remained, then,
except that he should hold his peace, and discern that he was himself
bound by his own question in an insoluble bond? But if any person in the
Trinity is also to be specially called the will of God, this name, like
love, is better suited to the Holy Spirit; for what else is love, except
will?

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p4"></span>39. I see that my argument in this
book respecting the Holy Spirit, according to the Holy Scripture, is
quite enough for faithful men who know already that the Holy Spirit is
God, and not of another substance, nor less than the Father and the
Son,—as we have shown to be true in the former books, according to the
same Scriptures. We have reasoned also from the creature which God made,
and, as far as we could, have warned those who demand a reason on such
subjects to behold and understand His invisible things, so far as they
could, by those things which are made <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036) and especially by the rational or
intellectual creature which is made after the image of God; through
which glass, so to say, they might discern as far as they could, if they
could, the Trinity which is God, in our own memory, understanding, will.
Which three things, if any one intelligently regards as by nature
divinely appointed in his own mind, and remembers by memory,
contemplates by <span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xx-Page_221"></span>understanding, embraces by love, how
great a thing that is in the mind, whereby even the eternal and
unchangeable nature can be recollected, beheld, desired, doubtless that
man finds an image of that highest Trinity. And he ought to refer the
whole of his life to the remembering, seeing, loving that highest
Trinity, in order that he may recollect, contemplate, be delighted by
it. But I have warned him, so far as seemed sufficient, that he must not
so compare this image thus wrought by that Trinity, and by his own fault
changed for the worse, to that same Trinity as to think it in all points
like to it, but rather that he should discern in that likeness, of
whatever sort it be, a great unlikeness also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[220:1036](1030239.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p3"></span> [Prov.
19.21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p3.1"></span>[Prov. xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021)<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[220:1037](1030239.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p5"></span> [Rom.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p5.1"></span>[Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.xvii.xx-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1030240)
