[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030181)  [Next](1030183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xv.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—The Will to Possess Blessedness
is One in All, But the Variety of Wills is Very Great Concerning that
Blessedness Itself.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.iv-p2"></span>7. It is wonderful, however, since the
will to obtain and retain blessedness is one in all, whence comes, on
the other hand, such a variety and diversity of wills concerning that
blessedness itself; not that any one is unwilling to have it, but that
all do not know it. For if all knew it, it would not be thought by some
to be in goodness of mind; by others, in pleasure of body; by others, in
both; and by some in one thing, by others in another. For as men find
special delight in this thing or that, so have they placed in it their
idea of a blessed life. How, then, do all love so warmly what not all
know? Who can love what he does not know?—a subject which I have already
discussed in the preceding books. <span
id="fr_799"></span>[800](#fn_799.md) Why, therefore, is blessedness loved
by all, when it is not known by all? Is it perhaps that all know what it
is itself, but all do not know where it is to be found, and that the
dispute arises from this?—as if, forsooth, the business was about some
place in this world, where every one ought to will to live who wills to
live blessedly; and as if the question where blessedness is were not
implied in the question what it is. For certainly, if it is in the
pleasure of the body, he is blessed who enjoys the pleasure of the body;
if in goodness of mind, he has it who enjoys this; if in both, he who
enjoys both. When, therefore, one says, to live blessedly is to enjoy
the pleasure of the body; but another, to live blessedly is to enjoy
goodness of mind; is it not, that either both know, or both do not know,
what a blessed life is? How, then, do both love it, if no one can love
what he does not know? Or is that perhaps false which we have assumed to
be most true and most certain, *viz*. that all men will to live
blessedly? For if to live blessedly is, for argument’s sake, to live
according to goodness of mind, how does he will to live blessedly who
does not will this? Should we not say more truly, That man does not will
to live blessedly, because he does not wish to live according to
goodness, which alone is to live blessedly? Therefore all men do not
will to live blessedly; on the contrary, few wish it; if to live
blessedly is nothing else but to live according to goodness of mind,
which many do not will to do. Shall we, then, hold that to be false of
which the Academic Cicero himself did not doubt (although Academics
doubt every thing), who, when he wanted in the dialogue *Hortensius* to
find some certain thing, of which no one doubted, from which to start
his argument, says, We certainly all will to be blessed? Far be it from
me to say this is false. But what then? Are we to say that, although
there is no other way of living blessedly than living according to
goodness of mind, yet even he who does not will this, wills to live
blessedly? This, indeed, seems too absurd. For it is much as if we
should say, Even he who does not will to live blessedly, wills to live
blessedly. Who could listen to, who could endure, such a contradiction?
And yet necessity thrusts us into this strait, if it is both true that
all will to live blessedly, and yet all do not will to live in that way
in which alone one can live blessedly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_799"></span>[170:800](1030182.htm#fr_799.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.iv-p3"></span> Bks. viii. c. 4, etc., x. c. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030183.md)
