[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030207)  [Next](1030209.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Whether Justice and the Other
Virtues Cease to Exist in the Future Life.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.ix-p2"></span>12. There is, however, some question
raised, whether the virtues likewise by which one lives well in this
present mortality, seeing that they themselves begin also to be in the
mind, which was a mind none the less when it existed before without
them, cease also to exist at that time when they have brought us to
things eternal. For some have thought that they will cease, and in the
case of three—prudence, fortitude, temperance—such an assertion seems to
have something in it; but justice is immortal, and will rather then be
made perfect in us than cease to be. Yet Tullius, the great author of
eloquence, when arguing in the dialogue *Hortensius*, says of all four:
“If we were allowed, when we migrated from this life, to live forever in
the islands of the blessed, as fables tell, what need were there of
eloquence when there would be no trials, or what need, indeed, of the
very virtues themselves? For we should not need fortitude when nothing
of either toil or danger was proposed to us; nor justice, when there was
nothing of anybody else’s to be coveted; nor temperance, to govern lasts
that would not exist; nor, indeed, should we need prudence, when there
was no choice offered between good and evil. We should be blessed,
therefore, solely by learning and knowing nature, by which alone also
the life of the gods is praiseworthy. And hence we may perceive that
everything else is a matter of necessity, but this is one of free
choice.” This great orator, then, when proclaiming the excellence of
philosophy, going over again all that he had learned from philosophers,
and excellently and pleasantly explaining it, has affirmed all four
virtues to be necessary in this life only, which we see to be full of
troubles and mistakes; but not one of them when we shall have migrated
from this life, if we are permitted to live there where is a blessed
life; but that blessed souls are blessed only in learning and knowing,
*i.e.* in the contemplation of nature, than which nothing is better and
more lovable. It is that nature which created and appointed all other
natures. And if it belongs to justice to be subject to the government of
this nature then justice is certainly immortal; nor will it cease to be
in that blessedness, but will be such and so great that it cannot be
more perfect or greater. Perhaps, too, the other three virtues—prudence
although no longer with any risk of error, and fortitude without the
vexation of bearing evils, and temperance without the thwarting of
lust—will exist in that blessedness: so that it may be the part of
prudence to prefer or equal no good thing to God; and of fortitude, to
cleave to Him most steadfastly; and of temperance, to be pleased by no
harmful defect. But that which justice is now concerned with in helping
the wretched, and prudence in guarding against treachery, and fortitude
in bearing troubles patiently, and temperance in controlling evil
pleasures, will not exist there, where there will be no evil at all. And
hence those acts of the virtues which are necessary to this mortal life,
like the faith to which they are to be referred, will be reckoned among
things past; and they make now a different trinity, whilst we hold, look
at, and love them as present, from that which they will then make, when
we shall discover them not to be, but to have been, by certain traces of
them which they will have left in passing in the memory; since then,
too, there will be a trinity, when that trace, be it of what sort it
may, shall be retained in the memory, and truly recognized, and then
these two be joined by will as a third.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030209.md)
