[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030412)  [Next](1030414.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—Of the Catholic Church, the
Remission of Sins, and the Resurrection of the Flesh.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p2"></span>—Inasmuch, I repeat, as this is the case,
we believe also in <span class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>The
Holy Church</span>, \[intending thereby\] assuredly the <span
class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.xi-p2.2"></span> Catholic</span>. For both
heretics and schismatics style their congregations churches. But
heretics, in holding false opinions regarding God, do injury to the
faith itself; while schismatics, on the other hand, in wicked
separations break off from brotherly charity, although they may believe
just what we believe. Wherefore neither do the heretics belong to the
Church catholic, which loves God; nor do the schismatics form a part of
the same, inasmuch as it loves the neighbor, and consequently readily
forgives the neighbor’s sins, because it prays that forgiveness may be
extended to itself by Him who has reconciled us to Himself, doing away
with all past things, and calling us to a new life. And until we reach
the perfection of this new life, we cannot be without sins. Nevertheless
it is a matter of consequence of what sort those sins may be.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p3"></span>22. Neither ought we only to treat of the
difference between sins, but we ought most thoroughly to believe that
those things in which we sin are in no way forgiven us, if we show
ourselves severely unyielding in the matter of forgiving the sins of
others. <span id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634.md) Thus, then, we
believe also in <span class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.xi-p4.2"></span>The
Remission of Sins.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p5"></span>23. And inasmuch as there are three things
of which man consists,—namely, spirit, soul, and body,—which again are
spoken of as two, because frequently the soul is named along with the
spirit; for a certain rational portion of the same, of which beasts are
devoid, is called spirit: the principal part in us is the spirit; next,
the life whereby we are united with the body is called the soul;
finally, the body itself, as it is visible, is the last part in us. This
“whole creation” (*creatura*), however, “groaneth and travaileth until
now.” <span id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635.md) Nevertheless, He has
given it the first-fruits of the Spirit, in that it has believed God,
and is now of a good will. <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636.md)
This spirit is also called the mind, regarding which an apostle speaks
thus: “With the mind I serve the law of God.” <span
id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637.md) Which apostle likewise expresses
himself thus in another passage: “For God is my witness, whom I serve in
my spirit.” <span id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638.md) Moreover, the
soul, when as yet it lusts after carnal good things, is called the
flesh. For a certain part thereof resists <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639.md) the Spirit, not in virtue of
nature, but in virtue of the custom of sins; whence it is said, “With
the mind I serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.” And
this custom has been turned into a nature, according to mortal
generation, by the sin of the first man. Consequently it is also written
in this wise, “And we were sometime by nature the children of
wrath,” <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640.md) that is, of
vengeance, through which it has come to pass that we serve the law of
sin. The nature of the soul, however, is perfect when it is made subject
to its own spirit, and when it follows that spirit as the same follows
God. Therefore “the animal man <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641.md) receiveth not the things which are
of the Spirit of God.” <span id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642.md) But
the soul is not so speedily subdued to the spirit <span id="page_332">p.
332</span> <span id="iv.iv.xi-Page_332"></span>unto good action, as is
the spirit to God unto true faith and goodwill; but sometimes its
impetus, whereby it moves downwards into things carnal and temporal, is
more tardily bridled. But inasmuch as this same soul is also made pure,
and receives the stability of its own nature, under the dominance of the
spirit, which is the head for it, which head of the said soul has again
its own head in Christ, we ought not to despair of the restoration of
the body also to its own proper nature. But this certainly will not be
effected so speedily as is the case with the soul; just as the soul too,
is not restored so speedily as the spirit. Yet it will take place in the
appropriate season, at the last trump, when “the dead shall rise
uncorrupted, and we shall be changed.” <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643.md) And accordingly we believe also in
<span class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.xi-p14.3"></span>The Resurrection of
the Flesh</span>, to wit, not merely that that soul, which at present by
reason of carnal affections is called the flesh, is restored; but that
it shall be so likewise with this visible flesh, which is the flesh
according to nature, the name of which has been received by the soul,
not in virtue of nature, but in reference to carnal affections: this
visible flesh, then, I say, which is the flesh properly so called, must
without doubt be believed to be destined to rise again. For the Apostle
Paul appears to point to this, as it were, with his finger, when he
says, “This corruptible must put on incorruption.” <span
id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644.md) For when he says *this*, he, as it
were, directs his finger toward it. Now it is that which is visible that
admits of being pointed out with the finger; since the soul might also
have been called corruptible, for it is itself corrupted by vices of
manners. And when it is read, “and this mortal \[must\] put on
immortality,” the same visible flesh is signified, inasmuch as at it
ever and anon the finger is thus as it were pointed. For the soul also
may thus in like manner be called mortal, even as it is designated
corruptible in reference to vices of manners. For assuredly it is “the
death of the soul to apostatize from God;” <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645.md) which is its first sin in Paradise,
as it is contained in the sacred writings.

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p17"></span>24. Rise again, therefore, the body will,
according to the Christian faith, which is incapable of deceiving. And
if this appears incredible to any one, \[it is because\] he looks simply
to what the flesh is at present, while he fails to consider of what
nature it shall be hereafter. For at that time of angelic change it will
no more be flesh and blood, but only body. <span
id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646.md) For when the apostle speaks of the
flesh, he says, “There is one flesh of cattle, another of birds, another
of fishes, another of creeping things: there are also both celestial
bodies and terrestrial bodies.” <span
id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647.md) Now what he has said here is not
“celestial flesh,” but “both celestial bodies and terrestrial bodies.”
For all flesh is also body; but every body is not also flesh. In the
first instance, \[for example, this holds good\] in the case of those
terrestrial bodies, inasmuch as wood is body, but not flesh. In the case
of man, again, or in that of cattle, we have both body and flesh. In the
case of celestial bodies, on the other hand, there is no flesh, but only
those simple and lucent bodies which the apostle designates spiritual,
while some call them ethereal. And consequently, when he says, “Flesh
and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God,” <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648.md) that does not contradict the
resurrection of the flesh; but the sentence predicates what will be the
nature of that hereafter which at present is flesh and blood. And if any
one refuses to believe that the flesh is capable of being changed into
the sort of nature thus indicated, he must be led on, step by step, to
this faith. For if you require of him whether earth is capable of being
changed into water, the nearness of the thing will make it not seem
incredible to him. Again, if you inquire whether water is capable of
being changed into air, he replies that this also is not absurd, for the
elements are near each other. And if, on the subject of the air, it is
asked whether that can be changed into an ethereal, that is, a celestial
body, the simple fact of the nearness at once convinces him of the
possibility of the thing. But if, then, he concedes that through such
gradations it is quite a possible thing that earth should be changed
into an ethereal body, why does he refuse to believe, when that will of
God, too, enters in addition, whereby a human body had power to walk
upon the waters, that the same change is capable of being effected with
the utmost rapidity, precisely in accordance with the saying, “in the
twinkling of an eye,” <span id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649.md) and
without any such gradations, even as, according to common wont, smoke is
changed into flame with marvellous quickness? For our flesh assuredly is
of earth. But philosophers, on the ground of whose arguments opposition
is for the most part offered to the resurrection of the flesh, so far as
in these they assert that no terrene body can possibly exist in heaven,
yet concede that any kind of body may be converted and <span
id="page_333">p. 333</span> <span id="iv.iv.xi-Page_333"></span>changed
into every \[other\] sort of body. And when this resurrection of the
body has taken place, being set free then from the condition of time, we
shall fully enjoy <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.xi-p21.3"></span>Eternal Life</span> in ineffable love and
steadfastness, without corruption. <span
id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650.md) For “then shall be brought to pass
the saying which is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. Where is,
O death, thy sting? Where is, O death, thy contention?” <span
id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651.md)

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p24"></span>25. This is the faith which in few words
is given in the Creed to Christian novices, to be held by them. And
these few words are known to the faithful, to the end that in believing
they may be made subject to God; that being made subject, they may
rightly live; that in rightly living, they may make the heart pure; that
with the heart made pure, they may understand that which they believe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[331:1635](1030413.htm#fr_1634.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p4"></span> [Matt.
6.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[331:1636](1030413.htm#fr_1635.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p6"></span> [Rom.
8.22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[331:1637](1030413.htm#fr_1636.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p7"></span> Reading *spiritus*. Taking *spiritus*,
the sense might be = Nevertheless, the spirit hath imparted the
first-fruits, in that it has believed God, and is now of a good will.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[331:1638](1030413.htm#fr_1637.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p8"></span> [Rom.
7.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p8.1"></span>[Rom. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[331:1639](1030413.htm#fr_1638.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p9"></span> [Rom.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p9.1"></span>[Rom. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[331:1640](1030413.htm#fr_1639.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p10"></span> Instead of *caro nominatur. Pars enim
ejus quœdam resistit*, etc., some good <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.xi-p10.1"></span>mss</span>. read *caro nominatur et
resistit*, etc. = is called the flesh, and resists, etc.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[331:1641](1030413.htm#fr_1640.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p11"></span> [Eph.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p11.1"></span>[Eph. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[331:1642](1030413.htm#fr_1641.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p12"></span> *Animalis homo*, literally = "the"
*soulish* man.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[331:1643](1030413.htm#fr_1642.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p13.1"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[332:1644](1030413.htm#fr_1643.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
15.52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p14.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[332:1645](1030413.htm#fr_1644.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
15.53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p15.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[332:1646](1030413.htm#fr_1645.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p16"></span> The text gives, *Mors quippe animæ est
apostatare a Deo*. The reference, perhaps, is to [Ecclus.
10.12](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p16.1"></span>[Ecclus. x.
12](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p16.2"></span>,
where the Vulgate has, *initium superbiœ hominis, apostatare a Deo*.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[332:1647](1030413.htm#fr_1646.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p18"></span> Augustin refers to this statement in the
passage quoted from the *Retractations* in the Introductory Notice
above.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[332:1648](1030413.htm#fr_1647.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p19"></span> [1 Cor.
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#039.md),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#040.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p19.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#039.md),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#040.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[332:1649](1030413.htm#fr_1648.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p20"></span> [1 Cor.
15.50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p20.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
50](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#050.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[332:1650](1030413.htm#fr_1649.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
15.52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.iv.xi-p21.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[333:1651](1030413.htm#fr_1650.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p21.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p22"></span> Instead of *a temporis conditione
liberati, æterna vita ineffabili caritate atque stabilitate sine
corruptione per fruemur*, several <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.xi-p22.1"></span>mss</span>. read, *corpus a temporis
conditione liberatum æterna vita ineffabili caritate per fruetur* = the
body, set free from the condition of time, shall fully enjoy eternal
life in ineffable love.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[333:1652](1030413.htm#fr_1651.md) <span
id="iv.iv.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xi-p23"></span> [1 Cor.
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054.md),
[55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p23.1"></span>[1
Cor. 15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054.md),
[55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055.md)<span id="iv.iv.xi-p23.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Faith of Things Not Seen.](1030414.md)
