[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030244)  [Next](1030246.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 26.—The Holy Spirit Twice Given
by Christ. The Procession of the Holy Spirit from the Father and from
the Son is Apart from Time, Nor Can He Be Called the Son of Both.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p2"></span>Further, in that Highest Trinity
which is <span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-Page_224"></span>God, there are no intervals of time,
by which it could be shown, or at least inquired, whether the Son was
born of the Father first and then afterwards the Holy Spirit proceeded
from both; since Holy Scripture calls Him the Spirit of both. For it is
He of whom the apostle says, “But because ye are sons, God hath sent
forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts:” <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046.md) and it is He of whom the same Son
says, “For it is not ye who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who
speaketh in you.” <span id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047.md) And it is
proved by many other testimonies of the Divine Word, that the Spirit,
who is specially called in the Trinity the Holy Spirit, is of the Father
and of the Son: of whom likewise the Son Himself says, “Whom I will send
unto you from the Father;” <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048.md)
and in another place, “Whom the Father will send in my name.” <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049.md) And we are so taught that He
proceeds from both, because the Son Himself says, He proceeds from the
Father. And when He had risen from the dead, and had appeared to His
disciples, “He breathed upon them, and said, Receive the Holy
Ghost,” <span id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050.md) so as to show that He
proceeded also from Himself. And Itself is that very “power that went
out from Him,” as we read in the Gospel, “and healed them all.” <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051.md)

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p9"></span>46. But the reason why, after His
resurrection, He both gave the Holy Spirit, first on earth, <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052.md) and afterwards sent Him from
heaven, <span id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053.md) is in my judgment
this: that “love is shed abroad in our hearts,” <span
id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054.md) by that Gift itself, whereby we
love God and our neighbors, according to those two commandments, “on
which hang all the law and the prophets.” <span
id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055.md) And Jesus Christ, in order to
signify this, gave to them the Holy Spirit, once upon earth, on account
of the love of our neighbor, and a second time from heaven, on account
of the love of God. And if some other reason may perhaps be given for
this double gift of the Holy Spirit, at any rate we ought not to doubt
that the same Holy Spirit was given when Jesus breathed upon them, of
whom He by and by says, “Go, baptize all nations in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,” where this Trinity is
especially commended to us. It is therefore He who was also given from
heaven on the day of Pentecost, *i.e.* ten days after the Lord ascended
into heaven. How, therefore, is He not God, who gives the Holy Spirit?
Nay, how great a God is He who gives God! For no one of His disciples
gave the Holy Spirit, since they prayed that He might come upon those
upon whom they laid their hands: they did not give Him themselves. And
the Church preserves this custom even now in the case of her rulers.
Lastly, Simon Magus also, when he offered the apostles money, does not
say, “Give me also this power, that I may give” the Holy Spirit; but,
“that on whomsoever I may lay my hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.”
Because neither had the Scriptures said before, And Simon, seeing that
the apostles gave the Holy Spirit; but it had said, “And Simon, seeing
that the Holy Spirit was given by the laying on of the apostles’
hands.” <span id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056.md) Therefore also the
Lord Jesus Christ Himself not only gave the Holy Spirit as God, but also
received it as man, and therefore He is said to be full of grace, <span
id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057.md) and of the Holy Spirit. <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058.md) And in the Acts of the Apostles it
is more plainly written of Him, “Because God anointed Him with the Holy
Spirit.” <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1060](#fn_1059.md) Certainly not with
visible oil but with the gift of grace which is signified by the visible
ointment wherewith the Church anoints the baptized. And Christ was
certainly not then anointed with the Holy Spirit, when He, as a dove,
descended upon Him at His baptism. <span
id="fr_1060"></span>[1061](#fn_1060.md) For at that time He deigned to
prefigure His body, *i.e.* His Church, in which especially the baptized
receive the Holy Spirit. But He is to be understood to have been then
anointed with that mystical and invisible unction, when the Word of God
was made flesh, <span id="fr_1061"></span>[1062](#fn_1061.md) *i.e.* when
human nature, without any precedent merits of good works, was joined to
God the Word in the womb of the Virgin, so that with it it became one
person. Therefore it is that we confess Him to have been born of the
Holy Spirit and of the Virgin Mary. For it is most absurd to believe Him
to have received the Holy Spirit when He was near thirty years old: for
at that age He was baptized by John; <span
id="fr_1062"></span>[1063](#fn_1062.md) but that He came to baptism as
without any sin at all, so not without the Holy Spirit. For if it was
written of His servant and forerunner John himself, “He shall be filled
with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother’s womb,” <span
id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063.md) because, although generated by his
father, yet he received the Holy Spirit when formed in the womb; what
must be understood and believed of the man Christ, of whose flesh the
very conception was not carnal, but spiritual? Both natures, too, as
well the human as the divine, are shown in that also that is written of
Him, that He received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, and
shed forth the Holy Spirit: <span id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064.md)
seeing <span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-Page_225"></span>that He received as man, and shed
forth as God. And we indeed can receive that gift according to our small
measure, but assuredly we cannot shed it forth upon others; but, that
this may be done, we invoke over them God, by whom this is accomplished.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p23"></span>47. Are we therefore able to ask
whether the Holy Spirit had already proceeded from the Father when the
Son was born, or had not yet proceeded; and when He was born, proceeded
from both, wherein there is no such thing as distinct times: just as we
have been able to ask, in a case where we do find times, that the will
proceeds from the human mind first, in order that that may be sought
which, when found, may be called offspring; which offspring being
already brought forth or born, that will is made perfect, resting in
this end, so that what had been its desire when seeking, is its love
when enjoying; which love now proceeds from both, *i.e.* from the mind
that begets, and from the notion that is begotten, as if from parent and
offspring? These things it is absolutely impossible to ask in this case,
where nothing is begun in time, so as to be perfected in a time
following. Wherefore let him who can understand the generation of the
Son from the Father without time, understand also the procession of the
Holy Spirit from both without time. And let him who can understand, in
that which the Son says, “As the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He
given to the Son to have life in Himself,” <span
id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065.md) not that the Father gave life to
the Son already existing without life, but that He so begat Him apart
from time, that the life which the Father gave to the Son by begetting
Him is co-eternal with the life of the Father who gave it: <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066.md) let him, I say, understand, that as
the Father has in Himself that the Holy Spirit should proceed from Him,
so has He given to the Son that the same Holy Spirit should proceed from
Him, and be both apart from time: and that the Holy Spirit is so said to
proceed from the Father as that it be understood that His proceeding
also from the Son, is a property derived by the Son from the Father. For
if the Son has of the Father whatever He has, then certainly He has of
the Father, that the Holy Spirit proceeds also from Him. But let no one
think of any times therein which imply a sooner and a later; because
these things are not there at all. How, then, would it not be most
absurd to call Him the Son of both: when, just as generation from the
Father, without any changeableness of nature, gives to the Son essence,
without beginning of time; so procession from both, without any
changeableness of nature, gives to the Holy Spirit essence without
beginning of time? For while we do not say that the Holy Spirit is
begotten, yet we do not therefore dare to say that He is unbegotten,
lest any one suspect in this word either two Fathers in that Trinity, or
two who are not from another. For the Father alone is not from another,
and therefore He alone is called unbegotten, not indeed in the
Scriptures, <span id="fr_1067"></span>[1068](#fn_1067.md) but in the usage
of disputants, who employ such language as they can on so great a
subject. And the Son is born of the Father; and the Holy Spirit proceeds
from the Father principally, the Father giving the procession without
any interval of time, yet in common from both \[Father and Son\]. <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[1069](#fn_1068.md) But He would be called the Son of
the Father and of the Son, if—a thing abhorrent to the feeling of all
sound minds—both had *begotten* Him. Therefore the Spirit of both is not
begotten of both, but proceeds from both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[224:1047](1030245.htm#fr_1046.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p3"></span> [Gal.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[224:1048](1030245.htm#fr_1047.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p4"></span> [Matt.
10.20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[224:1049](1030245.htm#fr_1048.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p5"></span> [John
15.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>[John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[224:1050](1030245.htm#fr_1049.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p6"></span> [John
14.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>[John xiv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[224:1051](1030245.htm#fr_1050.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p7"></span> [John
20.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>[John xx.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[224:1052](1030245.htm#fr_1051.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p8"></span> [Luke
6.19](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>[Luke vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[224:1053](1030245.htm#fr_1052.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p10"></span> [John
20.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>[John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[224:1054](1030245.htm#fr_1053.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p11"></span> [Acts
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>[Acts. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[224:1055](1030245.htm#fr_1054.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p12"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>[Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[224:1056](1030245.htm#fr_1055.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p13"></span> [Matt.
22.37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[224:1057](1030245.htm#fr_1056.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p14"></span> [Acts
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>[Acts
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[224:1058](1030245.htm#fr_1057.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p15"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>[John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[224:1059](1030245.htm#fr_1058.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p16"></span> [Luke
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052.md), [Luke
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>[Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p16.2"></span> and iv. 1

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[224:1060](1030245.htm#fr_1059.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p17"></span> [Acts
10.38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p17.1"></span>[Acts x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[224:1061](1030245.htm#fr_1060.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p18"></span> [Matt.
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[224:1062](1030245.htm#fr_1061.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p19"></span> [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>[John
i.](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p19.2"></span>14

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[224:1063](1030245.htm#fr_1062.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p20"></span> [Luke
3.21-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p20.1"></span>[Luke iii.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[224:1064](1030245.htm#fr_1063.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p21"></span> [Luke
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>[Luke i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[224:1065](1030245.htm#fr_1064.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p22"></span> [Acts
2.33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p22.1"></span>[Acts ii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[225:1066](1030245.htm#fr_1065.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p24"></span> [John
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p24.1"></span>[John v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[225:1067](1030245.htm#fr_1066.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p25"></span> \[Says Turrettin, III. xxix. 21.
“The Father does not generate the Son either as previously existing, for
in this case there would be no need of generation; nor yet as not yet
existing, for in this case the Son would not be eternal; but as
*co-existing*, because he is from eternity in the God-head.”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[225:1068](1030245.htm#fr_1067.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p26"></span> \[The term “unbegotten” is not
found in Scripture, but it is implied in the terms “begotten” and
“only-begotten,” which are found. The term “unity” is not applied to God
in Scripture, but it is implied in the term “one” which is so
applied.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[225:1069](1030245.htm#fr_1068.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xxvi-p27"></span> \[The spiration and procession of
the Holy Spirit is not by two separate acts, one of the Father, and one
of the Son—as perhaps might be inferred from Augustin’s remark that “the
Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father principally.” As Turrettin says:
“The Father and Son spirate the Spirit, not as two different essences in
each of which resides a spirative energy, but as two personal
subsistences of one essence, who concur in one act of spiration.”
*Institutio* III. xxxi. 6.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](1030246.md)
