[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030438)  [Next](1030440.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xiii"></span><span id="page_353">p. 353</span> <span
id="iv.vi.xiii-Page_353"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiii-p1"></span> 12. Wherefore I would that they would
tell me, in what kind they place the, supposed, error of the Catholic
Church. If in the first, it is altogether a grave charge; but it needs
not a far-fetched defense: for it is enough to deny that we so
understand, as the persons, who inveigh against us, suppose. If in the
second, the charge is not less grave; but they shall be refuted by the
same saying. If in the third, it is no charge at all. Proceed, and next
consider the Scriptures themselves. For what objection do they raise
against the books of (what is called) the Old Testament? Is it that they
are good, but are understood by us in an ill sense? But they themselves
do not receive them. Or is it that they are neither good, nor are well
understood? But our defense above is enough to drive them from this
position. Or is it this that they will say, although they are understood
by you in a good sense, yet they are evil? What is this other than to
acquit living adversaries, with whom they have to do, and to accuse men
long ago dead, with whom they have no strife? I indeed believe that both
those men profitably delivered to memory all things, and that they were
great and divine. And that that Law was published, and framed by the
command and will of God: and of this, although I have but very slight
knowledge of books of that kind, yet I can easily persuade any, if there
apply to me a mind fair and no way obstinate: and this I will do, when
you shall grant to me your ears and mind well disposed: this however
when it shall be in my power: but now is it not enough for me, however
that matter may stand, not to have been deceived?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](1030440.md)
