[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030061)  [Next](1030063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—In What Manner We are Gathered
from Many into One Through One Mediator.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.viii-p2"></span>11. This mystery, this sacrifice, this
priest, this God, before He was sent and came, being made of a woman—of
Him, all those things which appeared to our fathers in a sacred and
mystical way by angelical miracles, or which were done by the fathers
themselves, were similitudes; in order that every creature by its acts
might speak in some way of that One who was to be, in whom there was to
be salvation in the recovery of all from death. For because by the
wickedness of ungodliness we had recoiled and fallen away in discord
from the one true and supreme God, and had in many things become vain,
being distracted through many things and cleaving fast to many things;
it was needful, by the decree and command of God in His mercy, that
those same many things should join in proclaiming the One that should
come, and that One should come so proclaimed by these many things, and
that these many things should join in witnessing that this One had come;
and that so, freed from the burden of these many things, we should come
to that One, and dead as we were in our souls by many sins, and destined
to die in the flesh on account of sin, that we should love that One who,
without sin, died in the flesh for us; and by believing in Him now
raised again, and by rising again with Him in the spirit through faith,
that we should be justified by being made one in the one righteous One;
and that we should not despair of our own resurrection in the flesh
itself, when we consider that the one Head had gone before us the many
members; in whom, being now cleansed through faith, and then renewed by
sight, and through Him as mediator reconciled to God, we are to cleave
to the One, to feast upon the One, to continue one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1030063)
