[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030118)  [Next](1030120.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.x.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.x.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—How the Man Not Yet Righteous Can
Know the Righteous Man Whom He Loves.</span>

<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p2"></span>9. Return then with me, and let us
consider why we love the apostle. Is it at all on account of his human
kind, which we know right well, in that we believe him to have been a
man? Assuredly not; for if it were so, he now is not him whom we love,
since he is no longer that man, for his soul is separated from his body.
But we believe that which we love in him to be still living, for we love
his righteous mind. From what general or special rule then, except that
we know both what a mind is, and what it is to be righteous? And we say,
indeed, not unfitly, that we therefore know what a mind is, because we
too have a mind. For neither did we ever see it with our eyes, and
gather a special or general notion from the resemblance of more minds
than one, which we had seen; but rather, as I have said before, because
we too have it. For what is known so intimately, and so perceives itself
to be itself, as that by which also all other things are perceived, that
is, the mind itself? For we recognize the movements of bodies also, by
which we perceive that others live besides ourselves, from the
resemblance of ourselves; since we also so move our body in living as we
observe those bodies to be moved. For even when a living body is moved,
there is no way opened to our eyes to see the mind, a thing which cannot
be seen by the eyes; but we perceive something to be contained in that
bulk, such as is contained in ourselves, so as to move in like manner
our own bulk, which is the life and the soul. Neither is this, as it
were, the property of human foresight and reason, since brute animals
also perceive that not only they themselves live, but also other brute
animals interchangeably, and the one the other, and that we ourselves do
so. Neither do they see our souls, save from the movements of the body,
and that immediately and most easily by some natural agreement.
Therefore we both know the mind of any one from our own, and believe
also from our own of him whom we do not know. For not only do we
perceive that there is a mind, but we can also know what a mind is, by
reflecting upon our own: for we have a mind. But whence do we know what
a righteous man is? For we said above that we love the apostle for no
other reason except that he is a righteous mind. We know, then, what a
righteous man also is, just as we know what a mind is. But what a mind
is, as has been said, we know from ourselves, for there is a mind in us.
But whence do we know what a righteous man is, if we are not righteous?
But if no one but he who is righteous knows what is a righteous man, no
one but a righteous man loves a righteous man; for one cannot love him
whom one believes to be righteous, for this very reason that one does
believe him to be righteous, if one does not know what it is to be
righteous; according to that which we have shown above, that no one
loves what he believes and does not see, except by some rule of a
general or special notion. And if for this reason no one but a righteous
man loves a righteous man, how will any one wish to be a righteous man
who is not yet so? For no one wishes to be that which he does not love.
But, certainly, that he who is not righteous may be so, it is necessary
that he should wish to be righteous; and in order that he may wish to be
righteous, he loves the righteous man. Therefore, even he who is not yet
righteous, loves the righteous man. <span
id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672.md) But he cannot love the righteous man,
who is ignorant what a righteous man is. Accordingly, even he who is not
yet righteous, knows what a righteous man is. Whence then does he know
this? Does he see it with his eyes? Is any corporeal thing righteous, as
it is white, or black, or square, or round? Who could say this? Yet with
one’s eyes one has seen nothing except corporeal things. But there is
nothing righteous in a man except the mind; and when a man is called a
righteous man, he is called so from the mind, not from the body. For
righteousness is in some sort the beauty of the mind, by which men are
beautiful; very many too who are misshapen and deformed in body. And as
the mind is not seen with the eyes, so neither is its beauty. From
whence then does he who is not yet righteous know what a righteous man
is, and love the righteous man that he may become righteous? Do certain
signs shine forth by the motion of the body, by <span id="page_121">p.
121</span> <span id="iv.i.x.vii-Page_121"></span>which this or that man
is manifested to be righteous? But whence does any one know that these
are the signs of a righteous mind when he is wholly ignorant what it is
to be righteous? Therefore he does know. But whence do we know what it
is to be righteous, even when we are not yet righteous? If we know from
without ourselves, we know it by some bodily thing. But this is not a
thing of the body. Therefore we know in ourselves what it is to be
righteous. For I find this nowhere else when I seek to utter it, except
within myself; and if I ask another what it is to be righteous, he seeks
within himself what to answer; and whosoever hence can answer truly, he
has found within himself what to answer. And when indeed I wish to speak
of Carthage, I seek within myself what to speak, and I find within
myself a notion or image of Carthage; but I have received this through
the body, that is, through the perception of the body, since I have been
present in that city in the body, and I saw and perceived it, and
retained it in my memory, that I might find within myself a word
concerning it, whenever I might wish to speak of it. For its word is the
image itself of it in my memory, not that sound of two syllables when
Carthage is named, or even when that name itself is thought of silently
from time to time, but that which I discern in my mind, when I utter
that dissyllable with my voice, or even before I utter it. So also, when
I wish to speak of Alexandria, which I never saw, an image of it is
present with me. For whereas I had heard from many and had believed that
city to be great, in such way as it could be told me, I formed an image
of it in my mind as I was able; and this is with me its word when I wish
to speak of it, before I utter with my voice the five syllables which
make the name that almost every one knows. And yet if I could bring
forth that image from my mind to the eyes of men who know Alexandria,
certainly all either would say, It is not it; or if they said, It is, I
should greatly wonder; and as I gazed at it in my mind, that is, at the
image which was as it were its picture, I should yet not know it to be
it, but should believe those who retained an image they had seen. But I
do not so ask what it is to be righteous, nor do I so find it, nor do I
so gaze upon it, when I utter it; neither am I so approved when I am
heard, nor do I so approve when I hear; as though I have seen such a
thing with my eyes, or learned it by some perception of the body, or
heard it from those who had so learned it. For when I say, and say
knowingly, that mind is righteous which knowingly and of purpose assigns
to every one his due in life and behavior, I do not think of anything
absent, as Carthage, or imagine it as I am able, as Alexandria, whether
it be so or not; but I discern something present, and I discern it
within myself, though I myself am not that which I discern; and many if
they hear will approve it. And whoever hears me and knowingly approves,
he too discerns this same thing within himself, even though he himself
be not what he discerns. But when a righteous man says this, he discerns
and <span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="iv.i.x.vii-Page_122"></span>says that which he himself is. And
whence also does he discern it, except within himself? But this is not
to be wondered at; for whence should he discern himself except within
himself? The wonderful thing is, that the mind should see within itself
that which it has seen nowhere else, and should see truly, and should
see the very true righteous mind, and should itself be a mind, and yet
not a righteous mind, which nevertheless it sees within itself. Is there
another mind that is righteous in a mind that is not yet righteous? Or
if there is not, what does it there see when it sees and says what is a
righteous mind, nor sees it anywhere else but in itself, when itself is
not a righteous mind? Is that which it sees an inner truth present to
the mind which has power to behold it? Yet all have not that power; and
they who have power to behold it, are not all also that which they
behold, that is, they are not also righteous minds themselves, just as
they are able to see and to say what is a righteous mind. And whence
will they be able to be so, except by cleaving to that very same form
itself which they behold, so that from thence they may be formed and may
be righteous minds; not only discerning and saying that the mind is
righteous which knowingly and of purpose assigns to every one that which
is his due in life and behavior, but so likewise that they themselves
may live righteously and be righteous in character, by assigning to
every one that which is his due, so as to owe no man anything, but to
love one another. <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673.md) And whence can
any one cleave to that form but by loving it? Why then do we love
another whom we believe to be righteous, and do not love that form
itself wherein we see what is a righteous mind, that we also may be able
to be righteous? Is it that unless we loved that also, we should not
love him at all, whom through it we love; but whilst we are not
righteous, we love that form too little to allow of our being able to be
righteous? The man therefore who is believed to be righteous, is loved
through that form and truth which he who loves discerns and understands
within himself; but that very form and truth itself cannot be loved from
any other source than itself. For we do not find any other such thing
besides itself, so that by believing we might love it when it is
unknown, in that we here already know another such thing. For whatsoever
of such a kind one may have seen, is itself; and there is not any other
such thing, since itself alone is such as itself is. He therefore who
loves men, ought to love them either because they are righteous, or that
they may become righteous. For so also he ought to love himself, either
because he is righteous, or that he may become righteous; for in this
way he loves his neighbor as himself without any risk. For he who loves
himself otherwise, loves himself wrongfully, since he loves himself to
this end that he may be unrighteous; therefore to this end that he may
be wicked; and hence it follows next that he does not love himself; for,
“He who loveth iniquity, <span id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674.md) hateth
his own soul.” <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_672"></span>[120:673](1030119.htm#fr_672.md) <span
id="iv.i.x.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p3"></span> \[The “wish” and “love” which Augustin
here attributes to the non-righteous man is not true and spiritual, but
selfish. In chapter vii. 10, he speaks of true love as distinct from
that kind of desire which is a mere wish. The latter he calls
*cupiditas*. “That is to be called love which is true, otherwise it is
desire (*cupiditas*); and so those who desire (*cupidi*) are improperly
said to love (*diligere*), just as they who love (*diligunt*) are said
improperly to desire (*cupere*).”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_673"></span>[122:674](1030119.htm#fr_673.md) <span
id="iv.i.x.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p4"></span> [Rom.
13.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.i.x.vii-p4.1"></span>[Rom. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_674"></span>[122:675](1030119.htm#fr_674.md) <span
id="iv.i.x.vii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p5"></span> Violence—A.V.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[122:676](1030119.htm#fr_675.md) <span
id="iv.i.x.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p6"></span> [Ps.
11.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.i.x.vii-p6.1"></span>[Ps. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.i.x.vii-p6.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030120.md)
