[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030378)  [Next](1030380.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—That the Person Who Comes for
Catechetical Instruction is to Be Examined with Respect to His Views, on
Desiring to Become a Christian.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p2"></span>9. Moreover, it is on the gound of that
very severity of God, <span id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369.md) by
which the hearts of mortals are agitated with a most wholesome terror,
that love is to be built up; so that, rejoicing that he is loved by Him
whom he fears, man may have boldness to love Him in return, and yet at
the same time be afraid to displease His love toward himself, even
should he be able to do so with impunity. For certainly it very rarely
happens, nay, I should rather say, never, that any one approaches us
with the wish to become a Christian who has not been smitten with some
sort of fear of God. For if it is in the expectation of some advantage
from men whom he deems himself unlikely to please in any other way, or
with the idea of escaping any disadvantage at the hands of men of whose
displeasure or hostility he is seriously afraid, that a man wishes to
become a Christian, then his wish to become one is not so earnest as his
desire to feign one. <span id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370.md) For
faith is not a matter of the body which does obeisance, <span
id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371.md) but of the mind which believes. But
unmistakeably it is often the case that the mercy of God comes to be
present through the ministry of the catechiser, so that, affected by the
discourse, the man now wishes to become in reality that which he had
made up his mind only to feign. And so soon as he begins to have this
manner of desire, we may judge him then to have made a genuine approach
to us. It is true, indeed, that the precise time when a man, whom we
perceive to be present with us already in the body, comes to us in
reality with his mind, <span id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372.md) is a
thing hidden from us. But, notwithstanding that, we ought to deal with
him in such a manner that this wish may be made to arise within him,
even should it not be there at present. For no such labor is lost,
inasmuch as, if there is any wish at all, it is assuredly strengthened
by such action on our part, although we may be ignorant of the time or
the hour at which it began. It is useful certainly, if it can be done,
to get from those who know the man some idea beforehand of the state of
mind in which he is, or of the causes which have induced him to come
with the view of embracing religion. But if there is no other person
available from whom we may gather such information, then, indeed, the
man himself is to be interrogated, so that from what he says in reply we
may draw the beginning of our discourse. Now if he has come with a false
heart, desirous only of human advantages or thinking to escape
disadvantages, he will certainly speak what is untrue. Nevertheless, the
very untruth which he utters should be made the point from which we
start. This should not be done, however, with the (open) intention of
confuting his falsehood, as if that were a settled matter with you; but,
taking it for granted that he has professed to have come with a purpose
which is really worthy of approbation (whether that profession be true
or false), it should rather be our aim to commend and praise such a
purpose as that with which, in his reply, he has declared himself to
have come; so that we may make him feel it a pleasure to be the kind of
man actually that he wishes to seem to be. On the other hand, supposing
him to have given a declaration of his views other than what ought to be
before the mind of one who is to be instructed in the Christian faith,
then by reproving him with more than usual kindness and gentleness, as a
person uninstructed and ignorant, by pointing out and commending,
concisely and in a grave spirit the end of Christian doctrine in its
genuine reality, and by doing all this in such a manner as neither to
anticipate the times of a narration, which should be given subsequently,
nor to venture to impose that kind of statement upon a mind not
previously set for it, you may bring him to desire that which, either in
mistake or in dissimulation, he has not been desiring up to this stage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[288:1370](1030379.htm#fr_1369.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p3"></span> *De ipsa etiam severitate Dei…caritas
ædificanda est*

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[288:1371](1030379.htm#fr_1370.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p4"></span> *Non fieri vult potius quam fingere*

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[288:1372](1030379.htm#fr_1371.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p5"></span> Or = “signifying assent by its motions,”
adopting the reading of the best <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iii.vi-p5.1"></span> mss</span>., viz. *salutantis corporis*.
Some editions give *salvandi*, while certain <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iii.vi-p5.2"></span>mss</span>. have *salutis*, and others
*saltantis*.

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[288:1373](1030379.htm#fr_1372.md) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p6"></span> Reading *quando veniat animo*, for which
*quo veniat animo* also occurs = the mind in which a man comes…is a
matter hidden from us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1030380.md)
