[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030213)  [Next](1030215.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Although the Soul Hopes for
Blessedness, Yet It Does Not Remember Lost Blessedness, But Remembers
God and the Rules of Righteousness. The Unchangeable Rules of Right
Living are Known Even to the Ungodly.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p2"></span>21. And of this certainly it feels no
doubt, that it is wretched, and longs to be blessed nor can it hope for
the possibility of this on any other ground than its own changeableness
for if it were not changeable, then, as it could not become wretched
after being blessed, so neither could it become blessed after being
wretched. And what could have made it wretched under an omnipotent and
good God, except its own sin and the righteousness of its Lord? And what
will make it blessed, unless its own merit, and its Lord’s reward? But
its merit, too, is His grace, whose reward will be its blessedness; for
it cannot give itself the righteousness it has lost, and so has not. For
this it received when man was created, and assuredly lost it by sinning.
Therefore it receives righteousness, that on account of this it may
deserve to receive blessedness; and hence the apostle truly says to it,
when beginning to be proud as it were of its own good, “For what hast
thou that thou didst not receive? Now if thou didst receive it, why dost
thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?” <span
id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902.md) But when it rightly remembers its own
Lord, having received His Spirit, then, because it is so taught by an
inward teaching, it feels wholly that it cannot rise save by His
affection freely given, nor has been able to fall save by its own
defection freely chosen. Certainly it does not remember its own
blessedness; since that has been, but is not, and it has utterly
forgotten it, and therefore cannot even be reminded of it. <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903.md) But it believes what the trustworthy
Scriptures of its God tell of that blessedness, which were written by
His prophet, and tell of the blessedness of Paradise, and hand down to
us historical information of that first both good and ill of man. And it
remembers the Lord its God; for He always is, nor has been and is not,
nor is but has not been; but as He never will not be, so He never was
not. And He is whole everywhere. And hence it both lives, and is moved,
and is in Him; <span id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904.md) and so it can
remember Him. Not because it recollects the having known Him in Adam or
anywhere else before the life of this present body, or when it was first
made in order to be implanted in this body; for it remembers nothing at
all of all this. Whatever there is of this, it has been blotted out by
forgetfulness. But it is reminded, that it may be turned to God, as
though to that light by which it was in some way touched, even when
turned away from Him. For hence it is that even the ungodly think of
eternity, and rightly blame and rightly praise many things in the morals
of men. And by what rules do they thus judge, except by those wherein
they see how men ought to live, even though they themselves do not so
live? And where do they see these rules? For they do not see them in
their own \[moral\] nature; since no doubt these things are to be seen
by the mind, and their minds are confessedly changeable, but these rules
are seen as unchangeable by him who can see them at all; nor yet in the
character of their own mind, since these rules are rules of
righteousness, and their minds are confessedly unrighteous. Where indeed
are these rules written, wherein even the unrighteous recognizes what is
righteous, wherein he discerns that he ought to have what he himself has
not? Where, then, are they written, unless in the book of that Light
which is called Truth? whence every righteous law is <span
id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvi.xv-Page_195"></span>copied and transferred (not by
migrating to it, but by being as it were impressed upon it) to the heart
of the man that worketh righteousness; as the impression from a ring
passes into the wax, yet does not leave the ring. But he who worketh
not, and yet sees how he ought to work, he is the man that is turned
away from that light, which yet touches him. But he who does not even
see how he ought to live, sins indeed with more excuse, because he is
not a transgressor of a law that he knows; but even he too is just
touched sometimes by the splendor of the everywhere present truth, when
upon admonition he confesses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_902"></span>[194:903](1030214.htm#fr_902.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_903"></span>[194:904](1030214.htm#fr_903.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p4"></span> \[In the case of knowledge that is
remembered, there is something latent and potential—as when past
acquisitions are recalled by a voluntary act of recollection. The same
is true of innate ideas—these also are latent, and brought into
consciousness by reflection. But no man can either remember, or elicit,
his original holiness and blessedness, because this is not latent and
potential, but wholly lost by the fall.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_904"></span>[194:905](1030214.htm#fr_904.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p5"></span> [Acts
17.28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p5.1"></span>[Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.i.xvi.xv-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1030215.md)
