[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030152)  [Next](1030154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—The Unity of the Three Takes
Place in Thought, Viz Of Memory, of Ternal Vision,and of Will Combining
Both.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iii-p2"></span>6. The rational soul, however, lives
in a degenerate fashion, when it lives according to a trinity of the
*outer* man; that is, when it applies to those things which form the
bodily sense from without, not a praiseworthy will, by which to refer
them to some useful end, but a base desire, by which to cleave to them.
Since even if the form of the body, which was corporeally perceived, be
withdrawn, its likeness remains in the memory, to which the will may
again direct its eye, so as to be formed thence from within, as the
sense was formed from without by the presentation of the sensible body.
And so that trinity is produced from memory, from internal vision, and
from the will which unites both. And when these three things are
combined into one, from that combination <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731.md) itself they are called
conception. <span id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732.md) And in these three
there is no longer any diversity of substance. For neither is the
sensible body there, which is altogether distinct from the nature of the
living being, nor is the bodily sense there informed so as to produce
vision, nor does the will itself perform its office of applying the
sense, that is to be informed, to the sensible body, and of retaining it
in it when informed; but in place of that bodily species which was
perceived from without, there comes the memory retaining that species
which the soul has imbibed through the bodily sense; and in place of
that vision which was outward when the sense was informed through the
sensible body, there comes a similar vision within, while the eye of the
mind is informed from that which the memory retains, and the corporeal
things that are thought of are absent; and the will itself, as before it
applied the sense yet to be informed to the corporeal thing presented
from without, and united it thereto when informed, so now converts the
vision of the recollecting mind to memory, in order that the mental
sight may be informed by that which the memory has retained, and so
there may be in the conception a like vision. And as it was the reason
that distinguished the visible appearance by which the bodily sense was
informed, from the similitude of it, which was wrought in the sense when
informed in order to produce vision (otherwise they had been so united
as to be thought altogether one and the same); so, although that
phantasy also, which arises from the mind thinking of the appearance of
a body that it has seen, consists of the similitude of the body which
the memory retains, together with that which is thence formed in the eye
of the mind that recollects; yet it so seems to be one and single, that
it can only be discovered to be two by the judgment of reason, by which
we understand that which remains in the memory, even when we think it
from some other source, to be a different thing from that which is
brought into being when we remember, that is, come back again to the
memory, and there find the same appearance. And if this were not now
there, we should say that we had so forgotten as to be altogether unable
to recollect. And if the eye of him who recollects were not informed
from that thing which was in the memory, the vision of the thinker could
in no way take place; but the conjunction of both, that is, of that
which the memory retains, and of that which is thence expressed so as to
inform the eye of him who recollects, makes them ap<span
id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="iv.i.xiii.iii-Page_148"></span>pear as if they were one, because
they are exceedingly like. But when the eye of the concipient is turned
away thence, and has ceased to look at that which was perceived in the
memory, then nothing of the form that was impressed thereon will remain
in that eye, and it will be informed by that to which it had again been
turned, so as to bring about another conception. Yet that remains which
it has left in the memory, to which it may again be turned when we
recollect it, and being turned thereto may be informed by it, and become
one with that whence it is informed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_731"></span>[147:732](1030153.htm#fr_731.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iii-p3"></span> *Coactus*

<span id="fn_732"></span>[147:733](1030153.htm#fr_732.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.iii-p4"></span> *Cogitatio*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030154.md)
