[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030110)  [Next](1030112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Why We Do Not in the Trinity
Speak of One Person, and Three Essences. What He Ought to Believe
Concerning the Trinity Who Does Not Receive What is Said Above. Man is
Both After the Image, and is the Image of God.</span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p2"></span>11. But lest I should seem to favor
ourselves \[the Latins\], let us make this further inquiry. Although
they \[the Greeks\] also, if they pleased, as they call three substances
three hypostases, so might call three persons three “prosopa,” yet they
preferred that word which, perhaps, was more in accordance with the
usage of their language. For the case is the same with the word persons
also; for to God it is not one thing to be, another to be a person, but
it is absolutely the same thing. For if to be is said in respect to
Himself, but person relatively; in this way we should say three persons,
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; just as we speak of three friends, or
three relations, or three neighbors, in that they are so mutually, not
that each one of them is so in respect to himself. Wherefore any one of
these is the friend of the other two, <span id="page_112">p. 112</span>
<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-Page_112"></span>or the relation, or the neighbor,
because these names have a relative signification. What then? Are we to
call the Father the person of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, or the Son
the person of the Father and of the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Spirit the
person of the Father and of the Son? But neither is the word person
commonly so used in any case; nor in this Trinity, when we speak of the
person of the Father, do we mean anything else than the substance of the
Father. Wherefore, as the substance of the Father is the Father Himself,
not as He is the Father, but as He is, so also the person of the Father
is not anything else than the Father Himself; for He is called a person
in respect to Himself, not in respect to the Son, or the Holy Spirit:
just as He is called in respect to Himself both God and great, and good,
and just, and anything else of the kind; and just as to Him to be is the
same as to be God, or as to be great, or as to be good, so it is the
same thing to Him to be, as to be a person. Why, therefore, do we not
call these three together one person, as one essence and one God, but
say three persons, while we do not say three Gods or three essences;
unless it be because we wish some one word to serve for that meaning
whereby the Trinity is understood, that we might not be altogether
silent, when asked, what three, while we confessed that they are three?
For if essence is the genus, and substance or person the species, as
some think, then I must omit what I just now said, that they ought to be
called three essences, as they are called three substances or persons;
as three horses are called three horses, and the same are called three
animals, since horse is the species, animal the genus. For in this case
the species is not spoken of in the plural, and the genus in the
singular, as if we were to say that three horses were one animal; but as
they are three horses by the special name, so they are three animals by
the generic one. But if they say that the name of substance or person
does not signify species, but something singular and individual; so that
any one is not so called a substance or person as he is called a man,
for man is common to all men, but in the same manner as he is called
this or that man, as Abraham, as Isaac, as Jacob, or anyone else who, if
present, could be pointed out with the finger: so will the same reason
reach these too. For as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are called three
individuals, so are they called three men, and three souls. Why then are
both the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, if we are to reason
about them also according to genus and species and individual, not so
called three essences, as they are called three substances or persons?
But this, as I said, I pass over: but I do affirm, that if essence is a
genus, then a single essence has no species; just as, because animal is
a genus, a single animal has no species. Therefore the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit are not three species of one essence. But if essence is a
species, as man is a species, but those are three which we call
substances or persons, then they have the same species in common, in
such way as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have in common the species which
is called man; not as man is subdivided into Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
so can one man also be subdivided into several single men; for this is
altogether impossible, since one man is already a single man. Why then
is one essence subdivided into three substances or persons? For if
essence is a species, as man is, then one essence is as one man is: or
do we, as we say that any three human beings of the same sex, of the
same constitution of body, of the same mind, are one nature,—for they
are three human beings, but one nature,—so also say in the Trinity three
substances one essence, or three persons one substance or essence? But
this is somehow a parallel case, since the ancients also who spoke
Latin, before they had these terms, which have not long come into use,
that is, essence or substance, used for them to say nature. We do not
therefore use these terms according to genus or species, but as if
according to a matter that is common and the same. Just as if three
statues were made of the same gold, we should say three statues one
gold, yet should neither call the gold genus, and the statues species;
nor the gold species, and the statues individuals. For no species goes
beyond its own individuals, so as to comprehend anything external to
them. For when I define what man is, which is a specific name, every
several man that exists is contained in the same individual definition,
neither does anything belong to it which is not a man. But when I define
gold, not statues alone, if they be gold, but rings also, and anything
else that is made of gold, will belong to gold; and even if nothing were
made of it, it would still be called gold; since, even if there were no
gold statues, there will not therefore be no statues at all. Likewise no
species goes beyond the definition of its genus. For when I define
animal, since horse is a species of this genus, every horse is an
animal; but every statue is not gold. So, although in the case of three
golden statues we should rightly say three statues, one gold; yet we do
not so say it, as to understand gold to be the genus, and the statues to
be species. Therefore neither do we so call the Trinity <span
id="page_113">p. 113</span> <span id="iv.i.ix.vi-Page_113"></span>three
persons or substances, one essence and one God, as though three
somethings subsisted out of one matter \[leaving a remainder, *i. e.*\];
although whatever that is, it is unfolded in these three. For there is
nothing else of that essence besides the Trinity. Yet we say three
persons of the same essence, or three persons one essence; but we do not
say three persons out of the same essence, as though therein essence
were one thing, and person another, as we can say three statues out of
the same gold; for there it is one thing to be gold, another to be
statues. And when we say three men one nature, or three men of the same
nature, they also can be called three men out of the same nature, since
out of the same nature there can be also three other such men. But in
that essence of the Trinity, in no way can any other person whatever
exist out of the same essence. Further, in these things, one man is not
as much as three men together; and two men are something more than one
man: and in equal statues, three together amount to more of gold than
each singly, and one amounts to less of gold than two. But in God it is
not so; for the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit together is not a
greater essence than the Father alone or the Son alone; but these three
substances or persons, if they must be so called, together are equal to
each singly: which the natural man does not comprehend. For he cannot
think except under the conditions of bulk and space, either small or
great, since phantasms or as it were images of bodies flit about in his
mind.

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p3"></span>12. And until he be purged from this
uncleanness, let him believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one
God, alone, great, omnipotent, good, just, merciful, Creator of all
things visible and invisible, and whatsoever can be worthily and truly
said of Him in proportion to human capacity. And when he is told that
the Father only is God, let him not separate from Him the Son or the
Holy Spirit; for together with Him He is the only God, together with
whom also He is one God; because, when we are told that the Son also is
the only God, we must needs take it without any separation of the Father
or the Holy Spirit. And let him so say one essence, as not to think one
to be either greater or better than, or in any respect differing from,
another. Yet not that the Father Himself is both Son and Holy Spirit, or
whatever else each is singly called in relation to either of the others;
as Word, which is not said except of the Son, or Gift, which is not said
except of the Holy Spirit. And on this account also they admit the
plural number, as it is written in the Gospel, “I and my Father are
one.” <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650) He has both said
“*one*,” <span id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651) and “*we are* <span
id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652) one,” according to essence, because
they are the same God; “we are,” according to relation, because the one
is Father, the other is Son. Sometimes also the unity of the essence is
left unexpressed, and the relatives alone are mentioned in the plural
number: “My Father and I will come unto him, and make our abode with
him.” <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653) *We will come*, and *we
will make our abode*, is the plural number, since it was said before, “I
and my Father,” that is, the Son and the Father, which terms are used
relatively to one another. Sometimes the meaning is altogether latent,
as in Genesis: “Let us make man after our image and likeness.” <span
id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654) Both *let us make* and *our* is said
in the plural, and ought not to be received except as of relatives. For
it was not that gods might make, or make after the image and likeness of
gods; but that the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit might make after the
image of the Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, that man might subsist as
the image of God. And God is the Trinity. But because that image of God
was not made altogether equal to Him, as being not born of Him, but
created by Him; in order to signify this, he is in such way the image as
that he is “after the image,” that is, he is not made equal by parity,
but approaches to Him by a sort of likeness. For approach to God is not
by intervals of place, but by likeness, and withdrawal from Him is by
unlikeness. For there are some who draw this distinction, that they will
have the Son to be the image, but man not to be the image, but “after
the image.” But the apostle refutes them, saying, “For a man indeed
ought not to cover his head, forasmuch as he is the image and glory of
God.” <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655) He did not say *after the
image*, but *the image*. And this image, since it is elsewhere spoken of
as after the image, is not as if it were said relatively to the Son, who
is the image equal to the Father; otherwise he would not say *after our
image*. For how *our*, when the Son is the image of the Father alone?
But man is said to be “after the image,” on account, as we have said, of
the inequality of the likeness; and therefore after *our* image, that
man might be the image of the Trinity; <span
id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656) not equal to the Trinity as the Son is
equal to the Father, but approaching to it, as has been <span
id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span id="iv.i.ix.vi-Page_114"></span>said,
by a certain likeness; just as nearness may in a sense be signified in
things distant from each other, not in respect of place, but of a sort
of imitation. For it is also said, “Be ye transformed by the renewing of
your mind;” <span id="fr_657"></span>[658](#fn_657) to whom he likewise
says, “Be ye therefore imitators of God as dear children.” <span
id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) For it is said to the new man, “which
is renewed to the knowledge of God, after the image of Him that created
him.” <span id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659) Or if we choose to admit
the plural number, in order to meet the needs of argument, even putting
aside relative terms, that so we may answer in one term when it is asked
what three, and say three substances or three persons; then let no one
think of any bulk or interval, or of any distance of howsoever little
unlikeness, so that in the Trinity any should be understood to be even a
little less than another, in whatsoever way one thing can be less than
another: in order that there may be neither a confusion of persons, nor
such a distinction as that there should be any inequality. And if this
cannot be grasped by the understanding, let it be held by faith, until
He shall dawn in the heart who says by the prophet, “If ye will not
believe, surely ye shall not understand.” <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_650"></span>[113:651](1030111.htm#fr_650) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p4"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p4.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_651"></span>[113:652](1030111.htm#fr_651) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p5"></span> *Unum*

<span id="fn_652"></span>[113:653](1030111.htm#fr_652) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p6"></span> *Sumus*

<span id="fn_653"></span>[113:654](1030111.htm#fr_653) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p7"></span> [John
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p7.1"></span>[John xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_654"></span>[113:655](1030111.htm#fr_654) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p8"></span> [Gen.
1.26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p8.1"></span>[Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_655"></span>[113:656](1030111.htm#fr_655) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
11.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p9.1"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_656"></span>[113:657](1030111.htm#fr_656) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p10"></span> \[Augustin would find this “image” in
the ternaries of nature and the human mind which illustrate the Divine
trinality. The remainder of the treatise is mainly devoted to this
abstruse subject; and is one of the most metaphysical pieces of
composition in patristic literature. The exegetical portion of the work
ends substantially with the seventh chapter. The remainder is
ontological, yet growing out of, and founded upon the biblical data and
results of the first part.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_657"></span>[114:658](1030111.htm#fr_657) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p11"></span> [Rom.
12.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p11.1"></span>[Rom. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_658"></span>[114:659](1030111.htm#fr_658) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p12"></span> [Eph.
5.1](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p12.1"></span>[Eph. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_659"></span>[114:660](1030111.htm#fr_659) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p13"></span> [Col.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p13.1"></span>[Col. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_660"></span>[114:661](1030111.htm#fr_660) <span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p14"></span> [Isa.
7.9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.ix.vi-p14.1"></span>[Isa. vii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)<span id="iv.i.ix.vi-p14.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII](1030112)
