[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030722)  [Next](1030724.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xxxv"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p1"></span> 34. But some man will say, Would then
those midwives and Rahab have done better if they had shown no mercy, by
refusing to lie? Nay verily, those Hebrew women, if they were such as
that sort of persons of whom we ask whether they ought ever to tell a
lie, would both eschew to say aught false, and would most frankly refuse
that foul service of killing the babes. But, thou wilt say, themselves
would die. Yea, but see what follows. They would die with an heavenly
habitation for their incomparably more ample reward than those houses
which they made them on earth could be: they would die, to <span
id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span id="v.vi.xxxv-Page_497"></span>be in
eternal felicity, after enduring of death for most innocent truth. What
of her in Jericho? Could she do this? Would she not, if she did not by
telling a lie deceive the inquiring citizens, by speaking truth betray
the lurking guests? Or could she say <span
id="fr_2453"></span>[2454](#fn_2453.md) to their questionings, I know where
they are; but I fear God, I will not betray them? She could indeed say
this, were she already a true Israelitess in whom was no guile: <span
id="fr_2454"></span>[2455](#fn_2454.md) which thing she was about to be,
when through the mercy of God passing over into the city of God. But
they, hearing this (thou wilt say), would slay her, would search the
house. But did it follow that they would also find them, whom she had
diligently concealed? For in the foresight of this, that most cautious
woman had placed them where they would have been able to remain
undiscovered if she, telling a lie, should not be believed. So both she,
if after all she had been slain by her countrymen for the work of mercy,
would have ended this life, which must needs come to an end, by a death
precious in the sight of the Lord, <span
id="fr_2455"></span>[2456](#fn_2455.md) and towards them her benefit had
not been in vain. But, thou wilt say, “What if the men who sought them,
in their thorough-going search had come to the place where she had
concealed them?” In this fashion it may be said: What if a most vile and
base woman, not only telling, but swearing a lie, had not got them to
believe her? Of course even so would the things have been like to come
to pass, through fear of which she lied. And where do we put the will
and power of God? or haply was He not able to keep both her, neither
telling a lie to her own townsmen, nor betraying men of God, and them,
being His, safe from all harm? For by Whom also after the woman’s lie
they were guarded, by Him could they, even if she had not lied, have in
any wise been guarded. Unless perchance we have forgotten that this did
come to pass in Sodom, where males burning towards males with hideous
lust could not so much as find the door of the house in which were the
men they sought; when that just man, in a case altogether most similar,
would not tell a lie for his guests, whom he knew not to be Angels, and
feared lest they should suffer a violence worse than death. And
doubtless, he might have given the seekers the like answer as that woman
gave in Jericho. For it was in precisely the like manner that they
sought by interrogating. But that just person was not willing that for
the bodies of his guests his soul should be spotted by his own telling
of a lie, for which bodies he was willing that the bodies of his
daughters by iniquity of others’ lust should be deforced. <span
id="fr_2456"></span>[2457](#fn_2456.md) Let then a man do even for the
temporal safety of men what he can; but when it comes to that point that
to consult for such saving of them except by sinning is not in his
power, thenceforth let him esteem himself not to have what he may do,
when he shall perceive that only to be left him which he may not rightly
do. Therefore, touching Rahab in Jericho, because she entertained
strangers, men of God, because in entertaining of them she put herself
in peril, because she believed on their God, because she diligently hid
them where she could, because she gave them most faithful counsel of
returning by another way, let her be praised as meet to be imitated even
by the citizens of Jerusalem on high. But in that she lied, although
somewhat therein as prophetical be intelligently expounded, yet not as
meet to be imitated is it wisely propounded: albeit that God hath those
good things memorably honored, this evil thing mercifully overlooked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2453"></span>[497:2454](1030723.htm#fr_2453.md) <span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p2"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p2.1"></span>mss.</span> and edd. “*An posset*;” but Ben.
ed. propose “*an non posset*,” “Could she not?”

<span id="fn_2454"></span>[497:2455](1030723.htm#fr_2454.md) <span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p3"></span> [John
1.47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047.md)<span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p3.1"></span>[John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047.md)<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2455"></span>[497:2456](1030723.htm#fr_2455.md) <span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p3.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p4"></span> [Ps.
116.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015.md)<span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p4.1"></span>[Ps. cxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#015.md)<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2456"></span>[497:2457](1030723.htm#fr_2456.md) <span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p5"></span> [Gen.
19.5-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005.md)<span
id="v.vi.xxxv-p5.1"></span>[Gen. xix.
5-11](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005.md)<span id="v.vi.xxxv-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 35](1030724.md)
