[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030030)  [Next](1030032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Against Those Who Believed the
Father Only to Be Immortal and Invisible. The Truth to Be Sought by
Peaceful Study.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.x-p2"></span>15. But they who will have these texts
understood only of the Father, and not of the Son or the Holy Spirit,
declare the Son to be visible, not by having taken flesh of the Virgin,
but aforetime also in Himself. For He Himself, they say, appeared to the
eyes of the Fathers. And if you say to them, In whatever manner, then,
the Son is visible in Himself, in that manner also He is mortal in
Himself; so that it plainly follows that you would have this saying also
understood only of the Father, *viz*., “Who only hath immortality;” for
if the Son is mortal from having taken upon Him our flesh, then allow
that it is on account of this flesh that He is also visible: they reply,
that it is not on account of this flesh that they say that the Son is
mortal; but that, just as He was also before visible, so He was also
before mortal. For if they say the Son is mortal from having taken our
flesh, then it is not the Father alone without the Son who hath
immortality; because His Word also has immortality, by which all things
were made. For He did not therefore lose His immortality, because He
took mortal flesh; seeing that it could not happen even to the human
soul, that it should die with the body, when the Lord Himself says,
“Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the
soul.” <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) Or, forsooth, also the
Holy Spirit took flesh: concerning whom certainly they will, without
doubt, be troubled to say—if the Son is mortal on account of taking our
flesh—in what manner they understand that the Father only has
immortality without the Son and the Holy Spirit, since, indeed, the Holy
Spirit did not take our flesh; and if He has not immortality, then the
Son is not mortal on account of taking our flesh; but if the Holy Spirit
has immortality, then it is not said only of the Father, “Who only hath
immortality.” And therefore they think they are able to prove that the
Son in Himself was mortal also before the incarnation, because
changeableness itself is not unfitly called mortality, according to
which the soul also is said to die; not because it is changed and turned
into body, or into some substance other than itself, but because,
whatever in its own selfsame substance is now after another mode than it
once was, is discovered to be mortal, in so far as it has ceased to be
what it was. Because then, say they, before the Son of God was born of
the Virgin Mary, He Himself appeared to our fathers, not in one and the
same form only, but in many forms; first in one form, then in another;
He is both visible in Himself, because His substance was visible to
mortal eyes, when He had not yet taken our flesh, and mortal, inasmuch
as He is changeable. And so also the Holy Spirit, who appeared at one
time as a dove, and another time as fire. Whence, they say, the
following texts do not belong to the Trinity, but singularly and
properly to the Father only: “Now unto the King eternal, immortal, and
invisible, the only wise God;” and, “Who only hath immortality, dwelling
in the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor
can see.”

<span id="iv.i.iv.x-p4"></span>16. Passing by, then, these reasoners,
who are unable to know the substance even of the soul, which is
invisible, and therefore are very far indeed from knowing that the
substance of the one and only God, that is, the Father and the Son and
the Holy Spirit, remains ever not only invisible, but also unchangeable,
and that hence it possesses true and real immortality; let us, who deny
that God, whether the Father, or the Son, or the Holy <span
id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span id="iv.i.iv.x-Page_45"></span>Spirit,
ever appeared to bodily eyes, unless through the corporeal creature made
subject to His own power; let us, I say—ready to be corrected, if we are
reproved in a fraternal and upright spirit, ready to be so, even if
carped at by an enemy, so that he speak the truth—in catholic peace and
with peaceful study inquire, whether God indiscriminately appeared to
our fathers before Christ came in the flesh, or whether it was any one
person of the Trinity, or whether severally, as it were by turns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_265"></span>[44:266](1030031.htm#fr_265) <span
id="iv.i.iv.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.x-p3"></span> [Matt.
10.28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iv.i.iv.x-p3.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030032)
