[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030448)  [Next](1030450) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxiii-p1"></span> 22. But perhaps you seek to have some
reason given you on this very point, such as may persuade you, that you
ought not to be taught by reason before faith. Which may easily be done,
if only you make yourself a fair hearer. But, in order that it may be
done suitably, I wish you as it were to answer my questions; and, first,
to tell me, why you, think that one ought not to believe. Because,you
say, credulity, from which men are called credulous, in itself, seems to
me to be a certain fault: otherwise we should not use to cast this as a
term of reproach. For if a suspicious man is in fault, in that he
suspects things not ascertained; how much more a credulous man, who
herein differs from a suspicious man, that the one allows some doubt,
the other none, in matters which he knows not. In the mean while I
accept this opinion and distinction. But you know that we are not wont
to call a person even curious without some reproach; but we call him
studious even with praise. Wherefore observe, if you please, what seems
to you to be the difference between these two. This surely, you answer,
that, although both be led by great desire to know, yet the curious man
seeks after things that no way pertain to him, but the studious man, on
the contrary, seeks after what pertain to him. But, because we deny not
that a man’s wife and children, and their health, pertain unto him; if
any one, being settled abroad, were to be careful to ask all comers, how
his wife and children are and fare, he is surely led by great desire to
know, and yet we call not this man studious, who both exceedingly wishes
to know, and that (in) matters which very greatly pertain unto him.
Wherefore you now understand that the definition of a studious person
falters in this point, that every studious person wishes to know what
pertain to himself, and yet not every one, who makes this his business,
is to be called studious; but he who with all earnestness seeks those
things which pertain unto the liberal culture and adornment of the mind.
Yet we rightly call him one who studies, <span
id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733) especially if we add what he
studies to hear. For we may call him even studious of his own (family)
if he love only his own (family), we do not however, without some
addition, think him worthy of the common name of the studious. But one
who was desirous to hear how his family were I should not call studious
of hearing, unless taking pleasure in the good report, he should wish to
hear it again and again: but one who studied, even if only once. Now
return to the curious person, and tell me, if any one should be willing
to listen to some tale, such as would no way profit him, that is, of
matters that pertain not to him: and that not in an offensive way and
frequently, but very seldom and with great moderation, either at a
feast, or in some company, or meeting of any kind; would he seem to you
curious? I think not: but at any rate he would certainly seem to have a
care for that matter, to which he was willing to listen. Wherefore the
definition of a curious person also must be corrected by the same rule
as that of a studious person: Consider therefore whether the former
statements also do not need to be corrected. For why should not both he,
who at some time suspects something, be unworthy the name of a
suspicious person; and he who at some time believes something, of a
credulous person? Thus as there is very great difference between one who
studies any matter, and the absolutely studious; and again between him
who hath a care and the curious; so is there between him who believes
and the credulous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[357:1734](1030449.htm#fr_1733) <span
id="iv.vi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxiii-p2"></span> *Studentem*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 23](1030450)
