[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030380)  [Next](1030382) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—Of the Exposition of the
Resurrection, the Judgment, and Other Subjects, Which Should Follow This
Narration.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p2"></span>11. On the completion of this
narration, the hope of the resurrection should be set forth, and, so far
as the capacity and strength of the hearer will bear it, and so far also
as the measure of time at our disposal will allow, we ought to handle
our arguments against the vain scoffings of unbelievers on the subject
of the resurrection of the body, as well as on that of the future
judgment, with its goodness in relation to the good, its severity in
relation to the evil, its truth in relation to all. And after the
penalties of the impious have thus been declared with detestation and
horror, then the kingdom of the righteous and faithful, and that
supernal city and its joy, should form the next themes for our
discourse. At this point, moreover, we ought to equip and animate the
weakness of man in withstanding temptations and offenses, whether these
emerge without or rise within the church itself; without, as in
opposition to Gentiles, or Jews, or heretics; within, on the other hand,
as in opposition to the chaff of the Lord’s threshing-floor. It is not
meant, however, that we are to dispute against each several type of
perverse men, and that all their wrong opinions are to be refuted by set
arrays of argumentations: but, in a manner suitable to a limited
allowance of time, we ought to show how all this was foretold, and to
point out of what service temptations are in the training of the
faithful, and what relief <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379)
there is in the example of the patience of God, who has resolved to
permit them even to the end. But, again, while he is being furnished
against these (adversaries), whose perverse multitudes fill the churches
so far as bodily presence is concerned, the precepts of a Christian and
honorable manner of life should also be briefly and befittingly detailed
at the same time, to the intent that he may neither allow himself to be
easily led astray in this way, by any who are drunkards, covetous,
fraudulent, gamesters, adulterers, fornicators, lovers of public
spectacles, wearers of unholy charms, sorcerers, astrologers, or
diviners practising <span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="iv.iii.viii-Page_290"></span>any sort of vain and wicked arts, and
all other parties of a similar character; nor to let himself fancy that
any such course may be followed with impunity on his part, simply
because he sees many who are called Christians loving these things, and
engaging themselves with them, and defending them, and recommending
them, and actually persuading others to their use. For as to the end
which is appointed for those who persist in such a mode of life, and as
to the method in which they are to be borne with in the church itself,
out of which they are destined to be separated in the end,—these are
subjects in which the learner ought to be instructed by means of the
testimonies of the divine books. He should also, however, be informed
beforehand that he will find in the church many good Christians, most
genuine citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, if he sets about being such
himself. And, finally, he must be sedulously warned against letting his
hope rest on man. For it is not a matter that can be easily judged by
man, what man is righteous. And even were this a matter which could be
easily done, still the object with which the examples of righteous men
are set before us is not that we may be justified by them, but that, as
we imitate them, we may understand how we ourselves also are justified
by their Justifier. For the issue of this will be something which must
merit the highest approval,—namely this, that when the person who is
hearing us, or rather, who is hearing God by us, has begun to make some
progress in moral qualities and in knowledge, and to enter upon the way
of Christ with ardor, he will not be so bold as to ascribe the change
either to us or to himself; but he will love both himself and us, and
whatever other persons he loves as friends, in Him, and for His sake who
loved him when he was an enemy, in order that He might justify him and
make him a friend. And now that we have advanced thus far, I do not
think that you need any preceptor to tell you how you should discuss
matters briefly, when either your own time or that of those who are
hearing you is occupied; and how, on the other hand, you should
discourse at greater length when there is more time at your command. For
the very necessity of the case recommends this, apart from the counsel
of any adviser.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[289:1380](1030381.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="iv.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p3"></span> *Medicina*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1030382)
