[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030126)  [Next](1030128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—The Image of the Trinity in the
Mind of Man Who Knows Himself and Loves Himself. The Mind Knows Itself
Through Itself.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.iii-p2"></span>3. For the mind cannot love itself,
except also it know itself; for how can it love what it does not know?
Or if any body says that the mind, from either general or special
knowledge, believes itself of such a character as it has by experience
found others to be and therefore loves itself, he speaks most foolishly.
For whence does a mind know another mind, if it does not know itself?
For the mind does not know other minds and not know itself, as the eye
of the body sees other eyes and does not see itself; for we see bodies
through the eyes of the body, because, unless we are looking into a
mirror, we cannot refract and reflect the rays into themselves which
shine forth through those eyes, and touch whatever we discern,—a
subject, indeed, which is treated of most subtlely and obscurely, until
it be clearly demonstrated whether the fact be so, or whether it be not.
But whatever is the nature of the power by which we discern through the
eyes, certainly, whether it be rays or anything else, we cannot discern
with the eyes that power itself; but we inquire into it with the mind,
and if possible, understand even this with the mind. As the mind, then,
itself gathers the knowledge of corporeal things through the senses of
the body, so of incorporeal things through itself. Therefore it knows
itself also through itself, since it is incorporeal; for if it does not
know itself, it does not love itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030128)
