[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030411)  [Next](1030413) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—Of the Holy Spirit and the Mystery
of the Trinity.</span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p2"></span>16. The divine generation, therefore, of
our Lord, and his human dispensation, having both been thus
systematically disposed and commended to faith, <span
id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588) there is added to our Confession,
with a view to the perfecting of the faith which we have regarding God,
\[the doctrine of\] <span class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.x-p3.1"></span>
The</span> <span class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.x-p3.2"></span>Holy</span>
<span class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.x-p3.3"></span> Spirit</span>, who is
not of a nature inferior <span id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589) to
the Father and the Son, but, so to say, consubstantial and co-eternal:
for this Trinity is one God, not to the effect that the Father is the
same \[Person\] as the Son and the Holy Spirit, but to the effect that
the Father is the Father, and the Son is the Son, and the Holy Spirit is
the Holy Spirit; and this Trinity is one God, according as it is
written, “Hear, O Israel, the Lord your God is one God.” <span
id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590) At the same time, if we be
interrogated on the subject of each separately, and if the question be
put to us, “Is the Father God?” we shall reply, “He is God.” If it be
asked whether the Son is God, we shall answer to the same effect. Nor,
if this kind of inquiry be addressed to us with respect to the Holy
Spirit, ought we to affirm in reply that He is anything else than God;
being earnestly on our guard, \[however\], against an acceptance of this
merely in the sense in which it is applied to men, when it is said, “Ye
are gods.” <span id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591) For of all those
who have been made and fashioned of the Father, through the Son, by the
gift of the Holy Spirit, none are gods according to nature. For it is
this same Trinity that is signified when an apostle says, “For of Him,
and in Him, and through Him, are all things.” <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592) Consequently, although, when we are
interrogated on the subject of each \[of these Persons\] severally, we
reply that that particular one regarding whom the question is asked,
whether it be the Father, or the Son, or the Holy Spirit, is God, no
one, notwithstanding this, should suppose that three Gods are worshipped
by us.

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="iv.iv.x-Page_328"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p8"></span>17. Neither is it strange that these things
are said in reference to an ineffable Nature, when even in those objects
which we discern with the bodily eyes, and judge of by the bodily sense,
something similar holds good. For take the instance of an interrogation
on the subject of a fountain, and consider how we are unable then to
affirm that the said fountain is itself the river; and how, when we are
asked about the river, we are as little able to call it the fountain;
and, again, how we are equally unable to designate the draught, which
comes of the fountain or the river, either river or fountain.
Nevertheless, in the case of this trinity we use the name *water* \[for
the whole\]; and when the question is put regarding each of these
separately, we reply in each several instance that the thing is *water*.
For if I inquire whether it is water in the fountain, the reply is given
that it is water; and if we ask whether it is water in the river, no
different response is returned; and in the case of the said draught, no
other answer can possibly be made: and yet, for all this, we do not
speak of these things as three waters, but as one water. At the same
time, of course, care must be taken that no one should conceive of the
ineffable substance of that Majesty merely as he might think of this
visible and material <span id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593)
fountain, or river, or draught. For in the case of these latter that
water which is at present in the fountain goes forth into the river, and
does not abide in itself; and when it passes from the river or from the
fountain into the draught, it does not continue permanently there where
it is taken from. Therefore it is possible here that the same water may
be in view at one time under the appellation of the fountain and at
another under that of the river, and at a third under that of the
draught. But in the case of that Trinity, we have affirmed it to be
impossible that the Father should be sometime the Son, and sometime the
Holy Spirit: just as, in a tree, the root is nothing else than the root,
and the trunk (*robur*) is nothing else than the trunk, and we cannot
call the branches anything else than branches; for, what is called the
root cannot be called trunk and branches; and the wood which belongs to
the root cannot by any sort of transference be now in the root, and
again in the trunk, and yet again in the branches, but only in the root;
since this rule of designation stands fast, so that the root is wood,
and the trunk is wood, and the branches are wood, while nevertheless it
is not three woods that are thus spoken of, but only one. Or, if these
objects have some sort of dissimilarity, so that on account of their
difference in strength they may be spoken of, without any absurdity, as
three woods; at least all parties admit the force of the former
example,—namely, that if three cups be filled out of one fountain, they
may certainly be called three cups, but cannot be spoken of as three
waters, but only as one all together. Yet, at the same time, when asked
concerning the several cups, one by one, we may answer that in each of
them by itself there is water; although in this case no such
transference takes place as we were speaking of as occurring from the
fountain into the river. But these examples in things material
(*corporalia exempla*) have been adduced not in virtue of their likeness
to that divine Nature, but in reference to the oneness which subsists
even in things visible, so that it may be understood to be quite a
possibility for three objects of some sort, not only severally, but also
all together, to obtain one single name; and that in this way no one may
wonder and think it absurd that we should call the Father God, the Son
God, the Holy Spirit God, and that nevertheless we should say that there
are not three Gods in that Trinity, but one God and one substance. <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594)

<span id="iv.iv.x-p11"></span>18. And, indeed, on this subject of the
Father and the Son, learned and spiritual <span
id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595) men have conducted discussions in
many books, in which, so far as men could do with men, they have
endeavored to introduce an intelligible account as to how the Father was
not one personally with the Son, and yet the two were one
substantially; <span id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596) and as to what
the Father was individually (*proprie*), and what the Son: to wit, that
the former was the Begetter, the latter the Begotten; the former not of
the Son, the latter of the Father: the former the Beginning of the
latter, whence also He is called the Head of Christ, <span
id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597) although Christ likewise is the
Beginning, <span id="fr_1598"></span>[1599](#fn_1598) but not of the
Father; the latter, moreover, the Image <span
id="fr_1599"></span>[1600](#fn_1599) of the former, although in no
respect dissimilar, and although absolutely and without difference equal
(*omnino et indifferenter æqualis*). These questions are handled with
greater breadth by those who, in less narrow limits than ours are at
present, seek to set <span id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span
id="iv.iv.x-Page_329"></span>forth the profession of the Christian faith
in its totality. Accordingly, in so far as He is the Son, of the Father
received He it that He *is*, while that other \[the Father\] received
not this of the Son; and in so far as He, in unutterable mercy, in a
temporal dispensation took upon Himself the \[nature of\] man
(*hominem*),—to wit, the changeable creature that was thereby to be
changed into something better,—many statements concerning Him are
discovered in the Scriptures, which are so expressed as to have given
occasion to error in the impious intellects of heretics, with whom the
desire to teach takes precedence of that to understand, so that they
have supposed Him to be neither equal with the Father nor of the same
substance. Such statements \[are meant\] as the following: “For the
Father is greater than I;” <span id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600)
and, “The head of the woman is the man, the Head of the man is Christ,
and the Head of Christ is God;” <span
id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601) and, “Then shall He Himself be
subject unto Him that put all things under Him;” <span
id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602) and, “I go to my Father and your
Father, my God and your God,” <span id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603)
together with some others of like tenor. Now all these have had a place
given them, \[certainly\] not with the object of signifying an
inequality of nature and substance; for to take them so would be to
falsify a different class of statements, such as, “I and my Father are
one” (*unum*); <span id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604) and, “He that
hath seen me hath seen my Father also;” <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605) and, “The Word was God,” <span
id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606) for He was not made, inasmuch as
“all things were made by Him;” <span
id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607) and, “He thought it not robbery to
be equal with God:” <span id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) together
with all the other passages of a similar order. But these statements
have had a place given them, partly with a view to that administration
of His assumption of human nature (*administrationem suscepti hominis*),
in accordance with which it is said that “He emptied Himself:” not that
that Wisdom was changed, since it is absolutely unchangeable; but that
it was His will to make Himself known in such humble fashion to men.
Partly then, I repeat, it is with a view to this administration that
those things have been thus written which the heretics make the ground
of their false allegations; and partly it was with a view to the
consideration that the Son owes to the Father that which He *is*, <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) —thereby also certainly owing this
in particular to the Father, to wit, that He is equal to the same
Father, or that He is His Peer (*eidem Patri æqualis aut par est*),
whereas the Father owes whatsoever He is to no one.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p27"></span>19. With respect to the <span
class="c19"><span id="iv.iv.x-p27.1"></span>Holy Spirit</span>, however,
there has not been as yet, on the part of learned and distinguished
investigators of the Scriptures, a discussion of the subject full enough
or careful enough to make it possible for us to obtain an intelligent
conception of what also constitutes His special individuality
(*proprium*): in virtue of which special individuality it comes to be
the case that we cannot call Him either the Son or the Father, but only
the Holy Spirit; excepting that they predicate Him to be the Gift of
God, so that we may believe God not to give a gift inferior to Himself.
At the same time they hold by this position, namely, to predicate the
Holy Spirit neither as begotten, like the Son, of the Father; for Christ
is the only one \[so begotten\]: nor as \[begotten\] of the Son, like a
Grandson of the Supreme Father: while they do not affirm Him to owe that
which He is to no one, but \[admit Him to owe it\] to the Father, of
whom are all things; lest we should establish two Beginnings without
beginning (*ne duo constituamus principia isne principio*), which would
be an assertion at once most false and most absurd, and one proper not
to the catholic faith, but to the error of certain heretics. <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) Some, however, have gone so far as
to believe that the communion of the Father and the Son, and (so to
speak) their Godhead (*deitatem*), which the Greeks designate <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.x-p28.1"></span>θεότης</span>, is the Holy
Spirit; so that, inasmuch as the Father is God and the Son God, the
Godhead itself, in which they are united with each other,—to wit, the
former by begetting the Son, and the latter by cleaving to the
Father, <span id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611) —should \[thereby\]
be constituted equal with Him by whom He is begotten. This Godhead,
then, which they wish to be understood likewise as the love and charity
subsisting between these two \[Persons\], the one toward the other, they
affirm to have received the name of the Holy Spirit. And this opinion of
theirs they support by many proofs drawn from the Scriptures; among
which we might instance either the passage which says, “For the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who has been given
unto us,” <span id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612) or many other
proofs texts of a similar tenor: while they ground their position also
upon the express fact that it is through the Holy Spirit that we are
reconciled unto God; whence also, when He is called the Gift of God,
they will have it that sufficient indication is of<span id="page_330">p.
330</span> <span id="iv.iv.x-Page_330"></span>fered of the love of God
and the Holy Spirit being identical. For we are not reconciled unto Him
except through that love in virtue of which we are also called
sons: <span id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613) as we are no more
“under fear, like servants,” <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614)
because “love, when it is made perfect, casteth out fear;” <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) and \[as\] “we have received the
spirit of liberty, wherein we cry, Abba, Father.” <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) And inasmuch as, being reconciled
and called back into friendship through love, we shall be able to become
acquainted with all the secret things of God, for this reason it is said
of the Holy Spirit that “He shall lead you into all truth.” <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617) For the same reason also, that
confidence in preaching the truth, with which the apostles were filled
at His advent, <span id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) is rightly
ascribed to love; because diffidence also is assigned to fear, which the
perfecting of love excludes. Thus, likewise, the same is called the Gift
of God, <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) because no one enjoys
that which he knows, unless he also love it. To enjoy the Wisdom of God,
however, implies nothing else than to cleave to the same in love (*ei
dilectione cohærere*). Neither does any one abide in that which he
apprehends, but by love; and accordingly the Holy Spirit is called the
Spirit of sanctity (*Spiritus Sanctus*), inasmuch as all things that are
sanctioned (*sanciuntur*) <span id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620) are
sanctioned with a view to their permanence, and there is no doubt that
the term sanctity (*sanctitatem*) is derived from sanction (*a
sanciendo*). Above all, however, that testimony is employed by the
upholders of this opinion, where it is thus written, “That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit;” <span id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621) “for God is a
Spirit.” <span id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622) For here He speaks
of our regeneration, <span id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623) which is
not, according to Adam, of the flesh, but, according to Christ, of the
Holy Spirit. Wherefore, if in this passage mention is made of the Holy
Spirit, when it is said, “For God is a Spirit,” they maintain that we
must take note that it is not said, “for the Spirit is God,” <span
id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624) but, “for God is a Spirit;” so that
the very Godhead of the Father and the Son is in this passage called
God, and that is the Holy Spirit. To this is added another testimony
which the Apostle John offers, when he says, “For God is love.” <span
id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625) For here, in like manner, what he
says is not, “Love is God,” <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626)
but, “God is love;” so that the very Godhead is taken to be love. And
with respect to the circumstance that, in that enumeration of mutually
connected objects which is given when it is said, “All things are yours,
and ye are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s,” <span
id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627) as also, “The head of the woman is
the man, the Head of the man is Christ, and the Head of Christ is
God,” <span id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628) there is no mention of
the Holy Spirit; this they affirm to be but an application of the
principle that, in general, the connection itself is not wont to be
enumerated among the things which are connected with each other. Whence,
also, those who read with closer attention appear to recognize the
express Trinity likewise in that passage in which it is said, “For of
Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things.” <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629) “Of Him,” as if it meant, of that
One who owes it to no one that He *is*: “through Him,” as if the idea
were, through a Mediator; “in Him,” as if it were, in that One who holds
together, that is, unites by connecting.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p48"></span>20. Those parties oppose this opinion who
think that the said communion, which we call either Godhead, or Love, or
Charity, is not a substance. Moreover, they require the Holy Spirit to
be set forth to them according to substance; neither do they take it to
have been otherwise impossible for the expression “God is Love” to have
been used, unless love were a substance. In this, indeed, they are
influenced by the wont of things of a bodily nature. For if two bodies
are connected with each other in such wise as to be placed in
juxtaposition one with the other, the connection itself is not a body:
inasmuch as when these bodies which had been connected are separated, no
such connection certainly is found \[any more\]; while, at the same
time, it is not understood to have departed, as it were, and migrated,
as is the case with those bodies themselves. But men like these should
make their heart pure, so far as they can, in order that they may have
power to see that in the substance of God there is not anything of such
a nature as would imply that therein substance is one thing, and that
which is accident to substance (*aliud quod accidat subsantiœ*) another
thing, and not substance; whereas whatsoever can be taken to be therein
is substance. These things, however, can easily be spoken and believed;
but seen, so as to reveal how they are in themselves, they absolutely
cannot be, except by the pure heart. For which reason, <span
id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span id="iv.iv.x-Page_331"></span>whether
the opinion in question be true, or something else be the case, the
faith ought to be maintained unshaken, so that we should call the Father
God, the Son God, the Holy Spirit God, and yet not affirm three Gods,
but hold the said Trinity to be one God; and again, not affirm these
\[Persons\] to be different in nature, but hold them to be of the same
substance; and further uphold it, not as if the Father were sometime the
Son, and sometime the Holy Spirit, but in such wise that the Father is
always the Father, and the Son always the Son, and the Holy Spirit
always the Holy Spirit. Neither should we make any affirmation on the
subject of things unseen rashly, as if we had knowledge, but \[only
modestly\] as believing. For these things cannot be seen except by the
heart made pure; and \[even\] he who in this life sees them “in part,”
as it has been said, and “in an enigma,” <span
id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630) cannot secure it that the person to
whom he speaks shall also see them, if he is hampered by impurities of
heart. “Blessed,” however, “are they of a pure heart, for they shall see
God.” <span id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631) This is the faith on
the subject of God our Maker and Renewer.

<span id="iv.iv.x-p51"></span>21. But inasmuch as love is enjoined upon
us, not only toward God, when it was said, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind;” <span id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632) but also toward our
neighbor, for “thou shalt love,” saith He, “thy neighbor as
thyself;” <span id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633) and inasmuch,
moreover, as the faith in question is less fruitful, if it does not
comprehend a congregation and society of men, wherein brotherly charity
may operate;—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[327:1589](1030412.htm#fr_1588) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p3"></span> Instead of *fideique commendata et divina
generatione*, etc., another, but weakly supported, version is, *fide
atque commendata divina*, etc., which makes the sense = The faith,
therefore, having been systematically disposed, and our Lord’s divine
generation and human dispensation having been commended to the
understanding, etc.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[327:1590](1030412.htm#fr_1589) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p4"></span> *Non minore natura quam Pater*. The
Benedictine editors suggest *minor* for *minore* = not inferior in
nature, etc.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[327:1591](1030412.htm#fr_1590) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p5"></span> [Deut.
6.4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p5.1"></span>[Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[327:1592](1030412.htm#fr_1591) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p6"></span> [Ps.
82.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p6.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[327:1593](1030412.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p7"></span> [Rom.
11.36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p7.1"></span>[Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span id="iv.iv.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[328:1594](1030412.htm#fr_1593) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p9"></span> *Corporeum* = corporeal.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[328:1595](1030412.htm#fr_1594) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p10"></span> Many <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p10.1"></span> mss</span>., however, insert *colamus* after
*Deum* in the closing sentence, *sed unum Deum unamque substantiam*. The
sense then will be = and that nevertheless we should worship in that
Trinity not three Gods, but one God and one substance.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[328:1596](1030412.htm#fr_1595) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p12"></span> *Spiritales*, for which *religiosi* =
religious, is also sometimes given.

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[328:1597](1030412.htm#fr_1596) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p13"></span> *Non unus esset Pater et Filius, sed unum
essent* = how the Father and the Son were not one in person, but were
one in essence.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[328:1598](1030412.htm#fr_1597) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.x-p14.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[328:1599](1030412.htm#fr_1598) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p15"></span> In reference probably to [John
8.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p15.1"></span>[John viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025)<span id="iv.iv.x-p15.2"></span>,
where the Vulgate gives *principium qui et loquor vobis* as the literal
equivalent for the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p15.3"></span> Ϣὴν ἀρχὴν ὅ, τι καὶ λαλῶ ὑηῖν</span>

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[328:1600](1030412.htm#fr_1599) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p15.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p16"></span> [Col.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p16.1"></span>[Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[329:1601](1030412.htm#fr_1600) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p17"></span> [John
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p17.1"></span>[John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.x-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[329:1602](1030412.htm#fr_1601) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p18"></span> [1 Cor.
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.x-p18.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[329:1603](1030412.htm#fr_1602) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p19"></span> [1 Cor.
15.28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p19.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[329:1604](1030412.htm#fr_1603) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p20"></span> [John
20.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p20.1"></span>[John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.x-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[329:1605](1030412.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p21"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p21.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="iv.iv.x-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[329:1606](1030412.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p22"></span> [John
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p22.1"></span>[John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.x-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[329:1607](1030412.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p23"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p23.1"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[329:1608](1030412.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p24"></span> [John
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p24.1"></span>[John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.x-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[329:1609](1030412.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p25"></span> [Phil.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p25.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.x-p25.2"></span>.
\[See R.V.\]

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[329:1610](1030412.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p26"></span> Or it may be = that the Son owes it to
the Father that He *is*.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[329:1611](1030412.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p28"></span> In reference, again, to Manichean
errorists.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[329:1612](1030412.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p29"></span> *Patri cohœrendo* = by close connection
with the Father.

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[329:1613](1030412.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p30"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p30.1"></span>[Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.x-p30.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[330:1614](1030412.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p31"></span> [1 John
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.x-p31.1"></span>[1
John iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p31.2"></span>. The word *Dei* = of God, is sometimes added
here.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[330:1615](1030412.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p32"></span> [Rom.
8.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.x-p32.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[330:1616](1030412.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p33"></span> [1 John
4.18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.x-p33.1"></span>[1
John iv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p33.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[330:1617](1030412.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p34"></span> [Rom.
8.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p34.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.x-p34.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[330:1618](1030412.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p35"></span> [John
16.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p35.1"></span>[John xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span id="iv.iv.x-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[330:1619](1030412.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p36"></span> [Acts
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p36.1"></span>[Acts ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.x-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[330:1620](1030412.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p37"></span> [Eph.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p37.1"></span>[Eph. 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.x-p37.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[330:1621](1030412.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p38"></span> Instead of *sanciuntur*, which is the
reading of the <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p38.1"></span>mss</span>., some editions give
*sanctificantur* = all things that are sanctified are sanctioned, etc.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[330:1622](1030412.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p39"></span> [John
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p39.1"></span>[John iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.x-p39.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[330:1623](1030412.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p40"></span> [John
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p40.1"></span>[John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="iv.iv.x-p40.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[330:1624](1030412.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p41"></span> Reading, with the <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p41.1"></span>mss</span>. and the Benedictine editors, *Hic
enim regenerationem nostram dicit*. Some editions give *Hoc* for *Hic*,
and *dicunt* for *dicit* = for they say that this expresses our
regeneration.

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[330:1625](1030412.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p42"></span> *Quoniam Spiritus Deus est*. But various
editions and <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iv.x-p42.1"></span>mss</span>. give *Dei* for *Deus* = for the
Spirit is of God.

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[330:1626](1030412.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p43"></span> [1 John
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span id="iv.iv.x-p43.1"></span>[1
John iv. 16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[330:1627](1030412.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p44"></span> Here again, instead of *dilectio Deus
est*, we also find *dilectio Dei est* = love is of God.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[330:1628](1030412.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p45"></span> [1 Cor.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv.x-p45.1"></span>[1
Cor. 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv.x-p45.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[330:1629](1030412.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p46"></span> [1 Cor.
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.x-p46.1"></span>[1
Cor. xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p46.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[330:1630](1030412.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p47"></span> [Rom.
11.36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p47.1"></span>[Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span id="iv.iv.x-p47.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[331:1631](1030412.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p49"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p49.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.x-p49.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[331:1632](1030412.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p50"></span> [Matt.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[331:1633](1030412.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p52"></span> [Deut.
6.5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p52.1"></span>[Deut. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.x-p52.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[331:1634](1030412.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="iv.iv.x-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.x-p53"></span> [Luke
10.27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.x-p53.1"></span>[Luke x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)<span id="iv.iv.x-p53.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030413)
