[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030206)  [Next](1030208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—The Trinity Which is the Image
of God is Now to Be Sought in the Noblest Part of the Mind.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.viii-p2"></span>11. But we have come now to that
argument in which we have undertaken to consider the noblest part of the
human mind, by which it knows or can know God, in order that we may find
in it the image of God. For although the human mind is not of the same
nature with God, yet the image of that nature than which none is better,
is to be sought and found in us, in that than which our nature also has
nothing better. But the mind must first be considered as it is in
itself, before it becomes partaker of God; and His image must be found
in it. For, as we have said, although worn out and defaced by losing the
participation of God, yet the image of God still remains. <span
id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) For it is His image in this very
point, that it is capable of Him, and can be partaker of Him; which so
great good is only made possible by its being His image. Well, then, the
mind remembers, understands, loves itself; if we discern this, we
discern a trinity, not yet indeed God, but now at last an image of God.
The memory does not receive from without that which it is to hold; nor
does the understanding find without that which it is to regard, as the
eye of the body does; nor has will joined these two from without, as it
joins the form of the bodily object and that which is thence wrought in
the vision of the beholder; nor has conception, in being turned to it,
found an image of a thing seen without, which has been somehow seized
and laid up in the memory, whence the intuition of him that recollects
has been formed, will as a third joining the two: as we showed to take
place in those trinities which were discovered in things corporeal, or
which were somehow drawn within from bodily objects by the bodily sense;
of all which we have discoursed in the eleventh book. <span
id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) Nor, again, as it took place, or
appeared to do so, when we went on further to discuss that knowledge,
which had its place now in the workings of the inner man, and which was
to be distinguished from wisdom; of which knowledge the subject-matter
was, as it were, adventitious to the mind, and either was brought
thither by historical information,—as deeds and words, which are
performed in time and pass away, or which again are established in the
nature of things in their own times and places,—or arises in the man
himself not being there before, whether on the information of others, or
by his own thinking,—as faith, which we commended at length in the
thirteenth book, or as the virtues, by which, if they are true, one so
lives well in this mortality as to live blessedly in that immortality
which God promises. These and other things of the kind have their proper
order in time, and in that order we discerned more easily a trinity of
memory, sight, and love. For some of such things anticipate the
knowledge of learners. For they are knowable also before they are known,
and beget in the learner a knowledge of themselves. And they either
exist in their own proper places, or have happened in time past;
although things that are past do not themselves exist, but only certain
signs of them as past, the sight or hearing of which makes it known that
they have been and have passed away. And these signs are either situate
in the places themselves, as *e.g.* monuments of the dead or the like;
or exist in written books worthy of credit, as is all history that is of
weight and approved authority; or are in the minds of those who already
know them; since what is already known to them is knowable certainly to
others also, whose knowledge it has anticipated, and who are able to
know it on the information of those who do know it. And all these
things, when they are learned, produce a certain kind of trinity, *viz.*
by their own proper species, which was knowable also before it was
known, and by the application to this of the knowledge of the learner,
which then begins to exist when he learns them, and by will as a third
which combines both; and when they are known, yet another trinity is
produced in the recollecting of them, and this now inwardly in the mind
itself, from those images which, when they were learned, were impressed
upon the memory, and from the informing of the thought when the look has
been turned upon these by recollection, and from the will which as a
third combines these two. But those things which arise in the mind, not
having been there before, as faith and other things of that kind,
although they appear to be adventitious, since they are implanted by
teaching, yet are not situate without or transacted without, as are
those things which are believed; but began to be altogether within in
the mind itself. For faith is not that which is believed, but that by
which it is believed; and the former <span id="page_190">p. 190</span>
<span id="iv.i.xvi.viii-Page_190"></span>is believed, the latter seen.
Nevertheless, because it began to be in the mind, which was a mind also
before these things began to be in it, it seems to be somewhat
adventitious, and will be reckoned among things past, when sight shall
have succeeded, and itself shall have ceased to be. And it makes now by
its presence, retained as it is, and beheld, and loved, a different
trinity from that which it will then make by means of some trace of
itself, which in passing it will have left in the memory: as has been
already said above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_877"></span>[189:878](1030207.htm#fr_877) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.viii-p3"></span> *Supra*, c. iv.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[189:879](1030207.htm#fr_878) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.viii-p4"></span> Cc. 2 sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1030208)
