[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030261)  [Next](1030263.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—All Beings Were Made Good, But
Not Being Made Perfectly Good, are Liable to Corruption.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p2"></span>All things that exist, therefore, seeing
that the Creator of them all is supremely good, are themselves good. But
because they are not, like their Creator, supremely and unchangeably
good, their good may be diminished and increased. But for good to be
diminished is an evil, although, however much it may be diminished, it
is necessary, if the being is to continue, that some good should remain
to constitute the being. For however small or of whatever kind the being
may be, the good which makes it a being cannot be destroyed without
destroying the being itself. An uncorrupted nature is justly held in
esteem. But if, still further, it be incorruptible, it is undoubtedly
considered of still higher value. When it is corrupted, however, its
corruption is an evil, because it is deprived of some sort of good. For
if it be deprived of no good, it receives no injury; but it does receive
injury, therefore it is deprived of good. Therefore, so long as a being
is in process of corruption, there is in it some good of which it is
being deprived; and if a part of the being should remain which cannot be
corrupted, this will certainly be an incorruptible being, and
accordingly the process of corruption will result in the manifestation
of this great good. But if it do not cease to be corrupted, neither can
it cease to possess good of which corruption may deprive it. But if it
should be thoroughly and completely consumed by corruption, there will
then be no good left, because there will be no being. Wherefore
corruption can consume the good only by consuming the being. Every
being, therefore, is a good; a great good, if it can not be corrupted; a
little good, if it can: but in any case, only the foolish or ignorant
will deny that it is a good. And if it be wholly <span id="page_241">p.
241</span> <span id="iv.ii.xiv-Page_241"></span>consumed by corruption,
then the corruption itself must cease to exist, as there is no being
left in which it can dwell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1030263.md)
