[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030436)  [Next](1030438) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p1"></span> 10. But, passing over in the mean while
the depth of knowledge, to deal with you as I think I ought to deal with
my intimate friend; that is, as I have myself power, not as I have
wondered at the power of very learned men; there are three kinds of
error, whereby men err, when they read anything. I will speak of them
one by one. The first kind is, wherein that which is false is thought
true, whereas the writer thought otherwise. A second kind, although not
so extensive, yet not less hurtful, when that, which is false, is <span
id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span id="iv.vi.xi-Page_352"></span>thought
true, yet the thought is the same as that of the writer. A third kind,
when from the writing of another some truth is understood, whereas the
writer understood it not. In which kind there is no little profit,
rather, if you consider carefully, the whole entire fruit of reading. An
instance of the first kind is, as if any one, for example, should say
and believe that Rhadamanthus hears and judges the causes of the dead in
the realms below, because he hath so read in the strain of Maro. <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723) For this one errs in two ways: both
in that he believes a thing not to be believed, and also in that he,
whom he reads, is not to be thought to have believed it. The second kind
may be thus noticed: if one, because Lucretius writes that the soul is
formed of atoms, and that after death it is dissolved into the same
atoms and perishes, were to think this to be true and what he ought to
believe. For this one also is not less wretched, if, in a matter of so
great moment, he hath persuaded himself of that which is false, as
certain; although Lucretius, by whose books he hath been deceived, held
this opinion. For what doth it profit this one to be assured of the
meaning of the author, whereas he hath chosen him to himself not so as
through him to escape error, but so as with him to err. An instance
suited to the third kind is, if one, after having read in the books of
Epicurus some place wherein he praises continence, were to assert that
he had made the chief good to consist in virtue, and that therefore he
is not to be blamed. For how is this man injured by the error of
Epicurus, what though Epicurus believe that bodily pleasure is the chief
good of man: whereas he hath not surrendered up himself to so base and
hurtful an opinion, and is pleased with Epicurus for no other reason,
than that he thinks him not to have held sentiments which ought not to
be holden. This error is not only natural to man, <span
id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724) but often also most worthy of a
man. For what, if word were brought to me, concerning some one whom I
loved, that, when now he was of bearded age, he had said, in the hearing
of many, that he was so pleased with boyhood and childhood, as even to
swear that he wished to live after the same fashion, and that that was
so proved to me, as that I should be shameless to deny it: I should not,
should I, seem worthy of blame, if I thought that, in saying this, he
wished to show, that he was pleased with the innocence, and with the
temper of mind alien from those desires in which the race of man is
wrapped up, and from this circumstance should love him yet more and
more, than I used to love him before; although perhaps he had been
foolish enough to love in the age of children a certain freedom in play
and food, and an idle ease? For suppose that he had died after this
report had reached me, and that I had been unable to make any inquiry of
him, so as for him to open his meaning; would there be any one so
shameless as to be angry with me, for praising the man’s purpose and
wish, through those very words which I had heard? What, that even a just
judge of matters would not hesitate perhaps to praise my sentiment and
wish, in that both I was pleased with innocence, and, as man of man, in
a matter of doubt, preferred to think well, when it was in my power also
to think ill?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[352:1724](1030437.htm#fr_1723) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p2"></span> Virg. *Æn.* vi. 566–569.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[352:1725](1030437.htm#fr_1724) <span
id="iv.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xi-p3"></span> *Humanus*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 11](1030438)
