[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030397)  [Next](1030399) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 24.—Of the Church in Its Likeness to
a Vine Sprouting and Suffering Pruning.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p2"></span>44. “But that vine, which was spreading
forth its fruitful shoots throughout the circle of lands, according as
had been prophesied with regard to it, and as had been foretold by the
Lord Himself, sprouted all the more luxuriantly in proportion as it was
watered with richer streams of the blood of martyrs. And as these died
in behalf of the truth of the faith in countless numbers throughout all
lands, even the persecuting kingdoms themselves desisted, and were
converted to the knowledge and worship of Christ, with the neck of their
pride broken. Moreover it behoved that this same vine should be pruned
in accordance with the Lord’s repeated predictions, <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) and that the unfruitful twigs
should be cut out of it, by which heresies and schisms were occasioned
in various localities, under the name of Christ, on the part of men who
sought not His glory but their own; whose oppositions, however, also
served more and more to discipline the Church, and to test and
illustrate both its doctrine and its patience.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p4"></span>45. “All these things, then, we now
perceive to be realized precisely as we read of them in predictions
uttered so long before the event. And as the first Christians, inasmuch
as they did not see these things literally made good in their own day,
were moved by miracles to believe them; so as regards ourselves,
inasmuch as all these things have now been brought to pass exactly as we
read of them in those books which were written a long time previous to
the fulfillment of the things in question, wherein they were all
announced as matters yet future, even as they are now seen to be
actually present, we are built up unto faith, so that, enduring and
persevering in the Lord, we believe without any hesitation in the
destined accomplishment even of those things which still remain to be
realized. For, indeed, in the same Scriptures, tribulations yet to come
are still read of, as well as the final day of judgment itself, when all
the citizens of these two states shall receive their bodies again, and
rise and give account of their life before the judgment-seat of Christ.
For He will come in the glory of His power, who of old condescended to
come in the lowliness of humanity; and He will separate all the godly
from the ungodly,—not only from those who have utterly refused to
believe in Him at all, but also from those who have believed in Him to
no purpose and without fruit. To the one class He will give an eternal
kingdom together with Himself, while to the other He will award eternal
punishment together with the devil. But as no joy yielded by things
temporal can be found in any measure comparable to the joy of life
eternal which <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-Page_310"></span>the saints are destined to attain, so no
torment of temporal punishments can be compared to the everlasting
torments of the unrighteous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[309:1485](1030398.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p3"></span> [John
15.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p3.1"></span>[John xv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](1030399)
