[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030692)  [Next](1030694.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.v"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p1"></span> 4. Of lies are many sorts, which indeed
<span id="page_483">p. 483</span> <span id="v.vi.v-Page_483"></span>all,
universally, we ought to hate. For there is no lie that is not contrary
to truth. For, as light and darkness, piety and impiety, justice and
iniquity, sin and right-doing, health and weakness, life and death, so
are truth and a lie contrary the one to the other. Whence by how much we
love the former, by so much ought we to hate the latter. Yet in truth
there be some lies which to believe does no harm: although even by such
sort of lie to wish to deceive, is hurtful to him that tells it, not to
him that believes it. As though, if that brother, the servant of God,
Fronto, in the information which he gave thee, should (though far be the
thought!) say some things falsely; he would have hurt himself assuredly,
not thee, although thou, without iniquity of thine, hadst believed all,
upon his telling it. Because, whether those things did so take place or
not so, yet they have not any thing, which if a person believe to have
been so, though it were not so, he by the rule of truth and doctrine of
eternal salvation should be judged worthy of blame. Whereas, if a person
tell a lie which if any believe he will be an heretic against the
doctrine of Christ, by so much is he who tells the lie more hurtful, by
how much he that believes it is more miserable. See then, what manner of
thing it is, if against the doctrine of Christ we shall tell a lie which
whoso believes shall perish, in order that we may catch the enemies of
the same doctrine, to the end we may bring them to the truth, while we
recede from it; nay rather, when we catch liars by lying, teach worse
lies. For it is one thing what they say when they lie, another when they
are deceived. For, when they teach their heresy, they speak the things
in which they are deceived; but when they say that they think what they
do not think, or that they do not think what they do think, they say the
things in which they lie. In that any believeth them, what though he do
not find them out, himself perisheth not. For it is no receding from the
catholic rule, if, when a heretic lyingly professes the catholic
doctrines, one believes him to be a catholic: and therefore it is not
pernicious to him; because he is mistaken in the mind of a man, of
which, when latent, he cannot judge, not in the faith of God which it is
his duty to keep safe planted within him. Moreover, when they teach
their heresy, whoso shall believe them, in thinking it truth, will be
partaker, as of their error, so of their damnation. So it comes to pass,
that when they fable their nefarious dogmas in which they are with
deadly error deceived, then whoso believeth them is lost: whereas when
we preach catholic dogmas, in which we hold the right faith, then if he
shall believe, that man is found, whoso was lost. But when, they being
Priscillianists, do, in order that they may not betray their venom,
lyingly give themselves out to be of us; whoever of us believes them,
even while they escape detection, himself perseveres a Catholic: we on
the other hand, if, in order to attain to the discovery of them, we
falsely give ourselves out for Priscillianists, because we shall praise
their dogmas as though they were our own, whoso shall believe the same,
will either be confirmed among them, or will be transferred to them in
the meantime straightway: but what the coming hour may bring forth,
whether they shall be afterwards set free therefrom by us when speaking
true things, who were deceived by us when speaking false; and whether
they will be willing to hear one teaching whom they have thus
experienced telling a lie,who can know for certain? who can be ignorant
that this is uncertain? Whence it is gathered, that it is more
pernicious, or to speak more mildly, that it is more perilous for
Catholics to lie that they may catch heretics, than for heretics to lie
that they may not be found out by Catholics. Because, whoso believes
Catholics when they tell a lie to tempt people, is either made or
confirmed a heretic; but whoso believes heretics when they tell a lie to
conceal themselves, doth not cease to be a Catholic. But that this may
become more plain, let us propose some cases by way of example, and from
those writings in preference which thou hast sent me to read.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](1030694.md)
