[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030165)  [Next](1030167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—The Trinity and the Image of God
is in that Part of the Mind Alone Which Belongs to the Contemplation of
Eternal Things.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.iv-p2"></span>4. When, therefore, we discuss the
nature of the human mind, we discuss a single subject, and do not double
it into those two which I have mentioned, except in respect to its
functions. Therefore, when we seek the trinity in the mind, we seek it
in the whole mind, without separating the action of the reason in things
temporal from the contemplation of things eternal, so as to have further
to seek some third thing, by which a trinity may be completed. But this
trinity must needs be so discovered in the whole nature of the mind, as
that even if action upon temporal things were to be withdrawn, for which
work that help is necessary, with a view to which some part of the mind
is diverted in order to deal with these inferior things, yet a trinity
would still be found in the one mind that is no where parted off; and
that when this distribution has been already made, not only a trinity
may be found, but also an image of God, in that alone which belongs to
the contemplation of eternal things; while in that other which is
diverted from it in the dealing with temporal things, although there may
be a trinity, yet there cannot be found an image of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030167)
