[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030417)  [Next](1030419.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p1"></span> 4. If this faith be taken away from human
affairs, who but must observe how great disorder in them, and how
fearful confusion must follow? For who will be loved by any with mutual
affection, (being that the loving <span
id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655) itself is invisible,.md) if what I see
not, I ought not to believe? Therefore will the whole of friendship
perish, in that it consists not save of mutual love. For what of it will
it be able to receive from any, if nothing of it shall be believed to be
shown? Further, friendship perishing, there will be preserved in the
mind the bonds neither of marriages, nor of kindreds and relations;
because in these also there is assuredly a friendly union of sentiment.
Spouse therefore will not be able to love spouse in turn, inasmuch as
each believes not the other’s love, because the love itself cannot be
seen. Nor will they long to have sons, who they believe not will make
them a return. And if these be born and grow up, much less will the
parents themselves love their own children, whose love towards
themselves in those children’s hearts they will not see, it being
invisible; if it be not praiseworthy faith, but blameable rashness, to
believe those things which are not seen. Why should I now speak of the
other connections, of brothers, sisters, sons-in-law, and
fathers-in-law, and of them who are joined together by any kindred or
affinity, if love is uncertain, and the will suspected, that of parents
by sons, and that of sons by parents, whilst due benevolence is not
rendered; because neither is it thought to be due, that which is not
seen in another not being thought to exist. Further, if this caution be
not a mark of ability, <span id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656.md) but be
hateful, wherein we believe not that we are loved, because we see not
the love of them who love, and repay not them, unto whom we think not
that we owe a return; to that degree are human affairs thrown into
disorder, if what we see not we believe not, as to be altogether and
utterly overthrown, if we believe no wills of men, <span
id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span id="iv.v.iv-Page_339"></span>which
assuredly we cannot see. I omit to mention in how many things they, who
find fault with us because we believe what we see not, believe report or
history; or concerning places where they have not themselves been; and
say not, we believe not, because we have not seen. Since if they say
this, they are obliged to confess that their own parents are not surely
known to them: because on this point also they have believed the
accounts of others telling of it, who yet are unable to show it, because
it is a thing already past; retaining themselves no sense of that time,
and yet yielding assent without any doubting to others speaking of that
time: and unless this be done, there must of necessity be incurred a
faithless impiety towards parents, whilst we are, as it were, showing a
rashness of belief in those things which we cannot see. Since therefore,
if we believe not those things which we cannot see, human society
itself, through concord perishing, will not stand how much more is faith
to be applied to divine things, although they be not seen; failing the
application of which, it is not the friendship of some men or other, but
the very chiefest bond of piety <span
id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657.md) that is violated, so as for the
chiefest misery to follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[338:1656](1030418.htm#fr_1655.md) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p2"></span> *Dilectio*

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[338:1657](1030418.htm#fr_1656.md) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p3"></span> *Ingeniosa*

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[339:1658](1030418.htm#fr_1657.md) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p4"></span> “*Religio,*” (toward parents).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](1030419.md)
