[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030143)  [Next](1030145.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii"></span><span id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-Page_139"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—The Opinions of Philosophers
Respecting the Substance of the Soul. The Error of Those Who are of
Opinion that the Soul is Corporeal, Does Not Arise from Defective
Knowledge of the Soul, But from Their Adding There to Something Foreign
to It. What is Meant by Finding.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p2"></span>9. When, therefore, it thinks itself
to be something of this kind, it thinks itself to be a corporeal thing;
and since it is perfectly conscious of its own superiority, by which it
rules the body, it has hence come to pass that the question has been
raised what part of the body has the greater power in the body; and the
opinion has been held that this is the mind, nay, that it is even the
whole soul altogether. And some accordingly think it to be the blood,
others the brain, others the heart; not as the Scripture says, “I will
praise Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart;” and, “Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart;” <span
id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723.md) for this word by misapplication or
metaphor is transferred from the body to the soul; but they have simply
thought it to be that small part itself of the body, which we see when
the inward parts are rent asunder. Others, again, have believed the soul
to be made up of very minute and individual corpustules, which they call
atoms, meeting in themselves and cohering. Others have said that its
substance is air, others fire. Others have been of opinion that it is no
substance at all, since they could not think any substance unless it is
body, and they did not find that the soul was body; but it was in their
opinion the tempering together itself of our body, or the combining
together of the elements, by which that flesh is as it were conjoined.
And hence all of these have held the soul to be mortal; since, whether
it were body, or some combination of body, certainly it could not in
either case continue always without death. But they who have held its
substance to be some kind of life the reverse of corporeal, since they
have found it to be a life that animates and quickens every living body,
have by consequence striven also, according as each was able, to prove
it immortal, since life cannot be without life.

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p4"></span>For as to that fifth kind of body, I
know not what, which some have added to the four well-known elements of
the world, and have said that the soul was made of this, I do not think
we need spend time in discussing it in this place. For either they mean
by body what we mean by it, *viz.*, that of which a part is less than
the whole in extension of place, and they are to be reckoned among those
who have believed the mind to be corporeal: or if they call either all
substance, or all changeable substance, body, whereas they know that not
all substance is contained in extension of place by any length and
breadth and height, we need not contend with them about a question of
words.

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p5"></span>10. Now, in the case of all these
opinions, any one who sees that the nature of the mind is at once
substance, and yet not corporeal,—that is, that it does not occupy a
less extension of place with a less part of itself, and a greater with a
greater,—must needs see at the same time that they who are of opinion
that it is corporeal <span id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724.md) do not err
from defect of knowledge concerning mind, but because they associate
with it qualities without which they are not able to conceive any nature
at all. For if you bid them conceive of existence that is without
corporeal phantasms, they hold it merely nothing. And so the mind would
not seek itself, as though wanting to itself. For what is so present to
knowledge as that which is present to the mind? Or what is so present to
the mind as the mind itself? And hence what is called “invention,” if we
consider the origin of the word, what else does it mean, unless that to
find out <span id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725.md) is to “come into” that
which is sought? Those things accordingly which come into the mind as it
were of themselves, are not usually said to be found out, <span
id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726.md) although they may be said to be known;
since we did not endeavor by seeking to come into them, that is to
invent or find them out. And therefore, as the mind itself really seeks
those things which are sought by the eyes or by any other sense of the
body (for the mind directs even the carnal sense, and then finds out or
invents, when that sense comes to the things which are sought); so, too,
it finds out or invents other things which it ought to know, not with
the medium of corporeal sense, but through itself, when it “comes into”
them; and this, whether in the case of the higher substance that is in
God, or of the other parts of the soul; just as it does when it judges
of bodily images themselves, for it finds these within, in the soul,
impressed through the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_723"></span>[139:724](1030144.htm#fr_723.md) <span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p3"></span> [Ps.
9:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#000.md), [Ps.
111:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#000.md), [Ps.
138:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#000.md), [Deut.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005.md), [Matt.
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-p3.1"></span><span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p3.2"></span>, and
cxxxviii., [Deut. vi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-p3.3"></span>, and [Matt. xxii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="fn_724"></span>[139:725](1030144.htm#fr_724.md) <span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p6"></span> \[The distinction between corporeal
and incorporeal substance is one that Augustin often insists upon. See
Confessions VII. i-iii. The doctrine that all substance is extended
body, and that there is no such entity as spiritual unextended
substance, is combatted by Plato in the Theatetus. For a history of the
contest and an able defence of the substantiality of spirit, see
Cudworth’s *Intellectual System*, III. 384 sq. Harrison’s Ed.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_725"></span>[139:726](1030144.htm#fr_725.md) <span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p7"></span> *Invenire*

<span id="fn_726"></span>[139:727](1030144.htm#fr_726.md) <span
id="iv.i.xii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.vii-p8"></span> *Inventa*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1030145.md)
