[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030795)  [Next](1030797) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxii-p1"></span> 21. But if it be goaded on and
inflamed with deceitful visions and unclean incentives by the devilish
spirit, associated and conspiring therewith in malignant agreement, this
spirit makes the will of the man either frantic with error, or burning
with appetite of some worldly delight; and hence, it seems to show a
marvellous endurance of intolerable evils: but yet it does not follow
from this that an evil will without instigation of another and unclean
spirit, like as a good will without aid of the Holy Spirit, cannot
exist. For that there may be an evil will even without any spirit either
seducing or inciting, is sufficiently clear in the instance of the devil
himself, who is found to have become a devil, not through some other
devil, but of his own proper will. An evil will therefore, whether it be
hurried on by lust, whether called back by fear, whether expanded by
gladness, whether contracted by sadness, and in all these perturbations
of mind enduring and making light of whatever are to others, or at
another time, more grievous, this evil will may, without another spirit
to goad it on, seduce itself, and in lapsing by defection from the
higher to the lower, the more pleasant it shall account that thing to be
which it seeks to get or fears to lose, or rejoices to have gotten, or
grieves to have lost, the more tolerably for its sake bear what is less
for it to suffer than that is to be enjoyed. For whatever that thing be,
it is of the creature, of which one knows the pleasure. Because in some
sort, the creature loved approaches itself to the creature loving in
fond contact and connection, to the giving experience of its sweetness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 22](1030797)
