[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030221)  [Next](1030223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—A Brief Recapitulation of All
the Previous Books.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p2"></span>4. But since the necessities of our
discussion and argument have compelled us to say a great many things in
the course of fourteen books, which we cannot view at once in one
glance, so as to be able to refer them quickly in thought to that which
we desire to grasp, I will attempt, by the help of God, to the best of
my power, to put briefly together, without arguing, whatever I have
established in the several books by argument as known, and to place, as
it were, under one mental view, not the way in which we have been
convinced of each point, but the points themselves of which we have been
convinced; in order that what follows may not be so far separated from
that which precedes, as that the perusal of the former shall produce
forgetfulness of the latter; or at any rate, if it have produced such
forgetfulness, that what has escaped the memory may be speedily recalled
by re-perusal.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p3"></span>5. In the first book, the unity and
equality of that highest Trinity is shown from Holy Scripture. In the
second, and third, and fourth, the same: but a careful handling of the
question respecting the sending of the Son and of the Holy Spirit has
resulted in three books; and we have demonstrated, that He who is sent
is not therefore less than He who sends because the one sent, the other
was sent; since the Trinity, which is in all things equal, being also
equally in its own nature unchangeable, and invisible, and everywhere
present, works indivisibly. In the fifth,—with a view to those who think
that the substance of the Father and of the Son is therefore not the
same, because they suppose everything that is predicated of God to be
predicated according to substance, and therefore contend that to beget
and to be begotten, or to be begotten and unbegotten, as being diverse,
are diverse substances,—it is demonstrated that not everything that is
predicated of God is predicated according to substance, as He is called
good and great according to substance, or anything else that is
predicated of Him in respect to Himself, but that some things also are
predicated relatively, *i.e.* not in respect to Himself, but in respect
to something which is not Himself; as He is called the Father in respect
to the Son, or the Lord in respect to the creature that serves Him; and
that here, if anything thus relatively predicated, *i.e.* predicated in
respect to something that is not Himself, is predicated also as in time,
as, *e.g.*, “Lord, Thou hast become our <span id="page_201">p.
201</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-Page_201"></span>refuge,” <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944) then nothing happens to Him so as to
work a change in Him, but He Himself continues altogether unchangeable
in His own nature or essence. In the sixth, the question how Christ is
called by the mouth of the apostle “the power of God and the wisdom of
God,” <span id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945) is so far argued that the
more careful handling of that question is deferred, *viz*. whether He
from whom Christ is begotten is not wisdom Himself, but only the father
of His own wisdom, or whether wisdom begat wisdom. But be it which it
may, the equality of the Trinity became apparent in this book also, and
that God was not triple, but a Trinity; and that the Father and the Son
are not, as it were, a double as opposed to the single Holy Spirit: for
therein three are not anything more than one. We considered, too, how to
understand the words of Bishop Hilary, “Eternity in the Father, form in
the Image, use in the Gift.” In the seventh, the question is explained
which had been deferred: in what way that God who begat the Son is not
only Father of His own power and wisdom, but is Himself also power and
wisdom; so, too, the Holy Spirit; and yet that they are not three powers
or three wisdoms, but one power and one wisdom, as one God and one
essence. It was next inquired, in what way they are called one essence,
three persons, or by some Greeks one essence, three substances; and we
found that the words were so used through the needs of speech, that
there might be one term by which to answer, when it is asked what the
three are, whom we truly confess to be three, *viz*. Father, and Son,
and Holy Spirit. In the eighth, it is made plain by reason also to those
who understand, that not only the Father is not greater than the Son in
the substance of truth, but that both together are not anything greater
than the Holy Spirit alone, nor that any two at all in the same Trinity
are anything greater than one, nor all three together anything greater
than each severally. Next, I have pointed out, that by means of the
truth, which is beheld by the understanding, and by means of the highest
good, from which is all good, and by means of the righteousness for
which a righteous mind is loved even by a mind not yet righteous, we
might understand, so far as it is possible to understand, that not only
incorporeal but also unchangeable nature which is God; and by means,
too, of love, which in the Holy Scriptures is called God, <span
id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946) by which, first of all, those who have
understanding begin also, however feebly, to discern the Trinity, to
wit, one that loves, and that which is loved, and love. In the ninth,
the argument advances as far as to the image of God, *viz*. man in
respect to his mind; and in this we found a kind of trinity, *i.e.* the
mind, and the knowledge whereby the mind knows itself, and the love
whereby it loves both itself and its knowledge of itself; and these
three are shown to be mutually equal, and of one essence. In the tenth,
the same subject is more carefully and subtly handled, and is brought to
this point, that we found in the mind a still more manifest trinity of
the mind, *viz.* in memory, and understanding, and will. But since it
turned out also, that the mind could never be in such a case as not to
remember, understand, and love itself, although it did not always think
of itself; but that when it did think of itself, it did not in the same
act of thought distinguish itself from things corporeal; the argument
respecting the Trinity, of which this is an image, was deferred, in
order to find a trinity also in the things themselves that are seen with
the body, and to exercise the reader’s attention more distinctly in
that. Accordingly, in the eleventh, we chose the sense of sight, wherein
that which should have been there found to hold good might be recognized
also in the other four bodily senses, although not expressly mentioned;
and so a trinity of the outer man first showed itself in those things
which are discerned from without, to wit, from the bodily object which
is seen, and from the form which is thence impressed upon the eye of the
beholder, and from the purpose of the will combining the two. But these
three things, as was patent, were not mutually equal and of one
substance. Next, we found yet another trinity in the mind itself,
introduced into it, as it were, by the things perceived from without;
wherein the same three things, as it appeared, were of one substance:
the image of the bodily object which is in the memory, and the form
thence impressed when the mind’s eye of the thinker is turned to it, and
the purpose of the will combining the two. But we found this trinity to
pertain to the outer man, on this account, that it was introduced into
the mind from bodily objects which are perceived from without. In the
twelfth, we thought good to distinguish wisdom from knowledge, and to
seek first, as being the lower of the two, a kind of appropriate and
special trinity in that which is specially called knowledge; but that
although we have got now in this to something pertaining to the inner
man, yet it is not yet to be either called or thought an image of God.
And this is discussed in the thirteenth book by the commendation of
Christian faith. In the <span id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-Page_202"></span>fourteenth we discuss the true wisdom
of man, *viz*. that which is granted him by God’s gift in the partaking
of that very God Himself, which is distinct from knowledge; and the
discussion reached this point, that a trinity is discovered in the image
of God, which is man in respect to his mind, which mind is “renewed in
the knowledge” of God, “after the image of Him that created” man; <span
id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947) “after His own image;” <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948) and so obtains wisdom, wherein is the
contemplation of things eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_944"></span>[201:945](1030222.htm#fr_944) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p4"></span> [Ps.
90.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p4.1"></span>[Ps. xc.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_945"></span>[201:946](1030222.htm#fr_945) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p5.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_946"></span>[201:947](1030222.htm#fr_946) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p6"></span> [1 John
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p6.1"></span>[1 John iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_947"></span>[202:948](1030222.htm#fr_947) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p7"></span> [Col.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p7.1"></span>[Col. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_948"></span>[202:949](1030222.htm#fr_948) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p8"></span> [Gen.
1.27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p8.1"></span>[Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.iii-p8.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030223)
