[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030414)  [Next](1030416.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span> 1. <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span> There</span> are those who think that the
Christian religion is what we should smile at rather than hold fast, for
this reason, that, in it, not what may be seen, is shown, but men are
commanded faith of things which are not seen. We therefore, that we may
refute these, who seem to themselves through prudence to be unwilling to
believe what they cannot see, although we are not able to show unto
human sight those divine things which we believe, yet do show unto human
minds that even those things which are not seen are to be believed. And
first they are to be admonished, (whom folly hath so made subject to
their carnal eyes, as that, whatsoever they see not through them, they
think not that they are to believe,) how many things they not only
believe but also know, which cannot be seen by such eyes. Which things
being without number in our mind itself, (the nature of which mind is
incapable of being seen,) not to mention others, the very faith whereby
we believe, or the thought whereby we know that we either believe any
thing, or believe not, being as it is altogether alien from the sight of
those eyes; what so naked, so clear, what so certain is there to the
inner eyes of our minds? How then are we not to believe what we see not
with the eyes of the body, whereas, either that we believe, or that we
believe not, in a case where we cannot apply the eyes of the body, we
without any doubt see?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 2](1030416.md)
