[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030223)  [Next](1030225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—How Difficult It is to
Demonstrate the Trinity by Natural Reason.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p2"></span>7. But all that I have said, and
whatever else seems to be worthily said of God after the like fashion of
human speech, applies to the whole Trinity, which is one God, and to the
several Persons in that Trinity. For who would dare to say either of the
one God, which is the Trinity itself, or of the Father, or Son, or Holy
Spirit, either that He is not living, or is without sense or
intelligence; or that, in that nature in which they are affirmed to be
mutually equal, any one of them is mortal, or corruptible, or
changeable, or corporeal? Or is there any one who would deny that any
one in the Trinity is most powerful, most righteous, most beautiful,
most good, most blessed? If, then, these things, and all others of the
kind, can be predicated both of the Trinity itself, and of each several
one in that Trinity, where or how shall the Trinity manifest itself? Let
us therefore first reduce these numerous predicates to some limited
number. For that which is called life in God, is itself His essence and
nature. God, therefore, does not live, unless by the life which He is to
Himself. And this life is not such as that which is in a tree, wherein
is neither understanding nor sense; nor such as is in a beast, for the
life of a beast possesses the fivefold sense, but has no understanding.
But the life which is God perceives and understands all things, and
perceives by mind, not by body, because “God is a spirit.” <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) And God does not perceive through a
body, as animals do, which have bodies, for He does not consist of soul
and body. And hence that single nature perceives as it understands, and
understands as it perceives, and its sense and understanding are one and
the same. Nor yet so, that at any time He should either cease or begin
to be; for He is immortal. And it is not said of Him in vain, that “He
only hath immortality.” <span id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950) For
immortality is true immortality in His case whose nature admits no
change. That is also true eternity by which God is unchangeable, without
beginning, without end; consequently also incorruptible. It is one and
the same thing, therefore, to call God eternal, or immortal, or
incorruptible, or unchangeable; and it is likewise one and the same
thing to say that He is living, and that He is intelligent, that is, in
truth, wise. For He did not receive wisdom whereby to be wise, but He is
Himself wisdom. And this is life, and again is power or might, and yet
again beauty, whereby He is called powerful and beautiful. For what is
more powerful and more beautiful than wisdom, “which reaches from end to
end mightily, and sweetly disposes all things”? <span
id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951) Or do goodness, again, and
righteousness, differ from each other in the nature of God, as they
differ in His works, as though they were two diverse qualities of
God—goodness one, and righteousness an<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>
<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-Page_203"></span>other? Certainly not; but that
which is righteousness is also itself goodness; and that which is
goodness is also itself blessedness. And God is therefore called
incorporeal, that He may be believed and understood to be a spirit, not
a body.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p6"></span>8. Further, if we say, Eternal,
immortal, incorruptible, unchangeable, living, wise, powerful,
beautiful, righteous, good, blessed spirit; only the last of this list
as it were seems to signify substance, but the rest to signify qualities
of that substance; but it is not so in that ineffable and simple nature.
For whatever seems to be predicated therein according to quality, is to
be understood according to substance or essence. For far be it from us
to predicate spirit of God according to substance, and good according to
quality; but both according to substance. <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) And so in like manner of all those we
have mentioned, of which we have already spoken at length in the former
books. Let us choose, then, one of the first four of those in our
enumeration and arrangement, *i.e.* eternal, immortal, incorruptible,
unchangeable; since these four, as I have argued already, have one
meaning; in order that our aim may not be distracted by a multiplicity
of objects. And let it be rather that which was placed first, *viz*.
eternal. Let us follow the same course with the four that come next,
*viz*. living, wise, powerful, beautiful. And since life of some sort
belongs also to the beast, which has not wisdom; while the next two,
*viz*. wisdom and might, are so compared to one another in the case of
man, as that Scripture says, “Better is he that is wise than he that is
strong;” <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) and beauty, again, is
commonly attributed to bodily objects also: out of these four that we
have chosen, let Wise be the one we take. Although these four are not to
be called unequal in speaking of God; for they are four names, but one
thing. But of the third and last four,—although it is the same thing in
God to be righteous that it is to be good or to be blessed; and the same
thing to be a spirit that it is to be righteous, and good, and blessed;
yet, because in men there can be a spirit that is not blessed, and there
can be one both righteous and good, but not yet blessed; but that which
is blessed is doubtless both just, and good, and a spirit,—let us rather
choose that one which cannot exist even in men without the three others,
*viz*. blessed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_949"></span>[202:950](1030224.htm#fr_949) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p3"></span> [John
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p3.1"></span>[John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_950"></span>[202:951](1030224.htm#fr_950) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p4"></span> [1 Tim.
6.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p4.1"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_951"></span>[202:952](1030224.htm#fr_951) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p5"></span> [Wisdom
8.1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p5.1"></span>[Wisd. viii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_952"></span>[203:953](1030224.htm#fr_952) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p7"></span> \[In the Infinite Being, qualities are
inseparable from essence; in the finite being, they are separable. If
man or angel ceases to be good, or wise, or righteous, he does not
thereby cease to be man or angel. But if God should lose goodness,
wisdom or righteousness, he would no longer be God. This is the meaning
of Augustin, when he says that “goodness” as well as “spirit” must be
predicated of God, “according to substance”—that is, that qualities in
God are *essential* qualities. They are so one with the essence, that
they are inseparable.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_953"></span>[203:954](1030224.htm#fr_953) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p8"></span> [Wisdom
6.1](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.v-p8.1"></span>[Wisd. vi.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis006.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xvii.v-p8.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1030225)
