[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030044)  [Next](1030046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.v.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Of the Same Argument.</span>

<span id="iv.i.v.iv-p2"></span>Let us take, then, the case of a wise
man, such that his rational soul is already partaker of the unchangeable
and eternal truth, so that he consults it about all his actions, nor
does anything at all, which he does not by it know ought to be done, in
order that by being subject to it and obeying it he may do rightly.
Suppose now that this man, upon counsel with the highest reason of the
divine righteousness, which he hears with the ear of his heart in
secret, and by its bidding, should weary his body by toil in some office
of mercy, and should contract an illness; and upon consulting the
physicians, were to be told by one that the cause of the disease was
overmuch dryness of the body, but by another that it was overmuch
moisture; one of the two no doubt would allege the true cause and the
other would err, but both would pronounce concerning proximate causes
only, that is, corporeal ones. But if the cause of that dryness were to
be inquired into, and found to be the self-imposed toil, then we should
have come to a yet higher cause, which proceeds from the soul so as to
affect the body which the soul governs. Yet neither would this be the
first cause, for that doubtless was a higher cause still, and lay in the
unchangeable wisdom itself, by serving which in love, and by obeying its
ineffable commands, the soul of the wise man had undertaken that
self-imposed toil; and so nothing else but the will of God would be
found most truly to be the first cause of that illness. But suppose now
in that office of pious toil this wise man had employed the help of
others to co-operate in the good work, who did not serve God with the
same will as himself, but either desired to attain the reward of their
own carnal desires, or shunned merely carnal unpleasantnesses;—suppose,
too, he had employed beasts of burden, if the completion of the work
required such a provision, which beasts of burden would be certainly
irrational animals, and would not therefore move their limbs under their
burdens because they at all thought of that good work, but from the
natural appetite of their own liking, and for the avoiding of
annoyance;—suppose, lastly, he had employed bodily things themselves
that lack all sense, but were necessary for that work, as *e.g*. corn,
and wine, and oils, clothes, or money, or a book, or anything of the
kind;—certainly, in all these bodily things thus employed in this work,
whether animate or inanimate, whatever took place of movement, of wear
and tear, of reparation, of destruction, of renewal or of change in one
way or another, as places and times affected them; pray, could there be,
I say, any other cause of all these visible and changeable facts, except
the invisible and unchangeable will of God, using all these, both bad
and irrational souls, and lastly bodies, whether such as were inspired
and animated by those souls, or such as lacked all sense, by means of
that upright soul as the seat of His wisdom, since primarily that good
and holy soul itself employed them, which His wisdom had subjected to
itself in a pious and religious obedience?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030046)
