[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030197)  [Next](1030199.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—What Has Been Treated of in This
Book. How We Have Reached by Steps to a Certain Trinity, Which is Found
in Practical Knowledge and True Faith.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p2"></span>25. Now, therefore, let us see what this
prolix discourse has effected, what it has gathered, whereto it has
reached. It belongs to all men to will to be blessed; yet all men have
not faith, whereby the heart is cleansed, and so blessedness is reached.
And thus it comes to pass, that by means of the faith which not all men
will, we have to reach on to the blessedness which every one wills. All
see in their own heart that they will to be blessed; and so great is the
agreement of human nature on this subject, that the man is not deceived
who conjectures this concerning another’s mind, out of his own: in
short, we know ourselves that all will this. But many despair of being
immortal, although no otherwise can any one be that which all will, that
is, blessed. Yet they will also to be immortal if they could; but
through not believing that they can, they do not so live that they can.
Therefore faith is necessary, that we may attain blessedness in all the
good things of human nature, that is, of both soul <span
id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span id="iv.i.xv.xx-Page_182"></span>and
body. But that same faith requires that this faith be limited in Christ,
who rose in the flesh from the dead, not to die any more; and that no
one is freed from the dominion of the devil, through the forgiveness of
sins, save by Him; and that in the abiding place of the devil, life must
needs be at once miserable and never-ending, which ought rather to be
called death than life. All which I have also argued, so far as space
permitted, in this book, while I have already said much on the subject
in the fourth book of this work as well; <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847.md) but in that place for one purpose,
here for another,—namely, there, that I might show why and how Christ
was sent in the fullness of time by the Father, <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848.md) on account of those who say that He
who sent and He who was sent cannot be equal in nature; but here, in
order to distinguish practical knowlege from contemplative wisdom.

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p5"></span>26. For we wished to ascend, as it were,
by steps, and to seek in the inner man, both in knowledge and in wisdom,
a sort of trinity of its own special kind, such as we sought before in
the outer man; in order that we may come, with a mind more practised in
these lower things, to the contemplation of that Trinity which is God,
according to our little measure, if indeed, we can even do this, at
least in a riddle and as through a glass. <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849.md) If, then, any one have committed to
memory the words of this faith in their sounds alone, not knowing what
they mean, as they commonly who do not know Greek hold in memory Greek
words, or similarly Latin ones, or those of any other language of which
they are ignorant, has not he a sort of trinity in his mind? because,
first, those sounds of words are in his memory, even when he does not
think thereupon; and next, the mental vision (*acies*) of his act of
recollection is formed thence when he conceives of them; and next, the
will of him who remembers and thinks unites both. Yet we should by no
means say that the man in so doing busies himself with a trinity of the
interior man, but rather of the exterior; because he remembers, and when
he wills, contemplates as much as he wills, that alone which belongs to
the sense of the body, which is called hearing. Nor in such an act of
thought does he do anything else than deal with images of corporeal
things, that is, of sounds. But if he holds and recollects what those
words signify, now indeed something of the inner man is brought into
action; not yet, however, ought he to be said or thought to live
according to a trinity of the inner man, if he does not love those
things which are there declared, enjoined, promised. For it is possible
for him also to hold and conceive these things, supposing them to be
false, in order that he may endeavor to disprove them. Therefore that
will, which in this case unites those things which are held in the
memory with those things which are thence impressed on the mind’s eye in
conception, completes, indeed, some kind of trinity, since itself is a
third added to two others; but the man does not live according to this,
when those things which are conceived are taken to be false, and are not
accepted. But when those things are believed to be true, and those
things which therein ought to be loved, are loved, then at last the man
does live according to a trinity of the inner man; for every one lives
according to that which he loves. But how can things be loved which are
not known, but only believed? This question has been already treated of
in former books; <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850.md) and we found,
that no one loves what he is wholly ignorant of, but that when things
not known are said to be loved, they are loved from those things which
are known. And now we so conclude this book, that we admonish the just
to live by faith, <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851.md) which faith
worketh by love, <span id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852.md) so that the
virtues also themselves, by which one lives prudently, boldly,
temperately, and justly, be all referred to the same faith; for not
otherwise can they be true virtues. And yet these in this life are not
of so great worth, as that the remission of sins, of some kind or other,
is not sometimes necessary here; and this remission comes not to pass,
except through Him, who by His own blood conquered the prince of
sinners. Whatsoever ideas are in the mind of the faithful man from this
faith, and from such a life, when they are contained in the memory, and
are looked at by recollection, and please the will, set forth a kind of
trinity of its own sort. <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853.md) But the
image of God, of which by His help we shall afterwards speak, is not yet
in that trinity; a thing which will then be more apparent, when it shall
have been shown where it is, which the reader may expect in a succeeding
book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_847"></span>[182:848](1030198.htm#fr_847.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p3"></span> Cc. 19–21.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[182:849](1030198.htm#fr_848.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p4"></span> [Gal.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p4.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_849"></span>[182:850](1030198.htm#fr_849.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_850"></span>[182:851](1030198.htm#fr_850.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p7"></span> Bk. viii. cc. 8 seqq., and Bk. x. c. 1,
etc.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[182:852](1030198.htm#fr_851.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p8"></span> [Rom.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p8.1"></span>[Rom. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_852"></span>[182:853](1030198.htm#fr_852.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p9"></span> [Gal.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p9.1"></span>[Gal. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_853"></span>[182:854](1030198.htm#fr_853.md) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xx-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xx-p10"></span> \[The ternary is this: 1. The idea of
a truth or fact held in the memory. 2. The contemplation of it as thus
recollected. 3. The love of it. This last is the “will” that “unites”
the first two.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIV](1030199.md)
