[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030204)  [Next](1030206.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—How a Kind of Trinity Exists in
the Mind Thinking of Itself. What is the Part of Thought in This
Trinity.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vi-p2"></span>The function of thought, however, is so
great, that not even the mind itself can, so to say, place itself in its
own sight, except when it thinks of itself; and hence it is so far the
case, that nothing is in the sight of the mind, except that which is
being thought of, that not even the mind itself, whereby we think
whatever we do think, can be in its own sight otherwise than by thinking
of itself. But in *what way* it is not in its own sight when it is not
thinking of itself, while it can never *be* without itself, as though
itself were one thing, and the sight of itself another, it is not in my
power to discover. For this is not unreasonably said of the eye of the
body; for the eye itself of the body is fixed in its own proper place in
the body, but its sight extends to things external to itself, and
reaches even to the stars. And the eye is not in its own sight, since it
does not look at itself, unless by means of a mirror, as is said
above; <span id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876.md) a thing that certainly
does not happen when the mind places itself in its own sight by thinking
of itself. Does it then see one part of itself by means of another part
of itself, when it looks at itself in thought, as we look at some of our
members, which can be in our sight, with other also of our members,
*viz*. with our eyes? What can be said or thought more absurd? For by
what is the mind removed, except by itself? or where is it placed so as
to be in its own sight, except before itself? Therefore it will not be
there, where it was, when it was not in its own sight; because it has
been put down in one place, after being taken away from another. But if
it migrated in order to be beheld, where will it remain in order to
behold? Is it as it were doubled, so as to be in this and in that place
at the same time, *viz.* both where it can behold, and where it can be
beheld; that in itself it may be beholding, and before itself beheld? If
we ask the truth, it will tell us nothing of the sort since it is but
feigned images of bodily objects of which we conceive when we conceive
thus; and that the mind is not such, is very certain to the few minds by
which the truth on such a subject can be inquired. It appears,
therefore, that the beholding of the mind is something pertaining to its
nature, and is recalled to that nature when it conceives of itself, not
as if by moving through space, but by an incorporeal conversion; but
when it is not conceiving of itself, it appears that it is not indeed in
its own sight, nor is its own perception formed from it, but yet that it
knows itself as though it were to itself a remembrance of itself. Like
one who is skilled in many branches of learning: the things which he
knows are contained in his memory, but nothing thereof is in the sight
of his mind except that of which he is conceiving; while all the rest
are stored up in a kind of secret knowledge, which is called memory. The
trinity, then, which we were setting forth, was constituted in this way:
first, we placed in the memory the object by which the perception of the
percipient was formed; next, the conformation, or as it were the image
which is impressed thereby; lastly, love or will as that which combines
the two. When the mind, then, beholds itself in conception, it
understands and cognizes itself; it begets, therefore, this its own
understanding and cognition. For an incorporeal thing is understood when
it is beheld, and is cognized when understood. Yet certainly the mind
does not so beget this knowledge of itself, when it beholds itself as
understood by conception, as though it had before been unknown to
itself; but it was known to itself, in the way in which things are known
which are contained in the memory, but of which one is not thinking;
since we say that a man knows letters even when he is thinking of
something else, and not of letters. And these two, the begetter and the
begotten, are coupled together by love, as by a third, which is nothing
else than will, seeking or holding fast the enjoyment of something. We
held, therefore, that a trinity of the mind is to be intimated also by
these three terms, memory, intelligence, will.

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vi-p4"></span>9. But since the mind, as we said near
the end of the same tenth book, always remembers itself, and always
understands and loves itself, although it does not always think of
itself as distinguished from those things which are not itself; we must
inquire in what way understanding (*intellectus*) belongs to conception,
while the notion (*notitia*) of each thing that is in the mind, even
when one is not thinking of it, is said to belong only to the memory.
For if this is so, then the mind had not these three things: *viz*. the
remembrance, the understanding, and the love of itself; but it only
remembered itself, and afterwards, <span id="page_188">p. 188</span>
<span id="iv.i.xvi.vi-Page_188"></span>when it began to think of itself,
then it understood and loved itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_876"></span>[187:877](1030205.htm#fr_876.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.vi-p3"></span> Bk. x. c. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030206.md)
