[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030640)  [Next](1030642.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xxix-p1"></span> 28. Go on therefore in your course, and
run with perseverance, in order that ye may obtain; and by pattern of
life, and discourse of exhortation, carry away with you into this same
your course, whomsoever ye shall have had power. Let there not bend you
from this earnest purpose, whereby ye excite many to follow, the
complaint of vain persons, who say, How shall the human race subsist, if
all shall have been continent? As though it were for any other reason
that this world is delayed, save that the predestined number of the
Saints be fulfilled, and were this the sooner fulfilled, assuredly the
end of the world would not be put off. Nor let it stay you from your
earnest purpose of persuading others to the same good ye have, if it be
said to you, Whereas marriage also is good, how shall there be all goods
in the Body of Christ, both the greater, forsooth, and the lesser, if
all through praise and love of continence imitate? In the first place,
because with the endeavor that all be continent, there will still be but
few, for “not all receive this word.” But forasmuch as it is written,
“Whoso can receive, let him receive;” <span
id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300.md) then do they receive who can, when
silence is not kept even toward those who cannot. Next, neither ought we
<span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="v.iv.xxix-Page_454"></span>to fear lest haply all receive it, and
some one of lesser goods, that is, married life, be wanting in the body
of Christ. For if all shall have heard, and all shall have received, we
ought to understand that this very thing was predestinated, that married
goods already suffice in the number of those members which so many have
passed out of this life. For neither now, if all shall have been
continent, will they give the honor of the continent to those who have
already borne into the garners of the Lord the fruit thirty-fold, if
that be understood of married good. Therefore all these goods will have
there their place, although from this time no woman wish to be married,
no man wish to marry a wife. Therefore without anxiety urge on whom ye
can, to become what ye are; and pray with watchfulness and fervor, that
by the help of the Right Hand of the Most High, and by the abundance of
the most merciful grace of the Lord, ye may both persevere in that which
ye are, and may make advances unto that which ye shall be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[453:2301](1030641.htm#fr_2300.md) <span
id="v.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xxix-p2"></span> [Matt.
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012.md)<span id="v.iv.xxix-p2.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 29](1030642.md)
