[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030520)  [Next](1030522.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.v"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p1"></span> 4. There is this further, that in that very
debt which married persons pay one to another, even if they demand it
with somewhat too great intemperance and incontinence, yet they owe
faith alike one to another. Unto which faith the Apostle allows so great
right, as to call it “power,” saying, “The woman hath not power of her
own body, but the man; again in like manner also the man hath not power
of his own body, but the woman.” <span
id="fr_1942"></span>[1943](#fn_1942.md) But the violation of this faith is
called adultery, when either by instigation of one’s own lust, or by
consent of lust of another, there is sexual intercourse on either side
with another against the marriage compact: and thus faith is broken,
which, even in things that are of the body, and mean, is a great good of
the soul: and therefore it is certain that it ought to be preferred even
to the health of the body, wherein even this life of ours is contained.
For, although a little chaff in comparison of much gold is almost
nothing; yet faith, when it is kept pure in a matter of chaff, as in
gold, is not therefore less because it is kept in a lesser matter. But
when faith is employed to commit sin, it were strange that we should
have to call it faith; however of what kind soever it be, if also the
deed be done against it, it is the worse done; save when it is on this
account abandoned, that there may be a return unto true and lawful
faith, that is, that sin may be amended, by correction of perverseness
of the will. As if any, being unable alone to rob a man, should find a
partner in his iniquity, and make an agreement with him to do it
together, and to divide the spoil; and, after the crime hath been
committed, should take off the whole to himself alone. That other
grieves and complains that faith hath not been kept with him, but in his
very complaint he ought to consider, that he himself rather ought to
have kept faith with human society in a good life, and <span
id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span id="v.ii.v-Page_401"></span>not to
make unjust spoil of a man, if he feels with how great injustice it hath
failed to be kept with himself in a fellowship of sin. Forsooth the
former, being faithless in both instances, must assuredly be judged the
more wicked. But, if he had been displeased at what they had done ill,
and had been on this account unwilling to divide the spoil with his
partner in crime, in order that it might be restored to the man, from
whom it had been taken, not even a faithless man would call him
faithless. Thus a woman, if, having broken her marriage faith, she keep
faith with her adulterer, is certainly evil: but, if not even with her
adulterer, worse. Further, if she repent her of her sin, and returning
to marriage chastity, renounce all adulterous compacts and resolutions,
I count it strange if even the adulterer himself will think her one who
breaks faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[400:1943](1030521.htm#fr_1942.md) <span
id="v.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p2"></span> [1 Cor.
7.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004.md)<span id="v.ii.v-p2.1"></span>[1
Cor. vii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](1030522.md)
