[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030439)  [Next](1030441.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p1"></span> 13. I call to witness, Honoratus, my
conscience, and God Who hath His dwelling in pure souls, that I account
nothing more prudent, chaste, and religious, than are all those
Scriptures, which under the name of the Old Testament the Catholic
Church retains. You wonder at this, I am aware. For I cannot hide that
we were far otherwise persuaded. But there is indeed nothing more full
of rashness, (which at that time, being boys, we had in us,) than in the
case of each several book, to desert expounders, who profess that they
hold them, and that they can deliver them to their scholars, and to seek
their meaning from those, who, I know not from what cause compelling,
have proclaimed a most bitter war against the framers and authors of
them. For who ever thought that the hidden and dark books of Aristotle
were to be expounded to him by one who was the enemy of Aristotle; to
speak of these systems of teaching, wherein a reader may perhaps err
without sacrilege? Who, in fine, willed to read or learn the geometrical
writings of Archimedes, under Epicurus as a master; against which
Epicurus used to argue with great obstinacy, so far as I judge,
understanding them not at all? What are those Scriptures of the law most
plain, against which, as though set forth in public, these men make
their attack in vain and to no purpose? And they seem to me to be like
that weak woman, whom these same men are wont to mock at, who enraged at
the sun being extolled to her, and recommended as an object of worship
by a certain female Manichee, being as she was simple-minded and of a
religions spirit, leaped up in haste, and often striking with her foot
that spot on which the sun through the window cast light, began to cry
out, Lo, I trample on the sun and your God: altogether after a foolish
and womanish manner; Who denies it? But do not those men seem to you to
be such, who, in matters which they understand not, either wherefore, or
altogether of what kind they are, although like to matters cast in the
way, <span id="fr_1725"></span>[1726](#fn_1725.md) yet to such as
understand them exact <span id="fr_1726"></span>[1727](#fn_1726.md) and
divine, rending them with great onset of speech and reproaches, think
that they are effecting something, because the unlearned applaud them?
Believe me, whatever there is in these Scriptures, it is lofty and
divine: there is in them altogether truth, and a system of teaching most
suited to refresh and renew minds: and clearly so ordered in measure, as
that there is no one but may draw thence, what is enough for himself, if
only he approach to draw with devotion and piety, as true religion
demands. To prove this to you, needs many reasons and a longer
discourse. For first I must so treat with you as that you may not hate
the authors themselves; next, so as that you may love them: and this I
must treat in any other way, rather than by expounding their meanings
and words. For this reason, because in case we hated Virgil, nay, rather
in case we loved him not, before understanding him, by the commendation
of our forefathers, we should never be satisfied on those questions
about him without number, by which grammarians are wont to be disquieted
and troubled; nor should we listen willingly to one who solved these at
the same time praising him; but should favor that one who by means of
these essayed to show that he had erred and doated. But now, whereas
many essay to open these, and each (in a different way according to his
capacity, we applaud these in preference, through whose exposition the
poet is found better, who is believed, even by those who do not <span
id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="iv.vi.xiv-Page_354"></span>understand him, not only in nothing to
have offended, but also to have sung nothing but what was worthy of
praise. So that in some minute question, we are rather angry with the
master who fails, and has not what to answer, than think him silent
through any fault in Maro. And now, if, in order to defend himself, he
should wish to assert a fault in so great an author, hardly will his
scholars remain with him, even after they have paid his fee. How great
matter were it, that we should shew like good will towards them, of whom
it hath been confirmed by so long time of old that the Holy Spirit spake
by them? But, forsooth, we youths of the greatest understanding, and
marvellous searchers out of reasons, without having at least unrolled
these writings, without having sought teachers, without having somewhat
chided our own dullness, lastly, without having yielded our heart even
in a measure <span id="fr_1727"></span>[1728](#fn_1727.md) to those who
have willed that writings of this kind be so long read, kept, and
handled through the whole world; have thought that nothing in them is to
be believed, moved by the speech of those who are unfriendly and hostile
to them, with whom, under a false promise of reason, we should be
compelled to believe and cherish thousands of fables.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1725"></span>[353:1726](1030440.htm#fr_1725.md) <span
id="iv.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p2"></span> *Jacentibus*

<span id="fn_1726"></span>[353:1727](1030440.htm#fr_1726.md) <span
id="iv.vi.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p3"></span> *Subtilia*

<span id="fn_1727"></span>[354:1728](1030440.htm#fr_1727.md) <span
id="iv.vi.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xiv-p4"></span> *Mediocri corde*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 14](1030441.md)
