[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030823)  [Next](1030825) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxii-p1"></span> 21. Such, we may believe, was that John
the Monk, whom the elder Theodosius, the Emperor, consulted concerning
the issue of the civil war: seeing he had also the gift of prophecy. For
that not each several person has a several one of those gifts, but that
one man may have more gifts than one, I make no question. This John,
then, when once a certain most religious woman desired to see him, and
to obtain this did through her husband make vehement entreaty, refused
indeed this request because he had never allowed this to women, but
“Go,” said he, “tell thy wife, she shall see me this night, but in her
sleep.” And so it came to pass: and he gave her advice, whatever was
meet to be given to a wedded believing woman. And she, on her awaking,
made known to her husband that she had seen a man of God, such as he
knew him to be, and what she had been told by him. The person who
learned this from them, reported it to me, a grave man and a noble, and
most worthy to be believed. But if I myself had seen that holy monk,
because (it is said) he was most patient in hearing questions and most
wise in answering, I would have sought of him, as touching our question,
whether he himself came to that woman in sleep, that is to say, his
spirit in the form of his body, just as we dream that we see ourselves
in the form of our own body; or whether, while he himself was doing
something else, or, if asleep, was dreaming of <span id="page_550">p.
550</span> <span id="v.ix.xxii-Page_550"></span>something else, it was
either by an Angel or in some other way that such vision took place in
the woman’s dream; and that it would so be, as he promised, he himself
foreknew by the Spirit of prophecy revealing the same. For if he was
himself present to her in her dream, of course it was by miraculous
grace that he was enabled so to do, not by nature; and by God’s gift,
not by faculty of his own. But if, while he was doing some other thing
or sleeping and occupied with other sights, the woman saw him in her
sleep, then doubtless some such thing took place, as that is which we
read in the Acts of the Apostles, where the Lord Jesus speaks to Ananias
concerning Saul, <span id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771) and informs
him that Saul has seen Ananias coming unto him, while Ananias himself
wist not of it. The man of God would make answer to me of these things
as the case might be, and then about the Martyrs I should go on to ask
of him, whether they be themselves present in dreams, or in whatever
other way to those who see them in what shape they will; and above all
when the demons in men confess themselves tormented by the Martyrs, and
ask them to spare them; or whether these things be wrought through
angelic powers, to the honor and commendation of the Saints for men’s
profit, while those are in supreme rest, and wholly free for other far
better sights, apart from us, and praying for us. For it chanced at
Milan at (the tomb of) the holy Martyrs Protasius and Gervasius, that
Ambrose the bishop, at that time living, being expressly named, in like
manner as were the dead whose names they were rehearsing, the demons
confessed him and besought him to spare them, he being the while
otherwise engaged, and when this was taking place, altogether unwitting
of it. Or whether indeed these things are wrought, somewhiles by very
presence of the Martyrs, otherwhiles by that of Angels; and whether it
be possible, or by what tokens possible, for us to discriminate these
two cases; or whether to perceive and to judge of these things none be
able, but he which hath that gift through God’s Spirit, “dividing unto
every man severally as He will:” <span
id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772) the same John, methinks, would
discourse to me of all these matters, as I should wish; that either by
his teaching I might learn, and what I should be told should know to be
true and certain; or I should believe what I knew not, upon his telling
me what things he knew. But if peradventure he should make answer out of
holy Scripture, and say, “Things higher than thou, seek thou not; and
things stronger than thou, search thou not; but what the Lord hath
commanded thee, of those things bethink thee alway:” <span
id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773) this also I should thankfully
accept. For it is no small gain if, when any things are obscure and
uncertain to us, and we not able to comprehend them, it be at any rate
clear and certain that we are not to seek them; and what thing each one
wishes to learn, accounting it to be profitable that he should know it,
he should learn that it is no harm that he know it not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[550:2772](1030824.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="v.ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxii-p2"></span> [Acts
9.12](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#012)<span
id="v.ix.xxii-p2.1"></span>[Acts ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#012)<span id="v.ix.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[550:2773](1030824.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="v.ix.xxii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxii-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="v.ix.xxii-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="v.ix.xxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[550:2774](1030824.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="v.ix.xxii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xxii-p4"></span> [Ecclus.
3.22](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#022)<span
id="v.ix.xxii-p4.1"></span>[Ecclus. iii.
22](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#022)<span id="v.ix.xxii-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 22](1030825)
