[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030144)  [Next](1030146.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii.viii"></span><span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="iv.i.xii.viii-Page_140"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—How the Soul Inquires into
Itself. Whence Comes the Error of the Soul Concerning Itself.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.viii-p2"></span>11. It is then a wonderful question,
in what manner the soul seeks and finds itself; at what it aims in order
to seek, or whither it comes, that it may come into or find out. For
what is so much in the mind as the mind itself? But because it is *in*
those things which it thinks of with love, and is wont to be in
sensible, that is, in corporeal things with love, it is unable to be in
itself without the images of those corporeal things. And hence shameful
error arises to block its way, whilst it cannot separate from itself the
images of sensible things, so as to see itself alone. For they have
marvellously cohered with it by the close adhesion of love. And herein
consists its uncleanness; since, while it strives to think of itself
alone, it fancies itself to be that, without which it cannot think of
itself. When, therefore, it is bidden to become acquainted with itself,
let it not seek itself as though it were withdrawn from itself; but let
it withdraw that which it has added to itself. For itself lies more
deeply within, not only than those sensible things, which are clearly
without, but also than the images of them; which are indeed in some part
of the soul, *viz*., that which beasts also have, although these want
understanding, which is proper to the mind. As therefore the mind is
within, it goes forth in some sort from itself, when it exerts the
affection of love towards these, as it were, footprints of many acts of
attention. And these footprints are, as it were, imprinted on the
memory, at the time when the corporeal things which are without are
perceived in such way, that even when those corporeal things are absent,
yet the images of them are at hand to those who think of them. Therefore
let the mind become acquainted with itself, and not seek itself as if it
were absent; but fix upon itself the act of \[voluntary\] attention, by
which it was wandering among other things, and let it think of itself.
So it will see that at no time did it ever not love itself, at no time
did it ever not know itself; but by loving another thing together with
itself it has confounded itself with it, and in some sense has grown one
with it. And so, while it embraces diverse things, as though they were
one, it has come to think those things to be one which are diverse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1030146.md)
