[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030258)  [Next](1030260.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 9.—What We are to Believe. In Regard
to Nature It is Not Necessary for the Christian to Know More Than that
the Goodness of the Creator is the Cause of All Things.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p2"></span>When, then, the question is asked what we
are to believe in regard to religion, it is not necessary to probe into
the nature of things, <span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span
id="iv.ii.xi-Page_240"></span>as was done by those whom the Greeks call
*physici*; nor need we be in alarm lest the Christian should be ignorant
of the force and number of the elements,—the motion, and order, and
eclipses of the heavenly bodies; the form of the heavens; the species
and the natures of animals, plants, stones, fountains, rivers,
mountains; about chronology and distances; the signs of coming storms;
and a thousand other things which those philosophers either have found
out, or think they have found out. For even these men themselves,
endowed though they are with so much genius, burning with zeal,
abounding in leisure, tracking some things by the aid of human
conjecture, searching into others with the aids of history and
experience, have not found out all things; and even their boasted
discoveries are oftener mere guesses than certain knowledge. It is
enough for the Christian to believe that the only cause of all created
things, whether heavenly or earthly, whether visible or invisible, is
the goodness of the Creator the one true God; and that nothing exists
but Himself that does not derive its existence from Him; and that He is
the Trinity—to wit, the Father, and the Son begotten of the Father, and
the Holy Spirit proceeding from the same Father, but one and the same
Spirit of Father and Son.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](1030260.md)
