[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030697)  [Next](1030699) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.x"></span>

<span id="v.vi.x-p1"></span> 9. When therefore we teach ours to
blaspheme God that the Priscillianists may believe them theirs, let us
see what evil themselves say when they therefore lie that we may believe
them ours. They anathematize Priscillian, and detest him according to
our mind; they say that the soul is a creature of God, not a part; they
execrate the Priscillianists’ false martyrdoms; the catholic bishops by
whom that heresy has been stripped, attacked, prostrated, they extol
with great praises, and so forth. Behold, themselves speak truth when
they lie: not that the very thing which is a lie can be true at the same
time; but when in one thing they lie, in another they speak truth: for
when, in saying they are of us, they lie, of the catholic faith they
speak truth. And therefore they, that they may not be found out for
Priscillianists, speak in lying manner the truth: but we, that we may
find them out, not only speak lyingly, that we may be believed to belong
to them; but we also speak false things which we know to belong to their
error. Therefore as for them, when they wish to be thought of us, it is
both false in part, and true in part, what they say; for it is false
that they are of us, but true that the soul is not a part of God: but as
for us, when we wish to be thought to belong to them, it is false, both
the one and the other that we say, both that we are Priscillianists, and
that the soul is a part of God. They, then, praise God, not blaspheme,
when they conceal themselves; and when they do not so, but utter their
own sentiments, they know not that they blaspheme. So that if they be
converted to the catholic faith, they console themselves, because they
can say what the Apostle said: who when among other things he had said,
“I was before a blasphemer; but,” saith he, “I obtained mercy, because I
did it ignorantly.” <span id="fr_2392"></span>[2393](#fn_2392) We on the
contrary, in order that they may open themselves to us, if we utter this
as if it were a just lie for deceiving and catching them, do assuredly
both say that we belong to the blaspheming Priscillianists, and that
they may believe us, do without excuse of ignorance blaspheme. For a
catholic, who by blaspheming wishes to be thought a heretic, cannot say,
“I did it ignorantly.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2392"></span>[485:2393](1030698.htm#fr_2392) <span
id="v.vi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.x-p2"></span> [1 Tim.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="v.vi.x-p2.1"></span>[1
Tim. i. 13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span
id="v.vi.x-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](1030699)
