[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030208)  [Next](1030210) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—How a Trinity is Produced by the
Mind Remembering, Understanding, and Loving Itself.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.x-p2"></span>13. In the knowledge of all these
temporal things which we have mentioned, there are some knowable things
which precede the acquisition of the knowledge of them by an interval of
time, as in the case of those sensible objects which were already real
before they were known, or of all those things that are learned through
history; but some things begin to be at the same time with the knowing
of them,—just as, if any visible object, which did not exist before at
all, were to rise up before our eyes, certainly it does not precede our
knowing it; or if there be any sound made where there is some one to
hear, no doubt the sound and the hearing that sound begin and end
simultaneously. Yet none the less, whether preceding in time or
beginning to exist simultaneously, knowable things generate knowl<span
id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span id="iv.i.xvi.x-Page_191"></span>edge,
and are not generated by knowledge. But when knowledge has come to pass,
whenever the things known and laid up in memory are reviewed by
recollection, who does not see that the retaining them in the memory is
prior in time to the sight of them in recollection, and to the uniting
of the two things by will as a third? In the mind, howver, it is not so.
For the mind is not adventitious to itself, as though there came to
itself already existing, that same self not already existing, from
somewhere else, or did not indeed come from somewhere else, but that in
the mind itself already existing, there was born that same mind not
already existing; just as faith, which before was not, arises in the
mind which already was. Nor does the mind see itself, as it were, set up
in its own memory by recollection subsequently to the knowing of itself,
as though it was not there before it knew itself; whereas,doubtless,
from the time when it began to be, it has never ceased to remember, to
understand, and to love itself, as we have already shown. And hence,
when it is turned to itself by thought, there arises a trinity, in which
now at length we can discern also a word; since it is formed from
thought itself, will uniting both. Here, then, we may recognize, more
than we have hitherto done, the image of which we are in search.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030210)
