[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030203)  [Next](1030205.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.v"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Whether the Mind of Infants Knows
Itself.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.v-p2"></span>What, then, is to be said of the mind of
an infant, which is still so small, and buried in such profound
ignorance of things, that the mind of a man which knows anything shrinks
from the darkness of it? Is that too to be believed to know itself; but
that, as being too intent upon those things which it has begun to
perceive through the bodily senses, with the greater delight in
proportion to their novelty, it is not able indeed to be ignorant of
itself, but is also not able to think of itself? Moreover, how intently
it is bent upon sensible things that are without it, may be conjectured
from this one fact, that it is so greedy of sensible light, that if any
one through carelessness, or ignorance of the possible consequences,
place a light at nighttime where an infant is lying down, on that side
to which the eyes of the child so lying down can be bent, but its neck
cannot be turned, the gaze of that child will be so fixed in that
direction, that we have known some to have come to squint by this means,
in that the eyes retained that form which habit in some way impressed
upon them while tender and soft. <span id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874.md)
In the case, too, of the other bodily senses, the souls of infants, as
far as their age permits, so narrow themselves as it were, and are bent
upon them, that they either vehemently detest or vehemently desire that
only which offends or allures through the flesh, but do not think of
their own inward self, nor can be made to do so by admonition; because
they do not yet know the signs that express admonition, whereof words
are the chief, of which as of other things they are wholly ignorant. And
that it is one thing not to know oneself, another not to think of
oneself, we have shown already in the same book. <span
id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875.md)

<span id="iv.i.xvi.v-p5"></span>8. But let us pass by the infantine age,
since we cannot question it as to what goes on within itself, while we
have ourselves pretty well forgotten it. Let it suffice only for us
hence to be certain, that when man has come to be able to think of the
nature of his own mind, and to find out what is the truth, he <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span id="iv.i.xvi.v-Page_187"></span>will
find it nowhere else but in himself. And he will find, not what he did
not know, but that of which he did not think. For what do we know, if we
do not know what is in our own mind; when we can know nothing at all of
what we do know, unless by the mind?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_874"></span>[186:875](1030204.htm#fr_874.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.v-p3"></span> \[This occurred in the the case of
Edward Irving. Oliphant’s *Life of Irving*.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_875"></span>[186:876](1030204.htm#fr_875.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.v-p4"></span> Bk. x. c. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1030205.md)
