[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030460)  [Next](1030462.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxxv-p1"></span> 34. This is, believe me, a most
wholesome authority, this a lifting up first of our mind from dwelling
on the earth, this a turning from the love of this world unto the True
God. It is authority alone which moves fools to hasten unto wisdom. So
long as we cannot understand pure (truths), it is indeed wretched to be
deceived by authority, but surely more wretched not to be moved. For, if
the Providence of God preside not over human affairs, we have no need to
busy ourselves about religion. But if both the outward form of all
things, which we must believe assuredly flows from some fountain of
truest beauty, and some, I know not what, inward conscience exhorts, as
it were, in public and in private, all the better order of minds to seek
God, and to serve God; we must not give up all hope that the same God
Himself hath appointed some authority, whereon, resting as on a sure
step, we may be lifted up unto God. But this, setting aside reason,
which (as we have often said) it is very hard for fools to understand
pure, moves us two ways; in part by miracles, in part by <span
id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="iv.vi.xxxv-Page_364"></span>multitude of followers: no one of these
is necessary to the wise man; who denies it? But this is now the
business in hand, that we may be able to be wise, that is, to cleave to
the truth; which the filthy soul is utterly unable to do: but the filth
of the soul, to say shortly what I mean, is the love of any things
whatsoever save God and the soul: from which filth the more any one is
cleansed, the more easily he sees the truth. Therefore to wish to see
the truth, in order to purge your soul, when as it is purged for the
very purpose that you may see, is surely perverse and preposterous.
Therefore to man unable to see the truth, authority is at hand, in order
that he may be made fitted for it, and may allow himself to be cleansed;
and, as I said a little above, no one doubts that this prevails, in part
by miracles, in part by multitude. But I call that a miracle, whatever
appears that is difficult or unusual above the hope or power of them who
wonder. Of which kind there is nothing more suited for the people, and
in general for foolish men, than what is brought near to the senses. But
these, again, are divided into two kinds; for there are certain, which
cause only wonder, but certain others procure also great favor and
good-will. For, if one were to see a man flying, inasmuch as that matter
brings no advantage to the spectator, beside the spectacle itself, he
only wonders. But if any affected with grievous and hopeless disease
were to recover straightway, upon being bidden, his affection for him
who heals, will go beyond even his wonder at his healing. Such were done
at that time at which God in True Man appeared unto men, as much as was
enough. The sick were healed, the lepers were cleansed; walking was
restored to the lame, sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf. The men
of that time saw water turned into wine, five thousand filled with five
loaves, seas passed on foot, dead rising again: thus certain provided
for the good of the body by more open benefit, certain again for the
good of the soul by more hidden sign, and all for the good of men by
their witness to Majesty: thus, at that time, was the divine authority
moving towards Itself the wandering souls of mortal men. Why, say you,
do not those things take place now? because they would not move, unless
they were wonderful, and, if they were usual, they would not be
wonderful. <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753.md) For the
interchanges of day and night, and the settled order of things in
Heaven, the revolution of years divided into four parts, the fall and
return of leaves to trees, the boundless power of seeds, the beauty of
light, the varieties of colors, sounds, tastes, and scents, let there be
some one who shall see and perceive them for the first time, and yet
such an one as we may converse with; he is stupified and overwhelmed
with miracles: but we contemn all these, not because they are easy to
understand, (for what more obscure than the causes of these?) but surely
because they constantly meet our senses. Therefore they were done at a
very suitable time, in order that, by these a multitude of believers
having been gathered together and spread abroad, authority might be
turned with effect upon habits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[364:1754](1030461.htm#fr_1753.md) <span
id="iv.vi.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxxv-p2"></span> cf. *Retract.* b. i. c. 14. 5. “In
another place, where I had made mention of the miracles, which our Lord
Jesus did, while He was here in the Flesh, I added, saying, ‘Why, say
you, do not those things take place now?’ and I answered, ‘Because they
would not move unless they were wonderful, and if they were usual they
would not be wonderful.’ But this I said because not so great miracles,
nor all take place now, not because there are none wrought even now.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 35](1030462.md)
