[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030516)  [Next](1030518) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.i"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>This</span> treatise, and the following, were
written against somewhat that still remained of the heresy of Jovinian.
S. Aug. mentions this error in b. ii. c. 23, *de Nuptiis et Conc*.
“Jovinianus,” he says, “who a few years since tried to found a new
heresy, said that the Catholics favored the Manichæans, because in
opposition to him they preferred holy Virginity to Marriage.” And in his
book on *Heresies*, c. 82. “That heresy took its rise from one
Jovinianus, a Monk, in our own time, when we were yet young.” And he
adds that it was soon overborne and extinguished, say about <span
class="c19"><span id="v.ii.i-p1.2"></span>A.D.</span> 390, having been
condemned first at Rome, then at Milan. There are letters of Pope
Siricius on the subject to the Church of Milan, and the answer sent him
by the Synod of Milan, at which St. Ambrose presided. Jerome had refuted
Jovinian, but was said to have attempted the defense of the excellency
of the virgin state, at the expense of condemning marriage. That
Augustin might not be subject to any such complaint or calumny, before
speaking of the superiority of Virginity, he thought it well to write on
the Good of Marriage.

<span id="v.ii.i-p2"></span>This work we learn to have been finished
about the year 401, not only from the order of his *Retractations*, but
also from his books on Genesis after the Letter, begun about that year.
For in b. ix. on Genesis, c. 7, where he commends the Good of Marriage,
he says: “Now this is threefold, faithfulness, offspring, and the
Sacrament. For faithfulness, it is observed, that there be no lying with
other man or woman, out of the bond of wedlock: for the offspring, that
it be lovingly welcomed, kindly nourished, religiously brought up: for
the Sacrament, that marriage be not severed, and that man or woman
divorced be not joined to another even for the sake of offspring. This
is as it were the rule of Marriages by which rule either fruitfulness is
made seemly, or the perverseness of incontinence is brought to order.
Upon which since we have sufficiently discoursed in that book, which we
lately published, *on the Good of Marriage*, where we have also
distinguished the Widow’s continence and the Virgin’s excellency,
according to the worthiness of their degrees, our pen is not to be now
longer occupied.” This very work is referred to in Book I. on the
*Deserts and Remission of Sins*, c. 29.—*Bened. Ed.*

<span id="v.ii.i-p3"></span>NOTICE.

<span id="v.ii.i-p4"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p5"></span>The Editors are, of course, aware of the
danger there is in reading a treatise like the following in a spirit of
idle curiosity, and they beg any reader who has not well assured <span
id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span id="v.ii.i-Page_398"></span>himself
that his aim is right and holy to abstain from perusing it. At the same
time it must not be forgotten, that something far other than a mere
shrinking from subjects offensive to modern delicacy is needed, in order
to purify the thoughts with respect to the holy estate of Matrimony. The
mind that will but seriously attend to it in that light, will certainly
be strengthened against evil suggestions by seeing in the whole subject
a field of Christian duty.

<span id="v.ii.i-p6"></span>It seemed further requisite to bring forward
a work calculated to remove the imputation so falsely cast on the holy
Fathers, that they regarded Matrimony as unholy, and almost agreed with
the Manichean view of it, as a defilement and degradation to the
Christian. They did, it is true, prefer Virginity to Marriage, but as
St. Augustin expressly states, as the “better of two good things,” not
as though one were good, and the other evil.

<span id="v.ii.i-p7"></span>In estimating the work and the writer, the
age in which it was written must be kept in view, and what that age
required must not be imputed as a fault to him or to his religion. And
perhaps what was written for another age may serve the more safely
towards our improvement and guidance from the very circumstance that the
style and manner of antiquity has become a kind of veil, which takes off
somewhat from the strength and vividness of first impressions, and
leaves the mind more at liberty to use what is laid before it as it
will, than a more modern way of speaking would be likely to do. Let that
liberty be used rightly and conscientiously, and the effect of reading
will be good.—*Eds. of the Oxford Library.*

<span id="v.ii.i-p8"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 1](1030518)
