[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030137)  [Next](1030139.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—The Love of the Studious Mind,
that Is, of One Desirous to Know, is Not the Love of a Thing Which It
Does Not Know.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.i-p2"></span>1. <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.i.xii.i-p2.1"></span> Let</span> us now proceed, then, in due
order, with a more exact purpose, to explain this same point more
thoroughly. And first, since no one can love at all a thing of which he
is wholly ignorant, we must carefully consider of what sort is the love
of those who are studious, that is, of those who do not already know,
but are still desiring to know any branch of learning. Now certainly, in
those things whereof the word study is not commonly used, love often
arises from hearsay, when the reputation of anything for beauty inflames
the mind to the seeing and enjoying it; since the mind knows generically
wherein consist the beauties of corporeal things, from having seen them
very frequently, and since there exists within a faculty of approving
that which outwardly is longed for. And when this happens, the love that
is called forth is not of a thing wholly unknown, since its genus is
thus known. But when we love a good man whose face we never saw, we love
him from the knowledge of his virtues, which virtues we know
\[abstractly\] in the truth itself. But in the case of learning, it is
for the most part the authority of others who praise and commend it that
kindles our love of it; although nevertheless we could not burn with any
zeal at all for the study of it, unless we had already in our mind at
least a slight impression of the knowledge of each kind of learning. For
who, for instance, would devote any care and labor to the learning of
rhetoric, unless he knew before that it was the science of speaking?
Sometimes, again, we marvel at the results of learning itself, which we
have heard of or experienced; and hence burn to obtain, by learning, the
power of attaining these results. Just as if it were said to one who did
not know his letters, that there is a kind of learning which enables a
man to send words, wrought with the hand in silence, to one who is ever
so far absent, for him in turn to whom they are sent to gather these
words, not with his ears, but with his eyes; and if the man were to see
the thing actually done, is not that man, since he desires to know how
he can do this thing, altogether moved to study with a view to the
result which he already knows and holds? So it is that the studious zeal
of those who learn is kindled: for that of which any one is utterly
ignorant, he can in no way love.

<span id="iv.i.xii.i-p3"></span>2. So also, if any one hear an unknown
sign, as, for instance, the sound of some word of which he does not know
the signification, he desires to know what it is; that is, he desires to
know what thing it is which it is agreed shall be brought to mind by
that sound: as if he heard the word *temetum* <span
id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722.md) uttered, and not knowing, should ask
what it is. He must then know already that it is a sign, *i.e.* that the
word is not an empty sound, but that something is signified by it; for
in other respects this trisyllabic word is known to him already, and has
already impressed its articulate form upon his mind through the sense of
hearing. And then what more is to be required in him, that he may go on
to a greater knowledge of that of which all the letters and all the
spaces of its several sounds are already known, unless that it shall at
the same time have become known to him that it is a sign, and shall have
also moved him with the desire of knowing of what it is the sign? The
more, then, the thing is known, yet not fully known, the more the mind
desires to know concerning it what remains to be known. For if he <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span id="iv.i.xii.i-Page_135"></span>knew
it to be only such and such a spoken word, and did not know that it was
the sign of something, he would seek nothing further, since the sensible
thing is already perceived as far as it can be by the sense. But because
he knows it to be not only a spoken word, but also a sign, he wishes to
know it perfectly; and no sign is known perfectly, except it be known of
what it is the sign. He then who with ardent carefulness seeks to know
this, and inflamed by studious zeal perseveres in the search; can such
an one be said to be without love? What then does he love? For certainly
nothing can be loved unless it is known. For that man does not love
those three syllables which he knows already. But if he loves this in
them, that he knows them to signify something, this is not the point now
in question, for it is not this which he seeks to know. But we are now
asking what it is he loves, in that which he is desirous to know, but
which certainly he does not yet know; and we are therefore wondering why
he loves, since we know most assuredly that nothing can be loved unless
it be known. What then does he love, except that he knows and perceives
in the reason of things what excellence there is in learning, in which
the knowledge of all signs is contained; and what benefit there is in
the being skilled in these, since by them human fellowship mutually
communicates its own perceptions, lest the assemblies of men should be
actually worse than utter solitude, if they were not to mingle their
thoughts by conversing together? The soul, then, discerns this fitting
and serviceable species, and knows it, and loves it; and he who seeks
the meaning of any words of which he is ignorant, studies to render that
species perfect in himself as much as he can: for it is one thing to
behold it in the light of truth, another to desire it as within his own
capacity. For he beholds in the light of truth how great and how good a
thing it is to understand and to speak all tongues of all nations, and
so to hear no tongue and to be heard by none as from a foreigner. The
beauty, then, of this knowledge is already discerned by thought, and the
thing being known is loved; and that thing is so regarded, and so
stimulates the studious zeal of learners, that they are moved with
respect to it, and desire it eagerly in all the labor which they spend
upon the attainment of such a capacity, in order that they may also
embrace in practice that which they know beforehand by reason. And so
every one, the nearer he approaches that capacity in hope, the more
fervently desires it with love; for those branches of learning are
studied the more eagerly, which men do not despair of being able to
attain; for when any one entertains no hope of attaining his end, then
he either loves lukewarmly or does not love at all, howsoever he may see
the excellence of it. Accordingly, because the knowledge of all
languages is almost universally felt to be hopeless, every one studies
most to know that of his own nation; but if he feels that he is not
sufficient even to comprehend this perfectly, yet no one is so indolent
in this knowledge as not to wish to know, when he hears an unknown word,
what it is, and to seek and learn it if he can. And while he is seeking
it, certainly he has a studious zeal of learning, and seems to love a
thing he does not know; but the case is really otherwise. For that
species touches the mind, which the mind knows and thinks, wherein the
fitness is clearly visible which accrues from the associating of minds
with one another, in the hearing and returning of known and spoken
words. And this species kindles studious zeal in him who seeks what
indeed he knows not, but gazes upon and loves the unknown form to which
that pertains. If then, for example, any one were to ask, What is
*temetum* (for I had instanced this word already), and it were said to
him, What does this matter to you? he will answer, Lest perhaps I hear
some one speaking, and understand him not; or perhaps read the word
somewhere, and know not what the writer meant. Who, pray, would say to
such an inquirer, Do not care about understanding what you hear; do not
care about knowing what you read? For almost every rational soul quickly
discerns the beauty of that knowledge, through which the thoughts of men
are mutually made known by the enunciation of significant words; and it
is on account of this fitness thus known, and because known therefore
loved, that such an unknown word is studiously sought out. When then he
hears and learns that wine was called “*temetum*” by our forefathers,
but that the word is already quite obsolete in our present usage of
language, he will think perhaps that he has still need of the word on
account of this or that book of those forefathers. But if he holds these
also to be superfluous, perhaps he does now come to think the word not
worth remembering, since he sees it has nothing to do with that species
of learning which he knows with the mind, and gazes upon, and so loves.

<span id="iv.i.xii.i-p5"></span>3. Wherefore in all cases the love of a
studious mind, that is, of one that wishes to know what it does not
know, is not the love of that thing which it does not know, but of that
which it knows; on account of which it <span id="page_136">p. 136</span>
<span id="iv.i.xii.i-Page_136"></span>wishes to know what it does not
know. Or if it is so inquisitive as to be carried away, not for any
other cause known to it, but by the mere love of knowing things unknown;
then such an inquisitive person is, doubtless distinguishable from an
ordinary student, yet does not, any more than he, love things he does
not know; nay, on the contrary, he is more fitly said to hate things he
knows not, of which he wishes that there should be none, in wishing to
know everything. But lest any one should lay before us a more difficult
question, by declaring that it is just as impossible for any one to hate
what he does not know, as to love what he does not know, we will not
withstand what is true; but it must be understood that it is not the
same thing to say he loves to know things unknown, as to say he loves
things unknown. For it is possible that a man may love to know things
unknown; but it is not possible that he should love things unknown. For
the word to know is not placed there without meaning; since he who loves
to know things unknown, does not love the unknown things themselves, but
the knowing of them. And unless he knew what knowing means, no one could
say confidently, either that he knew or that he did not know. For not
only he who says I know, and says so truly, must needs know what knowing
is; but he also who says, I do not know, and says so confidently and
truly, and knows that he says so truly, certainly knows what knowing is;
for he both distinguishes him who does not know from him who knows, when
he looks into himself and says truly I do not know; and whereas he knows
that he says this truly, whence should he know it, if he did not know
what knowing is?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_722"></span>[134:723](1030138.htm#fr_722.md) <span
id="iv.i.xii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.i-p4"></span> Wine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1030139.md)
