[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030390)  [Next](1030392) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 17.—The Specimen of Catechetical
Discourse Continued, in Reference Specially to the Reproval of False
Aims on the Catechumen’s Part.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p2"></span>26. “For there are some whose reason
for desiring to become Christians is either that they may gain the favor
of men from whom they look for temporal advantages, or that they are
reluctant to offend those whom they fear. But these are reprobate; and
although the church bears them for a time, as the threshing-floor bears
the chaff until the period of winnowing, yet if they fail to amend and
begin to be Christians in sincerity in view of the everlasting rest
which is to come, they will be separated from it in the end. And let not
such flatter themselves, because it is possible for them to be in the
threshing-floor along with the grain of God. For they will not be
together with that in the barn, but are destined for the fire, which is
their due. There are also others of better hope indeed, but nevertheless
in no inferior danger. I mean those who now fear God, and mock not the
Christian name, neither enter the church of God with an assumed heart,
but still look for their felicity in this life, expecting to have more
felicity in earthly things than those enjoy who refuse to worship God.
And the consequence of this false anticipation is, that when they see
some wicked and impious men strongly established and excelling in this
worldly prosperity, while they themselves either possess it in a smaller
degree or miss it altogether, they are troubled with the thought that
they are serving God without reason, and so they readily fall away from
the faith.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p3"></span>27. “But as to the man who has in view
that everlasting blessedness and perpetual rest which is promised as the
lot destined for the saints after this life, and who desires to become a
Christian, in order that he may not pass into eternal fire with the
devil, but enter into the eternal kingdom together with Christ, <span
id="fr_1433"></span>[1434](#fn_1433) such an one is truly a Christian;
(and he will be) on his guard in every temptation, so that he may
neither be corrupted by prosperity nor be utterly broken in spirit by
adversity, but remain at once modest and temperate when the good things
of earth abound with him, and brave and patient when tribulations
overtake him. A person of this character will also advance in
attainments until he comes to that disposition of mind which will make
him love God more than he fears hell; so that even were God to say to
him, ‘Avail yourself of carnal pleasures for ever, and sin as much as
you are able, and you shall neither die nor be sent into hell, but you
will only not be with me, he would be terribly dismayed, and would
altogether abstain from sinning, not now (simply) with the purpose of
not falling into that of which he was wont to be afraid, but with the
wish not to offend Him whom he so greatly loves: in whom alone also
there is the rest which eye hath not seen, neither hath ear heard,
neither hath it entered into the heart of man (to conceive),—the rest
which God hath prepared for them that love Him. <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434)

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p6"></span>28. “Now, on the subject of this rest
Scripture is significant, and refrains not to speak, when it tells us
how at the beginning of the world, and at the time when God made heaven
and earth and all things which are in them, He worked during six days,
and rested on the seventh day. <span
id="fr_1435"></span>[1436](#fn_1435) For it was in the power of the
Almighty to make all things even in one moment of time. For He had not
labored in the view that He might enjoy (a needful) rest, since indeed
“He spake, and they were made; He commanded, and they were
created;” <span id="fr_1436"></span>[1437](#fn_1436) but that He might
signify how, after six ages of this world, in a seventh age, as on the
seventh day, He will rest in His saints; inasmuch as these same saints
shall rest also in Him after all the good works in which they have
served Him,—which He Himself, indeed, works in them, who calls them, and
instructs them, and puts away the offenses that are past, and justifies
the man who previously <span id="page_302">p. 302</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-Page_302"></span>was ungodly. For as, when by His gift
they work that which is good, He is Himself rightly said to work (that
in them), so, when they rest in Him, He is rightly said to rest Himself.
For, as regards Himself, He seeks no cessation, because He feels no
labor. Moreover He made all things by His Word; and His Word is Christ
Himself, in whom the angels and all those purest spirits of heaven rest
in holy silence. Man, however in that he fell by sin, has lost the rest
which he possessed in His divinity, and receives it again (now) in His
humanity; and for this purpose He became man, and was born of a woman,
at the seasonable time at which He Himself knew it behoved it so to be
fulfilled. And from the flesh assuredly He could not sustain any
contamination, being Himself rather destined to purify the flesh. Of His
future coming the ancient saints, in the revelation of the Spirit, had
knowledge, and prophesied. And thus were they saved by believing that He
was to come, even as we are saved by believing that He has come. Hence
ought we to love God who has so loved us as to have sent His only Son,
in order that He might endue Himself with the lowliness <span
id="fr_1437"></span>[1438](#fn_1437) of our mortality, and die both at
the hands of sinners and on behalf of sinners. For even in times of old,
and in the opening ages, the depth of this mystery ceases not to be
prefigured and prophetically announced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[301:1434](1030391.htm#fr_1433) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p4"></span> Cf. [Matt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[301:1435](1030391.htm#fr_1434) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p5.1"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[301:1436](1030391.htm#fr_1435) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p7"></span> [Gen.
2.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Gen. ii.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[301:1437](1030391.htm#fr_1436) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p8"></span> [Ps.
148.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p8.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[302:1438](1030391.htm#fr_1437) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p9"></span> *Humanitate*, = humanity, also occurs
instead of *humilitate*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](1030392)
