[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030000)  [Next](1030002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span> <span id="page_iii">p. iii</span> <span
id="ii-Page_iii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="ii-p3.1"></span>This</span> third volume contains the most important
doctrinal and moral treatises of St. Augustin, and presents a pretty
complete view of his dogmatics and ethics.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The most weighty of the doctrinal treatises is
that on the *Holy Trinity*. The Latin original *(De Trinitate contra
Arianos libri quindecim)* is contained in the 8th volume of the
Benedictine edition. It is the most elaborate, and probably also the
ablest and profoundest patristic discussion of this central doctrine of
the Christian religion, unless we except the *Orations against the
Arians*, by Athanasius, “the Father of Orthodoxy,” who devoted his life
to the defense of the Divinity of Christ. Augustin, owing to his
defective knowledge of Greek, wrote his work independently of the
previous treatises of the Eastern Church on that subject. He bestowed
more time and care upon it than on any other book, except the *City of
God*.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>The value of the present translation, which
first appeared in Mr. Clark’s edition, 1873, has been much increased by
the revision, the introductory essay, and the critical notes of a
distinguished American divine, who is in full sympathy with St.
Augustin, and thoroughly at home in the history of this dogma. I could
not have intrusted it to abler hands than those of my friend and
colleague, Dr. Shedd.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>The moral treatises (contained in the 6th volume
of the Benedictine edition) were first translated for the Oxford Library
of the Fathers (1847). They contain much that will instruct and interest
the reader; while some views will appear strange to those who fail to
distinguish between different ages and different types of virtue and
piety. Augustin shared with the Greek and Latin fathers the ascetic
preference for voluntary celibacy and poverty. He accepted the
distinction which dates from the second century, between two kinds of
morality: a lower morality of the common people, which consists in
keeping the ten commandments; and a higher sanctity of the elect few,
which observes, in addition, the evangelical counsels, so called, or the
monastic virtues. He practiced this doctrine after his conversion. He
ought to have married the mother of his son; but in devoting himself to
the priesthood, he felt it his duty to remain unmarried, according to
the prevailing spirit of the church in his age. His teacher, Ambrose,
and his older contemporary, Jerome, went still further in the
enthusiastic praise of single life. We must admire their power of
self-denial and undivided consecration, though we may dissent from their
theory. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span> <span id="ii-Page_iv"></span>

<span id="ii-p8"></span>The asceticism of the early church was a
reaction against the awful sexual corruption of surrounding heathenism,
and with all its excesses it accomplished a great deal of good. It
prepared the way for Christian family life. The fathers appealed to the
example of Christ, who in this respect, as the Son of God, stood above
ordinary human relations, and the advice of St. Paul, which was given in
view of “the present distress,” in times of persecution. They deemed
single life better adapted to the undivided service of Christ and his
church than the married state with its unavoidable secular cares ([1
Cor. 7.25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="ii-p8.1"></span>[1
Cor. vii. 25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)<span id="ii-p8.2"></span>
sqq.). Augustin expresses this view when he says, on *Virginity*, § 27:

<span id="ii-p9"></span>“Therefore go on, Saints of God, boys and girls,
males and females, unmarried men and women; go on and persevere unto the
end. Praise more sweetly the Lord, whom ye think on more richly; hope
more happily in Him, whom ye serve more earnestly; love more ardently
Him, whom ye please more attentively. With loins girded, and lamps
burning, wait for the Lord, when He returns from the marriage. Ye shall
bring unto the marriage of the Lamb a new song, which ye shall sing on
your harps.”

<span id="ii-p10"></span>The Reformation has abolished the system of
monasticism and clerical celibacy, and substituted for it, as the normal
condition for the clergy as well as the laity, the purity, chastity and
beauty of family life, instituted by God in Paradise and sanctioned by
our Saviour’s presence at the wedding at Cana.

<span id="ii-p11"></span><span class="c9"><span id="ii-p11.1"></span>New
York</span>, March, 1887.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[iii:1](1030001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p7"></span> On the ascetic tendencies of the second and
third centuries, and the gradual introduction of clerical celibacy
(which began with a decree of Bishop Siricius of Rome, 385), see Schaff,
*Church Hist*., vol. ii. 367–414, and vol. iii. 242–250.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](1030002)
