[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030525)  [Next](1030527.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.x"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p1"></span> 9. Truly we must consider, that God gives
us some goods, which are to be sought for their own sake, such as
wisdom, health, friendship: but others, which are necessary for the sake
of somewhat, such as learning, meat, drink, sleep, marriage, sexual
intercourse. For of these certain are necessary for the sake of wisdom,
as learning: certain for the sake of health, as meat and drink and
sleep: certain for the sake of friendship, as marriage or sexual
intercourse: for hence subsists the propagation of the human kind,
wherein friendly fellowship is a great good. These goods, therefore,
which are necessary for the sake of something else, whoso useth not for
this purpose, wherefore they were instituted, sins; in some cases
venially, in other cases damnably. But whoso useth them for this
purpose, wherefore they were given doeth well. Therefore, to whomsoever
they are not necessary, if he use them not, he doeth better. Wherefore,
these goods, when we have need, we do well to wish; but we do better not
to wish than to wish: because ourselves are in a better state, when we
account them not necessary. And on this account it is good to marry,
because it is good to beget children, to be a mother of a family: but it
is better not to marry, <span id="fr_1960"></span>[1961](#fn_1960.md)
because it is better not to stand in need of this work, in order to
human fellowship itself. For such is the state of the human race now,
that (others, who contain not, not only being taken up with marriage,
but many also waxing wanton through unlawful concubinages, the Good
Creator working what is good out of their evils) there fails not
numerous progeny, and abundant succession, out of which to procure holy
friendships. Whence we gather, that, in the first times of the human
race, chiefly for the propagation of the People of God, through whom the
Prince and Saviour of all people should both be prophesied of, and be
born, it was the duty of the Saints to use this good of marriage, not as
to be sought for its own sake, but necessary for the sake of something
else: but now, whereas, in order to enter upon holy and pure fellowship,
there is on all sides from out all nations an overflowing fullness of
spiritual kindred, even they who wish to contract marriage only for the
sake of children, are to be admonished, that they use rather the larger
good of continence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[403:1961](1030526.htm#fr_1960.md) <span
id="v.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p2"></span> [1 Tim.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014.md)<span id="v.ii.x-p2.1"></span>[1
Tim. v. 14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.ii.x-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 10](1030527.md)
