[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030051)  [Next](1030053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.v.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—In How Many Ways the Creature is
to Be Taken by Way of Sign. The Eucharist.</span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p2"></span>Excepting, therefore, all these things as
I just now said, there are some also of another kind; which, although
from the same corporeal substance, are yet brought within reach of our
senses in order to announce something from God, and these are properly
called miracles and signs; yet is not the person of God Himself assumed
in all things which are announced to us by the Lord God. When, however,
that person is assumed, it is sometimes made manifest as an angel;
sometimes in that form which is not an angel in his own proper being,
although it is ordered and ministered by an angel. Again, when it is
assumed in that form which is not an angel in his own proper being;
sometimes in this case it is a body itself already existing, assumed
after some kind of change, in order to make that message manifest;
sometimes it is one that comes into being for the purpose, and that
being accomplished, is discarded. Just as, also, when men are the
messengers, sometimes they speak the words of God in their own person,
as when it is premised, “The Lord said,” or, “Thus saith the
Lord,” <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) or any other such phrase,
but sometimes without any such prefix, they take upon themselves the
very person of God, as *e.g.*: “I will instruct thee, and teach thee in
the way wherein thou shalt go:” <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393)
so, not only in word, but also in act, the signifying of the person of
God is imposed upon the prophet, in order that he may bear that person
in the ministering of the prophecy; just as he, for instance, bore that
person who divided his garment into twelve parts, and gave ten of them
to the servant of King Solomon, to the future king of Israel. <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) Sometimes, also, a thing which was not
a prophet in his own proper self, and which existed already among
earthly things, was assumed in order to signify this; as Jacob, when he
had seen the dream, upon waking up did with the stone, which when asleep
he had under his head. <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) Sometimes
a thing is made in the same kind, for the mere purpose; so as either to
continue a little while in existence, as that brazen serpent was able to
do which was lifted up in the wilderness, <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) and as written records are able to do
likewise; or so as to pass away after having accomplished its ministry,
as the bread made for the purpose is consumed in the receiving of the
sacrament.

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p8"></span>20. But because these things are known to
men, in that they are done by men, they may well meet with reverence as
being holy things, but they cannot cause wonder as being miracles. And
therefore those things which are done by angels are the more wonderful
to us, in that they are more difficult and more known; but they are
known and easy to them as being their own actions. An angel speaks in
the person of God to man, saying, “I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-Page_64"></span>and the God of Jacob;” the Scripture
having said just before, “The angel of the Lord appeared to him.” <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) And a man also speaks in the person of
God, saying, “Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee, O Israel:
I am the Lord thy God.” <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) A rod
was taken to serve as a sign, and was changed into a serpent by
angelical power; <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) but although
that power is wanting to man, yet a stone was taken also by man for a
similar sign. <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) There is a wide
difference between the deed of the angel and the deed of the man. The
former is both to be wondered at and to be understood, the latter only
to be understood. That which is understood from both, is perhaps one and
the same; but those things from which it is understood, are different.
Just as if the name of God were written both in gold and in ink; the
former would be the more precious, the latter the more worthless; yet
that which is signified in both is one and the same. And although the
serpent that came from Moses’ rod signified the same thing as Jacob’s
stone, yet Jacob’s stone signified something better than did the
serpents of the magicians. For as the anointing of the stone signified
Christ in the flesh, in which He was anointed with the oil of gladness
above His fellows; <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) so the rod of
Moses, turned into a serpent, signified Christ Himself made obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross. <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) Whence it is said, “And as Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be
lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have
everlasting life;” <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) just as by
gazing on that serpent which was lifted up in the wilderness, they did
not perish by the bites of the serpents. For “our old man is crucified
with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed.” <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) For by the serpent death is
understood, which was wrought by the serpent in paradise, <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) the mode of speech expressing the
effect by the efficient. Therefore the rod passed into the serpent,
Christ into death; and the serpent again into the rod, whole Christ with
His body into the resurrection; which body is the Church; <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) and this shall be in the end of time,
signified by the tail, which Moses held, in order that it might return
into a rod. <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) But the serpents of
the magicians, like those who are dead in the world, unless by believing
in Christ they shall have been as it were swallowed up by, <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) and have entered into, His body, will
not be able to rise again in Him. Jacob’s stone, therefore, as I said,
signified something better than did the serpents of the magicians; yet
the deed of the magicians was much more wonderful. But these things in
this way are no hindrance to the understanding of the matter; just as if
the name of a man were written in gold, and that of God in ink.

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p21"></span>21. What man, again, knows how the
angels made or took those clouds and fires in order to signify the
message they were bearing, even if we supposed that the Lord or the Holy
Spirit was manifested in those corporeal forms? Just as infants do not
know of that which is placed upon the altar and consumed after the
performance of the holy celebration, whence or in what manner it is
made, or whence it is taken for religious use. And if they were never to
learn from their own experience or that of others, and never to see that
species of thing except during the celebration of the sacrament, when it
is being offered and given; and if it were told them by the most weighty
authority whose body and blood it is; they will believe nothing else,
except that the Lord absolutely appeared in this form to the eyes of
mortals, and that that liquid actually flowed from the piercing of a
side <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) which resembled this. But
it is certainly a useful caution to myself, that I should remember what
my own powers are, and admonish my brethren that they also remember what
theirs are, lest human infirmity pass on beyond what is safe. For how
the angels do these things, or rather, how God does these things by His
angels, and how far He wills them to be done even by the bad angels,
whether by permitting, or commanding, or compelling, from the hidden
seat of His own supreme power; this I can neither penetrate by the sight
of the eyes, nor make clear by assurance of reason, nor be carried on to
comprehend it by reach of intellect, so as to speak thereupon to all
questions that may be asked respecting these matters, as certainly as if
I were an angel, or a prophet, or an apostle. “For the thoughts of
mortal men are miserable, and our devices are but uncertain. For the
corruptible body presseth down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle
weigheth down the mind, that museth upon many things. And hardly do we
guess aright at things that are upon earth, and with labor do we find
the things that are before us; but the things that are in heaven, who
hath searched out?” But because it goes on to say, “And Thy counsel who
hath known, except Thou give wisdom, and send Thy Holy Spirit from
above;” <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) therefore we refrain
indeed from searching out the things which are in heaven, under which
kind are contained both angelical bodies according to their proper <span
id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span id="iv.i.v.xi-Page_65"></span>dignity,
and any corporeal action of those bodies; yet, according to the Spirit
of God sent to us from above, and to His grace imparted to our minds, I
dare to say confidently, that neither God the Father, nor His Word, nor
His Spirit, which is the one God, is in any way changeable in regard to
that which He is, and whereby He is that which He is; and much less is
in this regard visible. Since there are no doubt some things changeable,
yet not visible, as are our thoughts, and memories, and wills, and the
whole incorporeal creature; but there is nothing that is visible that is
not also changeable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_392"></span>[63:393](1030052.htm#fr_392) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p3"></span> [Jer.
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p3.1"></span>[Jer. 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_393"></span>[63:394](1030052.htm#fr_393) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p4"></span> [Ps.
32.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p4.1"></span>[Ps. xxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_394"></span>[63:395](1030052.htm#fr_394) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p5"></span> [1 Kings
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p5.1"></span>[1
Kings 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_395"></span>[63:396](1030052.htm#fr_395) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p6"></span> [Gen.
28.18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p6.1"></span>[Gen. xxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_396"></span>[63:397](1030052.htm#fr_396) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p7"></span> [Num.
21.9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p7.1"></span>[Num. xxi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_397"></span>[64:398](1030052.htm#fr_397) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p9"></span> [Exod.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p9.1"></span>[Exod. 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_398"></span>[64:399](1030052.htm#fr_398) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p10"></span> [Ps.
81:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p10.1"></span>[Ps. 81:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_399"></span>[64:400](1030052.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p11"></span> [Ex.
7.10](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p11.1"></span>[Ex. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_400"></span>[64:401](1030052.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p12"></span> [Gen.
28.18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p12.1"></span>[Gen. xxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_401"></span>[64:402](1030052.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p13"></span> [Ps.
45.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p13.1"></span>[Ps. xlv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_402"></span>[64:403](1030052.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p14"></span> [Phil.
2.9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p14.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_403"></span>[64:404](1030052.htm#fr_403) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p15"></span> [John
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p15.1"></span>[John
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_404"></span>[64:405](1030052.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p16"></span> [Rom.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p16.1"></span>[Rom. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_405"></span>[64:406](1030052.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p17"></span> [Gen.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_406"></span>[64:407](1030052.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p18"></span> [Col.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p18.1"></span>[Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_407"></span>[64:408](1030052.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p19"></span> [Ex.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p19.1"></span>[Ex. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_408"></span>[64:409](1030052.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p20"></span> [Ex.
7.12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p20.1"></span>[Ex. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_409"></span>[64:410](1030052.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p22"></span> [John
19.34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p22.1"></span>[John xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_410"></span>[64:411](1030052.htm#fr_410) <span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.xi-p23"></span> [Wisdom
9.14-17](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p23.1"></span>[Wisd. ix.
14-17](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.v.xi-p23.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030053)
