[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030072)  [Next](1030074.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—The Son of God Became Incarnate
in Order that We Being Cleansed by Faith May Be Raised to the
Unchangeable Truth.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p2"></span>24. Since, then, we were not fit to
take hold of things eternal, and since the foulness of sins weighed us
down, which we had contracted by the love of temporal things, and which
were implanted in us as it were naturally, from the root of mortality,
it was needful that we should be cleansed. But cleansed we could not be,
so as to be tempered together with things eternal, except it were
through things temporal, wherewith we were already tempered together and
held fast. For health is at the opposite extreme from disease; but the
intermediate process of healing does not lead us to perfect health,
unless it has some congruity with the disease. Things temporal that are
useless merely deceive the sick; things temporal that are useful take up
those that need healing, and pass them on healed, to things eternal. And
the rational mind, as when cleansed it owes contemplation to things
eternal; so, when needing cleansing, owes faith to things temporal. One
even of those who were formerly esteemed wise men among the Greeks has
said, The truth stands to faith in the same relation in which eternity
stands to that which has a beginning. And he is no doubt right in saying
so. For what we call temporal, he describes as having had a beginning.
And we also ourselves come under this kind, not only in respect to the
body, but also in respect to the changeableness of the soul. For that is
not properly called eternal which undergoes any degree of change.
Therefore, in so far as we are changeable, in so far we stand apart from
eternity. But life eternal is promised to us through the truth, from the
clear knowledge of which, again, our faith stands as far apart as
mortality does from eternity. We then now put faith in things done in
time on our account, and by that faith itself we are cleansed; in order
that when we have come to sight, as truth follows faith, so eternity may
follow upon mortality. And therefore, since our faith will become truth,
when we have attained to that which is promised to us who believe: and
that which is promised us is eternal life; and the Truth (not that which
shall come to be according as our faith shall be, but that truth which
is always, because in it is eternity,—the Truth then) has said, “And
this is life eternal, that <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-Page_82"></span>they might know Thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent:” <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527.md) when our faith by seeing shall come to
be truth, then eternity shall possess our now changed mortality. And
until this shall take place, and in order that it may take
place,—because we adapt the faith of belief to things which have a
beginning, as in things eternal we hope for the truth of contemplation,
lest the faith of mortal life should be at discord with the truth of
eternal life,—the Truth itself, co-eternal with the Father, took a
beginning from earth, <span id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528.md) when the
Son of God so came as to become the Son of man, and to take to Himself
our faith, that He might thereby lead us on to His own truth, who so
undertook our mortality, as not to lose His own eternity. For truth
stands to faith in the relation in which eternity stands to that which
has a beginning. Therefore, we must needs so be cleansed, that we may
come to have such a beginning as remains eternal, that we may not have
one beginning in faith, and another in truth. Neither could we pass to
things eternal from the condition of having a beginning, unless we were
transferred, by union of the eternal to ourselves through our own
beginning, to His own eternity. Therefore our faith has, in some
measure, now followed thither, whither He in whom we have believed has
ascended; born, <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529.md) dead, risen
again, taken up. Of these four things, we knew the first two in
ourselves. For we know that men both have a beginning and die. But the
remaining two, that is, to be raised, and to be taken up, we rightly
hope will be in us, because we have believed them done in Him. Since,
therefore, in Him that, too, which had a beginning has passed over to
eternity, in ourselves also it will so pass over, when faith shall have
arrived at truth. For to those who thus believe, in order that they
might remain in the word of faith, and being thence led on to the truth,
and through that to eternity, might be freed from death, He speaks thus:
“If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed.” And as
though they would ask, With what fruit? He proceeds to say, “And ye
shall know the truth.” And again, as though they would say, Of what good
is truth to mortal men? “And the truth,” He says, “shall make you
free.” <span id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530.md) From what, except from
death, from corruptions, from changeableness? Since truth remains
immortal, incorrupt, unchangeable. But true immortality, true
incorruptibility, true unchangeableness, is eternity itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_527"></span>[82:528](1030073.htm#fr_527.md) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p3"></span> [John
17.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p3.1"></span>[John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_528"></span>[82:529](1030073.htm#fr_528.md) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p4"></span> [Ps.
85.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p4.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_529"></span>[82:530](1030073.htm#fr_529.md) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p5"></span> Ortus.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[82:531](1030073.htm#fr_530.md) <span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p6"></span> [John
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.i.vi.xix-p6.1"></span>[John
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032.md)<span id="iv.i.vi.xix-p6.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1030074.md)
