[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030393)  [Next](1030395.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 20.—Of Israel’s Bondage in Egypt,
Their Deliverance, and Their Passage Through the Red Sea.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p2"></span>34. “That people, then, having been
brought down into Egypt, were in bondage to the harshest of kings; and,
taught by the most oppressive labors, they sought their deliverer in
God; and there was sent to them one belonging to the people themselves,
Moses, the holy servant of God, who, in the might of God, terrified the
impious nation of the Egyptians in those days by great miracles, and led
forth the people of God out of that land through the Red Sea, where the
water parted and opened up a way for them as they crossed it, whereas,
when the Egyptians pressed on in pursuit, the waves returned to their
channel and overwhelmed them, so that they perished. Thus, then, just as
the earth through the agency of the flood was cleansed by the waters
from the wickedness of the sinners, who in those times were destroyed in
their inundation, while the righteous escaped by means of the wood; so
the people of God, when they went forth from Egypt, found a way through
the waters by which their enemies were devoured. Nor was the sacrament
of the wood wanting there. For Moses smote with his rod, in order that
that miracle might be effected. Both these <span id="page_305">p.
305</span> <span id="iv.iii.xxi-Page_305"></span>are signs of holy
baptism, by which the faithful pass into the new life, while their sins
are done away with like enemies, and perish. But more clearly was the
passion of Christ prefigured in the case of that people, when they were
commanded to slay and eat the lamb, and to mark their door-posts with
its blood, and to celebrate this rite every year, and to designate it
the Lord’s passover. For surely prophecy speaks with the utmost
plainness of the Lord Jesus Christ, when it says that “He was led as a
lamb to the slaughter.” <span id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444.md) And
with the sign of His passion and cross, thou art this day to be marked
on thy forehead, as on the door-post, and all Christians are marked with
the same.

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p4"></span>35. “Thereafter this people was
conducted through the wilderness for forty years. They also received the
law written by the finger of God, under which name the Holy Spirit is
signified, as it is declared with the utmost plainness in the Gospel.
For God is not defined <span id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445.md) by the
form of a body, neither are members and fingers to be thought of as
existent in Him in the way in which we see them in ourselves. But,
inasmuch as it is through the Holy Spirit that God’s gifts are divided
to His saints, in order that, although they vary in their capacities,
they may nevertheless not lapse from the concord of charity, and
inasmuch as it is especially in the fingers that there appears a certain
kind of division, while nevertheless there is no separation from unity,
this may be the explanation of the phrase. But whether this may be the
case, or whatever other reason may be assigned for the Holy Spirit being
called the finger of God, we ought not at any rate to think of the form
of a human body when we hear this expression used. The people in
question, then, received the law written by the finger of God, and that
in good sooth on tables of stone, to signify the hardness of their heart
in that they were not to fulfill the law. For, as they eagerly sought
from the Lord gifts meant for the uses of the body, they were held by
carnal fear rather than by spiritual charity. But nothing fulfills the
law save charity. Consequently, they were burdened with many visible
sacraments, to the intent that they should feel the pressure of the yoke
of bondage in the observances of meats, and in the sacrifices of
animals, and in other rites innumerable; which things, at the same time,
were signs of spiritual matters relating to the Lord Jesus Christ and to
the Church; which, furthermore, at that time were both understood by a
few holy men to the effect of yielding the fruit of salvation, and
observed by them in accordance with the fitness of the time, while by
the multitude of carnal men they were observed only and not understood.

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p6"></span>36. “In this manner, then, through many
varied signs of things to come, which it would be tedious to enumerate
in complete detail, and which we now see in their fulfillment in the
Church, that people were brought to the land of promise, in which they
were to reign in a temporal and carnal way in accordance with their own
longings: which earthly kingdom, nevertheless, sustained the image of a
spiritual kingdom. There Jerusalem was founded, that most celebrated
city of God, which, while in bondage, served as a sign of the free city,
which is called the heavenly Jerusalem <span
id="fr_1446"></span>[1447](#fn_1446.md) which latter term is a Hebrew word,
and signifies by interpretation the ‘vision of peace.’ The citizens
thereof are all sanctified men, who have been, who are, and who are yet
to be; and all sanctified spirits, even as many as are obedient to God
with pious devotion in the exalted regions of heaven, and imitate not
the impious pride of the devil and his angels. The King of this city is
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Word of God, by whom the highest angels are
governed, and at the same time the Word that took unto Himself human
nature, <span id="fr_1447"></span>[1448](#fn_1447.md) in order that by Him
men also might be governed, who, in His fellowship, shall reign all
together in eternal peace. In the service of prefiguring this King in
that earthly kingdom of the people of Israel, King David stood forth
pre-eminent, <span id="fr_1448"></span>[1449](#fn_1448.md) of whose seed
according to the flesh that truest King was to come, to wit, our Lord
Jesus Christ, ‘who is over all, God blessed for ever.’ <span
id="fr_1449"></span>[1450](#fn_1449.md) In that land of promise many things
were done, which held good as figures of the Christ who was to come, and
of the Church, with which you will have it in your power to acquaint
yourself by degrees in the Holy Books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[305:1445](1030394.htm#fr_1444.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p3"></span> [Isa.
53.7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p3.1"></span>[Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[305:1446](1030394.htm#fr_1445.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p5"></span> Or = circumscribed, *definitus*.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[305:1447](1030394.htm#fr_1446.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p7"></span> Cf. [Gal.
4.26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>[Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[305:1448](1030394.htm#fr_1447.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p8"></span> Hominem.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[305:1449](1030394.htm#fr_1448.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p9"></span> [1 Kings
11.13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p9.1"></span>[1 Kings xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[305:1450](1030394.htm#fr_1449.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p10"></span> [Rom.
9.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p10.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](1030395.md)
