[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030733)  [Next](1030735.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.vii.iii-p1"></span> 2. First then, it is to be seen, what is
said by persons of that profession, who will not work: then, if we shall
find that they think not aright, what is meet to be said for their
correction? “It is not,” say they, “of this corporal work in which
either husbandmen or handicraftsmen labor, that the Apostle gave
precept, when he said, ‘If any will not work, neither let him eat.’” For
he could not be contrary to the Gospel, where the Lord Him<span
id="page_504">p. 504</span> <span id="v.vii.iii-Page_504"></span>self
saith, “Therefore I say unto you, be not solicitous for your life, what
ye shall eat, neither for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the
life more than meat, and the body than raiment? Consider the fowls of
heaven, that they sow not, nor reap, nor gather into barns; and your
heavenly Father feedeth them. Are not ye rather of more worth than they?
But who of you by taking thought can add to his stature one cubit? And
concerning raiment, why are ye solicitous? Consider the lilies of the
field, how they grow; they labor not, neither spin; but I say unto you,
that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these.
But if the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into
the oven, God so clotheth; how much more you, (O ye) of little faith! Be
not therefore solicitous, saying, What shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or wherewithal shall we be clad? for all these things do the
Gentiles seek. And your heavenly Father knoweth that ye need all these.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and His righteousness, and all
these shall be added unto you. Be not therefore solicitous for the
morrow: for the morrow will be solicitous for itself. Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof.” <span id="fr_2476"></span>[2477](#fn_2476.md)
Lo, say they, where the Lord biddeth us be without care concerning our
food and clothing: how then could the Apostle think contrary to the
Lord, that he should instruct us that we ought to be in such sort
solicitous, what we shall eat, or what we shall drink, or wherewithal we
shall be clothed, that he should even burden us with the arts, cares,
labors of handicraftsmen? Wherefore in that he saith, “If any will not
work, neither let him eat;” works spiritual, say they, are what we must
understand: of which he saith in another place, “To each one according
as the Lord hath given: I have planted, Apollos hath watered; but God
gave the increase.” <span id="fr_2477"></span>[2478](#fn_2477.md) And a
little after, “Each one shall receive his reward according to his own
labor. We are God’s fellow-workers; God’s husbandry, God’s building are
ye: according to the grace which is given unto me, as a wise
masterbuilder I have laid the foundation.” As therefore the Apostle
worketh in planting, watering, building, and foundation-laying, in that
way whoso will not work, let him not eat. For what profiteth in eating
spiritually to be fed with the word of God, if he do not thence work
others’ edification? As that slothful servant, what did it profit to
receive a talent and to hide it, and not work for the Lord’s gain? Was
it that it should be taken from him at last, and himself cast into outer
darkness? So, say they, do we also. We read with the brethren, who come
to us fatigued from the turmoil of the world, that with us, in the word
of God, and in prayers, psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, they may
find rest. We speak to them, console, exhort, building up in them
whatever unto their life, according to their degree, we perceive to be
lacking. Such works if we wrought not, with peril should we receive of
the Lord our spiritual sustenance itself. For this is it the Apostle
said, “If any one will not work, neither let him eat.” Thus do these men
deem themselves to comply with the apostolic and evangelic sentence,
when both the Gospel they believe to have given precept concerning the
not caring for the corporal and temporal indigence of this life, and the
Apostle concerning spiritual work and food to have said, “If any will
not work, neither let him eat.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2476"></span>[504:2477](1030734.htm#fr_2476.md) <span
id="v.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii.iii-p2"></span> [Matt.
6.25-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025.md)<span
id="v.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2477"></span>[504:2478](1030734.htm#fr_2477.md) <span
id="v.vii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii.iii-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
3.5-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005.md)<span
id="v.vii.iii-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
5-10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005.md)<span id="v.vii.iii-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 3](1030735.md)
