[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030629)  [Next](1030631) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xviii-p1"></span> 17. Let us therefore set before our
eyes three widows, each having one of the things, the whole of which
were in her: let us suppose one who had had one husband, in whose case
is wanting both so great length of widowhood, in that she hath lived
long with her husband, and so great zeal of piety, in that she doth not
so serve with fasts and prayers: a second, who after the very short life
of her former husband, had quickly lost a second also, and is now long
time a widow, but yet herself also doth not so set herself to the most
religious service of fasts and prayers: a third, who not only hath had
two husbands, but also hath lived long with each of them singly, or with
one of them, and being left a <span id="page_448">p. 448</span> <span
id="v.iv.xviii-Page_448"></span>widow at a later period of life, wherein
indeed, in case she had wished to marry, she might also conceive sons,
hath taken upon her widowed continence; but is more intent on God, more
careful to do always the things that please Him, day and night, like
Anna, serving by prayers and fasts. If a question be raised, which of
these is to be preferred in deserts, who but must see that in this
contest the palm must be given to the greater and, more glowing piety?
So also if three others be set, in each of whom are two of those three,
but one of the three in each wanting, who can doubt that they will be
the better, who shall have in a more excellent manner in their two goods
pious humility, in order that there may be lofty piety?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](1030631)
