[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030159)  [Next](1030161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—The Imagination Also Adds Even
to Things We Have Not Seen, Those Things Which We Have Seen
Elsewhere.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.x-p2"></span>17. But if we do not remember except
what we have \[sensuously\] perceived, nor conceive except what we
remember; why do we often conceive things that are false, when certainly
we do not remember falsely those things which we have perceived, unless
it be because that will (which I have already taken pains to show as
much as I can to be the uniter and the separater of things of this kind)
leads the vision of the conceiver that is to be formed, after its own
will and pleasure, <span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="iv.i.xiii.x-Page_154"></span>through the hidden stores of the
memory; and, in order to conceive \[imagine\] those things which we do
not remember, impels it to take one thing from hence, and another from
thence, from those which we do remember; and these things combining into
one vision make something which is called false, because it either does
not exist externally in the nature of corporeal things, or does not seem
copied from the memory, in that we do not remember that we ever saw such
a thing. For who ever saw a black swan? And therefore no one remembers a
black swan; yet who is there that cannot conceive it? For it is easy to
apply to that shape which we have come to know by seeing it, a black
color, which we have not the less seen in other bodies; and because we
have seen both, we remember both. Neither do I remember a bird with four
feet, because I never saw one; but I contemplate such a phantasy very
easily, by adding to some winged shape such as I have seen, two other
feet, such as I have likewise seen. <span
id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741) And therefore, in conceiving
conjointly, what we remember to have seen singly, we seem not to
conceive that which we remember; while we really do this under the law
of the memory, whence we take everything which we join together after
our own pleasure in manifold and diverse ways. For we do not conceive
even the very magnitudes of bodies, which magnitudes we never saw,
without help of the memory; for the measure of space to which our gaze
commonly reaches through the magnitude of the world, is the measure also
to which we enlarge the bulk of bodies, whatever they may be, when we
conceive them as great as we can. And reason, indeed, proceeds still
beyond, but phantasy does not follow her; as when reason announces the
infinity of number also, which no vision of him who conceives according
to corporeal things can apprehend. The same reason also teaches that the
most minute atoms are infinitely divisible; yet when we have come to
those slight and minute particles which we remember to have seen, then
we can no longer behold phantasms more slender and more minute, although
reason does not cease to continue to divide them. So we conceive no
corporeal things, except either those we remember, or from those things
which we remember.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_741"></span>[154:742](1030160.htm#fr_741) <span
id="iv.i.xiii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.x-p3"></span> *Vid. Retract*. 11. xv. 2. \[Augustin
here says that when he wrote the above, he forgot what is said in [Lev.
11.20](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.xiii.x-p3.1"></span>[Leviticus xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.xiii.x-p3.2"></span>,
of “fowls that creep, going upon all four, which have legs above their
feet to leap withal upon the earth.”—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030161)
