[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030134)  [Next](1030136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xi.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xi.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—That the Image or Begotten Word
of the Mind that Knows Itself is Equal to the Mind Itself.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.xi-p2"></span>16. But all knowledge according to
species is like the thing which it knows. For there is another knowledge
according to privation, according to which we speak a word only when we
condemn. And this condemnation of a privation is equivalent to praise of
the species, and so is approved. The mind, then, contains some likeness
to a known species, whether when liking that species or when disliking
its privation. And hence, in so far as we know God, we are like Him, but
not like to the point of equality, since we do not know Him to the
extent of His own being. And as, when we speak of bodies by means of the
bodily sense, there arises in our mind some likeness of them, which is a
phantasm of the memory; for the bodies themselves are not at all in the
mind, when we think them, but only the likenesses of those bodies;
therefore, when we approve the latter for the former, we err, for the
approving of one thing for another is an error; yet the image of the
body in the mind is a thing of a better sort than the species of the
body itself, inasmuch as the former is in a better nature, *viz*. in a
living substance, as the mind is: so when we know God, although we are
made better than we were before we knew Him, and above all when the same
knowledge being also liked and worthily loved becomes a word, and so
that knowledge becomes a kind of likeness of God; yet that knowledge is
of a lower kind, since it is in a lower nature; for the mind is
creature, but God is Creator. And from this it may be inferred, that
when the mind knows and approves itself, this same knowledge is in such
way its word, as that it is altogether on a par and equal with it, and
the same; because it is neither the knowledge of a lower essence, as of
the body, nor of a higher, as of God. And whereas knowledge bears a
likeness to that which it knows, that is, of which it is the knowledge;
in this case it has perfect and equal likeness, when the mind itself,
which knows, is known. And so it is both image and word; because it is
uttered concerning that mind to which it is equalled in knowing, and
that which is begotten is equal to the begetter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1030136)
