[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030389)  [Next](1030391.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 16.—A Specimen of a Catechetical
Address; And First, the Case of a Catechumen with Worthy Views.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p2"></span>24. Nevertheless, however that may be,
let us here suppose that some one has come to us who desires to be made
a Christian, and who belongs indeed to the order of private
persons, <span id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427.md) and yet not to the
class of rustics, but to that of the city-bred, such as those whom you
cannot fail to come across in numbers in Carthage. Let us also suppose
that, on being asked whether the inducement leading him to desire to be
a Christian is any advantage looked for in the present life, or the rest
which is hoped for after this life, he has answered that his inducement
has been the rest that is yet to come. Then perchance such a person
might be instructed by us in some such strain of address as the
following: <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xvii-Page_300"></span>“Thanks be to God, my brother;
cordially do I wish you joy, and I am glad on your account that, amid
all the storms of this world, which are at once so great and so
dangerous, you have bethought yourself of some true and certain
security. For even in this life men go in quest of rest and security at
the cost of heavy labors, but they fail to find such in consequence of
their wicked lusts. For their thought is to find rest in things which
are unquiet, and which endure not. And these objects, inasmuch as they
are withdrawn from them and pass away in the course of time, agitate
them by fears and griefs, and suffer them not to enjoy tranquillity. For
if it be that a man seeks to find his rest in wealth, he is rendered
proud rather than at ease. Do we not see how many have lost their riches
on a sudden,—how many, too, have been undone by reason of them, either
as they have been coveting to possess them, or as they have been borne
down and despoiled of them by others more covetous than themselves? And
even should they remain with the man all his life long, and never leave
their lover, yet would he himself (have to) leave them at his death. For
of what measure is the life of man, even if he lives to old age? Or when
men desire for themselves old age, what else do they really desire but
long infirmity? So, too, with the honors of this world,—what are they
but empty pride and vanity, and peril of ruin? For holy Scripture speaks
in this wise: ‘All flesh is grass, and the glory of man is as the flower
of grass. The grass withereth, the flower thereof falleth away; but the
word of the Lord endureth for ever.’ <span
id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428.md) Consequently, if any man longs for
true rest and true felicity, he ought to lift his hope off things which
are mortal and transitory, and fix it on the word of the Lord; so that,
cleaving to that which endures for ever, he may himself together with it
endure for ever.

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p5"></span>25. “There are also other men who
neither crave to be rich nor go about seeking the vain pomps of honors,
but who nevertheless are minded to find their pleasure and rest in
dainty meats, and in fornications, and in those theatres and spectacles
which are at their disposal in great cities for nothing. But it fares
with these, too, in the same way; or they waste their small means in
luxury, and subsequently, under pressure of want, break out into thefts
and burglaries, and at times even into highway robberies, and so they
are suddenly filled with fears both numerous and great; and men who a
little before were singing in the house of revelry, are now dreaming of
the sorrows of the prison. Moreover, in their eager devotion to the
public spectacles, they come to resemble demons, as they incite men by
their cries to wound each other, and instigate those who have done them
no hurt to engage in furious contests with each other, while they seek
to please an insane people. And if they perceive any such to be
peaceably disposed, they straightway hate them and persecute them, and
raise an outcry, asking that they should be beaten with clubs, as if
they had been in collusion to cheat them; and this iniquity they force
even the judge, who is the (appointed) avenger of iniquities, to
perpetrate. On the other hand, if they observe such men exerting
themselves in horrid hostilities against each other, whether they be
those who are called *sintœ*, <span id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429.md)
or theatrical actors and players, <span
id="fr_1430"></span>[1431](#fn_1430.md) or charioteers, or hunters,—those
wretched men whom they engage in conflicts and struggles, not only men
with men, but even men with beasts,—then the fiercer the fury with which
they perceive these unhappy creatures rage against each other, the
better they like them, and the greater the enjoyment they have in them;
and they favor them when thus excited, <span
id="fr_1431"></span>[1432](#fn_1431.md) and by so favoring them they excite
them all the more, the spectators themselves striving more madly with
each other, as they espouse the cause of different combatants, than is
the case even with those very men whose madness they madly provoke,
while at the same time they also long to be spectators of the same in
their mad frenzy. <span id="fr_1432"></span>[1433](#fn_1432.md) How then
can that mind keep the soundness of peace which feeds on strifes and
contentions? For just as is the food which is received, such is the
health which results. In fine, although mad pleasures are no pleasures,
nevertheless let these things be taken as they are, and it still remains
the case that, whatever their nature may be, and whatever the measure of
enjoyment yielded by the boasts of riches, and the inflation of honors,
and the spendthrift pleasures of the taverns, and the contests of the
theatres, and the impurity of fornications, and the pruriency of the
baths, they are all things of which one <span id="page_301">p.
301</span> <span id="iv.iii.xvii-Page_301"></span>little fever deprives
us, while, even from those who still survive, it takes away the whole
false happiness of their life. Then there remains only a void and
wounded conscience, destined to apprehend that God as a Judge whom it
refused to have as a Father, and destined also to find a severe Lord in
Him whom it scorned to seek and love as a tender Father. But thou,
inasmuch as thou seekest that true rest which is promised to Christians
after this life, wilt taste the same sweet and pleasant rest even here
among the bitterest troubles of this life, if thou continuest to love
the commandments of Him who hath promised the same. For quickly wilt
thou feel that the fruits of righteousness are sweeter than those of
unrighteousness, and that a man finds a more genuine and pleasurable joy
in the possession of a good conscience in the midst of troubles than in
that of an evil conscience in the midst of delights. For thou hast not
come to be united to the Church of God with the idea of seeking from it
any temporal advantage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[299:1428](1030390.htm#fr_1427.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p3"></span> *Idiotarum*

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[300:1429](1030390.htm#fr_1428.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p4"></span> [Isa.
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008.md), [1 Pet.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p4.1"></span>[Isa.
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p4.2"></span>;
[1 Pet. 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[300:1430](1030390.htm#fr_1429.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p6"></span> Reading *sive sintœ qui appellantur*,
for which there occur such varieties of reading as these: *sint athletæ
qui appellantur* = those who are called athletes; or *sint æqui
appellantur*; or simply *sint qui appellantur* = whatever name they
bear, whether actors, etc. The term *sintæ*, borrowed from the Greek
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.xvii-p6.1"></span>Σίνται</span> =
*devourers, spoilers*, may have been a word in common use among the
Africans, as the Benedictine editors suggest, for designating some sort
of coarse characters.

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[300:1431](1030390.htm#fr_1430.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p7"></span> *Thymelici*, strictly = the musicians
belonging to the *thymele*, or orchestra.

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[300:1432](1030390.htm#fr_1431.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p8"></span> Reading *incitatis favent*, for which
some <span class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.xvii-p8.1"></span>mss</span>.
give *incitati* = excited themselves, they favor them; and others have
*incitantes* = exciting them, they favor them.

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[300:1433](1030390.htm#fr_1432.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvii-p9"></span> Compare a passage in the
*Confessions*, vi. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](1030391.md)
