[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030049)  [Next](1030051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.v.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—God Alone Creates Those Things
Which are Changed by Magic Art.</span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p2"></span>13. Yet it is not on this account to be
thought that the matter of visible things is subservient to the bidding
of those wicked angels; but rather to that of God, by whom this power is
given, just so far as He, who is unchangeable, determines in His lofty
and spiritual abode to give it. For water and fire and earth are
subservient even to wicked men, who are condemned to the mines, in order
that they may do therewith what they will, but only so far as is
permitted. Nor, in truth, are those evil angels to be called creators,
because by their means the magicians, withstanding the servant of God,
made frogs and serpents; for it was not they who created them. But, in
truth, some hidden seeds of all things that are born corporeally and
visibly, are concealed in the corporeal elements of this world. For
those seeds that are visible now to our eyes from fruits and living
things, are quite distinct from the hidden seeds of those former seeds;
from which, at the bidding of the Creator, the water produced the first
swimming creatures and fowl, and the earth the first buds after their
kind, and the first living creatures after their kind. <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) For neither at that time were those
seeds so drawn forth into products of their several kinds, as that the
power of production was exhausted in those products; but oftentimes,
suitable combinations of circumstances are wanting, whereby they may be
enabled to burst forth and complete their species. For, consider, the
very least shoot is a seed; for, if fitly consigned to the earth, it
produces a tree. But of this shoot there is a yet more subtle seed in
some grain of the same species, and this is visible even to us. But of
this grain also there is further still a seed, which, although we are
unable to see it with our eyes, yet we can conjecture its existence from
our reason; because, except there were some such power in those
elements, there would not so frequently be produced from the earth
things which had not been sown there; nor <span id="page_61">p.
61</span> <span id="iv.i.v.ix-Page_61"></span>yet so many animals,
without any previous commixture of male and female; whether on the land,
or in the water, which yet grow, and by commingling bring forth others,
while themselves sprang up without any union of parents. And certainly
bees do not conceive the seeds of their young by commixture, but gather
them as they lie scattered over the earth with their mouth. <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) For the Creator of these invisible
seeds is the Creator of all things Himself; since whatever comes forth
to our sight by being born, receives the first beginnings of its course
from hidden seeds, and takes the successive increments of its proper
size and its distinctive forms from these as it were original rules. As
therefore we do not call parents the creators of men, nor farmers the
creators of corn,—although it is by the outward application of their
actions that the power <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) of God
operates within for the creating these things;—so it is not right to
think not only the bad but even the good angels to be creators, if,
through the subtilty of their perception and body, they know the seeds
of things which to us are more hidden, and scatter them secretly through
fit temperings of the elements, and so furnish opportunities of
producing things, and of accelerating their increase. But neither do the
good angels do these things, except as far as God commands, nor do the
evil ones do them wrongfully, except as far as He righteously permits.
For the malignity of the wicked one makes his own will wrongful; but the
power to do so, he receives rightfully, whether for his own punishment,
or, in the case of others, for the punishment of the wicked, or for the
praise of the good.

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p6"></span>14. Accordingly, the Apostle Paul,
distinguishing God’s creating and forming within, from the operations of
the creature which are applied from without, and drawing a similitude
from agriculture, says, “I planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the
increase.” <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) As, therefore, in the
case of spiritual life itself, no one except God can work righteousness
in our minds, yet men also are able to preach the gospel as an outward
means, not only the good in sincerity, but also the evil in
pretence; <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) so in the creation of
visible things it is God that works from within; but the exterior
operations, whether of good or bad, of angels or men, or even of any
kind of animal, according to His own absolute power, and to the
distribution of faculties, and the several appetites for things
pleasant, which He Himself has imparted, are applied by Him to that
nature of things wherein He creates all things, in like manner as
agriculture is to the soil. Wherefore I can no more call the bad angels,
evoked by magic arts, the creators of the frogs and serpents, than I can
say that bad men were creators of the corn crop, which I see to have
sprung up through their labor.

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p9"></span>15. Just as Jacob, again, was not the
creator of the colors in the flocks, because he placed the various
colored rods for the several mothers, as they drank, to look at in
conceiving. <span id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) Yet neither were the
cattle themselves creators of the variety of their own offspring,
because the variegated image, impressed through their eyes by the sight
of the varied rods, clave to their soul, but could affect the body that
was animated by the spirit thus affected only through sympathy with this
commingling, so far as to stain with color the tender beginnings of
their offspring. For that they are so affected from themselves, whether
the soul from the body, or the body from the soul, arises in truth from
suitable reasons, which immutably exist in that highest wisdom of God
Himself, which no extent of place contains; and which, while it is
itself unchangeable, yet quits not one even of those things which are
changeable, because there is not one of them that is not created by
itself. For it was the unchangeable and invisible reason of the wisdom
of God, by which all things are created, which caused not rods, but
cattle, to be born from cattle; but that the color of the cattle
conceived should be in any degree influenced by the variety of the rods,
came to pass through the soul of the pregnant cattle being affected
through their eyes from without, and so according to its own measure
drawing inwardly within itself the rule of formation, which it received
from the innermost power of its own Creator. How great, however, may be
the power of the soul in affecting and changing corporeal substance
(although certainly it cannot be called the creator of the body, because
every cause of changeable and sensible substance, and all its <span
id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span id="iv.i.v.ix-Page_62"></span>measure
and number and weight, by which are brought to pass both its being at
all and its being of such and such a nature, arise from the intelligible
and unchangeable life, which is above all things, and which reaches even
to the most distant and earthly things), is a very copious subject, and
one not now necessary. But I thought the act of Jacob about the cattle
should be noticed, for this reason, *viz*. in order that it might be
perceived that, if the man who thus placed those rods cannot be called
the creator of the colors in the lambs and kids; nor yet even the souls
themselves of the mothers, which colored the seeds conceived in the
flesh by the image of variegated color, conceived through the eyes of
the body, so far as nature permitted it; much less can it be said that
the creators of the frogs and serpents were the bad angels, through whom
the magicians of Pharaoh then made them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_381"></span>[60:382](1030050.htm#fr_381) <span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p3"></span> [Gen.
1.20-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p3.1"></span>[Gen. i.
20-25](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_382"></span>[61:383](1030050.htm#fr_382) <span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p4"></span> \[Augustin is not alone in his belief
that the bee is an exception to the dictum; *omne animal ex ovo*. As
late as 1744, Thorley, an English “scientist,” said that “the manner in
which bees propagate their species is entirely hid from the eyes of all
men; and the most strict, diligent, and curious observers and
inquisitors have not been able to discover it. It is a secret, and will
remain a mystery. Dr. Butler says that they do not copulate as other
living creatures do.” (Thorley: Melisselogia. Section viii.) The
observations of Huber and others have disproved this opinion. Some infer
that ignorance of physics proves ignorance of philosophy and theology.
The difference between matter and mind is so great, that erroneous
opinions in one province are compatible with correct ones in the other.
It does not follow that because Augustin had wrong notions about bees,
and no knowledge at all of the steam engine and telegraph, his knowledge
of God and the soul was inferior to that of a modern
materialist.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_383"></span>[61:384](1030050.htm#fr_383) <span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p5"></span> \[The English translator renders
“*virtus*” in its secondary sense of “goodness.” Augustin employs it
here, in its primary sense of “energy,” “force.”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_384"></span>[61:385](1030050.htm#fr_384) <span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p7"></span> [1 Cor.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p7.1"></span>[1
Cor. iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_385"></span>[61:386](1030050.htm#fr_385) <span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p8"></span> [Phil
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p8.1"></span>[Phil. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_386"></span>[61:387](1030050.htm#fr_386) <span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p10"></span> [Gen.
30.41](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#041)<span
id="iv.i.v.ix-p10.1"></span>[Gen. xxx.
41](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#041)<span id="iv.i.v.ix-p10.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1030051)
