[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030140)  [Next](1030142.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—How the Mind Knows Itself, Not
in Part, But as a Whole.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xii.iv-p2"></span>6. What then shall we say? Does that
which knows itself in part, not know itself in part? But it is absurd to
say, that it does not as a whole know what it knows. I do not say, it
knows wholly; but what it knows, it as a whole knows. When therefore it
knows anything about itself, which it can only know as a whole, it knows
itself as a whole. But it does know that itself knows something, while
yet except as a whole it cannot know anything. Therefore it knows itself
as a whole. Further, what in it is so known to itself, as that it lives?
And it cannot at once be a mind, and not live, while it has also
something over and above, *viz*., that it understands: for the souls of
beasts also live, but do not understand. As therefore a mind is a whole
mind, so it lives as a whole. But it knows that it lives. Therefore it
knows itself as a whole. Lastly, when the mind seeks to know itself, it
already knows that it is a mind: otherwise it knows not whether it seeks
itself, and perhaps seeks one thing while intending to seek another. For
it might happen that itself was not a mind, and so, in seeking to know a
mind, that it did not seek to know itself. Wherefore since the mind,
when it seeks to know what mind is, knows that it seeks itself,
certainly it knows that itself is a mind. Furthermore, if it knows this
in itself, that it is a mind, and a whole mind, then it knows itself as
a whole. But suppose it did not know itself to be a mind, but in seeking
itself only knew that it did seek itself. For so, too, it may possibly
seek one thing for another, if it does not know this: but that it may
not seek one thing for another, without doubt it knows what it seeks.
But if it knows what it seeks, and seeks itself, then certainly it knows
itself. What therefore more does it seek? But if it knows itself in
part, but still seeks itself in part, then it seeks not itself, but part
of itself. For when we speak of the mind itself, we speak of it as a
whole. Further, because it knows that it is not yet found by itself as a
whole, it knows how much the whole is. And so it seeks that <span
id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span id="iv.i.xii.iv-Page_138"></span>which
is wanting, as we are wont to seek to recall to the mind something that
has slipped from the mind, but has not altogether gone away from it;
since we can recognize it, when it has come back, to be the same thing
that we were seeking. But how can mind come into mind, as though it were
possible for the mind not to be in the mind? Add to this, that if,
having found a part, it does not seek itself as a whole, yet it as a
whole seeks itself. Therefore as a whole it is present to itself, and
there is nothing left to be sought: for that is wanting which is sought,
not the mind which seeks. Since therefore it as a whole seeks itself,
nothing of it is wanting. Or if it does not as a whole seek itself, but
the part which has been found seeks the part which has not yet been
found then the mind does not seek itself, of which no part seeks itself.
For the part which has been found, does not seek itself; nor yet does
the part itself which has not yet been found, seek itself; since it is
sought by that part which has been already found. Wherefore, since
neither the mind as a whole seeks itself, nor does any part of it seek
itself, the mind does not seek itself at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030142.md)
