[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030009)  [Next](1030011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—What Augustin Requests from His
Readers. The Errors of Readers Dull of Comprehension Not to Be Ascribed
to the Author.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p2"></span> 5. Further let me ask of my reader,
wherever, alike with myself, he is certain, there to go on with me;
wherever, alike with myself, he hesitates, there to join with me in
inquiring; wherever he recognizes himself to be in error, there to
return to me; wherever he recognizes me to be so, there to call me back:
so that we may enter together upon the path of charity, and advance
towards Him of whom it is said, “Seek His face evermore.” <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) And I would make this pious and safe
agreement, in the presence of our Lord God, with all who read my
writings, as well in all other cases as, above all, in the case of those
which inquire into the unity of the Trinity, of the Father and the Son
and the Holy Spirit; because in no other subject is error more
dangerous, or inquiry more laborious, or the discovery of truth more
profitable. If, then, any reader shall say, This is not well said,
because I do not understand it; such an one finds fault with my
language, not with my faith: and it might perhaps in very truth have
been put more clearly; yet no man ever so spoke as to be understood in
all things by all men. Let him, therefore, who finds this fault with my
discourse, see whether he can understand other men who have handled
similar subjects and questions, when he does not understand me: and if
he can, let him put down my book, or even, if he pleases, throw it away;
and let him spend labor and time rather on those whom he
understands. <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) Yet let him not think
on that account that I ought to have been silent, because I have not
been able to express myself so smoothly and clearly to him as those do
whom he understands. For neither do all things, which all men have
written, come into the hands of all. And possibly some, who are capable
of understanding even these our writings, may not find those more lucid
works, and may meet with ours only. And therefore it is useful that many
persons should write many books, differing in style but not in faith,
concerning even the same questions, that the matter itself may reach the
greatest number—some in one way, some in another. But if he who
complains that he has not understood these things has never been able to
comprehend any careful and exact reasonings at all upon such subjects,
let him in that case deal with himself by resolution and study, that he
may <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-Page_20"></span>know better; not with me by
quarrellings and wranglings, that I may hold my peace. Let him, again,
who says, when he reads my book, Certainly I understand what is said,
but it is not true, assert, if he pleases, his own opinion, and refute
mine if he is able. And if he do this with charity and truth, and take
the pains to make it known to me (if I am still alive), I shall then
receive the most abundant fruit of this my labor. And if he cannot
inform myself, most willing and glad should I be that he should inform
those whom he can. Yet, for my part, “I meditate in the law of the
Lord,” <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) if not “day and night,” at
least such short times as I can; and I commit my meditations to writing,
lest they should escape me through forgetfulness; hoping by the mercy of
God that He will make me hold steadfastly all truths of which I feel
certain; “but if in anything I be otherwise minded, that He will himself
reveal even this to me,” <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) whether
through secret inspiration and admonition, or through His own plain
utterances, or through the reasonings of my brethren. This I pray for,
and this my trust and desire I commit to Him, who is sufficiently able
to keep those things which He has given me, and to render those which He
has promised.

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p7"></span>6. I expect, indeed, that some, who
are more dull of understanding, will imagine that in some parts of my
books I have held sentiments which I have not held, or have not held
those which I have. But their error, as none can be ignorant, ought not
to be attributed to me, if they have deviated into false doctrine
through following my steps without apprehending me, whilst I am
compelled to pick my way through a hard and obscure subject: seeing that
neither can any one, in any way, rightly ascribe the numerous and
various errors of heretics to the holy testimonies themselves of the
divine books; although all of them endeavor to defend out of those same
Scriptures their own false and erroneous opinions. The law of Christ,
that is, charity, admonishes me clearly, and commands me with a sweet
constraint, that when men think that I have held in my books something
false which I have not held, and that same falsehood displeases one and
pleases another, I should prefer to be blamed by him who reprehends the
falsehood, rather than praised by him who praises it. For although I,
who never held the error, am not rightly blamed by the former, yet the
error itself is rightly censured; whilst by the latter neither am I
rightly praised, who am thought to have held that which the truth
censures, nor the sentiment itself, which the truth also censures. Let
us therefore essay the work which we have undertaken in the name of the
Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[19:21](1030010.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p3"></span> [Ps.
105.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>[Ps. cv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_21"></span>[19:22](1030010.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p4"></span> \[This request of Augustin to his
reader, involves an admirable rule for authorship generally—the desire,
namely, that truth be attained, be it through himself or through others.
Milton teaches the same, when he says that the author must “study and
love learning for itself, not for lucre, or any other end, but the
service of God and of truth, and perhaps that lasting fame and
perpetuity of praise, which God and good men have consented shall be the
reward of those whose published labors advance the good of
mankind.”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_22"></span>[20:23](1030010.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p5"></span> [Ps.
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>[Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_23"></span>[20:24](1030010.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p6"></span> [Phil.
3.15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>[Phil. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030011)
