[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030007)  [Next](1030009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—This Work is Written Against
Those Who Sophistically Assail the Faith of the Trinity, Through Misuse
of Reason. They Who Dispute Concerning God Err from a Threefold Cause.
Holy Scripture, Removing What is False, Leads Us on by Degrees to Things
Divine. What True Immortality is. We are Nourished by Faith, that We May
Be Enabled to Apprehend Things Divine.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p2"></span>1. <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p2.1"></span>The</span> following dissertation concerning
the Trinity, as the reader ought to be informed, has been written in
order to guard against the sophistries of those who disdain to begin
with faith, and are deceived by a crude and perverse love of reason. Now
one class of such men endeavor to transfer to things incorporeal and
spiritual the ideas they have formed, whether through experience of the
bodily senses, or by natural human wit and diligent quickness, or by the
aid of art, from things corporeal; so as to seek to measure and conceive
of the former by the latter. Others, again, frame whatever sentiments
they may have concerning God according to the nature or affections of
the human mind; and through this error they govern their discourse, in
disputing concerning God, by distorted and fallacious rules. While yet a
third class strive indeed to transcend the whole creation, which
doubtless is changeable, in order to raise their thought to the
unchangeable substance, which is God; but being weighed down by the
burden of mortality, whilst they both would seem to know what they do
not, and cannot know what they would, preclude themselves from entering
the very path of understanding, by an over-bold affirmation of their own
presumptuous judgments; choosing rather not to correct their own opinion
when it is perverse, than to change that which they have once defended.
And, indeed, this is the common disease of all the three classes which I
have mentioned,—*viz.*, both of those who frame their thoughts of God
according to things corporeal, and of those who do so according to the
spiritual creature, such as is the soul; and of those who neither regard
the body nor the spiritual creature, and yet think falsely about God;
and are indeed so much the further from the truth, that nothing can be
found answering to their conceptions, either in the body, or in the made
or created spirit, or in the Creator Himself. For he who thinks, for
instance, that God is white or red, is in error; and yet these things
are found in the body. Again, he who thinks of God as now forgetting and
now remembering, or anything of the same kind, is none the less in
error; and yet these things are found in the mind. But he who thinks
that God is of such power as to have generated Himself, is so much the
<span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-Page_18"></span>more in error, because not only does God
not so exist, but neither does the spiritual nor the bodily creature;
for there is nothing whatever that generates its own existence. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p4"></span>2. In order, therefore, that the human
mind might be purged from falsities of this kind, Holy Scripture, which
suits itself to babes has not avoided words drawn from any class of
things really existing, through which, as by nourishment, our
understanding might rise gradually to things divine and transcendent.
For, in speaking of God, it has both used words taken from things
corporeal, as when it says, “Hide me under the shadow of Thy
wings;” <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) and it has borrowed many
things from the spiritual creature, whereby to signify that which indeed
is not so, but must needs so be said: as, for instance, “I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God;” <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) and, “It
repenteth me that I have made man.” <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)
But it has drawn no words whatever, whereby to frame either figures of
speech or enigmatic sayings, from things which do not exist at all. And
hence it is that they who are shut out from the truth by that third kind
of error are more mischievously and emptily vain than their fellows; in
that they surmise respecting God, what can neither be found in Himself
nor in any creature. For divine Scripture is wont to frame, as it were,
allurements for children from the things which are found in the
creature; whereby, according to their measure, and as it were by steps,
the affections of the weak may be moved to seek those things that are
above, and to leave those things that are below. But the same Scripture
rarely employs those things which are spoken properly of God, and are
not found in any creature; as, for instance, that which was said to
Moses, “I am that I am;” and, “I Am hath sent me to you.” <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) For since both body and soul also are
said in some sense to *be*, Holy Scripture certainly would not so
express itself unless it meant to be understood in some special sense of
the term. So, too, that which the Apostle says, “Who only hath
immortality.” <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) Since the soul also
both is said to be, and is, in a certain manner immortal, Scripture
would not say “only hath,” unless because true immortality is
unchangeableness; which no creature can possess, since it belongs to the
creator alone. <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) So also James says,
“Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down
from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow
of turning.” <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) So also David, “Thou
shall change them, and they shall be changed; but Thou art the
same.” <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p13"></span>3. Further, it is difficult to
contemplate and fully know the substance of God; who fashions things
changeable, yet without any change in Himself, and creates things
temporal, yet without any temporal movement in Himself. And it is
necessary, therefore, to purge our minds, in order to be able to see
ineffably that which is ineffable; whereto not having yet attained, we
are to be nourished by faith, and led by such ways as are more suited to
our capacity, that we may be rendered apt and able to comprehend it. And
hence the Apostle says, that “in Christ indeed are hid all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge;” <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) and yet
has commended Him to us, as to babes in Christ, who, although already
born again by His grace, yet are still carnal and psychical, not by that
divine virtue wherein He is equal to the Father, but by that human
infirmity whereby He was crucified. For he says, “I determined not to
know anything among you, save Jesus Christ and Him crucified;” <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) and then he continues, “And I was with
you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.” And a little after
he says to them, “And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal, <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) even
as unto babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat:
for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye
able.” <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) There are some who are angry
at language of this kind, and think it is used in slight to themselves,
and for the most part prefer rather to believe that they who so speak to
them have nothing to say, than that they themselves cannot understand
what they have said. And sometimes, indeed, we do allege to them, not
certainly that account of the case which they seek in their inquiries
about God,—because neither can they themselves receive it, nor can we
perhaps either apprehend or express it,—but such an account of it as to
demonstrate to them how incapable and utterly unfit they are to
understand that which they require of us. But they, on their parts,
because <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-Page_19"></span>they do not hear what they desire, think
that we are either playing them false in order to conceal our own
ignorance, or speaking in malice because we grudge them knowledge; and
so go away indignant and perturbed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[18:8](1030008.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p3"></span> \[Augustin here puts *generare* for
*creare*—which is rarely the case with him, since the distinction
between generation and creation is of the highest importance in
discussing the doctrine of the Trinity. His thought here is, that God
does not bring himself into being, because he always is. Some have
defined God as the Self-caused: *causa sui*. But the category of cause
and effect is inapplicable to the Infinite Being.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_8"></span>[18:9](1030008.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p5"></span> [Ps.
17.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p5.1"></span>[Ps. xvii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_9"></span>[18:10](1030008.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p6"></span> [Ex.
20.5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p6.1"></span>[Ex. xx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_10"></span>[18:11](1030008.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p7"></span> [Gen.
6.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p7.1"></span>[Gen. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_11"></span>[18:12](1030008.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p8"></span> [Ex.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p8.1"></span>[Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_12"></span>[18:13](1030008.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p9"></span> [1 Tim.
6.16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p9.1"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_13"></span>[18:14](1030008.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p10"></span> \[God’s being is necessary; that of
the creature is contingent. Hence the name I Am, or Jehovah,—which
denotes this difference. God alone has immortality a *parte ante*, as
well as a *parte post*.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_14"></span>[18:15](1030008.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p11"></span> [Jas.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p11.1"></span>[Jas. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_15"></span>[18:16](1030008.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p12"></span> [Ps.
102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p12.1"></span>[Ps.
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_16"></span>[18:17](1030008.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p14"></span> [Col.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p14.1"></span>[Col. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18:18](1030008.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p15.1"></span>[1 Cor.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_18"></span>[18:19](1030008.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p16"></span> \[St. Paul, in this place, denominates
imperfect but true believers “carnal,” in a relative sense, only. They
are comparatively carnal, when contrasted with the law of God, which is
absolutely and perfectly spiritual. ([Rom
7.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p16.1"></span>[Rom. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p16.2"></span>.) They do not, however, belong to the
*class* of carnal or natural men, in distinction from spiritual. The
persons whom the Apostle here denominates “carnal,” are “babes in
Christ.”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_19"></span>[18:20](1030008.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iii.i-p17.1"></span>[1 Cor.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.iii.i-p17.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1030009)
