[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030546)  [Next](1030548.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xxxi-p1"></span> 30. The right question plainly is, not
whether a virgin every way disobedient is to be compared to an obedient
married woman, but a less obedient to a more obedient: forasmuch as that
also of marriage is chastity, and therefore a good, but less than
virginal. Therefore if the one, by so much less in the good of
obedience, as she is greater in the good of chastity, be compared with
the other, which of them is to be preferred that person judges, who in
the first place comparing chastity itself and obedience, sees that
obedience is in a certain way the mother of all virtues. And therefore,
for this reason, there may be obedience without virginity, because
virginity is of counsel, not of precept. But I call that obedience,
whereby precepts are complied with. And, therefore, there may be
obedience to precepts without virginity, but not without chastity. For
it pertains unto chastity, not to commit fornication, not to commit
adultery, to be defiled by no unlawful intercourse: and whoso observe
not these, do contrary to the precepts of God, and on this account are
banished from the virtue of obedience. But there may be vir<span
id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span id="v.ii.xxxi-Page_412"></span>ginity
without obedience, on this account, because it is possible for a woman,
having received the counsel of virginity, and having guarded virginity,
to slight precepts: even as we have known many sacred virgins,
talkative, curious, drunken, litigious, covetous, proud: all which are
contrary to precepts, and slay one, even as Eve herself, by the crime of
disobedience. Wherefore not only is the obedient to be preferred to the
disobedient, but a more obedient married woman to a less obedient
virgin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 31](1030548.md)
