[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030201)  [Next](1030203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—A Difficulty Removed, Which
Lies in the Way of What Has Just Been Said.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p2"></span>But far be it from us to think, that
while the nature of the soul is immortal, and from the first beginning
of its creation thenceforth never ceases to be, yet that that which is
the best thing it has should not endure for ever with its own
immortality. Yet what is there in its nature as created, better than
that it is made after the image of its Creator? <span
id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871.md) We must find then what may be
fittingly called the image of God, not in the holding, contemplating,
and loving that faith which will not exist always, but in that which
will exist always.

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p4"></span>5. Shall we then scrutinize somewhat
more carefully and deeply whether the case is really thus? For it may be
said that this trinity does not perish even when faith itself shall have
passed away; because, as now we both hold it by memory, and discern it
by thought, and love it by will; so then also, when we shall both hold
in memory, and shall recollect, that we once had it, and shall unite
these two by the third, namely will, the same trinity will still
continue. Since, if it have left in its passage as it were no trace in
us, doubtless we shall not have ought of it even in our memory, whereto
to recur when recollecting it as past, and by the third, *viz*. purpose,
coupling both these, to wit, what was in our memory though we were not
thinking about it, and what is formed thence by conception. But he who
speaks thus, does not perceive, that when we hold, see, and love in
ourselves our present faith, we are concerned with a different trinity
as now existing, from that trinity which will exist, when we shall
contemplate by recollection, not the faith itself, but as it were the
imagined trace of it laid up in the memory, and shall unite by the will,
as by a third, these two things, *viz*. that which was in the memory of
him who retains, and that which is impressed thence upon the vision of
the mind of him who recollects. And that we may understand this, let us
take an example from things corporeal, of which we have sufficiently
spoken in the eleventh book. <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872.md) For
as we ascend from lower to higher things, or pass inward from outer to
inner things, we first find a trinity in the bodily object which is
seen, and in the vision of the seer, which, when he sees it, is informed
thereby, and in the purpose of the will which combines both. Let us
assume a trinity like this, when the faith which is now in ourselves is
so established in our memory as the bodily object we spoke of was in
place, from which faith is formed the conception in recollection, as
from that bodily object was formed the vision of the beholder; and to
these two, to complete the trinity, will is to be reckoned as a third,
which connects and combines the faith established in the memory, and a
sort of effigy of that faith impressed upon the vision of recollection;
just as in that trinity of corporeal vision, the form of the bodily
object that is seen, and the corresponding form wrought in the vision of
the beholder, are combined by the purpose of the will. Suppose, then,
that this bodily object which was beheld was dissolved and had perished,
and that nothing at all of it remained anywhere, to the vision of which
the gaze might have recourse; are we then to say, that because the image
of the bodily object thus now past and done with remains in the memory,
whence to form the conception in recollecting, and to have the two
united by will as a third, therefore it is the same trinity as that
former one, when the appearance of the bodily object posited in place
was seen? Certainly not, but altogether a different one: for, not to say
that that was from without, while this is from within; the former
certainly was produced by the appearance of a present bodily object, the
latter by the image of that object now past. So, too, in the case of
which we are now treating, to illustrate which we have thought good to
adduce this example, the faith which is even now in our mind, as that
bodily object was in place, while held, looked at, loved, produces a
sort of trinity; but that trinity will exist no more, when this faith in
the mind, like that bodily object in place, shall no longer exist. But
that which will then exist, when we shall remember it to have been, but
not now to be, in us, will doubtless be a different one. For that which
now is, is wrought by the thing itself, actually present and attached to
the mind of one who believes; but that which shall then be, will be
wrought by the imagination of a past thing left in the memory of one who
recollects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_871"></span>[185:872](1030202.htm#fr_871.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p3"></span> [Gen.
1.27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p3.1"></span>[Gen. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_872"></span>[185:873](1030202.htm#fr_872.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iii-p5"></span> Cc. 2 sq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030203.md)
