[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030156)  [Next](1030158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 7.—There is Another Trinity in
the Memory of Him Who Thinks Over Again What He Has Seen.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vii-p2"></span>11. But yet again, take the case of
another trinity, more inward indeed than that which is in things
sensible, and in the senses, but which is yet conceived from thence;
while now it is no longer the sense of the body that is informed from
the body, but the eye of the mind that is informed from the memory,
since the species of the body which we perceived from without has
inhered in the memory itself. And that species, which is in the memory,
we call the quasi-parent of that which is wrought in the phantasy of one
who conceives. For it was in the memory also, before we conceived it,
just as the body was in place also before we \[sensuously\] perceived
it, in order that vision might take place. But when it is conceived,
then from that form which the memory retains, there is copied in the
mind’s eye (*acie*) of him who conceives, and by remembrance is formed,
that species, which is the quasi-offspring of that which the memory
retains. But neither is the one a true parent, nor the other a true
offspring. For the mind’s vision which is formed from memory when we
think anything by recollection, does not proceed from that species which
we remember as seen; since we could not indeed have remembered those
things, unless we had seen them; yet the mind’s eye, which is informed
by the recollection, existed also before we saw the body that we
remember; and therefore how much more before we committed it to memory?
Although therefore the form which is wrought in the mind’s eye of him
who remembers, is wrought <span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="iv.i.xiii.vii-Page_151"></span>from that form which is in the
memory; yet the mind’s eye itself does not exist from thence, but
existed before it. And it follows, that if the one is not a true parent,
neither is the other a true offspring. But both that quasi-parent and
that quasi-offspring suggest something, whence the inner and truer
things may appear more practically and more certainly.

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vii-p3"></span>12. Further, it is more difficult to
discern clearly, whether the will which connects the vision to the
memory is not either the parent or the offspring of some one of them;
and the likeness and equality of the same nature and substance cause
this difficulty of distinguishing. For it is not possible to do in this
case, as with the sense that is formed from without (which is easily
discerned from the sensible body, and again the will from both), on
account of the difference of nature which is mutually in all three, and
of which we have treated sufficiently above. For although this trinity,
of which we at present speak, is introduced into the mind from without;
yet it is transacted within, and there is no part of it outside of the
nature of the mind itself. In what way, then, can it be demonstrated
that the will is neither the quasi-parent, nor the quasi-offspring,
either of the corporeal likeness which is contained in the memory, or of
that which is copied thence in recollecting; when it so unites both in
the act of conceiving, as that they appear singly as one, and cannot be
discerned except by reason? It is then first to be considered that there
cannot be any will to remember, unless we retain in the recesses of the
memory either the whole, or some part, of that thing which we wish to
remember. For the very will to remember cannot arise in the case of a
thing which we have forgotten altogether and absolutely; since we have
already remembered that the thing which we wish to remember is or has
been, in our memory. For example, if I wish to remember what I supped on
yesterday, either I have already remembered that I did sup, or if not
yet this, at least I have remembered something about that time itself,
if nothing else; at all events, I have remembered yesterday, and that
part of yesterday in which people usually sup, and what supping is. For
if I had not remembered anything at all of this kind, I could not wish
to remember what I supped on yesterday. Whence we may perceive that the
will of remembering proceeds, indeed, from those things which are
retained in the memory, with the addition also of those which, by the
act of discerning, are copied thence through recollection; that is, from
the combination of something which we have remembered, and of the vision
which was thence wrought, when we remembered, in the mind’s eye of him
who thinks. But the will itself which unites both requires also some
other thing, which is, as it were, close at hand, and adjacent to him
who remembers. There are, then, as many trinities of this kind as there
are remembrances; because there is no one of them wherein there are not
these three things, *viz*. that which was stored up in the memory also
before it was thought, and that which takes place in the conception when
this is discerned, and the will that unites both, and from both and
itself as a third, completes one single thing. Or is it rather that we
so recognize some one trinity in this kind, as that we are to speak
generally, of whatever corporeal species lie hidden in the memory, as of
a single unity, and again of the general vision of the mind which
remembers and conceives such things, as of a single unity, to the
combination of which two there is to be joined as a third the will that
combines them, that this whole may be a certain unity made up from
three?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](1030158)
