[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030097)  [Next](1030099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.viii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.viii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—The Same Argument
Continued.</span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.iv-p2"></span>6. For in like manner the virtues
which are in the human mind, although each has its own several and
different meaning, yet are in no way mutually separable; so that, for
instance, whosoever were equal in courage, are equal also in prudence,
and temperance, and justice. For if you say that such and such men are
equal in courage, but that one of them is greater in prudence, it
follows that the courage of the other is less prudent, and so neither
are they equal in courage, since the courage of the former is more
prudent. And so you will find it to be the case with the other virtues,
if you consider them one by one. For the question is not of the strength
of the body, but of the courage of <span id="page_100">p. 100</span>
<span id="iv.i.viii.iv-Page_100"></span>the mind. How much more
therefore is this the case in that unchangeable and eternal substance,
which is incomparably more simple than the human mind is? Since, in the
human mind, to be is not the same as to be strong, or prudent, or just,
or temperate; for a mind can exist, and yet have none of these virtues.
But in God to be is the same as to be strong, or to be just, or to be
wise, or whatever is said of that simple multiplicity, or multifold
simplicity, whereby to signify His substance. Wherefore, whether we say
God of God in such way that this name belongs to each, yet not so that
both together are two Gods, but one God; for they are in such way united
with each other, as according to the apostle’s testimony may take place
even in diverse and differing substances; for both the Lord alone is a
Spirit, and the spirit of a man alone is assuredly a spirit; yet, if it
cleave to the Lord, “it is one spirit:” how much more there, where there
is an absolutely inseparable and eternal union, so that He may not seem
absurdly to be called as it were the Son of both, when He is called the
Son of God, if that which is called God is only said of both together.
Or perhaps it is, that whatever is said of God so as to indicate His
substance, is not said except of both together, nay of the Trinity
itself together? Whether therefore it be this or that (which needs a
closer inquiry), it is enough for the present to see from what has been
said, that the Son is in no respect equal with the Father, if He is
found to be unequal in anything which has to do with signifying His
substance, as we have already shown. But the apostle has said that He is
equal. Therefore the Son is equal with the Father in all things, and is
of one and the same substance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030099)
