[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030442)  [Next](1030444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xvii-p1"></span> 16. But it will be said, the truth is
with some few; therefore you already know what it is, if you know with
whom it is. Said I not a little above, that we were in search of it as
unlearned men? But if from the very force of truth you conjecture that
few possess it, but know not who they are; what if it is thus, that
there are so few who know the truth, as that they hold the multitude by
their authority, whence the small number may set itself free, and, as it
were, strain itself <span id="fr_1728"></span>[1729](#fn_1728) forth
into those secrets? Do we not see how few attain the highest eloquence,
whereas through the whole world the schools of rhetoricians are
resounding with troops of young men? What, do they, as many as desire to
turn out good orators, alarmed at the multitude of the unlearned, think
that they are to bestow their labor on the orations of Cæcilius, or
Erucius, rather than those of Tullius? All aim at these, which are
confirmed by authority of our forefathers. Crowds of unlearned persons
essay to learn the same, which by the few learned are received as to be
learned: yet very few attain, yet fewer practise, the very fewest
possible become famous. What, if true religion be some such thing? What
if a multitude of unlearned persons attend the Churches, and yet that be
no proof, that therefore no one is made perfect by these mysteries? And
yet, if they who studied eloquence were as few as the few who are
eloquent, our parents would never believe that we ought to be committed
to such masters. Whereas, then, we have been called to these studies by
a multitude, which is numerous in that portion of it which is made up of
the unlearned, so as to become enamored of that which few can attain
unto; why are we unwill<span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="iv.vi.xvii-Page_355"></span>ing to be in the same case in religion,
which perhaps we despise with great danger to our soul? For if the
truest and purest worship of God, although it be found with a few, be
yet found with those, with whom a multitude albeit wrapped up in lusts,
and removed far from purity of understanding, agrees; (and who can doubt
that this may happen?) I ask, if one were to charge us with rashness and
folly, that we seek not diligently with them who teach it, that, which
we are greatly anxious to discover, what can we answer? \[Shall we
say,\] I was deterred by numbers? Why from the pursuit of liberal arts,
which hardly bring any profit to this present life; why from search
after money? Why from attaining unto honor; why, in fine, from gaining
and keeping good health; lastly, why from the very aim at a happy life;
whereas all are engaged in these, few excel; were you deterred by no
numbers?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1728"></span>[354:1729](1030443.htm#fr_1728) <span
id="iv.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xvii-p2"></span> *Eliquare*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 17](1030444)
