[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030817)  [Next](1030819.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xvi-p1"></span> 15. Similar to this is also that
condition when persons, with their senses more profoundedly in abeyance
than is the case in sleep, are occupied with the like visions. For to
them also appear images of quick and dead; but then, when they return to
their senses, whatever dead they say they have seen are thought to have
been verily with them: and they who hear these things pay no heed to the
circumstance that there were seen in like manner the images of certain
living persons, absent and unconscious. A certain man by name Curma, of
the municipal town of Tullium, which is hard by Hippo, a poor member of
the Curia, <span id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743.md) scarcely competent
to serve the office of a duumvir <span
id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744.md) of that place, and a mere rustic,
being ill, and all his senses entranced, lay all but dead for several
days: a very slight breathing in his nostrils, which on applying the
hand was just felt, and barely betokened that he lived, was all that
kept him from being buried for dead. Not a limb did he stir, nothing did
he take in the way of sustenance, neither in the eyes nor in any other
bodily sense was he sensible of any annoyance that impinged upon them.
Yet he was seeing many things like as in a dream, which, when at last
after a great many days he woke up, he told that he had seen. And first,
presently after he opened his eyes, Let some one go, said he, to the
house of Curma the smith, and see what is doing there. And when some one
had gone thither, the smith was found to have died in that moment that
the other had come back to his senses, and, it might almost be said,
revived from death. Then, as those who stood by eagerly listened, he
told them how the other had been ordered to be had up, when he himself
was dismissed; and that he had heard it said in that place from which he
had returned, that it was not Curma of the Curia, but Curma the smith
who had been ordered to be fetched to that place of the dead. Well, in
these dream-like visions of his, among those deceased persons whom he
saw handled according to the diversity of their merits, he recognized
also some whom he had known when alive. That they were the very persons
themselves I might perchance have believed, had he not in the course of
this seeming dream of his seen also some who are alive even to this
present time, namely, some clerks of his district, by whose presbyter
there he was told to be baptized at Hippo by me, which thing he said had
also taken place. So then he had seen a presbyter, clerks, myself,
persons, to wit, not yet dead, in this vision in which he afterwards
also saw dead persons. Why may he not be thought to have seen these last
in the same way as he saw us? that is, both the one sort, and the other,
absent and unconscious, and consequently not the persons themselves, but
similitudes of them just as of the places? He saw, namely, both a plot
of ground where was that presbyter with the clerks, and Hippo where he
was by me seemingly baptized: in which spots assuredly he was not, when
he seemed to himself to be there. For what was at that time going on
there, he knew not: which, without doubt, he would have known if he had
verily been there. The sights beheld, therefore, were those which are
not presented in the things themselves as they are, but shadowed forth
in a sort of images of the things. In fine, after much that he saw, he
narrated how he had, moreover, been led into Paradise, and how it was
there said to him, when he was thence dismissed to return to his own
family, “Go, be baptized, if thou wilt be in this place of the blessed.”
Thereupon, being admonished to be baptized by me, he said it was done
already. He who was talking with him replied, “Go, be truly baptized;
for that thou didst but see in the vision.” After this he re<span
id="page_547">p. 547</span> <span id="v.ix.xvi-Page_547"></span>covered,
went his way to Hippo. Easter was now approaching, he gave his name
among the other Competents, alike with very many unknown to us; nor did
he care to make known the vision to me or to any of our people. He was
baptized, at the close of the holy days he returned to his own place.
After the space of two years or more, I learned the whole matter; first,
through a certain friend of mine and his at my own table, while we were
talking about some such matters: then I took it up, and made the man in
his own person tell me the story, in the presence of some honest
townsmen of his attesting the same, both concerning his marvellous
illness, how he lay all but dead for many days, and about that other
Curma the smith, what I have mentioned above, and about all these
matters; which, while he was telling me, they recalled to mind, and
assured me, that they had also at that time heard them from his lips.
Wherefore, just as he saw his own baptism, and myself, and Hippo, and
the basilica, and the baptistery, not in the very realities, but in a
sort of similitudes of the things; and so likewise certain other living
persons, without consciousness on the part of the same living persons:
then why not just so those dead persons also, without consciousness on
the part of the same dead persons?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[546:2744](1030818.htm#fr_2743.md) <span
id="v.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xvi-p2"></span> *Curialis*

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[546:2745](1030818.htm#fr_2744.md) <span
id="v.ix.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xvi-p3"></span> *Duumviralitius*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 16](1030819.md)
