[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030339)  [Next](1030341.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xcii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xcii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xcii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 90.—If There Be Differences and
Inequalities Among the Bodies of Those Who Rise Again, There Shall Be
Nothing Offensive or Disproportionate in Any.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xcii-p2"></span>Nor does it necessarily follow that
there shall be differences of stature among those who rise again,
because they were of different statures during life; nor is it certain
that the lean shall rise again in their former leanness, and the fat in
their former fatness. But if it is part of the Creator’s design that
each should preserve his own peculiarities of feature, and retain a
recognizable likeness to his former self, while in regard to other
bodily advantages all should be equal, then the material of which each
is composed may be so modified that none of it shall be lost, and that
any defect may be supplied by Him who can create at His will out of
nothing. But if in the bodies of those who rise again there shall be a
well-ordered inequality, such as there is in the voices that make up a
full harmony, then the material of each man’s body shall be so dealt
with that it shall form a man fit for the assemblies of the angels, and
one who shall bring nothing among them to jar upon their sensibilities.
And assuredly nothing that is unseemly shall be there; but whatever
shall be there shall be graceful and becoming: for if anything is not
seemly, neither shall it be.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 91](1030341.md)
