[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030099)  [Next](1030101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.viii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.viii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—How God is a Substance Both
Simple and Manifold.</span>

<span id="iv.i.viii.vi-p2"></span>8. But if it is asked how that
substance is both simple and manifold: consider, first, why the creature
is manifold, but in no way really simple. And first, all that is body is
composed certainly of parts; so that therein one part is greater,
another less, and the whole is greater than any part whatever or how
great soever. For the heaven and the earth are parts of the whole bulk
of the world; and the earth alone, and the heaven alone, is composed of
innumerable parts; and its third part is less than the remainder, and
the half of it is less than the whole; and the whole body of the world,
which is usually <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="iv.i.viii.vi-Page_101"></span>called by its two parts, *viz*. the
heaven and the earth, is certainly greater than the heaven alone or the
earth alone. And in each several body, size is one thing, color another,
shape another; for the same color and the same shape may remain with
diminished size; and the same shape and the same size may remain with
the color changed; and the same shape not remaining, yet the thing may
be just as great, and of the same color. And whatever other things are
predicated together of body can be changed either all together, or the
larger part of them without the rest. And hence the nature of body is
conclusively proved to be manifold, and in no respect simple. The
spiritual creature also, that is, the soul, is indeed the more simple of
the two if compared with the body; but if we omit the comparison with
the body, it is manifold, and itself also not simple. For it is on this
account more simple than the body, because it is not diffused in bulk
through extension of place, but in each body, it is both whole in the
whole, and whole in each several part of it; and, therefore, when
anything takes place in any small particle whatever of the body, such as
the soul can feel, although it does not take place in the whole body,
yet the whole soul feels it, since the whole soul is not unconscious of
it. But, nevertheless, since in the soul also it is one thing to be
skillful, another to be indolent, another to be intelligent, another to
be of retentive memory; since cupidity is one thing, fear another, joy
another, sadness another; and since things innumerable, and in
innumerable ways, are to be found in the nature of the soul, some
without others, and some more, some less; it is manifest that its nature
is not simple, but manifold. For nothing simple is changeable, but every
creature is changeable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030101)
