[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030455)  [Next](1030457) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxx-p1"></span> 29. Therefore this so vast difficulty,
since our enquiry is about religion, God alone can remedy: nor indeed,
unless we believe both that He is, and that He helps men’s minds, ought
we even to enquire after true religion itself. For what I ask do we with
so great endeavor desire to search out? What do we wish to attain unto?
Whither do we long to arrive? Is it at that which we believe not exists
or pertains to us? Nothing is more perverse than such a state of mind.
Then, when you would not dare to ask of me a kindness, or at any rate
would be shameless in daring, come you to demand the discovery of
religion, when you think that God neither exists, nor, if He exist, hath
any care for us? What, if it be so great a matter, as that it cannot be
found out, unless it be sought carefully and with all our might? What,
if the very extreme difficulty of discovery be an exercise for the mind
of the inquirer, in order to receive what shall be discovered? For what
more pleasant and familiar to our eyes than this light? And yet men are
unable after long darkness to hear and endure it. What more suited to
the body exhausted by sickness than meat and drink? And yet we see that
persons who are recovering are restrained and checked, lest they dare to
commit themselves to the fullness of persons in health, and so bring to
pass by means of their very food their return to that disease which used
to reject it. I speak of persons who are recovering. What, the very
sick, do we not urge them to take something? Wherein assuredly they
would not with so great discomfort obey us, if they believed not that
they would recover from that disease. When then will you give yourself
up to a search very full of pains and labor? When will you have the
heart to impose upon yourself so great care and trouble as the matter
deserves, when you believe not in the existence of that which you are in
search of? Rightly therefore hath it been ordained by the majesty of the
Catholic system of teaching, that they who approach unto religion be
before all things persuaded to have faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 30](1030457)
