[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030386)  [Next](1030388.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xiv"></span><span id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-Page_296"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—Of the Remedy for the Fourth
Source of Weariness.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p2"></span>18. But in good truth it is a serious
demand to make upon us, to continue discoursing on to the set limit when
we fail to see our hearer in any degree moved; whether it be that, under
the restraints of the awe of religion, he has not the boldness to
signify his approval by voice or by any movement of his body, or that he
is kept back by the modesty proper to man, <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410.md) or that he does not understand our
sayings, or that he counts them of no value. Since, then, this must be a
matter of uncertainty to us, as we cannot discern his mind, it becomes
our duty in our discourse to make trial of all things which may be of
any avail in stirring him up and drawing him forth as it were from his
place of concealment. For that sort of fear which is excessive, and
which obstructs the declaration of his judgment, ought to be dispelled
by the force of kindly exhortation; and by bringing before him the
consideration of our brotherly affinity, we should temper his reverence
for us; and by questioning him, we should ascertain whether he
understands what is addressed to him; and we should impart to him a
sense of confidence, so that he may give free expression to any
objection which suggests itself to him. We should at the same time ask
him whether he has already listened to such themes on some previous
occasion, and whether perchance they fail to move him now in consequence
of their being to him like things well known and commonplace. And we
ought to shape our course in accordance with his answer, so as either to
speak in a simpler style and with greater detail of explanation, or to
refute some antagonistic opinion, or, instead of attempting any more
diffuse exposition of the subjects which are known to him, to give a
brief summary of these, and to select some of those matters which are
handled in a mystical manner in the holy books, and especially in the
historical narrative, the unfolding and setting forth of which may make
our addresses more attractive. But if the man is of a very sluggish
disposition, and if he is senseless, and without anything in common with
all such sources of pleasure, then we must simply bear with him in a
compassionate spirit; and, after briefly going over other points, we
ought to impress upon him, in a manner calculated to inspire him with
awe, the truths which are most indispensable on the subject of the unity
of the Catholic Church, <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411.md) on
that of temptation, on that of a Christian conversation in view of the
future judgment; and we ought rather to address ourselves to God for him
than address much to him concerning God.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p5"></span>19. It is likewise a frequent occurrence
that one who at first listened to us with all readiness, becomes
exhausted either by the effort of hearing or by standing, and now no
longer commends what is said, but gapes and yawns, and even unwillingly
exhibits a disposition to depart. When we observe that, it becomes our
duty to refresh his mind by saying something seasoned with an honest
cheerfulness and adapted to the matter which is being discussed, or
something of a very wonderful and amazing order, or even, it may be,
something of a painful and mournful nature. Whatever we thus say may be
all the better if it affects himself more immediately, so that the quick
sense of self-concern may keep his attention on the alert. At the same
time, however, it should not be of the kind to offend his spirit of
reverence by any harshness attaching to it; but it should be of a nature
fitted rather to conciliate him by the friendliness which it breathes.
Or else, we should relieve him by accommodating him with a seat,
although unquestionably matters will be better ordered if from the
outset, whenever that can be done with propriety, he sits and listens.
And indeed in certain of the churches beyond the sea, with a far more
considerate regard to the fitness of things, not only do the prelates
sit when they address the people, but they also themselves put down
seats for the people, lest any person of enfeebled strength should
become exhausted by standing, and thus have his mind diverted from the
most wholesome purport (of the discourse), or even be under the
necessity of departing. And yet it is one thing if it be simply some one
out of a great multitude who withdraws in order to recruit his strength,
he being also already under the obligations which result from
participation in the sacraments; and it is quite another thing if the
person withdrawing is one (inasmuch as it is usually the case in these
circumstances that the man is unavoidably urged to that course by the
fear that he should even fall, overcome by internal weakness) who has to
be initiated in the first sacraments; for a person in this position is
at once restrained by the sense of shame from stating the reason of his
going, and not permitted to stand through the force of his weakness.
This I speak from experience. For this was the case with a certain
individual, a man from the country, when I was instructing him
catechetically: and from <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-Page_297"></span>his instance I have learned that this
kind of thing is carefully to be guarded against. For who can endure our
arrogance when we fail to make men who are our brethren, <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412.md) or even those who are not yet in
that relation to us (for our solicitude then should be all the greater
to get them to become our brethren), to be seated in our presence,
seeing that even a woman sat as she listened to our Lord Himself, in
whose service the angels stand alert? <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413.md) Of course if the address is to be
but short, or if the place is not well adapted for sitting, they should
listen standing. But that should be the case only when there are many
hearers, and when they are not to be formally admitted <span
id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414.md) at the time. For when the audience
consists only of one or two, or a few, who have come with the express
purpose of being made Christians, there is a risk in speaking to them
standing. Nevertheless, supposing that we have once begun in that
manner, we ought at least, whenever we observe signs of weariness on the
part of the hearer, to offer him the liberty of being seated; nay more,
we should urge him by all means to sit down, and we ought to drop some
remark calculated at once to refresh him and to banish from his mind any
anxiety which may have chanced to break in upon him and draw off his
attention. For inasmuch as the reasons why he remains silent and
declines to listen cannot be certainly known to us, now that he is
seated we may speak to some extent against the incidence of thoughts
about worldly affairs, delivering ourselves either in the cheerful
spirit to which I have already adverted, or in a serious vein; so that,
if these are the particular anxieties which have occupied his mind, they
may be made to give way as if indicted by name: while, on the other
hand, supposing them not to be the special causes (of the loss of
interest), and supposing him to be simply worn out with listening, his
attention will be relieved of the pressure of weariness when we address
to him some unexpected and extraordinary strain of remark on these
subjects, in the mode of which I have spoken, as if they were the
particular anxieties,—for indeed we are simply ignorant (of the true
causes). But let the remark thus made be short, especially considering
that it is thrown in out of order, lest the very medicine even increase
the malady of weariness which we desire to relieve; and, at the same
time, we should go on rapidly with what remains, and promise and present
the prospect of a conclusion nearer than was looked for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[296:1411](1030387.htm#fr_1410.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p3"></span> Or = by the reverence which he feels
for the man: *humana verecundia*.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[296:1412](1030387.htm#fr_1411.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p4"></span> The text gives simply *Catholicæ*. One
<span class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>ms</span>. has
*Catholicæ fidei* = the Catholic faith. But it is most natural to supply
*Ecclesiæ*.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[297:1413](1030387.htm#fr_1412.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p6"></span> Instead of *viros fratres*, some <span
class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> read *veros
fratres* = our genuine brethren.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[297:1414](1030387.htm#fr_1413.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p7"></span> [Luke
10.39](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Luke x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#039.md)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[297:1415](1030387.htm#fr_1414.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p8"></span> *Initiandi* = initiated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1030388.md)
