[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030729)  [Next](1030731.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xlii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xlii-p1"></span> 41. Either then we are to eschew lies by
right doing, or to confess them by repenting: but not, while they
unhappily abound in our living, to make them more by teaching also. But
let him who thinks this, choose out whereby he may help his fellow man
being in peril, to what safety he will, what kinds soever of lies;
provided yet even of such men we obtain our demand, that upon no cause
must we be carried on to false-swearing and to blaspheming. These
wickednesses at least let us judge either greater than deeds of
lewdness, or certainly not smaller. For indeed it is worth thinking of,
that very often men, where they suspect them of adultery, challenge
their wives to an oath: which surely they would not do, unless they
believed that even they who were not afraid to perpetrate adultery,
might be afraid of perjury. Because in fact also some lewd women who
were not afraid by unlawful embraces to deceive their husbands, have
been afraid to call God deceitfully to witness unto those same husbands
whom they had deceived. What cause then can there be, that a chaste and
religious person should be unwilling by adultery to help a man to
baptism, yet be willing to help him by perjury, which even adulterers
are wont to dread? And then, if it be shocking to do this by perjuring
one’s self, how much rather by blaspheming? Far be it then from a
Christian to deny and blaspheme Christ, that he may make another man a
Christian; and by losing himself seek to find one, whom, if he teach him
such things, he may cause to be lost when found. The book then which is
called “the Pound,” thou must in this method refute and destroy; namely,
that head of it in which they dogmatize that for the purpose of
concealing religion a lie may be told, this thou shall understand must
be the first to be amputated; in such manner, that their testimonies by
which they labor to advance the Holy Books as patrons of their lies,
thou must demonstrate partly not to be lies, partly, even those which
are such, to be not meet to be imitated: and if infirmity usurps to
herself thus much, that somewhat shall be venially permitted unto her
which truth approve not, yet that thou unshakenly hold and defend, that
in divine religion it is at no time whatever right to tell a lie. And,
as for concealed heretics, that, as we are not to find out concealed
adulterers by committing of adulteries, nor murderers by committing of
murders, nor practisers of black arts <span
id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474.md) by practising of black arts, so
neither must we seek to find out liars by telling lies or blasphemers by
blaspheming: according to the reasonings which we have in this volume so
copiously set forth, that unto the goal of the same, which we fixed to
be in this place, we have with difficulty come at last.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[500:2475](1030730.htm#fr_2474.md) <span
id="v.vi.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xlii-p2"></span> *Maleficos*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Work of Monks.](1030731.md)
