[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030521)  [Next](1030523) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span> 5. Also the question is wont to be asked,
when a male and female, neither the one the husband, nor the other the
wife, of any other, come together, not for the begetting of children,
but, by reason of incontinence, for the mere sexual intercourse, there
being between them this faith, that neither he do it with any other
woman, nor she with any other man, whether it is to be called
marriage. <span id="fr_1943"></span>[1944](#fn_1943) And perhaps this
may, not without reason, be called marriage, <span
id="fr_1944"></span>[1945](#fn_1944) if it shall be the resolution <span
id="fr_1945"></span>[1946](#fn_1945) of both parties until the death of
one, and if the begetting of children, although they came not together
for that cause, yet they shun not, so as either to be unwilling to have
children born to them, or even by some evil work to use means that they
be not born. But, if either both, or one, of these be wanting, I find
not how we can call it marriage. For, if a man should take unto him any
one for a time, until he find another worthy either of his honors or of
his means, to marry as his compeer; in his soul itself he is an
adulterer, and that not with her whom he is desirous of finding, but
with her, with whom he so lies, as not to have with her the partnership
of a husband. Whence she also herself, knowing and willing this,
certainly acts unchastely in having intercourse with him, with whom she
has not the compact of a wife. However, if she keep to him faith of bed,
and after he shall have married, have no thought of marriage herself,
and prepare to contain herself altogether from any such work, perhaps I
should not dare lightly to call her an adulteress; but who shall say
that she sins not, when he is aware that she has intercourse with a man,
not being his wife? But further, if from that intercourse, so far as
pertains to herself, she has no wish but for sons, and suffers unwilling
whatever she suffers beyond the cause of begetting; there are many
matrons to whom she is to be preferred; who, although they are not
adulteresses, yet force their husbands, for the most part also wishing
to exercise continence, to pay the due of the flesh, not through desire
of children, but through glow of lust making an intemperate use of their
very right; in whose marriages, however, this very thing, that they are
married, is a good. For for this purpose are they married, that the lust
being brought under a lawful bond, should not float at large without
form and loose; having of itself weakness of flesh that cannot be
curbed, but of marriage fellowship of faith that cannot be dissolved; of
itself encroachment of immoderate intercourse, of marriage a way of
chastely begetting. For, although it be shameful to wish to use a
husband for purposes of lust, yet it is honorable to be unwilling to
have intercourse save with an husband, and not to give birth to children
save from a husband. There are also men incontinent to that degree, that
they spare not their wives even when pregnant. Therefore whatever that
is immodest, shameless, base, married persons do one with another, is
the sin of the persons, not the fault of marriage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[401:1944](1030522.htm#fr_1943) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p2"></span> *Nuptiœ*

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[401:1945](1030522.htm#fr_1944) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p3"></span> *Connubium*

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[401:1946](1030522.htm#fr_1945) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p4"></span> *Placuerit*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 6](1030523)
