[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030014)  [Next](1030016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 8.—The Texts of Scripture
Explained Respecting the Subjection of the Son to the Father, Which Have
Been Misunderstood. Christ Will Not So Give Up the Kingdom to the
Father, as to Take It Away from Himself. The Beholding Him is the
Promised End of All Actions. The Holy Spirit is Sufficient to Our
Blessedness Equally with the Father.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p2"></span>15. As for that which the apostle
says, “And when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then shall the Son
also Himself be subject unto Him that put all things under Him:” either
the text has been so turned, lest any one should think that the
“fashion” <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) of Christ, which He took
according to the human creature, was to be transformed hereafter into
the Divinity, or (to express it more precisely) the Godhead itself, who
is not a creature, but is the unity of the Trinity,—a nature
incorporeal, and unchangeable, and consubstantial, and co-eternal with
itself; or if <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-Page_25"></span>any one contends, as some have
thought, that the text, “Then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto
Him that put all things under Him,” is so turned in order that one may
believe that very “subjection” to be a change and conversion hereafter
of the creature into the substance or essence itself of the Creator,
that is, that that which had been the substance of a creature shall
become the substance of the Creator;—such an one at any rate admits
this, of which in truth there is no possible doubt, that this had not
yet taken place, when the Lord said, “My Father is greater than I.” For
He said this not only before He ascended into heaven, but also before He
had suffered, and had risen from the dead. But they who think that the
human nature in Him is to be changed and converted into the substance of
the Godhead, and that it was so said, “Then shall the Son also Himself
be subject unto Him that put all things under Him,”—as if to say, Then
also the Son of man Himself, and the human nature taken by the Word of
God, shall be changed into the nature of Him who put all things under
Him,—must also think that this will then take place, when, after the day
of judgment, “He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father.” And hence even still, according to this opinion, the Father is
greater than that form of a servant which was taken of the Virgin. But
if some affirm even further, that the man Christ Jesus has already been
changed into the substance of God, at least they cannot deny that the
human nature still remained, when He said before His passion, “For my
Father is greater than I;” whence there is no question that it was said
in this sense, that the Father is greater than the form of a servant, to
whom in the form of God the Son is equal. Nor let any one, hearing what
the apostle says, “But when He saith all things are put under Him, it is
manifest that He is excepted which did put all things under Him,” <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) think the words, that He hath put all
things under the Son, to be so understood of the Father, as that He
should not think that the Son Himself put all things under Himself. For
this the apostle plainly declares, when he says to the Philippians, “For
our conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour,
the Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto His glorious body, according to the working whereby
He is able even to subdue <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) all
things unto Himself.” <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) For the
working of the Father and of the Son is indivisible. Otherwise, neither
hath the Father Himself put all things under Himself, but the Son hath
put all things under Him, who delivers the kingdom to Him, and puts down
all rule and all authority and power. For these words are spoken of the
Son: “When He shall have delivered up,” says the apostle, “the kingdom
to God, even the Father; when He shall have put down <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) all rule, and all authority, and all
power.” For the same that puts down, also makes subject.

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p8"></span>16. Neither may we think that Christ
shall so give up the kingdom to God, even the Father, as that He shall
take it away from Himself. For some vain talkers have thought even this.
For when it is said, “He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the Father,” He Himself is not excluded; because He is one God
together with the Father. But that word “until” deceives those who are
careless readers of the divine Scriptures, but eager for controversies.
For the text continues, “For He must reign, until He hath put all
enemies under His feet;” <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) as though,
when He had so put them, He would no more reign. Neither do they
perceive that this is said in the same way as that other text, “His
heart is established: He shall not be afraid, until He see His desire
upon His enemies.” <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) For He will not
then be afraid when He has seen it. What then means, “When He shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father,” as though God and the
Father has not the kingdom now? But because He is hereafter to bring all
the just, over whom now, living by faith, the Mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus, reigns, to that sight which the same apostle
calls “face to face;” <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) therefore the
words, “When He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father,” are as much as to say, When He shall have brought believers to
the contemplation of God, even the Father. For He says, “All things are
delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the
Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal Him.” <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) The Father will then be revealed by the
Son, “when He shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and all
power;” that is, in such wise that there shall be no more need of any
economy of similitudes, by means of angelic rulers, and authorities, and
powers. Of whom that is not unfitly understood, which is said in the
Song of Songs to the bride, “We will make thee borders <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) of gold, with studs of silver, while the
King sitteth at His <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-Page_26"></span>table;” <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) that is, as long as Christ is in His
secret place: since “your life is hid with Christ in God; when Christ,
who is our <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) life, shall appear, then
shall ye also appear with Him in glory.” <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) Before which time, “we see now through a
glass, in an enigma,” that is, in similitudes, “but then face to
face.” <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78)

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p18"></span>17. For this contemplation is held
forth to us as the end of all actions, and the everlasting fullness of
joy. For “we are the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him;
for we shall see Him as He is.” <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) For
that which He said to His servant Moses, “I am that I am; thus shalt
thou say to the children of Israel, I Am hath sent me to you;” <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) this it is which we shall contemplate
when we shall live in eternity. For so it is said, “And this is life
eternal, that they might know Thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ,
whom Thou hast sent.” <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) This shall be
when the Lord shall have come, and “shall have brought to light the
hidden things of darkness;” <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) when
the darkness of this present mortality and corruption shall have passed
away. Then will be our morning, which is spoken of in the Psalm, “In the
morning will I direct my prayer unto Thee, and will contemplate
Thee.” <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) Of this contemplation I
understand it to be said, “When He shall have delivered up the kingdom
to God, even the Father;” that is, when He shall have brought the just,
over whom now, living by faith, the Mediator between God and man, the
man Christ Jesus, reigns, to the contemplation of God, even the Father.
If herein I am foolish, let him who knows better correct me; to me at
least the case seems as I have said. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) For we shall not seek anything else, when
we shall have come to the contemplation of Him. But that contemplation
is not yet, so long as our joy is in hope. For “hope that is seen is not
hope: for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for
that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it,” <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) *viz*. “as long as the King sitteth at
His table.” <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) Then will take place
that which is written, “In Thy presence is fullness of joy.” <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) Nothing more than that joy will be
required; because there will be nothing more than can be required. For
the Father will be manifested to us, and that will suffice for us. And
this much Philip had well understood, so that he said to the Lord, “Show
us the Father, and it sufficeth us.” But he had not yet understood that
he himself was able to say this very same thing in this way also: Lord,
show Thyself to us, and it sufficeth us. For, that he might understand
this, the Lord replied to him, “Have I been so long time with you, and
yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the
Father.” But because He intended him, before he could see this, to live
by faith, He went on to say, “Believest thou not that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me?” <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) For
“while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: for we
walk by faith, not by sight.” <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) For
contemplation is the recompense of faith, for which recompense our
hearts are purified by faith; as it is written, “Purifying their hearts
by faith.” <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) And that our hearts are
to be purified for this contemplation, is proved above all by this text,
“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) And that this is life eternal, God says
in the Psalm, “With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my
salvation.” <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Whether, therefore, we
hear, Show us the Son; or whether we hear, Show us the Father; it is
even all one, since neither can be manifested without the other. For
they are one, as He also Himself says, “My Father and I are one.” <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) Finally, on account of this very
indivisibility, it suffices that sometimes the Father alone, or the Son
alone, should be named, as hereafter to fill us with the joy of His
countenance.

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p34"></span>18. Neither is the Spirit of either
thence excluded, that is, the Spirit of the Father and of the Son; which
Holy Spirit is specially called “the Spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive.” <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) For to have the
fruition of God the Trinity, after whose image we are made, is indeed
the fullness of our joy, than which there is no greater. On this account
the Holy Spirit is sometimes spoken of as if He alone sufficed to our
blessedness: and He does alone so suffice, because He cannot be divided
from the Father and the Son; as the Father alone is sufficient, because
He cannot be divided from the Son and the Holy Spirit; and the Son alone
is sufficient because He cannot be divided from the Father and the Holy
Spirit. For what does He mean by saying, “If ye love me, keep my
commandments; and I will pray the Father, and He shall give <span
id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span id="iv.i.iii.viii-Page_27"></span>you
another Comforter, that He may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit
of truth, whom the world cannot receive,” <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) that is, the lovers of the world? For
“the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God.” <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) But it may perhaps seem, further, as if
the words, “And I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another
Comforter,” were so said as if the Son alone were not sufficient. And
that place so speaks of the Spirit, as if He alone were altogether
sufficient: “When He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you
into all truth.” <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) Pray, therefore,
is the Son here excluded, as if He did not teach all truth, or as if the
Holy Spirit were to fill up that which the Son could not fully teach?
Let them say then, if it pleases them, that the Holy Spirit is greater
than the Son, whom they are wont to call less. Or is it, forsooth,
because it is not said, He alone,—or, No one else except Himself—will
guide you into all truth, that they allow that the Son also may be
believed to teach together with Him? In that case the apostle has
excluded the Son from knowing those things which are of God, where he
says, “Even so the things of God knoweth no one, but the Spirit of
God:” <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) so that these perverse men
might, upon this ground, go on to say that none but the Holy Spirit
teaches even the Son the things of God, as the greater teaches the less;
to whom the Son Himself ascribes so much as to say, “But because I have
said these things unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart. Nevertheless
I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I
go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you.” <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[24:66](1030015.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p3"></span> *Habitum*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[25:67](1030015.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_67"></span>[25:68](1030015.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p5"></span> *Subjicere*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[25:69](1030015.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p6"></span> [Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p6.1"></span>[Phil.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_69"></span>[25:70](1030015.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p7"></span> *Evacuaverit*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[25:71](1030015.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p9.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_71"></span>[25:72](1030015.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p10"></span> [Ps.
112.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p10.1"></span>[Ps. cxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_72"></span>[25:73](1030015.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p11"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p11.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_73"></span>[25:74](1030015.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p12"></span> [Matt.
11.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_74"></span>[25:75](1030015.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p13"></span> *Similitudines*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[26:76](1030015.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p14"></span> *In recubitu* [Song of Sol.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p14.1"></span>[Cant. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p14.2"></span>; see LXX.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[26:77](1030015.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p15"></span> *Vestra*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[26:78](1030015.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p16"></span> [Col.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p16.1"></span>[Col.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_78"></span>[26:79](1030015.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p17.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="fn_79"></span>[26:80](1030015.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p19"></span> [1 John
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p19.1"></span>[1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_80"></span>[26:81](1030015.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p20"></span> [Ex.
3.14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_81"></span>[26:82](1030015.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p21"></span> [John
17.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p21.1"></span>[John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_82"></span>[26:83](1030015.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p22"></span> [1 Cor.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p22.1"></span>[1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="fn_83"></span>[26:84](1030015.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p23"></span> [Ps.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p23.1"></span>[Ps. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_84"></span>[26:85](1030015.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p24"></span> \[The common explanation is better,
which regards the “kingdom” that is to be delivered up, to be the
mediatorial commission. When Christ shall have finished his work of
redeeming men, he no longer discharges the office of a mediator. It
seems incongruous to denominate the beatific vision of God by the
redeemed, a surrender of a kingdom. In I. x. 21, Augustin says that when
the Redeemer brings the redeemed from faith to sight, “He is said to
‘deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father.’ ”—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_85"></span>[26:86](1030015.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p25"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p25.1"></span>[Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="fn_86"></span>[26:87](1030015.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p26"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p26.1"></span>[Cant. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_87"></span>[26:88](1030015.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p27"></span> [Ps.
16.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p27.1"></span>[Ps. xvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_88"></span>[26:89](1030015.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p28"></span> [John
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p28.1"></span>[John
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_89"></span>[26:90](1030015.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p29"></span> [2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p29.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_90"></span>[26:91](1030015.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p30"></span> [Acts
15.9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p30.1"></span>[Acts xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="fn_91"></span>[26:92](1030015.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p31"></span> [Matt.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="fn_92"></span>[26:93](1030015.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p32"></span> [Ps.
91.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p32.1"></span>[Ps. xci.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="fn_93"></span>[26:94](1030015.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p33"></span> [John
10.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p33.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="fn_94"></span>[26:95](1030015.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p35"></span> [John
14.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p35.1"></span>[John xiv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="fn_95"></span>[27:96](1030015.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p36"></span> [John
14.15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p36.1"></span>[John xiv.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="fn_96"></span>[27:97](1030015.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p37"></span> [1 Cor.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p37.1"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="fn_97"></span>[27:98](1030015.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p38"></span> [John
16.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p38.1"></span>[John xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="fn_98"></span>[27:99](1030015.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p39"></span> [1 Cor.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p39.1"></span>[1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="fn_99"></span>[27:100](1030015.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.viii-p40"></span> [John
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p40.1"></span>[John
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.iii.viii-p40.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](1030016)
