[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030814)  [Next](1030816.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xiii-p1"></span> 12. Stories are told of certain
appearances or visions, <span id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736.md) which
may seem to bring into <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="v.ix.xiii-Page_545"></span>this discussion a question which should
not be slighted. It is said, namely, that dead men have at times either
in dreams or in some other way appeared to the living who knew not where
their bodies lay unburied, and have pointed out to them the place, and
admonished that the sepulture which was lacking should be afforded them.
These things if we shall answer to be false, we shall be thought
impudently to contradict the writings of certain faithful men, and the
senses of them who assure us that such things have happened to
themselves. But it is to be answered, that it does not follow that we
are to account the dead to have sense of these things, because they
appear in dreams to say or indicate or ask this. For living men do also
appear ofttimes to the living as they sleep, while they themselves know
not that they do appear; and they are told by them, what they dreamed,
namely, that in their dream the speakers saw them doing or saying
something. Then if it may be that a person in a dream should see me
indicating to him something that has happened or even foretelling
something about to happen, while I am perfectly unwitting of the thing
and altogether regardless not only what he dreams, but whether he is
awake while I am asleep, or he asleep while I am awake, or whether at
one and the same time we are both awake or asleep, at what time he has
the dream in which he sees me: what marvel if the dead be unconscious
and insensible of these things, and, for all that, are seen by the
living in their dreams, and say something which those on awaking find to
be true? By angelical operations, then, I should think it is effected,
whether permitted from above, or commanded, that they seem in dreams to
say something about burying of their bodies, when they whose the bodies
are are utterly unconscious of it. Now this is sometimes serviceably
done; whether for some sort of solace to the survivors, to whom pertain
those dead whose likenesses <span id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737.md)
appear to them as they dream; or whether that by these admonitions the
human race may be made to have regard to humanity of sepulture, which,
allow that it be no help to the departed, yet is there culpable
irreligiousness in slighting of it. Sometimes however, by fallacious
visions, <span id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738.md) men are cast into
great errors, who deserve to suffer this. As, if one should see in a
dream, what Æneas by poetic falsity is told to have seen in the world
beneath: and there should appear to him the likeness of some unburied
man, which should speak such words as Palinurus is said to have spoken
to him; and when he awakes, he should find the body in that place where
he heard say while dreaming, that it lay unburied, and was admonished
and asked to bury it when found; and because he finds this to be true,
should believe that the dead are buried on purpose that their souls may
pass to places from which he dreamed that the souls of men unburied are
by an infernal law prohibited: does he not, in believing all this,
exceedingly swerve from the path of truth?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[544:2737](1030815.htm#fr_2736.md) <span
id="v.ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xiii-p2"></span> *Visa*

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[545:2738](1030815.htm#fr_2737.md) <span
id="v.ix.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xiii-p3"></span> *Imagines*

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[545:2739](1030815.htm#fr_2738.md) <span
id="v.ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix.xiii-p4"></span> *Visis*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 13](1030816.md)
