[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030373)  [Next](1030375) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span><span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="iv.iii.i-Page_279"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c7"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Introductory Notice.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>In</span> the fourteenth chapter of the second
book of his *Retractations*, Augustin makes the following statement:
“There is also a book of ours on the subject of the *Catechising of the
Uninstructed*, \[or, *for Instructing the Unlearned, De Catechizandis
Rudibus*\], that being, indeed, the express title by which it is
designated. In this book, where I have said, *‘Neither did the angel,
who, in company with other spirits who were his satellites, forsook in
pride the obedience of God, and became the devil, do any hurt to God,
but to himself; for God knoweth how to dispose of souls that leave
Him:’* it would be more appropriate to say, *‘spirits that leave Him,’*
inasmuch as the question dealt with angels. This book commences in these
terms: *‘You have requested me, brother Deogratias.’* ”

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span>The composition so described in the
passage cited is reviewed by Augustin in connection with other works
which he had in hand about the year 400 <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span> A.D.</span>, and may therefore be taken to
belong to that date. It has been conjectured that the person to whom it
is addressed may perhaps be the same with the presbyter Deogratias, to
whom, as we read in the epistle which now ranks as the hundred and
second, Augustin wrote about the year 406, in reply to some questions of
the pagans which were forwarded to him from Carthage.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span>The Benedictine editors introduce the
treatise in the following terms: “At the request of a deacon of
Carthage, Augustin undertakes the task of teaching the art of
catechising; and in the first place, he gives certain injunctions, to
the effect that this kind of duty may be discharged not only in a
settled method and an apt order, but also without tediousness, and in a
spirit of cheerfulness. Thereafter reducing his injunctions to practical
use, he gives an example of what he means by delivering two set
discourses, presenting parallels to each other, the one being somewhat
lengthened and the other very brief, but both suitable for the
instruction of any individual whose desire is to be a Christian.”

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span>\[This treatise shows what was thought in
the age of Saint Augustin to be the most needful instruction in
religion. The Latin text: *De Cactechizandis Rudibus*, is in the sixth
vol. of the Benedictine edition, and in the handy ed. of C. <span
class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.i-p5.1"></span>Marriott</span>: *S.
Augustini Opuscula quædam*, Oxford and London (Parker & Co.) 4th ed.
1885. An earlier and closer English Version by Rev. C. L. <span
class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.i-p5.2"></span>Cornish</span>, M. A., of
Exeter College, Oxford, appeared in the Oxford “Library of the Fathers”
(1847, pp. 187 sqq.,) under the title *On Instructing the Unlearned*. H.
<span class="c19"><span id="iv.iii.i-p5.3"></span>De Romestin</span>
reproduces the Oxford translation in the English version of Marriott’s
ed. of five treatises of St. Augustin, Oxford and London, 1885, pp.
1–71.—P.S.\]

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](1030375)
