[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030175)  [Next](1030177.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—What is the Difference Between
Wisdom and Knowledge. The Worship of God is the Love of Him. How the
Intellectual Cognizance of Eternal Things Comes to Pass Through
Wisdom.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p2"></span>For knowledge also has its own good
measure, if that in it which puffs up, or is wont to puff up, is
conquered by love of eternal things, which does not puff up, but, as we
know, edifieth. <span id="fr_784"></span>[785](#fn_784.md) Certainly
without knowledge the virtues themselves, by which one lives rightly,
cannot be possessed, by which this miserable life may be so governed,
that we may attain to that eternal life which is truly blessed.

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p4"></span>22. Yet action, by which we use
temporal things well, differs from contemplation of eternal things; and
the latter is reckoned to wisdom, the former to knowledge. For although
that which is wisdom can also be called knowledge, as the apostle too
speaks, where he says, “Now I know in part, but then shall I know even
as also I am known;” <span id="fr_785"></span>[786](#fn_785.md) when
doubtless he meant his words to be understood of the knowledge of the
contemplation of God, which will be the highest reward of the saints;
yet where he says, “For to one is given by the Spirit the word of
wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit,” <span
id="fr_786"></span>[787](#fn_786.md) certainly he distinguishes without
doubt these two things, although he does not there explain the
difference, nor in what way one may be discerned from the other. But
having examined a great number of passages from the Holy Scriptures, I
find it written in the Book of Job, that holy man being the speaker,
“Behold, piety, that is wisdom; but to depart from evil is
knowledge.” <span id="fr_787"></span>[788](#fn_787.md) In thus
distinguishing, it must be understood that wisdom belongs to
contemplation, knowledge to action. For in this place he meant by piety
the worship of God, which in Greek is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p7.2"></span>θεοσέβεια</span>. For the sentence in the
Greek <span class="c19"><span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p7.3"></span>mss.</span>
has that word. And what is there in eternal things more excellent than
God, of whom alone the nature is unchangeable? And what is the worship
of Him except the love of Him, by which we now desire to see Him, and we
believe and hope that we shall see Him; and in proportion as we make
progress, see now through a glass in an enigma, but then in clearness?
For this is what the Apostle Paul means by “face to face.” <span
id="fr_788"></span>[789](#fn_788.md) This is also what John says, “Beloved,
now we are the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be;
but we know that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him; for we
shall see Him as He is.” <span id="fr_789"></span>[790](#fn_789.md)
Discourse about these and the like subjects seems to me to be the
discourse itself of wisdom. But to depart from evil, which Job says is
knowledge, is without doubt of temporal things. Since it is in reference
to time \[and this world\] that we are in evil, from which we ought to
abstain that we may come to those good eternal things. And therefore,
whatsoever we do prudently, boldly, temperately, and justly, belongs to
that knowledge or discipline wherewith our action is conversant in
avoiding evil and desiring good; and so also, whatsoever we gather by
the knowledge that comes from inquiry, in the way of examples either to
be guarded against or to be imitated, and in the way of necessary proofs
respecting any subject, accommodated to our use.

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p10"></span>23. When a discourse then relates to
these things, I hold it to be a discourse belonging to knowledge, and to
be distinguished from a discourse belonging to wisdom, to which those
things belong, which neither have been, <span id="page_164">p.
164</span> <span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-Page_164"></span>nor shall be, but
are; and on account of that eternity in which they are, are said to have
been, and to be, and to be about to be, without any changeableness of
times. For neither have they been in such way as that they should cease
to be, nor are they about to be in such way as if they were not now; but
they have always had and always will have that very absolute being. And
they abide, but not as if fixed in some place as are bodies; but as
intelligible things in incorporeal nature, they are so at hand to the
glance of the mind, as things visible or tangible in place are to the
sense of the body. And not only in the case of sensible things posited
in place, there abide also intelligible and incorporeal reasons of them
apart from local space; but also of motions that pass by in successive
times, apart from any transit in time, there stand also like reasons,
themselves certainly intelligible, and not sensible. And to attain to
these with the eye of the mind is the lot of few; and when they are
attained as much as they can be, he himself who attains to them does not
abide in them, but is as it were repelled by the rebounding of the eye
itself of the mind, and so there comes to be a transitory thought of a
thing not transitory. And yet this transient thought is committed to the
memory through the instructions by which the mind is taught; that the
mind which is compelled to pass from thence, may be able to return
thither again; although, if the thought should not return to the memory
and find there what it had committed to it, it would be led thereto like
an uninstructed person, as it had been led before, and would find it
where it had first found it, that is to say, in that incorporeal truth,
whence yet once more it may be as it were written down and fixed in the
mind. For the thought of man, for example, does not so abide in that
incorporeal and unchangeable reason of a square body, as that reason
itself abides: if, to be sure, it could attain to it at all without the
phantasy of local space. Or if one were to apprehend the rhythm of any
artificial or musical sound, passing through certain intervals of time,
as it rested without time in some secret and deep silence, it could at
least be thought as long as that song could be heard; yet what the
glance of the mind, transient though it was, caught from thence, and,
absorbing as it were into a belly, so laid up in the memory, over this
it will be able to rumiuate in some measure by recollection, and to
transfer what it has thus learned into systematic knowledge. But if this
has been blotted out by absolute forgetfulness, yet once again, under
the guidance of teaching, one will come to that which had altogether
dropped away, and it will be found such as it was.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_784"></span>[163:785](1030176.htm#fr_784.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p3"></span> [1 Cor.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p3.1"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_785"></span>[163:786](1030176.htm#fr_785.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p5.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_786"></span>[163:787](1030176.htm#fr_786.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p6"></span> [1 Cor.
12.8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p6.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_787"></span>[163:788](1030176.htm#fr_787.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p7"></span> [Job
28.8](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="fn_788"></span>[163:789](1030176.htm#fr_788.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
13.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_789"></span>[163:790](1030176.htm#fr_789.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p9"></span> [1 John
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p9.1"></span>[1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.i.xiv.xiv-p9.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1030177.md)
