[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030392)  [Next](1030394.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—Of the Co-Existence of Good and
Evil in the Church, and Their Final Separation.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p2"></span>31. “Neither ought we to be moved by the
consideration that many consent unto the devil, and few follow God; for
the grain, too, in comparison with the chaff, has greatly the defect in
number. But even as the husbandman knows what to do with the mighty heap
of chaff, so the multitude of sinners is nothing to God, who knows what
to do with them, so as not to let the administration of His kingdom be
disordered and dishonored in any part. Nor is the devil to be supposed
to have proved victorious for the mere reason of his drawing away with
him more than the few by whom he may be overcome. In this way there are
two communities—one of the ungodly, and another of the holy—which are
carried down from the beginning of the human race even to the end of the
world, which are at present commingled in respect of bodies, but
separated in respect of wills, and which, moreover, are destined to be
separated also in respect of bodily presence in the day of judgment. For
all men who love pride and temporal power with vain elation and pomp of
arrogance, and all spirits who set their affections on such things and
seek their own glory in the subjection of men, are bound fast together
in one association; nay, even although they frequently fight against
each other on account of these things, they are nevertheless
precipitated by the like weight of lust into the same abyss, and are
united with each other by similarity of manners and merits. And, again,
all men and all spirits who humbly seek the glory of God and not their
own, and who follow Him in piety, belong to one fellowship. And,
notwithstanding this, God is most merciful and patient with ungodly men,
and offers them a place for penitence and amendment.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p3"></span>32. “For with respect also to the fact
that He destroyed all men in the flood, with the exception of one
righteous man together with his house, whom He willed to be saved in the
ark, He knew indeed that they would not amend themselves; yet,
nevertheless, as the building of the ark went on for the space of a
hundred years, the wrath of God which was to come upon them was
certainly preached to them: <span id="fr_1440"></span>[1441](#fn_1440.md)
and if they only would have turned to God, He would have spared them, as
at a later period He spared the city of Nineveh when it repented, after
He had announced to it, by means of a prophet, the destruction that was
about to overtake it. <span id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441.md) Thus,
moreover, God acts, granting a space for repentance even to those who He
knows will persist in wickedness, in order that He may exercise and
instruct our patience by His own example; whereby also we may know how
greatly it befits us to bear with the evil in long-suffering, when we
know not what manner of men they will prove hereafter, seeing that He,
whose cognizance nothing that is yet to be escapes, spares them and
suffers them to live. Under the sacramental sign of the flood, however,
in which the righteous were rescued by the wood, there was also a
fore-announcement of the Church which was to be, which Christ, its King
and God, has raised on high; by the mystery of His cross, in safety from
the submersion of this world. Moreover, God was not ignorant of the fact
that, even of those who had been saved in the ark, there would be born
wicked men, who would cover the face of the earth a second time with
iniquities. But, nevertheless, He both gave them a pattern of the future
judgment, and fore-announced the deliverance of the holy by the <span
id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span id="iv.iii.xx-Page_304"></span>mystery
of the wood. For even after these things wickedness did not cease to
sprout forth again through pride, and lusts, and illicit impieties, when
men, forsaking their Creator, not only fell to the (standard of the)
creature which God made, so as to worship instead of God that which God
made, but even bowed their souls to the works of the hands of men and to
the contrivances of craftsmen, wherein a more shameful triumph was to be
won over them by the devil, and by those evil spirits who rejoice in
finding themselves adored and reverenced in such false devices, while
they feed <span id="fr_1442"></span>[1443](#fn_1442.md) their own errors
with the errors of men.

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p7"></span>33. “But in truth there were not wanting
in those times righteous men also of the kind to seek God piously and to
overcome the pride of the devil, citizens of that holy community, who
were made whole by the humiliation of Christ, which was then only
destined to enter, but was revealed to them by the Spirit. From among
these, Abraham, a pious and faithful servant of God, was chosen, in
order that to him might be shown the sacrament of the Son of God, so
that thus, in virtue of the imitation of his faith, all the faithful of
all nations might be called his children in the future. Of him was born
a people, by whom the one true God who made heaven and earth should be
worshipped when all other nations did service to idols and evil spirits.
In that people, plainly, the future Church was much more evidently
prefigured. For in it there was a carnal multitude that worshipped God
with a view to visible benefits. But in it there were also a few who
thought of the future rest, and looked longingly for the heavenly
fatherland, to whom through prophecy was revealed the coming humiliation
of God in the person of our King and Lord Jesus Christ, in order that
they might be made whole of all pride and arrogance through that faith.
And with respect to these saints who in point of time had precedence of
the birth of the Lord, not only their speech, but also their life, and
their marriages, and their children, and their doings, constituted a
prophecy of this time, at which the Church is being gathered together
out of all nations through faith in the passion of Christ. By the
instrumentality of those holy patriarchs and prophets this carnal people
of Israel, who at a later period were also called Jews, had ministered
unto them at once those visible benefits which they eagerly desired of
the Lord in a carnal manner, and those chastisements, in the form of
bodily punishments, which were intended to terrify them for the time, as
was befitting for their obstinacy. And in all these, nevertheless, there
were also spiritual mysteries signified, such as were meant to bear upon
Christ and the Church; of which Church those saints also were members,
although they existed in this life previous to the birth of Christ, the
Lord, according to the flesh. For this same Christ, the only-begotten
Son of God, the Word of the Father, equal and co-eternal with the
Father, by whom all things were made, was Himself also made man for our
sakes, in order that of the whole Church, as of His whole body, He might
be the Head. But just as when the whole man is in the process of being
born, although he may put the hand forth first in the act of birth, yet
is that hand joined and compacted together with the whole body under the
head, even as also among these same patriarchs some were born <span
id="fr_1443"></span>[1444](#fn_1443.md) with the hand put forth first as a
sign of this very thing: so all the saints who lived upon the earth
previous to the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, although they were born
antecedently, were nevertheless united under the Head with that
universal body of which He is the Head.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[303:1441](1030393.htm#fr_1440.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p4"></span> [Gen.
6.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p4.1"></span>[Gen. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[303:1442](1030393.htm#fr_1441.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p5"></span> [Jonah
3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[304:1443](1030393.htm#fr_1442.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p6"></span> Instead of *pascunt* the reading
*miscent*, = mix, is also found.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[304:1444](1030393.htm#fr_1443.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xx-p8"></span> [Gen.
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026.md), [Gen.
38:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xx-p8.1"></span>[Gen. xxv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.iii.xx-p8.2"></span>,
xxxviii. 27–30

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1030394.md)
