[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030288)  [Next](1030290.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xli"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter 39.—Not Everything that is Born of
Another is to Be Called a Son of that Other.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xli-p2"></span>We need not therefore take for granted,
that whatever is born of a thing is forthwith to be declared the son of
that thing. For, to pass over the fact that a son is born of a man in a
different sense from that in which a hair or a louse is born of him,
neither of these being a son; to pass over this, I say, as too mean an
illustration for a subject of so much importance: it is certain that
those who are born of water and of the Holy Spirit cannot with propriety
be called sons of the water though they are called sons of God the
Father, and of the Church their mother. In the same way, then, He who
was born of the Holy Spirit is the Son of God the Father, not of the
Holy Spirit. For what I have said of the hair and the other things is
sufficient to show us that not everything which is born of another can
be called the son of that of which it is born, just as it does not
follow that all who are called a man’s sons were born of him, for some
sons are adopted. And some men are called sons of hell, not as being
born of hell, but as prepared for it, as the sons of the kingdom are
prepared for the kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 40](1030290.md)
