[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030357)  [Next](1030359.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.cx"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.cx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.cx-p1.1"></span>Chapter 108.—A Mediator Was Necessary to
Reconcile Us to God; And Unless This Mediator Had Been God, He Could Not
Have Been Our Redeemer.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.cx-p2"></span>For we could not be redeemed, even through
the one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, if He were
not also God. Now when Adam was created, he, being a righteous man, had
no need of a mediator. But when sin had placed a wide gulf between God
and the human race, it was expedient that a Mediator, who alone of the
human race was born, lived, and died without sin, should reconcile us to
God, and procure even for our bodies a resurrection to eternal life, in
order that the pride of man might be exposed and cured through the
humility of God; that man might be shown how far he had departed from
God, when God became incarnate to bring him back; that an example might
be set to disobedient man in the life of obedience of the God-Man; that
the fountain of grace might be opened by the Only-begotten taking upon
Himself the form of a servant, a form which had no antecedent merit;
that an earnest of that resurrection of the body which is promised to
the redeemed might be given in the resurrection of the Redeemer; that
the devil might be subdued by the same nature which it was his boast to
have deceived, and yet man not glorified, lest pride should again spring
up; and, in fine, with a view to all the advantages which the thoughtful
can perceive and describe, or perceive without being able to describe,
as flowing from the transcendent mystery of the person of the Mediator.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 109](1030359.md)
