[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030454)  [Next](1030456.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxix-p1"></span> 28. Here again arises a very difficult
question. For in what way shall we fools be able to find a wise man,
whereas this name, although hardly any one dare openly, yet most men lay
claim to indirectly: so disagreeing one with another in the very
matters, in the knowledge of which wisdom consists, as that it must
needs be that either none of them, or but some certain one be wise? But
when the fool enquires, who is that wise man? I do not at all see, in
what way he can be distinguished and perceived. For by no signs whatever
can one recognize any thing, unless he shall have known that thing,
whereof these are signs. But the fool is ignorant of wisdom. For not,
as, in the case of gold and silver and other things of that kind, it is
allowed both to know them when you see them and not to have them, thus
may wisdom be seen by the mind’s eye of him who hath it not. For
whatever things we come into contact with by bodily sense, are presented
to us from without; and therefore we may perceive by the eyes what
belong to others, when we ourselves possess not any of them or of that
kind. But what is perceived by the understanding is within in the mind,
and to have it is nothing else than to see. But the fool is void of
wisdom, therefore he knows not wisdom. For he could not see it with the
eyes: but he cannot see it and not have it, nor have it and be a fool.
Therefore he knoweth it not, and, so long as he knoweth it not, he
cannot recognize it in another place. No one, so long as he is a fool,
can by most sure knowledge find out a wise man, by obeying whom he may
be set free from so great evil of folly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 29](1030456.md)
