[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030694)  [Next](1030696.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vii-p1"></span> 6. It remains, then, that what the
Priscillianists think, according to the nefarious falsity of their
heresy, of God, of the soul, of the body, and the rest, we hesitate not
with truthful pity to condemn; but what they think of the right of
telling a lie to hide the truth is to be to us and them (which God
forbid!) a common dogma. This is so great an evil, that even though this
attempt of ours, whereby we desire by means of a lie to catch them and
change them, should so prosper that we do catch and change them, there
is no gain that can compensate the damage of making ourselves wrong with
them in order to set them right. For through this lie shall both we be
in that respect perverse, and they but half corrected; seeing that their
thinking it right to tell a lie on behalf of the truth is a fault which
we do not correct in them, because we have learned and do teach the same
thing, and lay it down that it is fit to be done, in order that we may
be able to attain to the amending of them. Whom yet we amend not, for
their fault, with which they think right to hide the truth, we take not
away, rather we make ourselves faulty when by such a fault we seek them;
nor do we find how we can believe them, when converted, to whom, while
perverted, we have lied; lest haply what was done to them that they
might be caught, they do to us when caught; not only because to do it
hath been their wont, but because in us also, to whom they come, they
find the same.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 7](1030696.md)
