[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030180)  [Next](1030182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xv.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 3.—Some Desires Being the Same in
All, are Known to Each. The Poet Ennius.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.iii-p2"></span>6. There is, indeed, so closely
conspiring a harmony in the same nature living and using reason, that
although one knows not what the other wills, yet there are some wills of
all which are also known to each; and although each man does not know
what any other one man wills, yet in some things he may know what all
will. And hence comes that story of the comic actor’s witty joke, who
promised that he would say in the theatre, in some other play, what all
had in their minds, and what all willed; and when a still greater crowd
had come together on the day appointed, with great expectation, all
being in suspense and silent, is affirmed to have said: You will to buy
cheap, and sell dear. And mean actor though he was, yet all in his words
recognized what themselves were conscious of, and applauded him with
wonderful goodwill, for saying before the eyes of all what was
confessedly true, yet what no one looked for. And why was so great
expectation raised by his promising that he would say what was the will
of all, unless because no man knows the wills of other men? But did not
he know that will? Is there any one who does not know it? Yet why,
unless because there are some things which not unfitly each conjectures
from himself to be in others, through sympathy or agreement either in
vice or virtue? But it is one thing to see one’s own will; another to
conjecture, however certainly, what is another’s. For, in human affairs,
I am as certain that Rome was built as that Constantinople was, although
I have seen Rome with my eyes, but know nothing of the other city,
except what I have believed on the testimony of others. And truly that
comic actor believed it to be common to all to will to buy cheap and
sell dear, either by observing himself or by making experiment also of
others. But since such a will is in truth a fault, every one can attain
the counter virtue, or run into the mischief of some other fault which
is contrary to it, whereby to resist and conquer it. For I myself know a
case where a manuscript was offered to a man for purchase, who perceived
that the vendor was ignorant of its value, and was therefore asking
something very small, and who thereupon gave him, though not expecting
it, the just price, which was much more. Suppose even the case of a man
possessed with wickedness so great as to sell cheap what his parents
left to him, and to buy dear, in order to waste it on his own lusts?
Such wanton extravagance, I fancy, is not incredible; and if such men
are sought, they may be found, or even fall in one’s way although not
sought; who, by a wickedness more than that of the theatre, make a mock
of the theatrical proposition or declaration, by buying dishonor at a
great price, while selling lands at a small one. We have heard, too, of
persons that, for the sake of distribution, have bought corn at a higher
<span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="iv.i.xv.iii-Page_170"></span>price, and sold it to their
fellow-citizens at a lower one. And note also what the old poet Ennius
has said: that “all mortals wish themselves to be praised;” wherein,
doubtless, he conjectured what was in others, both by himself, and by
those whom he knew by experience; and so seems to have declared what it
is that all men will. Lastly, if that comic actor himself, too, had
said, You all will to be praised, no one of you wills to be abused; he
would have seemed in like manner to have expressed what all will. Yet
there are some who hate their own faults, and do not desire to be
praised by others for that for which they are displeased with
themselves; and who thank the kindness of those who rebuke them, when
the purpose of that rebuke is their own amendment. But if he had said,
You all will to be blessed, you do not will to be wretched; he would
have said something which there is no one that would not recognize in
his own will. For whatever else a man may will secretly, he does not
withdraw from that will, which is well known to all men, and well known
to be in all men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](1030182)
