[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030647)  [Next](1030649) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v.v-p1"></span> 4. But it may be a very nice question
whether in the absence of all will to deceive, lying is altogether
absent. Thus, put the case that a person shall speak a false thing,
which he esteems to be false, on the ground that he thinks he is not
believed, to the intent, that in that way falsifying his faith he may
deter the person to whom he speaks, which person he perceives does not
choose to believe him. For here is a person who tells a lie with studied
purpose of not deceiving, if to tell a lie is to utter any thing
otherwise than you know or think it to be. But if it be no lie, unless
when something is uttered with wish to deceive, that person lies not,
who says a false thing, knowing or thinking it to be false, but says it
on purpose that the person to whom he speaks by not believing him may
not be deceived, because the speaker either knows or thinks the other
will not believe him. Whence if it appear to be possible that a person
should say a false thing on purpose that he to whom it is said may not
be deceived, on the other hand there is this opposite case, the case of
a person saying the truth on purpose that he may deceive. For if a man
determines to say a true thing because he perceives he is not believed,
that man speaks truth on purpose that he may deceive: for he knows or
thinks that what is said may be accounted false, just because it is
spoken by him. Wherefore in saying a true thing on purpose that it may
be thought false, he says a true thing on purpose to deceive. So that it
may be inquired, which rather lies: he who says a false thing that he
<span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span id="v.v.v-Page_459"></span>may
not deceive, or he who says a true thing that he may deceive? the one
knowing or thinking that he says a false thing, and the other knowing or
thinking that he says a true thing? For we have already said that the
person who does not know the thing to be false which he utters, does not
lie if he thinks it to be true; and that that person rather lies who
utters even a true thing when he thinks it false: because it is by the
sense of their mind that they are to be judged. Concerning these persons
therefore, whom we have set forth, there is no small question. The one,
who knows or thinks he says a false thing, and says it on purpose that
he may not deceive: as, if he knows a certain road to be beset by
robbers, and fearing lest some person for whose safety he is anxious
should go by that road, which person he knows does not trust him, should
tell him that that road has no robbers, on purpose that he may not go by
it, as he will think there are robbers there precisely because the other
has told him there are none, and he is resolved not to believe him,
accounting him a liar. The other, who knowing or thinking that to be
true which he says, says it on purpose that he may deceive: for
instance, if he tells a person who does not believe him, that there are
robbers in that road where he really knows them to be, that he to whom
he tells it may the rather go by that road and so fall among robbers,
because he thinks that to be false, which the other told him. Which then
of these lies? the one who has chosen to say a false thing that he may
not deceive? or the other who has chosen to say a true thing that he may
deceive? that one, who in saying a false thing aimed that he to whom he
spake should follow the truth? or this one, who in saying a true thing
aimed that he to whom he spake should follow a falsehood? Or haply have
both lied? the one, because he wished to say a false thing: the other,
because he wished to deceive? Or rather, has neither lied? not the one,
because he had the will not to deceive: not the other, because he had
the will to speak the truth? For the question is not now which of them
sinned, but which of them lied: as indeed it is presently seen that the
latter sinned, because by speaking a truth he brought it about that a
person should fall among robbers, and that the former has not sinned, or
even has done good, because by speaking a false thing he has been the
means of a person’s avoiding destruction. But then these instances may
be turned the other way, so that the one should be supposed to wish some
more grievous suffering to the person whom he wishes not to be deceived;
for there are many cases of persons who through knowing certain things
to be true, have brought destruction upon themselves, if the things were
such as ought to have continued unknown to them: and the other may be
supposed to wish some convenience to result to the person whom he wishes
to be deceived; for there have been instances of persons who would have
destroyed themselves had they known some evil that had really befallen
those who were dear to them, and through deeming it false have spared
themselves: and so to be deceived has been a benefit to them, as to
others it has been a hurt to know the truth. The question therefore is
not with what purpose of doing a kindness or a hurt, either the one said
a false thing that he might not deceive, or the other a true thing that
he might deceive: but, setting apart the convenience or inconvenience of
the persons spoken to, in so far as relates to the very truth and
falsehood, the question is, whether both of them or neither has lied.
For if a lie is an utterance with will of uttering a false thing, that
man has rather lied who willed to say a false thing, and said what he
willed, albeit he said it of set purpose not to deceive. But if a lie is
any utterance whatever with will to deceive; then not the former has
lied, but the latter, who even in speaking truth willed to deceive. And
if a lie is an utterance with will of any falsity, both have lied;
because both the former willed his utterance to be false, and the latter
willed a false thing to be believed concerning his utterance which was
true. Further, if a lie is an utterance of a person wishing to utter a
false thing that he may deceive, neither has lied; because both the
former in saying a false thing had the will to make a true thing
believed, and the latter to say a true thing in order that he might make
a false thing believed. We shall be clear then of all rashness and all
lying, if, what we know to be true or right to be believed, we utter
when need is, and wish to make that thing believed which we utter. If,
however, either thinking that to be true which is false, or accounting
as known that which is to us unknown, or believing what we ought not to
believe, or uttering it when need is not, we yet have no other aim than
to make that believed which we utter; we do not stand clear indeed of
the error of temerity, but we do stand clear of all lying. For there is
no need to be afraid of any of those definitions, when the mind has a
good conscience, that it utters that which to be true it either knows,
or opines, or believes, and that it has no wish <span id="page_460">p.
460</span> <span id="v.v.v-Page_460"></span>to make any thing believed
but that which it utters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 5](1030649)
