[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030705)  [Next](1030707.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xviii-p1"></span> 17. Wherefore, though there be indeed
many ways in which latent heretics may be sought out, without
vituperating the catholic faith or praising heretical impiety, yet if
there were no other way at all of drawing out heretical impiety from its
caverns, but that the catholic tongue should deviate from the straight
path of truth; more tolerable were it that that should be hid, than that
this should be precipitated; more tolerable that the foxes should lurk
in their pits unseen, than for the sake of catching them the huntsmen
should fall into the pit of blasphemy; more tolerable that the perfidy
of Priscillianists should be covered with the veil of truth, than that
the faith of catholics, lest it should of lying Priscillianists be
praised, should of believing catholics be denied. For if lies, not of
whatsoever kind, but blasphemous lies, are therefore just because they
are committed with intent to detect hidden heretics; it will be possible
at that rate, if they be commuted with the same intention, that there
should be chaste adulteries. For put the case that of a number of lewd
Priscillianists, some woman should cast her eye upon a catholic Joseph,
and promise him that she will betray their hidden retreats if she obtain
from him that he lie with her, and it be certain that if he consent unto
her she will make good her promise: shall we judge that it ought to be
done? Or shall we understand that by no means must such a price be paid
in purchase of that kind of merchandise? Why then do we not rout out
heretics, in order to their being caught, by the flesh committing
lasciviousness in adultery, and yet think right to rout them out by a
mouth committing fornication in blasphemy? For either it will be lawful
to defend both the one and the other with equal reason, that these
things be therefore said to be not unjust, because they were done with
intention of finding out the unjust: or if sound doctrine willeth not
even for the sake of finding out heretics that we should have to do with
unchaste women, albeit only in body, not in mind, assuredly not even for
the sake of finding out heretics willeth it that by us, albeit only in
voice not in mind, either unclean heresy were preached, or the chaste
Catholic Church blasphemed. Because even the very sovereignty of the
mind, to which every inferior motion of the man ought to be obedient,
will not lack deserved opprobrium, when a thing is done that ought not
to be done, whether by member or by word. Although even when it is done
by word, it is done by member: because the tongue is a member, by which
the word is made; nor is any deed of ours by any member brought to the
birth unless it is first conceived in the heart; or rather being by our
inwardly thinking upon and consenting unto it already brought to the
birth, it is brought forth abroad in our doing of it, by a member. It is
therefore no excusing the mind from the deed, when any thing is said to
be done not after the purpose of the mind, <span
id="fr_2404"></span>[2405](#fn_2404.md) which yet were not done, unless the
mind decreed it to be done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2404"></span>[487:2405](1030706.htm#fr_2404.md) <span
id="v.vi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.xviii-p2"></span> *Ex animo*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 18](1030707.md)
