[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030183)  [Next](1030185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xv.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Why, When All Will to Be Blessed,
that is Rather Chosen by Which One Withdraws from Being So.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.vi-p2"></span>9. Since, then, a blessed life consists
of these two things, and is known to all, and dear to all; what can we
think to be the cause why, when they cannot have both, men choose, out
of these two, to have all things that they will, rather than to will all
things well, even although they do not have them? Is it the depravity
itself of the human race, in such wise that, while they are not unaware
that neither is he blessed who has not what he wills, nor he who has
what he wills wrongly, but he who both has whatsoever good things he
wills, and wills no evil ones, yet, when both are not granted of those
two things in which the blessed life consists, that is rather chosen by
which one is withdrawn the more from a blessed life (since he certainly
is further from it who obtains things which he wickedly desired, than he
who only does not obtain the things which he desired); whereas the good
will ought rather to be chosen, and to be preferred, even if it do not
obtain the things which it seeks? For he comes near to being a blessed
man, who wills well whatsoever he wills, and wills things, which when he
obtains, he will be blessed. And certainly not bad things, but good,
make men blessed, when they do so make them. And of good things he
already has something, and that, too, a something not to be lightly
esteemed,—namely, the very good will itself; who longs to rejoice in
those good things of which human nature is capable, and not in the
performance or the attainment of any evil; and who follows diligently,
and attains as much as he can, with a prudent, temperate, courageous,
and right mind, such good things as are possible in the present
miserable life; so as to be good even in evils, and when all evils have
been put an end to, and all good things fulfilled, then to be blessed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030185)
