[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030696)  [Next](1030698) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi.ix"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ix-p1"></span> 8. But now observe how more tolerable in
comparison with us is the lying of the Priscillianists, when they know
that they speak deceitfully: whom by our own lying we think right to
deliver from those false things in which they by erring are decayed. A
Priscillianist saith, that the soul is a part of God, and of the same
nature and substance with Him. This is a great and detestable blasphemy.
For it follows that the nature of God may be taken captive, deceived,
cheated, disturbed, and defiled, condemned and tortured. But if that man
also saith this, who from so great an evil desires to deliver a man by a
lie, let us see what is the difference between the one blasphemer and
the other. “Very much,” sayest thou: “for this the Priscillianist saith,
also believing it so: but the catholic not so believing, though so
speaking.” The one, then, blasphemes without knowing, the other with
knowledge: the one against science, the other against conscience; the
one hath the blindness of thinking false things, but in them hath at
least the will of saying true things; the other in secret seeth truth,
and willingly speaketh false. “But the one;” thou wilt say, “teacheth
this, that he may make men partakers of his error and madness: the
latter saith it that from that error and madness he may deliver men.”
Now I have already shown above how hurtful is this very <span
id="page_485">p. 485</span> <span id="v.vi.ix-Page_485"></span>thing
which people believe will do good: but meanwhile if we weigh in these
two the present evils, (for the future good which a catholic seeks from
correcting a heretic is uncertain,) who sins worse? who deceives a man
without knowing it, or he who blasphemes God, knowing it? Assuredly
which is the worse, that man understands, who with solicitous piety
preferreth God to man. Add to this, that, if God may be blasphemed in
order that we may bring men to praise Him, without doubt we do by our
example and doctrine invite men not only to praise, but also to
blaspheme God: because they whom through blasphemies against God we plot
to bring to the praises of God, verily, if we do bring them, will learn
not only to praise, but also to blaspheme. These be the benefits we
confer on them whom, by blaspheming not ignorantly but with knowledge,
we deliver from heretics! And whereas the Apostle delivered men to Satan
himself that they might learn not to blaspheme, <span
id="fr_2391"></span>[2392](#fn_2391) we endeavor to rescue men from
Satan, that they may learn to blaspheme not with ignorance, but with
knowledge. And upon ourselves, their masters, we bring this so great
bane, that, for the sake of catching heretics, we first become, which is
certain, blasphemers of God, in order that we may for the sake of
delivering them, which is uncertain, be able to be teachers of His
truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2391"></span>[485:2392](1030697.htm#fr_2391) <span
id="v.vi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ix-p2"></span> [1 Tim.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span id="v.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>[1
Tim. i. 20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span
id="v.vi.ix-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 9](1030698)
