[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030155)  [Next](1030157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—Of What Kind We are to Reckon
the Rest (Requies), and End (Finis), of the Will in Vision.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p2"></span>10. Perhaps we can rightly call vision
the end and rest of the will, only with respect to this one object
\[namely, the bodily thing that is visible\]. For it will not will
nothing else merely because it sees something which it is now willing.
It is not therefore the whole will itself of the man, of which the end
is nothing else than blessedness; but the will provisionally directed to
this one object, which has as its end in seeing, nothing but vision,
whether it refer the thing seen to any other thing or not. For if it
does not refer the vision to anything further, but wills only to see
this, there can be no question made about showing that the end of the
will is the vision; for it is manifest. But if it does refer it to
anything further, then certainly it does will something else, and it
will not be now a will merely to see; or if to see, not one to see the
particular thing. Just as, if any one wished to see the scar, that from
thence he might learn that there had been a wound; or wished to see the
window, that through the window he might see the passers-by: all these
and other such acts of will have their own proper \[proximate\] ends,
which are referred to that \[final\] end of the will by which we will to
live blessedly, and to attain to that life which is not referred to
anything else, but suffices of itself to him who loves it. The will then
to see, has as its end vision; and the will to see this particular
thing, has as its end the vision of this particular thing. Therefore the
will to see the scar, desires its own end, that is, the vision of the
scar, and does not reach beyond it; for the will to prove that there had
been a wound, is a distinct will, although dependent upon that, of which
the end also is to prove that there had been a wound. And the will to
see the window, has as its end the vision of the window; for that is
another and further will which depends upon it, *viz*. to see the
passers-by through the window, of which also the end is the vision of
the passers-by. But all the several wills that are bound to each other,
are at once right, if that one is good, to which all are referred; and
if that is bad, then all are bad. And so the connected series of right
wills is a sort of road which consists as it were of certain steps,
whereby to ascend to blessedness; but the entanglement of depraved and
distorted wills is a bond by which he will be bound who thus acts, so as
to be cast into outer darkness. <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737)
Blessed therefore are they who in act and character sing the song of the
steps \[degrees\]; <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738) and woe to
those that draw sin, as it were a long rope. <span
id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739) And it is just the same to speak of
the will being in repose, which we call its end, if it is still referred
to something further, as if we should say that the foot is at rest in
walking, when it is placed there, whence yet another foot may be planted
in the direction of the man’s steps. But if something so satisfies, that
the will acquiesces in it with a certain delight; it is nevertheless not
yet that to which the man ultimately tends; but this too is referred to
something further, so as to be regarded not as the native country of a
citizen, but as a place of refreshment, or even of stopping, for a
traveller.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_737"></span>[150:738](1030156.htm#fr_737) <span
id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p3"></span> [Matt.
22.13](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_738"></span>[150:739](1030156.htm#fr_738) <span
id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p4"></span> [Ps.
120](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#000)<span
id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p4.1"></span>., and following.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[150:740](1030156.htm#fr_739) <span
id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p5"></span> [Isa.
5.18](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p5.1"></span>[Isa. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.xiii.vi-p5.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030157)
