[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030231)  [Next](1030233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 13.—Still Further of the
Difference Between the Knowledge and Word of Our Mind, and the Knowledge
and Word of God.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p2"></span>But is it so, that God the Father,
from whom is born the Word that is God of God,—is it so, then, that God
the Father, in respect to that wisdom which He is to Himself, has
learned some things by His bodily senses, and others by Himself? Who
could say this, who thinks of God, not as a rational animal, but as One
above the rational soul? So far at least as He can be thought of, by
those who place Him above all animals and all souls, although they see
Him by conjecture through a glass and in an enigma, not yet face to face
as He is. Is it that God the Father has learned those very things which
He knows, not by the body, for He has none, but by Himself, from
elsewhere from some one? or has stood in need of messengers or witnesses
that He might know them? Certainly not; since His own perfection enables
Him to know all things that He knows. No doubt He has messengers, *viz*.
the angels; but not to announce to Him things that He knows not, for
there is nothing He does not know. But their good lies in consulting the
truth about their own works. And this it is which is meant by saying
that they bring Him word of some things, not that He may learn of them,
but they of Him by His word without bodily sound. They bring Him word,
too, of that which He wills, being sent by Him to whomever He wills, and
hearing all from Him by that word of His, *i.e.* finding in His truth
what themselves are to do: what, to whom, and when, they are to bring
word. For we too pray to Him, yet do not inform Him what our necessities
are. “For your Father knoweth,” says His Word, “what things ye have need
of, before you ask Him.” <span id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988) Nor did
He become acquainted with them, so as to know them, at any definite
time; but He knew beforehand, without any beginning, all things to come
in time, and among them also both what we should ask of Him, and when;
and to whom He would either listen or not listen, and on what subjects.
And with respect to all His creatures, both spiritual and corporeal, He
does not know them because they are, but they are because He knows them.
For He was not ignorant of what He was about to create; therefore He
created because He knew; He did not know because He created. Nor did He
know them when created in any other way than He knew them when still to
be created, for nothing accrued to His wisdom from them; but that wisdom
remained as it was, while they came into existence as it was fitting and
when it was fitting. So, too, it is written in the book of
Ecclesiasticus: “All things are known to Him ere ever they were created:
so also after they were perfected.” <span
id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) “So,” he says, not otherwise; so were
they known to Him, both ere ever they were created, and after they were
perfected. This knowledge, therefore, is far unlike our knowledge. And
the knowledge of God is itself also His wisdom, and His wisdom is itself
His essence or substance. Because in the marvellous simplicity of that
nature, it is not one thing to be wise and another to be, but to be wise
is to be; as we have often said already also in the earlier books. But
our knowledge is in most things <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-Page_213"></span>capable both of being lost and of
being recovered, because to us to be is not the same as to know or to be
wise; since it is possible for us to be, even although we know not,
neither are wise in that which we have learned from elsewhere.
Therefore, as our knowledge is unlike that knowledge of God, so is our
word also, which is born from our knowledge, unlike that Word of God
which is born from the essence of the Father. And this is as if I should
say, born from the Father’s knowledge, from the Father’s wisdom; or
still more exactly, from the Father who is knowledge, from the Father
who is wisdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_988"></span>[212:989](1030232.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p3"></span> [Matt.
6.8](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_989"></span>[212:990](1030232.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p4"></span> [Ecclus.
23.20](../../../bib/apo/sir023.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p4.1"></span>[Ecclus. xxiii.
20](../../../bib/apo/sir023.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiii-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](1030233)
