[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030677)  [Next](1030679.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxxv"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxv-p1"></span> 34. For what is written in another place,
“Wish not to use every lie;” <span id="fr_2357"></span>[2358](#fn_2357.md)
they say is not of force for this, that a person is not to use any lie.
Therefore, when one man shall say, that according to this testimony of
Scripture we must to that degree hold every sort and kind of lie in
detestation, that even if a man wish to lie, yea, though he lie not, the
very wish is to be condemned; and to this sense interpreteth, that it is
not said, Do not use every lie, but, “Do not wish to use every lie;”
that one must not dare not only to tell, but not even to wish to tell,
any lie whatever: saith another man, “Nay, in that it saith, Do not wish
to use every lie, it willeth that from the mouth of the heart we
exterminate and estrange lying: so that while from some lies we must
abstain with the mouth of the body, as are those chiefly which pertain
to doctrine of religion; from some, we are not to abstain with the mouth
of the body, if reason of avoiding a greater evil require; but with the
mouth of the heart we must abstain utterly from every lie.” Where it
behoveth to be understood what is said, “Do not wish:” namely, the will
itself is taken as it were the mouth of the heart, so that it concerneth
not the mouth of the heart when in shunning a greater evil we lie
unwillingly. There is also a third sense in which thou mayest so take
this word, “not every,” that, except some lies, it giveth thee leave to
lie. Like as if he should say, wish not to believe every man: he would
not mean to advise that none should be believed; but that not all, some
however, should be believed. And that which follows, “For assiduity
thereof will not profit for good,” sounds as if, not lying, but
assiduous lying, that is, the custom and love of lying, should seem to
be that which he would prohibit. To which that person will assuredly
slide down, <span id="fr_2358"></span>[2359](#fn_2358.md) who either shall
think that every lie may be boldly used (for so he will shun not that
even which is committed in the doctrine of piety and religion; than
which what more abominably wicked thing canst thou easily find, not
among all lies, but among all sins?) or to some lie (no matter how easy,
how harmless,) shall accommodate the inclination of the will; so as to
lie, not unwillingly for the sake of escaping a greater evil, but
willingly and with liking. So, seeing there be three things which may be
understood in this sentence, either “Every lie, not only tell thou not,
but do not even wish to tell:” or, “Do not wish, but even unwillingly
tell a lie when aught worse is to be avoided:” or, “Not every,” to wit,
that except some lies, the rest are admitted: one of these is found to
make for those who hold that one is never to lie, two for those who
think that sometimes <span id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span
id="v.v.xxxv-Page_473"></span>one may tell a lie. But yet what follows,
“For assiduity thereof will not profit to good,” I know not whether it
can countenance the first sentence of these three; except haply so, that
while it is a precept for the perfect not only not to lie, but not even
to wish; assiduity of lying is not permitted even to beginners. As if,
namely, on laying down the rule at no time whatever not merely to lie
but so much as to have a wish to lie, and this being gainsaid by
examples, in regard that there are some lies which have been even
approved by great authority, it should be rejoined that those indeed are
lies of beginners, which have, in regard of this life, some kind of duty
of mercy; and yet to that degree is every lie evil, and by perfect and
spiritual minds in every way to be eschewed, that not even beginners are
permitted to have assiduous custom thereof. For we have already spoken
concerning the Egyptian midwives, that it is in respect of the promise
of growth and proficiency to better things that they while lying are
spoken of with approval: because it is some step towards loving the true
and eternal saving of the soul, when a person doth mercifully for the
saving of any man’s albeit mortal life even tell a lie.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2357"></span>[472:2358](1030678.htm#fr_2357.md) <span
id="v.v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxv-p2"></span> [Ecclus.
7.13](../../../bib/apo/sir007.htm#013.md)<span id="v.v.xxxv-p2.1"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.v.xxxv-p2.2"></span>μὴ θέλε ψεύδεσθαι
πᾶν Ψεῦδος</span>, *noli velle mentiri omne mendacium.* “Use not to make
any manner of lie,” E.V. “Every” is used for “any.”

<span id="fn_2358"></span>[472:2359](1030678.htm#fr_2358.md) <span
id="v.v.xxxv-p2.3"></span>

<span id="v.v.xxxv-p3"></span> *Abutendum*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 35](1030679.md)
