[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030453)  [Next](1030455) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxviii-p1"></span> 27. But now hear, what I trust I
shall by this time more easily persuade you of. In a matter of religion,
that is, of the worship and knowledge of God, they are less to be
followed, who forbid us to believe, making most ready professions of
reason. For no one doubts that all men are either fools or wise. <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743) But now I call wise, not clever and
gifted men, but those, in whom there is, so much as may be in man, the
knowledge of man himself and of God most surely received, and a life and
manners suitable to that knowledge; but all others, whatever be their
skill or want of skill, whatever their manner of life, whether to be
approved or disapproved, I would account in the number of fools. And,
this being so, who of moderate understanding but will clearly see, that
it is more useful and more healthful for fools to obey the precepts of
the wise, than to live by their own judgment? For everything that is
done, if it be not rightly done, is a sin, nor can that any how be
rightly done which proceeds not from right reason. Further, right reason
is very virtue. But to whom of men is virtue at hand, save to the mind
of the wise? Therefore the wise man alone sins not. Therefore every fool
sins, save in those actions, in which he hath obeyed a wise man: for all
such actions proceed from right reason, and, so to say, the fool is not
to be accounted master of his own action, he being, as it were, the
instrument and that which ministers <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) to the wise man. Wherefore, if it
be better for all men not to sin than to sin; assuredly all fools would
live better, if they could be slaves of the wise. And, if no one doubts
that this is better in lesser matters, as in buying and selling, and
cultivating the ground, in taking <span id="page_361">p. 361</span>
<span id="iv.vi.xxviii-Page_361"></span>a wife, in undertaking and
bringing <span id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) up children, lastly,
in the management of household property, much more in religion. For both
human matters are more easy to distinguish between, than divine; and in
all matters of greater sacredness and excellence, the greater obedience
and service we owe them, the more wicked and the more dangerous is it to
sin. Therefore you see henceforth <span
id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746) that nothing else is left us, so
long as we are fools, if our heart be set on an excellent and religious
life, but to seek wise men, by obeying whom we may be enabled both to
lessen the great feeling of the rule of folly, whilst it is in us, and
at the last to escape from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[360:1744](1030454.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="iv.vi.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxviii-p2"></span> cf. *Retract.* b. i. ch. 14. 4. “Also
what I said, ‘No one doubts that all men are either fools or wise,’ may
seem contrary to what is read in my third book *On Free Will,* (c. 24.)
‘as though human nature admitted of no middle state between folly and
wisdom.’ But that is said when the question was about the first man,
whether he was made wise, or foolish, or neither: since we could in no
wise call him foolish, who was made without fault, since folly is a
great fault, and how we could call him wise, who was capable of being
led astray, did not appear. So for shortness I thought well to say, ‘as
though human nature admitted of no middle state between folly and
wisdom.’ I also had infants in view, whom though we confess to bear with
them original sin, yet we cannot properly call either wise or foolish,
not as yet using free will either well or ill. But now I said that men
were either wise or foolish, meaning those to be understood who are
already using reason, by which they are distinguished from cattle, so as
to be men; as we say that ‘all men wish to be happy.’ For can we in so
true and manifest a statement be in fear of being supposed to mean
infants, who have not yet the power of so wishing?”

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[360:1745](1030454.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="iv.vi.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxviii-p3"></span> *Ministerium*

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[361:1746](1030454.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="iv.vi.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxviii-p4"></span> *Or “begetting,”—suscipiendis*

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[361:1747](1030454.htm#fr_1746) <span
id="iv.vi.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxviii-p5"></span> *Ben. ed.—a modo. Mss. admodum*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 28](1030455)
