[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030081)  [Next](1030083.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.vii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—Nothing is Spoken of God
According to Accident, But According to Substance or According to
Relation.</span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.v-p2"></span>6. Wherefore nothing in Him is said in
respect to accident, since nothing is accidental to Him, and yet all
that is said is not said according to substance. For in created and
changeable things, that which is not said according to substance, must,
by necessary alternative, be said according to accident. For all things
are accidents to them, which can be either lost or diminished, whether
magnitudes or qualities; and so also is that which is said in relation
to something, as friendships, relationships, services, likenesses,
equalities, and anything else of the kind; so also positions and
conditions, <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569.md) places and times,
acts and passions. But in God nothing is said to be according to
accident, because in Him nothing is changeable; and yet everything that
is said, is not said, according to substance. For it is said in relation
to something, as the Father in relation to the Son and the Son in
relation to the Father, which is not accident; because both the one is
always Father, and the other is always Son: yet not “always,” meaning
from the time when the Son was born \[*natus*\], so that the Father
ceases not to be the Father because the Son never *ceases* to be the
Son, but because the Son was *always* born, and never began to be the
Son. But if He had begun to be at any time, or were at any time to cease
to be, the Son, then He would be called Son according to accident. But
if the Father, in that He is called the Father, were so called in
relation to Himself, not to the Son; and the Son, in that He is called
the Son, were so called in relation to Himself, not to the Father; then
both the one would be called Father, and the other Son, according to
substance. But because the Father is not called the Father except in
that He has a Son, and the Son is not called Son except in that He has a
Father, these things are not said according to substance; because each
of them is not so called in relation to Himself, but the terms are used
reciprocally and in relation each to the other; nor yet according to
accident, because both the being called the Father, and the being called
the Son, is eternal and unchangeable to them. Wherefore, although to be
the Father and to be the Son is different, yet their substance is not
different; because they are so called, not according to substance, but
according to relation, which relation, however, is not accident, because
it is not changeable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_569"></span>[89:570](1030082.htm#fr_569.md) <span
id="iv.i.vii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vii.v-p3"></span> *Habitus*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1030083.md)
