[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030113)  [Next](1030115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.x.ii"></span><span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span
id="iv.i.x.ii-Page_116"></span>

<span id="iv.i.x.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.x.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 1.—It is Shown by Reason that in God
Three are Not Anything Greater Than One Person.</span>

<span id="iv.i.x.ii-p2"></span>2. For we say that in this Trinity two or
three persons are not anything greater than one of them; which carnal
perception does not receive, for no other reason except because it
perceives as it can the true things which are created, but cannot
discern the truth itself by which they are created; for if it could,
then the very corporeal light would in no way be more clear than this
which we have said. For in respect to the substance of truth, since it
alone truly is, nothing is greater, unless because it more truly
is. <span id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661.md) But in respect to whatsoever
is intelligible and unchangeable, no one thing is more truly than
another, since all alike are unchangeably eternal; and that which
therein is called great, is not great from any other source than from
that by which it truly is. Wherefore, where magnitude itself is truth,
whatsoever has more of magnitude must needs have more of truth;
whatsoever therefore has not more of truth, has not also more of
magnitude. Further, whatsoever has more of truth is certainly more true,
just as that is greater which has more of magnitude; therefore in
respect to the substance of truth that is more great which is more true.
But the Father and the Son together are not more truly than the Father
singly, or the Son singly. Both together, therefore, are not anything
greater than each of them singly. And since also the Holy Spirit equally
is truly, the Father and Son together are not anything greater than He,
since neither are they more truly. The Father also and the Holy Spirit
together, since they do not surpass the Son in truth (for they are not
more truly), do not surpass Him either in magnitude. And so the Son and
the Holy Spirit together are just as great as the Father alone, since
they are as truly. So also the Trinity itself is as great as each
several person therein. For where truth itself is magnitude, that is not
more great which is not more true: since in regard to the essence of
truth, to be true is the same as to be, and to be is the same as to be
great; therefore to be great is the same as to be true. And in regard to
it, therefore, what is equally true must needs also be equally great.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_661"></span>[116:662](1030114.htm#fr_661.md) <span
id="iv.i.x.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.x.ii-p3"></span> \[In this and the following chapter, the
meaning of Augustin will be clearer, if the Latin “*veritas*,” “*vera*,”
and “*vere*,” are rendered occasionally, by “reality,” “real,” and
“really.” He is endeavoring to prove the equality of the three persons,
by the fact that they are equally real (true), and the degree of their
reality (truth) is the same. Real being is true being; reality is truth.
In common phraseology, truth and reality are synonymous.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](1030115.md)
