[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030173)  [Next](1030175.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 12.—There is a Kind of Hidden
Wedlock in the Inner Man. Unlawful Pleasures of the Thoughts.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p2"></span>17. Let us now complete, so far as the
Lord helps us, the discussion which we have undertaken, respecting that
part of reason to which knowledge belongs, that is, the cognizance of
things temporal and changeable, which is necessary for managing the
affairs of this life. For as in the case of that visible wedlock of the
two human beings who were made first, the serpent did not eat of the
forbidden tree, but only persuaded them to eat of it; and the woman did
not eat alone, but gave to her husband, and they eat together; although
she alone spoke with the serpent, and she alone was led away by
him: <span id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774.md) so also in the case of that
hidden and secret kind of wedlock, which is transacted and discerned in
a single human being, the carnal, or as I may say, since it is directed
to the senses of the body, the sensuous movement of the soul, which is
common to us with beasts, is shut off from the reason of wisdom. For
certainly bodily things are perceived by the sense of the body; but
spiritual things, which are eternal and unchangeable, are understood by
the reason of wisdom. But the reason of knowledge has appetite very near
to it: seeing that what is called the science or knowledge of actions
reasons concerning the bodily things which are perceived by the bodily
sense; if well, in order that it may refer that knowledge to the end of
the chief good; but if ill, in order that it may enjoy them as being
such good things as those wherein it reposes with a false blessedness.
Whenever, then, that carnal or animal sense introduces into this purpose
of the mind which is conversant about things temporal and corporeal,
<span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-Page_162"></span>with a view to the offices of a man’s
actions, by the living force of reason, some inducement to enjoy itself,
that is, to enjoy itself as if it were some private good of its own, not
as the public and common, which is the unchangeable, good; then, as it
were, the serpent discourses with the woman. And to consent to this
allurement, is to eat of the forbidden tree. But if that consent is
satisfied by the pleasure of thought alone, but the members are so
restrained by the authority of higher counsel that they are not yielded
as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; <span
id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775.md) this, I think, is to be considered as
if the woman alone should have eaten the forbidden food. But if, in this
consent to use wickedly the things which are perceived through the
senses of the body, any sin at all is so determined upon, that if there
is the power it is also fulfilled by the body; then that woman must be
understood to have given the unlawful food to her husband with her, to
be eaten together. For it is not possible for the mind to determine that
a sin is not only to be thought of with pleasure, but also to be
effectually committed, unless also that intention of the mind yields,
and serves the bad action, with which rests the chief power of applying
the members to an outward act, or of restraining them from one.

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p5"></span>18. And yet, certainly, when the mind
is pleased in thought alone with unlawful things, while not indeed
determining that they are to be done, but yet holding and pondering
gladly things which ought to have been rejected the very moment they
touched the mind, it cannot be denied to be a sin, but far less than if
it were also determined to accomplished it in outward act. And therefore
pardon must be sought for such thoughts too, and the breast must be
smitten, and it must be said, “Forgive us our debts;” and what follows
must be done, and must be joined in our prayer, “As we also forgive our
debtors.” <span id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776.md) For it is not as it
was with those two first human beings, of which each one bare his own
person; and so, if the woman alone had eaten the forbidden food, she
certainly alone would have been smitten with the punishment of death: it
cannot, I say, be so said also in the case of a single human being now,
that if the thought, remaining alone, be gladly fed with unlawful
pleasures, from which it ought to turn away directly, while yet there is
no determination that the bad actions are to be done, but only that they
are retained with pleasure in remembrance, the woman as it were can be
condemned without the man. Far be it from us to believe this. For here
is one person, one human being, and he as a whole will be condemned,
unless those things which, as lacking the will to do, and yet having the
will to please the mind with them, are perceived to be sins of thought
alone, are pardoned through the grace of the Mediator. <span
id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777.md)

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p8"></span>19. This reasoning, then, whereby we
have sought in the mind of each several human being a certain rational
wedlock of contemplation and action, with functions distributed through
each severally, yet with the unity of the mind preserved in both; saving
meanwhile the truth of that *history* which divine testimony hands down
respecting the first two human beings, that is, the man and his wife,
from whom the human species is propagated; <span
id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778.md) —this reasoning, I say, must be
listened to only thus far, that the apostle may be understood to have
intended to signify something to be sought in one individual man, by
assigning the image of God to the man only, and not also to the woman,
although in the merely different sex of two human beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_774"></span>[161:775](1030174.htm#fr_774.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p3"></span> [Gen.
3.1-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p3.1"></span>[Gen. iii.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_775"></span>[162:776](1030174.htm#fr_775.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p4"></span> [Rom.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p4.1"></span>[Rom. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_776"></span>[162:777](1030174.htm#fr_776.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p6"></span> [Matt.
6.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_777"></span>[162:778](1030174.htm#fr_777.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p7"></span> \[Augustin here teaches that the
inward lust is guilt as well as the outward action prompted by it. This
is in accordance with [Matt. 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028.md),
[Acts 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#021.md), [Rom.
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007.md), [Jas.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p7.1"></span>[Matt. v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p7.2"></span>; [Acts viii.
21-22](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p7.3"></span>; [Rom. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p7.4"></span>;
[James i. 14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p7.5"></span>.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_778"></span>[162:779](1030174.htm#fr_778.md) <span
id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv.xii-p9"></span> \[Augustin means, that while he has
given an allegorical and mystical interpretation to the narrative of the
fall, in Genesis, he also holds to its historical sense.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](1030175.md)
