[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030631)  [Next](1030633.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xx-p1"></span> 19. These discussions, therefore,
concerning the different deserts of married women, and of different
widows, I would not in this work enter upon, if, what I am writing unto
you, I were writing only for you. But, since there are in this kind of
discourse certain very difficult questions, it was my wish to say
something more than what properly relates to you, by reason of certain,
who seem not to themselves learned, unless they essay, not by passing
judgment to discuss, but by rending to cut in pieces the labors of
others: in the next place, that you yourself also may not only keep what
you have vowed, and make advance in that good; but also know more
carefully and more surely, that this same good of yours is not
distinguished from the evil of marriage, but is set before the good of
marriage. For let not such, as condemn the marriage of widowed females,
although they exercise their continence in abstaining from many things,
which you make use of, on this account lead you astray, to think what
they think, although you cannot do what they do. For no one would be a
madman, although he see that the strength of a madman is greater than of
men in their sound senses. Chiefly, therefore, let sound doctrine both
adorn and guard goodness of purpose. Forsooth it is from this cause that
catholic females, even after that they have been married more than once,
are by just judgment preferred, not only to the widows who have had one
husband, but also to the virgins of heretics. There are indeed on these
three matters, of marriage, widowhood, and virginity, many winding
recesses of questions, many perplexities; and in order by discussion to
enter deeply into and solve these, there is required both greater care,
and a fuller discourse; that either we may have a right mind in all
those things, or, if in any matter we be otherwise minded, this also God
may reveal unto us. However, what there also the Apostle saith next
after, “Whereunto we have arrived, in that let us walk.” <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263.md) But we have arrived, in what
relates to this matter on which we are speaking, so far as to set
continence before marriage, but holy virginity even before widowed
continence; and not to condemn any marriages, which yet are not
adulteries but marriages, by praise of any purpose whatever of our own
or of our friends. Many other things on these matters we have said in a
Book concerning the Good of Marriage, and in another Book concerning
Holy Virginity, and in a Book which we composed with as great pains as
we could against Faustus the Manichee; since, by most biting reproaches
in his writ<span id="page_449">p. 449</span> <span
id="v.iv.xx-Page_449"></span>ings of the chaste marriages of Patriarchs
and Prophets, he had turned aside the minds of certain unlearned persons
from soundness of faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[448:2264](1030632.htm#fr_2263.md) <span
id="v.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.xx-p2"></span> [Phil.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#016.md)<span
id="v.iv.xx-p2.1"></span>[Phil. 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#016.md)<span id="v.iv.xx-p2.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 20](1030633.md)
