[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030232)  [Next](1030234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 14.—The Word of God is in All
Things Equal to the Father, from Whom It is.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p2"></span>23. The Word of God, then, the
only-begotten Son of the Father, in all things like and equal to the
Father, God of God, Light of Light, Wisdom of Wisdom, Essence of
Essence, is altogether that which the Father is, yet is not the Father,
because the one is Son, the other is Father. And hence He knows all that
the Father knows; but to Him to know, as to be, is from the Father, for
to know and to be is there one. And therefore, as to be is not to the
Father from the Son, so neither is to know. Accordingly, as though
uttering Himself, the Father begat the Word equal to Himself in all
things; for He would not have uttered Himself wholly and perfectly, if
there were in His Word anything more or less than in Himself. And here
that is recognized in the highest sense, “Yea, yea; nay, nay.” <span
id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) And therefore this Word is truly
truth, since whatever is in that knowledge from which it is born is also
in itself and whatever is not in that knowledge is not in the Word. And
this Word can never have anything false, because it is unchangeable, as
He is from whom it is. For “the Son can do nothing of Himself, but what
He seeth the Father do.” <span id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) Through
power He cannot do this; nor is it infirmity, but strength, by which
truth cannot be false. Therefore God the Father knows all things in
Himself, knows all things in the Son; but in Himself as though Himself,
in the Son as though His own Word which Word is spoken concerning all
those things that are in Himself. Similarly the Son knows all things,
*viz*. in Himself, as things which are born of those which the Father
knows in Himself, and in the Father, as those of which they are born,
which the Son Himself knows in Himself. The Father then, and the Son
know mutually; but the one by begetting, the other by being born. And
each of them sees simultaneously all things that are in their knowledge,
in their wisdom, in their essence: not by parts or singly, as though by
alternately looking from this side to that, and from that side to this,
and again from this or that object to this or that object, so as not to
be able to see some things without at the same time not seeing others;
but, as I said, sees all things simultaneously, whereof there is not one
that He does not always see.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p5"></span>24. And that word, then, of ours
which has neither sound nor thought of sound, but is of that thing in
seeing which we speak inwardly, and which therefore belongs to no
tongue; and hence is in some sort like, in this enigma, to that Word of
God which is also God; since this too is born of our knowledge, in such
manner as that also is born of the knowledge of the Father: such a word,
I say, of ours, which we find to be in some way like that Word, let us
not be slow to consider how unlike also it is, as it may be in our power
to utter it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_990"></span>[213:991](1030233.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p3"></span> [Matt.
5.37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_991"></span>[213:992](1030233.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p4"></span> [John
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p4.1"></span>[John v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xiv-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](1030234)
