[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030398)  [Next](1030400.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 25.—Of Constancy in the Faith of
the Resurrection.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>46. “Therefore, brother, confirm
yourself in the name and help of Him in whom you believe, so as to
withstand the tongues of those who mock at our faith, in whose case the
devil speaks seductive words, bent above all on making a mockery of the
faith in a resurrection. But, judging from your own history, <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485.md) believe that, seeing you have been,
you will also be hereafter, even as you perceive yourself now to be,
although previously you were not. For where was this great structure of
your body, and where this formation and compacted connection of members
a few years ago, before you were born, or even before you were conceived
in your mother’s womb? Where, I repeat, was then this structure and this
stature of your body? Did it not come forth to light from the hidden
secrets of this creation, under the invisible formative operations of
the Lord God, and did it not rise to its present magnitude and fashion
by those fixed measures of increase which come with the successive
periods of life? <span id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486.md) Is it then
in any way a difficult thing for God, who also in a moment brings
together out of secrecy the masses of the clouds and veils the heavens
in an instant of time, to make this quantity of your body again what it
was, seeing that He was able to make it what formerly it was not? <span
id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487.md) Consequently, believe with a manful
and unshaken spirit that all those things which seem to be withdrawn
from the eyes of men as if to perish, are safe and exempt from loss in
relation to the omnipotence of God, who will restore them, without any
delay or difficulty, when He is so minded,—those of them at least, I
should say, that are judged by His justice to merit restoration; in
order that men may give account of their deeds in their very bodies in
which they have done them; and that in these they may be deemed worthy
to receive either the exchange of heavenly incorruption in accordance
with the deserts of their piety, or the corruptible condition of
body <span id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488.md) in accordance with the
deserts of their wickedness,—and that, too, not a condition such as may
be done away with by death, but such as shall furnish material for
everlasting pains.

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p7"></span>47. “Flee, therefore, by steadfast
faith and good manners,—flee, brother, those torments in which neither
the torturers fail, nor do the tortured die; to whom it is death without
end, to be unable to die in their pains. And be kindled with love and
longing for the everlasting life of the saints, in which neither will
action be toilsome nor will rest be indolent; in which the praise of God
will be without irksomeness and without defect; wherein there will be no
weariness in the mind, no exhaustion in the body; wherein, too, there
shall be no want, whether on your own part, so that you should crave for
relief, or on your neighbor’s part, so that you should be in haste to
carry relief to him. God will be the whole enjoyment and
satisfaction <span id="fr_1489"></span>[1490](#fn_1489.md) of that holy
city, which lives in Him and of Him, in wisdom and beatitude. For as we
hope and look for what has been promised by Him, we shall be made equal
to the angels of God, <span id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490.md) and
together with them we shall enjoy that Trinity now by sight, wherein at
present we walk by faith. <span id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491.md) For
we believe that which we see not, in order that through these very
deserts of faith we may be counted worthy also to see that which we
believe, and to abide in it; to the intent that these mysteries of the
equality of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and the unity of
this same Trinity, and the manner in which these three subsistences are
one God, need no more be uttered by us in words of faith and sounding
syllables, but may be drunk in in purest and most burning contemplation
in that silence.

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p11"></span>48. “These things hold fixed in your
heart, and call upon the God in whom you believe, to defend you against
the temptations of the devil; and be careful, lest that adversary come
stealthily upon you from a strange quarter, who, as a most malevolent
solace for his own damnation, seeks others whose companionship he may
obtain in that damnation. For he is bold enough not only to tempt
Christian people through the instrumentality of those who hate the
Christian name, or are pained to see the world taken possession of by
that name, and still fondly desire to do service to idols and to the
curious rites of evil spirits, but at times he also attempts the same
through the agency of such men as we have mentioned a little ago, to
wit, persons severed from the unity of the Church, like the twigs which
are lopped off when the vine is pruned, who are called heretics or <span
id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-Page_311"></span>schismatics. Howbeit sometimes also he
makes the same effort by means of the Jews, seeking to tempt and seduce
believers by their instrumentality. Nevertheless, what ought above all
things to be guarded against is, that no individual may suffer himself
to be tempted and deceived by men who are within the Catholic Church
itself, and who are borne by it like the chaff that is sustained against
the time of its winnowing. For in being patient toward such persons, God
has this end in view, namely, to exercise and confirm the faith and
prudence of His elect by means of the perverseness of these others while
at the same time He also takes account of the fact that many of their
number make an advance, and are converted to the doing of the good
pleasure of God with a great impetus, when led to take pity upon their
own souls. <span id="fr_1492"></span>[1493](#fn_1492.md) For not all
treasure up for themselves, through the patience of God, wrath in the
day of the wrath of His just judgment; <span
id="fr_1493"></span>[1494](#fn_1493.md) but many are brought by the same
patience of the Almighty to the most wholesome pain of repentance. <span
id="fr_1494"></span>[1495](#fn_1494.md) And until that is effected, they
are made the means of exercising not only the forbearance, but also the
compassion of those who are already holding by the right way.
Accordingly, you will have to witness many drunkards, covetous men,
deceivers gamesters, adulterers, fornicators, men who bind upon their
persons sacrilegious charms and others given up to sorcerers and
astrologers, <span id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495.md) and diviners
practised in all kinds of impious arts. You will also have to observe
how those very crowds which fill the theatres on the festal days of the
pagans also fill the churches on the festal days of the Christians. And
when you see these things you will be tempted to imitate them. Nay, why
should I use the expression, *you will see*, in reference to what you
assuredly are acquainted with even already? For you are not ignorant of
the fact that many who are called Christians engage in all these evil
things which I have briefly mentioned. Neither are you ignorant that at
times, perchance, men whom you know to bear the name of Christians are
guilty of even more grievous offenses than these. But if you have come
with the notion that you may do such things as in a secured position,
you are greatly in error; neither will the name of Christ be of any
avail to you when He begins to judge in utmost strictness, who also of
old condescended in utmost mercy to come to man’s relief. For He Himself
has foretold these things, and speaks to this effect in the Gospel: ‘Not
every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven; but he that doeth the will of my Father. Many shall say unto
me in that day, Lord, Lord, in thy name we have eaten and
drunken.’ <span id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496.md) For all, therefore,
who persevere in such works the end is damnation. Consequently, when you
see many not only doing these things but also defending and recommending
them, keep yourself firmly by the law of God, and follow not its willful
transgressors. For it is not according to their mind, but according to
His <span id="fr_1497"></span>[1498](#fn_1497.md) truth that you will be
judged.

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p18"></span>49. “Associate with the good, whom you
perceive to be at one with you in loving your King. For there are many
such for you to discover, if you also begin to cultivate that character
yourself. For if in the public spectacles you wished to be in congenial
company, and to attach yourself closely <span
id="fr_1498"></span>[1499](#fn_1498.md) to men who are united with you in a
liking for some charioteer, or some hunter, or some player or other, how
much more ought you to find pleasure in associating with those who are
at one with you in loving that God, with regard to whom no one that
loves Him shall ever have cause for the blush of shame, inasmuch as not
only is He Himself incapable of being overcome, but He will also render
those unconquerable who are affectionately disposed toward Him. At the
same time, not even on those same good men, who either anticipate you or
accompany you on the way to God, ought you to set your hope, seeing that
no more ought you to place it on yourself, however great may be the
progress you have made, but on Him who justifies both them and you, and
thus makes you what you are. For you are secure in God, because He
changes not; but in man no one prudently counts himself secure. But if
we ought to love those who are not righteous as yet, with the view that
they may be so, how much more warmly ought those to be loved who already
are righteous? At the same time, it is one thing to love man, and
another thing to set one’s hope in man; and the difference is so great,
that God enjoins the one and forbids the other. Moreover, if you have to
<span id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-Page_312"></span>sustain either any insults or any
sufferings in the cause of the name of Christ, and neither fall away
from the faith nor decline from the good way, <span
id="fr_1499"></span>[1500](#fn_1499.md) you are certain to receive the
greater reward; whereas those who give way to the devil in such
circumstances, lose even the less reward. But be humble toward God, in
order that He may not permit you to be tempted beyond your strength.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[310:1486](1030399.htm#fr_1485.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p3"></span> *Sed ex te ipso crede*. It may also =
but, on your side, do you believe.

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[310:1487](1030399.htm#fr_1486.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p4"></span> *Certisque ætatum incrementis*, etc.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[310:1488](1030399.htm#fr_1487.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p5"></span> Reading *sicut non erat*; for which,
however, *cum non erat* also occurs = seeing He was able to make it when
it was not.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[310:1489](1030399.htm#fr_1488.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p6"></span> *Corruptibilem corporis conditionem*.
But *corruptibilis* also occurs = the condition of a corruptible body.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[310:1490](1030399.htm#fr_1489.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p8"></span> *Satietas*. Some editions, however,
give *societas* = the society.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[310:1491](1030399.htm#fr_1490.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p9"></span> [Luke
20.36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>[Luke xx.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[310:1492](1030399.htm#fr_1491.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p10"></span> [2 Cor.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>[2 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[311:1493](1030399.htm#fr_1492.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p12"></span> *Ad placendum Deo miserati animas
suas*, etc. Instead of *miserati* the reading *miseranti* also occurs =
"to" the doing of the good pleasure of the God who takes pity on their
souls. The Benedictine editors suggest that the whole clause is in
reference to [Sir. 30:23](../../../bib/apo/sir030.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/apo/sir030.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>[Ecclesiasticus xxx.
24](../../../bib/apo/sir030.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>, (23), which in the Latin runs thus:
*miserere animæ tuæ placens Deo*.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[311:1494](1030399.htm#fr_1493.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p13"></span> [Rom.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>[Rom. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[311:1495](1030399.htm#fr_1494.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p14"></span> Cf. [Rom.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>[Rom. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[311:1496](1030399.htm#fr_1495.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p15"></span> *Mathematicis*

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[311:1497](1030399.htm#fr_1496.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p16"></span> [Matt.
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[311:1498](1030399.htm#fr_1497.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p17"></span> Or = its (*i.e*. the law’s) truth.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[311:1499](1030399.htm#fr_1498.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p19"></span> Adopting *nam si in spectaculis cum
illis esse cupiebas et eis inhærere*. Another, but less weightily
supported reading, is, *nam si in spectaculis et vanitatibus insanorum
certaminum illis cupiebas inhærere* = for if in the public spectacles
and vanities of mad struggles you wish to attach yourself closely to
men, etc.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[312:1500](1030399.htm#fr_1499.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxvi-p20"></span> *Bona via*. Another and well
authenticated rendering is, *bona vita* = the good life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](1030400.md)
