[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030237)  [Next](1030239.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 19.—The Holy Spirit is Called the
Gift of God in the Scriptures. By the Gift of the Holy Spirit is Meant
the Gift Which is the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is Specially Called
Love, Although Not Only the Holy Spirit in the Trinity is Love.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p2"></span>33. Is this too to be proved, that
the Holy Spirit is called in the sacred books the gift of God? If people
look for this too, we have in the Gospel according to John the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who says, “If any one thirst, let him come to me
and drink: he that believeth on me, as the Scripture saith, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water.” And the evangelist has gone on
further to add, “And this He spake of the Spirit, which they should
receive who believe in Him.” <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015.md)
And hence Paul the apostle also says, “And we have all been made to
drink into one Spirit.” <span id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016.md) The
question then is, whether that water is called the gift of God which is
the Holy Spirit. But as we find here that this water is the Holy Spirit,
so we find elsewhere in the Gospel itself that this water is called the
gift of God. For when the same Lord was talking with the woman of
Samaria at the well, to whom He had said, “Give me <span
id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-Page_218"></span>to
drink,” and she had answered that the Jews “have no dealings” with the
Samaritans, Jesus answered and said unto her, “If thou hadst known the
gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou
wouldest have asked of Him, and He would have given thee living water.
The woman saith unto Him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the
well is deep: whence then hast thou this living water, etc.? Jesus
answered and said unto her, Every one that drinketh of this water shall
thirst again; but whose shall drink of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him
a fountain of water springing up unto eternal life.” <span
id="fr_1017"></span>[1018](#fn_1017.md) Because this living water, then, as
the evangelist has explained to us, is the Holy Spirit, without doubt
the Spirit is the gift of God, of which the Lord says here, “If thou
hadst known the gift of God, and who it is that saith unto thee, Give me
to drink, thou wouldest have asked of Him, and He would have given thee
living water.” For that which is in the one passage, “Out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water,” is in the other, “shall be in him a
fountain of water springing up unto eternal life.”

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p6"></span>34. Paul the apostle also says, “To
each of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ;” and then, that he might show that by the gift of Christ he
meant the Holy Spirit, he has gone on to add, “Wherefore He saith, He
hath ascended up on high, He hath led captivity captive, and hath given
gifts to men.” <span id="fr_1018"></span>[1019](#fn_1018.md) And every one
knows that the Lord Jesus, when He had ascended into heaven after the
resurrection from the dead, gave the Holy Spirit, with whom they who
believed were filled, and spake with the tongues of all nations. And let
no one object that he says *gifts*, not *gift*: for he quoted the text
from the Psalm. And in the Psalm it is read thus, “Thou hast ascended up
on high, Thou hast led captivity captive, Thou hast received gifts in
men.” <span id="fr_1019"></span>[1020](#fn_1019.md) For so it stands in
many <span class="c19"><span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p8.3"></span>mss</span>.,
especially in the Greek <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p8.4"></span> mss</span>., and so we have it
translated from the Hebrew. The apostle therefore said *gifts*, as the
prophet did, not *gift*. But whereas the prophet said, “Thou hast
received gifts in men,” the apostle has preferred saying, “He gave gifts
to men:” and this in order that the fullest sense may be gathered from
both expressions, the one prophetic, the other apostolic; because both
possess the authority of a divine utterance. For both are true, as well
that He gave to men, as that He received in men. He gave to men, as the
head to His own members: He Himself that gave, received in men, no doubt
as in His own members; on account of which, namely, His own members, He
cried from heaven, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?” <span
id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020.md) And of which, namely, His own
members, He says, “Since ye have done it to one of the least of these
that are mine, ye have done it unto me.” <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021.md) Christ Himself, therefore, both
gave from heaven and received on earth. And further, both prophet and
apostle have said gifts for this reason, because many gifts, which are
proper to each, are divided in common to all the members of Christ, by
the Gift, which is the Holy Spirit. For each severally has not all, but
some have these and some have those; although all have the Gift itself
by which that which is proper to each is divided to Him, *i.e.* the Holy
Spirit. For elsewhere also, when he had mentioned many gifts, “All
these,” he says, “worketh that one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to
each severally as He will.” <span id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022.md)
And this word is found also in the Epistle to the Hebrews, where it is
written, “God also bearing witness both with signs and wonders, and with
divers miracles, and gifts <span id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023.md) of
the Holy Ghost.” <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024.md) And so here,
when he had said, “He ascended up on high, He led captivity captive, He
gave gifts to men,” he says further, “But that He ascended, what is it
but that He also first descended into the lower parts of the earth? He
who descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens,
that He might fill all things. And He gave some apostles, some prophets,
and some evangelists, and some pastors and doctors.” (This we see is the
reason why gifts are spoken of; because, as he says elsewhere, “Are all
apostles? are all prophets?” <span id="fr_1025"></span>[1026](#fn_1025.md)
etc.) And here he has added, “For the perfecting of the saints, for the
work of the ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ.” <span
id="fr_1026"></span>[1027](#fn_1026.md) This is the house which, as the
Psalm sings, is built up after the captivity; <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1028](#fn_1027.md) since the house of Christ, which
house is called His Church, is built up of those who have been rescued
from the devil, by whom they were held captive. But He Himself led this
captivity captive, who conquered the devil. And that he might not draw
with him into eternal punishment those who were to become the members of
the Holy Head, He bound him first by the bonds of righteousness, and
then by those of might. The devil himself, there<span id="page_219">p.
219</span> <span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-Page_219"></span>fore, is called
captivity, which He led captive who ascended up on high, and gave gifts
to men, or received gifts in men.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p17"></span>35. And Peter the apostle, as we
read in that canonical book, wherein the Acts of the Apostles are
recorded,—when the hearts of the Jews were troubled as he spake of
Christ, and they said, “Brethren, what shall we do? tell us,”—said to
them, “Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins: and ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Spirit.” <span id="fr_1028"></span>[1029](#fn_1028.md) And we
read likewise in the same book, that Simon Magus desired to give money
to the apostles, that he might receive power from them, whereby the Holy
Spirit might be given by the laying on of his hands. And the same Peter
said to him, “Thy money perish with thee: because thou hast thought to
purchase for money the gift of God.” <span
id="fr_1029"></span>[1030](#fn_1029.md) And in another place of the same
book, when Peter was speaking to Cornelius, and to those who were with
him, and was announcing and preaching Christ, the Scripture says, “While
Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell upon all them
that heard the word; and they of the circumcision that believed, as many
as came with Peter, were astonished, because that upon the Gentiles also
the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out. For they heard them speak
with tongues, and magnify God.” <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1031](#fn_1030.md) And when Peter afterwards was
giving an account to the brethren that were at Jerusalem of this act of
his, that he had baptized those who were not circumcised, because the
Holy Spirit, to cut the knot of the question, had come upon them before
they were baptized, and the brethren at Jerusalem were moved when they
heard it, he says, after the rest of his words, “And when I began to
speak to them, the Holy Spirit fell upon them, as upon us in the
beginning. And I remembered the word of the Lord, how He said, that John
indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Spirit. If, therefore, He gave a like gift to them, as also to us who
believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could hinder God
from giving to them the Holy Spirit?” <span
id="fr_1031"></span>[1032](#fn_1031.md) And there are many other
testimonies of the Scriptures, which unanimously attest that the Holy
Spirit is the gift of God, in so far as He is given to those who by Him
love God. But it is too long a task to collect them all. And what is
enough to satisfy those who are not satisfied with those we have
alleged?

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p22"></span>36. Certainly they must be warned,
since they now see that the Holy Spirit is called the gift of God, that
when they hear of “the gift of the Holy Spirit,” they should recognize
therein that mode of speech which is found in the words, “In the
spoiling of the body of the flesh.” <span
id="fr_1032"></span>[1033](#fn_1032.md) For as the body of the flesh is
nothing else but the flesh, so the gift of the Holy Spirit is nothing
else but the Holy Spirit. He is then the gift of God, so far as He is
given to those to whom He is given. But in Himself He is God, although
He were given to no one, because He was God co-eternal with the Father
and the Son before He was given to any one. Nor is He less than they,
because they give, and He is given. For He is given as a gift of God in
such way that He Himself also gives Himself as being God. For He cannot
be said not to be in His own power, of whom it is said, “The Spirit
bloweth where it listeth;” <span id="fr_1033"></span>[1034](#fn_1033.md)
and the apostle says, as I have already mentioned above, “All these
things worketh that selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as
He will.” We have not here the creating of Him that is given, and the
rule of them that give, but the concord of the given and the givers.

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p25"></span>37. Wherefore, if Holy Scripture
proclaims that God is love, and that love is of God, and works this in
us that we abide in God and He in us, and that hereby we know this,
because He has given us of His Spirit, then the Spirit Himself is God,
who is love. Next, if there be among the gifts of God none greater than
love, and there is no greater gift of God than the Holy Spirit, what
follows more naturally than that He is Himself love, who is called both
God and of God? And if the love by which the Father loves the Son, and
the Son loves the Father, ineffably demonstrates the communion of both,
what is more suitable than that He should be specially called love, who
is the Spirit common to both? For this is the sounder thing both to
believe and to understand, that the Holy Spirit is not alone love in
that Trinity, yet is not specially called love to no purpose, for the
reasons we have alleged; just as He is not alone in that Trinity either
a Spirit or holy, since both the Father is a Spirit, and the Son is a
Spirit; and both the Father is holy, and the Son is holy,—as piety
doubts not. And yet it is not to no purpose that He is specially called
the Holy Spirit; for because He is common to both, He is specially
called that which both are in common. Otherwise, if in that Trinity the
Holy Spirit alone is love, then doubtless the Son too turns out to be
the Son, not of the Father only, but also of the Holy <span
id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-Page_220"></span>Spirit. For He is both said and read
in countless places to be so,—the only-begotten Son of God the Father;
as that what the apostle says of God the Father is true too: “Who hath
delivered us from the power of darkness and hath translated us into the
kingdom of the Son of His own love.” <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034.md) He did not say, “of His own Son.”
If He had so said, He would have said it most truly, just as He did say
it most truly, because He has often said it; but He says, “the Son of
His own love.” Therefore He is the Son also of the Holy Spirit, if there
is in that Trinity no love in God except the Holy Spirit. And if this is
most absurd, it remains that the Holy Spirit is not alone therein love,
but is specially so called for the reasons I have sufficiently set
forth; and that the words, “Son of His own love,” mean nothing else than
His own beloved Son,—the Son, in short, of His own substance. For the
love in the Father, which is in His ineffably simple nature, is nothing
else than His very nature and substance itself,—as we have already often
said, and are not ashamed of often repeating. And hence the “Son of His
love,” is none other than He who is born of His substance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[217:1016](1030238.htm#fr_1015.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p3"></span> [John
7.37-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p3.1"></span>[John vii.
37-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[217:1017](1030238.htm#fr_1016.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
12.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p4.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[218:1018](1030238.htm#fr_1017.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p5"></span> [John
4.7-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p5.1"></span>[John iv.
7-14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[218:1019](1030238.htm#fr_1018.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p7"></span> [Eph.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p7.1"></span>[Eph.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[218:1020](1030238.htm#fr_1019.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p8"></span> [Ps.
68.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p8.1"></span>[Ps. lxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[218:1021](1030238.htm#fr_1020.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p8.5"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p9"></span> [Acts
9.4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p9.1"></span>[Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[218:1022](1030238.htm#fr_1021.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p10"></span> [Matt.
25.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[218:1023](1030238.htm#fr_1022.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p11"></span> [1 Cor.
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p11.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[218:1024](1030238.htm#fr_1023.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p12"></span> *Distributionibus*

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[218:1025](1030238.htm#fr_1024.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p13"></span> [Heb.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p13.1"></span>[Heb. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[218:1026](1030238.htm#fr_1025.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
12.29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p14.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[218:1027](1030238.htm#fr_1026.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p15"></span> [Eph.
4.7-12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p15.1"></span>[Eph. iv.
7-12](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[218:1028](1030238.htm#fr_1027.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p16"></span> [Ps.
126.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p16.1"></span>[Ps. cxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[219:1029](1030238.htm#fr_1028.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p18"></span> [Acts
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p18.1"></span>[Acts
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[219:1030](1030238.htm#fr_1029.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p19"></span> [Acts
8.18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p19.1"></span>[Acts viii.
18-20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[219:1031](1030238.htm#fr_1030.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p20"></span> [Acts
10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044.md),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p20.1"></span>[Acts
10:44](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#044.md),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#046.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[219:1032](1030238.htm#fr_1031.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p21"></span> [Acts
11.15-17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p21.1"></span>[Acts xi.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[219:1033](1030238.htm#fr_1032.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p23"></span> [Col.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p23.1"></span>[Col. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[219:1034](1030238.htm#fr_1033.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p24"></span> [John
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p24.1"></span>[John iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[220:1035](1030238.htm#fr_1034.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p26"></span> [Col.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p26.1"></span>[Col. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvii.xix-p26.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](1030239.md)
