[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030016)  [Next](1030018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter 10.—In What Manner Christ Shall
Deliver Up the Kingdom to God, Even the Father. The Kingdom Having Been
Delivered to God, Even the Father, Christ Will Not Then Make
Intercession for Us.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p2"></span>20. Our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore,
will so deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, Himself not
being thence excluded, nor the Holy Spirit, when He shall bring
believers to the contemplation of God, wherein is the end of all good
actions, and everlasting rest, and joy which never will be taken from
us. For He signifies this in that which He says: “I will see you again,
and your heart shall rejoice; and your joy no man taketh from
you.” <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) Mary, sitting at the feet
of the Lord, and earnestly listening to His word, foreshowed a
similitude of this joy; resting as she did from all business, and intent
upon the truth, according to that manner of which this life is capable,
by which, however, to prefigure that which shall be for eternity. For
while Martha, her sister, was cumbered about necessary business, which,
although good and useful, yet, when rest shall have succeeded, is to
pass away, she herself was resting in the word of the Lord. And so the
Lord replied to Martha, when she complained that her sister did not help
her: “Mary hath chosen the best part, which shall not be taken away from
her.” <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) He did not say that Martha
was acting a bad part; but that “best part that shall not be taken
away.” For that part which is occupied in the ministering to a need
shall be “taken away” when the need itself has passed away. Since the
reward of a good work that will pass away is rest that will not pass
away. In that contemplation, therefore, God will be all in all; because
nothing else but Himself will be required, but it will be sufficient to
be enlightened by and to enjoy Him alone. And so he in whom “the Spirit
maketh intercession with groanings which cannot be uttered,” <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) says, “One thing have I desired of the
Lord, that I will seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life, to contemplate the beauty of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) For we shall then contemplate God, the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, when the Mediator between God
and men, the man Christ Jesus, shall have delivered up the kingdom to
God, even the Father, so as no longer to make intercession for us, as
our Mediator and Priest, Son of God and Son of man; <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) but that He Himself too, in so far as
He is a Priest that has taken the form of a servant for us, shall be put
under Him who has put all things under Him, and under whom He has put
all things: so that, in so far as He is God, He with Him will have put
us under Himself; in so far as He is a Priest, He with us will be put
under Him. <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) And therefore as the
\[incarnate\] Son is both God and man, it is rather to be said that the
manhood in the Son is another substance \[from the Son\], than that the
Son in the Father \[is another substance from the Father\]; just as
<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span id="iv.i.iii.x-Page_29"></span>the
carnal nature of my soul is more another substance in relation to my
soul itself, although in one and the same man, than the soul of another
man is in relation to my soul. <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113)

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p10"></span>21. When, therefore, He “shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father,”—that is, when He
shall have brought those who believe and live by faith, for whom now as
Mediator He maketh intercession, to that contemplation, for the
obtaining of which we sigh and groan, and when labor and groaning shall
have passed away,—then, since the kingdom will have been delivered up to
God, even the Father, He will no more make intercession for us. And this
He signifies, when He says: “These things have I spoken unto you in
similitudes; <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) but the time cometh
when I shall no more speak unto you in similitudes, <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) but I shall declare <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) to you plainly of the Father:” that
is, they will not then be “similitudes,” when the sight shall be “face
to face.” For this it is which He says, “But I will declare to you
plainly of the Father;” as if He said I will plainly show you the
Father. For He says, I will “declare” to you, because He is His word.
For He goes on to say, “At that day ye shall ask in my name; and I say
not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you: for the Father
Himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the
world: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father.” <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) What is meant by “I came forth from
the Father,” unless this, that I have not appeared in that form in which
I am equal to the Father, <span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-Page_30"></span>but otherwise, that is, as less than the
Father, in the creature which I have taken upon me? And what is meant by
“I am come into the world,” unless this, that I have manifested to the
eyes even of sinners who love this world, the form of a servant which I
took, making myself of no reputation? And what is meant by “Again, I
leave the world,” unless this, that I take away from the sight of the
lovers of this world that which they have seen? And what is meant by “I
go to the Father,” unless this, that I teach those who are my faithful
ones to understand me in that being in which I am equal to the Father?
Those who believe this will be thought worthy of being brought by faith
to sight, that is, to that very sight, in bringing them to which He is
said to “deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father.” For His
faithful ones, whom He has redeemed with His blood, are called His
kingdom, for whom He now intercedes; but then, making them to abide in
Himself there, where He is equal to the Father, He will no longer pray
the Father for them. “For,” He says, “the Father Himself loveth you.”
For indeed He “prays,” in so far as He is less than the Father; but as
He is equal with the Father, He with the Father grants. Wherefore He
certainly does not exclude Himself from that which He says, “The Father
Himself loveth you;” but He means it to be understood after that manner
which I have above spoken of, and sufficiently intimated,—namely, that
for the most part each Person of the Trinity is so named, that the other
Persons also may be understood. Accordingly, “For the Father Himself
loveth you,” is so said that by consequence both the Son and the Holy
Spirit also may be understood: not that He does not now love us, who
spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all; <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) but God loves us, such as we shall be,
not such as we are, for such as they are whom He loves, such are they
whom He keeps eternally; which shall then be, when He who now maketh
intercession for us shall have “delivered up the kingdom to God, even
the Father,” so as no longer to ask the Father, because the Father
Himself loveth us. But for what deserving, except of faith, by which we
believe before we see that which is promised? For by this faith we shall
arrive at sight; so that He may love us, being such, as He loves us in
order that we may become; and not such, as He hates us because we are,
and exhorts and enables us to wish not to be always.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[28:108](1030017.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p3"></span> [John
16.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p3.1"></span>[John xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_108"></span>[28:109](1030017.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p4"></span> [Luke
10.30-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p4.1"></span>[Luke x.
30-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_109"></span>[28:110](1030017.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p5"></span> [Rom.
8.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p5.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_110"></span>[28:111](1030017.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p6"></span> [Ps.
27.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p6.1"></span>[Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="fn_111"></span>[28:112](1030017.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p7"></span> \[The redeemed must forever stand in
the relation of redeemed sinners to their Redeemer. Thus standing, they
will forever need Christ’s sacrifice and intercession in respect to
their *past* sins in this earthly state. But as in the heavenly state
they are sinless, and are incurring no new guilt, it is true that they
do not require the fresh application of atoning blood for new sins, nor
Christ’s intercession for such. This is probably what Augustin means by
saying that Christ “no longer makes intercession for us,” when he has
delivered up the kingdom to God. When the Mediator has surrendered his
commission, he ceases to redeem sinners from death, while yet he
continues forever to be the Head of those whom he has redeemed, and
their High Priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek ([Heb.
7.17](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p7.1"></span>[Heb. vii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p7.2"></span>.)—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_112"></span>[28:113](1030017.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p8"></span> [1 Cor.
15.24-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
24-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_113"></span>[29:114](1030017.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p9"></span> \[The animal soul is different in kind
from the rational soul though both constitute one person; while the
rational soul of a man is the same in kind with that of another man.
Similarly, says Augustin, there is a difference in kind between the
human nature and the divine nature of Christ, though constituting one
theanthropic person, while the divine nature of the Son is the same in
substance with that of the Father, though constituting two different
persons, the Father and Son.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_114"></span>[29:115](1030017.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p11"></span> Proverbs—A.V.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[29:116](1030017.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p12"></span> Proverbs—A.V.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[29:117](1030017.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p13"></span> Show—A.V.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[29:118](1030017.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p14"></span> [John
16.25-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p14.1"></span>[John xvi.
25-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p14.2"></span>

<span id="fn_118"></span>[30:119](1030017.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p15"></span> [Rom.
8.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.i.iii.x-p15.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="iv.i.iii.x-p15.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](1030018)
