[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030012)  [Next](1030014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 6.—That the Son is Very God, of the
Same Substance with the Father. Not Only the Father, But the Trinity, is
Affirmed to Be Immortal. All Things are Not from the Father Alone, But
Also from the Son. That the Holy Spirit is Very God, Equal with the
Father and the Son.</span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p2"></span>9. They who have said that our Lord
Jesus Christ is not God, or not very God, or not with the Father the One
and only God, or not truly immortal because changeable, are proved wrong
by the most plain and unanimous voice of divine testimonies; as, for
instance, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God.” For it is plain that we are to take the Word of God
to be the only Son of God, of whom it is afterwards said, “And the Word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us,” on account of that birth of His
incarnation, which was wrought in time of the Virgin. But herein is
declared, not only that He is God, but also that He is of the same
substance with the Father; because, after saying, “And the Word was
God,” it is said also, “The same was in the beginning with God: all
things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything made.” <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) Not simply “all things;” but only all
things that were *made*, that is; the whole creature. From which it
appears clearly, that He Himself was not made, by whom all things were
made. And if He was not made, then He is not a creature; but if He is
not a creature, then He is of the same substance with the Father. For
all substance that is not God is creature; and all that is not creature
is God. <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) And if the <span
id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span id="iv.i.iii.vi-Page_22"></span>Son is
not of the same substance with the Father, then He is a substance that
was made: and if He is a substance that was made, then all things were
not made by Him; but “all things were made by Him,” therefore He is of
one and the same substance with the Father. And so He is not only God,
but also very God. And the same John most expressly affirms this in his
epistle: “For we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know the true God, and that we may be in His
true Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.” <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p6"></span>10. Hence also it follows by
consequence, that the Apostle Paul did not say, “Who alone has
immortality,” of the Father merely; but of the One and only God, which
is the Trinity itself. For that which is itself eternal life is not
mortal according to any changeableness; and hence the Son of God,
because “He is Eternal Life,” is also Himself understood with the
Father, where it is said, “Who only hath immortality.” For we, too, are
made partakers of this eternal life, and become, in our own measure,
immortal. But the eternal life itself, of which we are made partakers,
is one thing; we ourselves, who, by partaking of it, shall live
eternally, are another. For if He had said, “Whom in His own time the
Father will show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of
kings, and Lord of lords; who only hath immortality;” not even so would
it be necessarily understood that the Son is excluded. For neither has
the Son separated the Father from Himself, because He Himself, speaking
elsewhere with the voice of wisdom (for He Himself is the Wisdom of
God), <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) says, “I alone compassed the
circuit of heaven.” <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) And therefore
so much the more is it not necessary that the words, “Who hath
immortality,” should be understood of the Father alone, omitting the
Son; when they are said thus: “That thou keep this commandment without
spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: whom
in His own time He will show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of kings, and Lord of lords; who only hath immortality, dwelling in
the light which no man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can
see: to whom be honor and power everlasting. Amen.” <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) In which words neither is the Father
specially named, nor the Son, nor the Holy Spirit; but the blessed and
only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; that is, the One
and only and true God, the Trinity itself.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p10"></span>11. But perhaps what follows may
interfere with this meaning; because it is said, “Whom no man hath seen,
nor can see:” although this may also be taken as belonging to Christ
according to His divinity, which the Jews did not see, who yet saw and
crucified Him in the flesh; whereas His divinity can in no wise be seen
by human sight, but is seen with that sight with which they who see are
no longer men, but beyond men. Rightly, therefore, is God Himself, the
Trinity, understood to be the “blessed and only Potentate,” who “shows
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in His own time.” For the words,
“Who only hath immortality,” are said in the same way as it is said,
“Who only doeth wondrous things.” <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39)
And I should be glad to know of whom they take these words to be said.
If only of the Father, how then is that true which the Son Himself says,
“For what things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son
likewise?” Is there any, among wonderful works, more wonderful than to
raise up and quicken the dead? Yet the same Son saith, “As the Father
raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth
whom He will.” <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) How, then, does the
Father alone “do wondrous things,” when these words allow us to
understand neither the Father only, nor the Son only, but assuredly the
one only true God, that is, the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit? <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p14"></span>12. Also, when the same apostle says,
“But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and
we in Him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
Him,” <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) who can doubt that he speaks
of all things which are created; as does John, when he says, “All things
were made by Him”? I ask, therefore, of whom he speaks in another place:
“For of Him, and through Him, and in Him, are all things: to whom be
glory for ever. Amen.” <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) For if of
the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, so as to assign each
clause severally to each person: of Him, that is to say, of the Father;
through Him, that is to say, through the Son; in Him, that is to say, in
the Holy Spirit,—it is manifest that the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit is one God, inasmuch as the words continue in the singular
number, “To whom <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) be glory for
ever.” <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-Page_23"></span>For at the beginning of the passage he
does not say, “O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge” of the Father, or of the Son, or of the Holy Spirit, but “of
the wisdom and knowledge of God!” “How unsearchable are His judgments,
and His ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord?
or who hath been His counsellor? Or who hath first given to Him and it
shall be recompensed unto him again? For of Him, and through Him, and in
Him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen.” <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) But if they will have this to be
understood only of the Father, then in what way are all things by the
Father, as is said here; and all things by the Son, as where it is said
to the Corinthians, “And one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things,” <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) and as in the Gospel of
John, “All things were made by Him?” For if some things were made by the
Father, and some by the Son, then all things were not made by the
Father, nor all things by the Son; but if all things were made by the
Father, and all things by the Son, then the same things were made by the
Father and by the Son. The Son, therefore, is equal with the Father, and
the working of the Father and the Son is indivisible. Because if the
Father made even the Son, whom certainly the Son Himself did not make,
then all things were not made by the Son; but all things were made by
the Son: therefore He Himself was not made, that with the Father He
might make all things that were made. And the apostle has not refrained
from using the very word itself, but has said most expressly, “Who,
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with
God;” <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) using here the name of God
specially of the Father; <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) as
elsewhere, “But the head of Christ is God.” <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p25"></span>13. Similar evidence has been
collected also concerning the Holy Spirit, of which those who have
discussed the subject before ourselves have most fully availed
themselves, that He too is God, and not a creature. But if not a
creature, then not only God (for men likewise are called gods <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) ), but also very God; and therefore
absolutely equal with the Father and the Son, and in the unity of the
Trinity consubstantial and co-eternal. But that the Holy Spirit is not a
creature is made quite plain by that passage above all others, where we
are commanded not to serve the creature, but the Creator; <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) not in the sense in which we are
commanded to “serve” one another by love, <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) which is in Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p28.3"></span>δουλεύειν</span>, but
in that in which God alone is served, which is in Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p28.4"></span>λατρεύειν</span>. From
whence they are called idolaters who tender that service to images which
is due to God. For it is this service concerning which it is said, “Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.” <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) For this is found also more distinctly in
the Greek Scriptures, which have <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p29.3"></span>λατρεύσεις</span>. Now if we are forbidden
to serve the creature with such a service, seeing that it is written,
“Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve”
(and hence, too, the apostle repudiates those who worship and serve the
creature more than the Creator), then assuredly the Holy Spirit is not a
creature, to whom such a service is paid by all the saints; as says the
apostle, “For we are the circumcision, which serve the Spirit of
God,” <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) which is in the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p30.3"></span>λατρεύοντες</span>.
For even most Latin copies also have it thus, “We who serve the Spirit
of God;” but all Greek ones, or almost all, have it so. Although in some
Latin copies we find, not “We worship the Spirit of God,” but, “We
worship God in the Spirit.” But let those who err in this case, and
refuse to give up to the more weighty authority, tell us whether they
find this text also varied in the <span class="c19"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p30.4"></span>mss.</span>: “Know ye not that your body
is the temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God?”
Yet what can be more senseless or more profane, than that any one should
dare to say that the members of Christ are the temple of one who, in
their opinion, is a creature inferior to Christ? For the apostle says in
another place, “Your bodies are members of Christ.” But if the members
of Christ are also the temple of the Holy Spirit, then the Holy Spirit
is not a creature; because we must needs owe to Him, of whom our body is
the <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-Page_24"></span>temple, that service wherewith God only
is to be served, which in Greek is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p30.5"></span>λατρεία</span>. And accordingly the
apostle says, “Therefore glorify God in your body.” <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[21:34](1030013.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p3"></span> [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p3.1"></span>[John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_34"></span>[21:35](1030013.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p4"></span> \[Augustin here postulates the
theistic doctrines of two substances—infinite and finite; in
contradiction to the postulate of pantheism, that there is only one
substance—the infinite.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_35"></span>[22:36](1030013.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p5"></span> [1 John
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p5.1"></span>[1 John v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="fn_36"></span>[22:37](1030013.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p7"></span> [1 Cor.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>[1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="fn_37"></span>[22:38](1030013.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p8"></span> [Ecclus.
24.5](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>[Ecclus. xxiv.
5](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#005)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="fn_38"></span>[22:39](1030013.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p9"></span> [1 Tim.
6.14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>[1 Tim. vi.
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="fn_39"></span>[22:40](1030013.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p11"></span> [Ps.
72.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p11.1"></span>[Ps. lxxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#018)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_40"></span>[22:41](1030013.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p12"></span> [John
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>[John
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="fn_41"></span>[22:42](1030013.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p13"></span> \[Nothing is more important, in order
to a correct interpretation of the New Testament, than a correct
explanation of the term God. Sometimes it denotes the Trinity, and
sometimes a person of the Trinity. The context always shows which it is.
The examples given here by Augustin are only a few out of
many.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_42"></span>[22:43](1030013.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="fn_43"></span>[22:44](1030013.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p16"></span> [Rom.
11.36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p16.1"></span>[Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="fn_44"></span>[22:45](1030013.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p17"></span> Ipsi.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[23:46](1030013.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p18"></span> [Rom.
11.33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p18.1"></span>[Rom. xi.
33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="fn_46"></span>[23:47](1030013.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p19"></span> [1 Cor.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p19.1"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="fn_47"></span>[23:48](1030013.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p20"></span> [Phil.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p20.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="fn_48"></span>[23:49](1030013.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p21"></span> \[It is not generally safe to differ
from Augustin in trinitarian exegesis. But in [Phil.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p21.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p21.2"></span>
“God” must surely denote the Divine Essence, not the first Person of the
Essence. St. Paul describes “Christ Jesus” as “subsisting” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p21.3"></span>ὑπάρχων</span>)
originally, that is prior to incarnation, “in a form of God”(<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p21.4"></span>ἐν μορφῇ θεοῦ),</span>
and because he so subsisted, as being “equal with God.” The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p21.5"></span>μορφῇ</span> is
anarthrous in the text: *a* form, not *the* form, as the A.V and R.V.
render. St. Paul refers to one of three “forms” of God—namely, that
particular form of Sonship, which is peculiar to the second person of
the Godhead. Had the apostle employed the article with <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p21.6"></span> μορφῆ</span>, the
implication would be that there is only one “form of God”—that is, only
one person in the Divine Essence.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p22"></span>If then <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p22.1"></span>θεοῦ</span>, in this place, denotes the
Father, as Augustin says, St. Paul would teach that the Logos subsisted
“in a form of the *Father*,” which would imply that the Father had more
than one “form,” or else (if <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p22.2"></span> μορφῆ</span> be rendered with the
article) that the Logos subsisted in the “form” of the Father, neither
of which is true. But if “God,” in this place, denotes the Divine
Essence, then St. Paul teaches that the unincarnate Logos subsisted in a
particular “form” of the Essence—the Father and Spirit subsisting in
other “forms” of it.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p23"></span>The student will observe that Augustin
is careful to teach that the Logos, when he took on him “a form of a
servant,” did not *lay aside* “a form of God.” He understands the
kenosis (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p23.1"></span>ἐκένωσε</span>) to be, the humbling of the
divinity by its *union* with the humanity, not the exinanition of it in
the extremest sense of entirely divesting himself of the divinity, nor
the less extreme sense of a *total* non-use of it during the
humiliation.—W.G.T.S.\]

<span id="fn_49"></span>[23:50](1030013.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p24"></span> [1 Cor.
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p24.1"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="fn_50"></span>[23:51](1030013.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p26"></span> [Ps.
82.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p26.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="fn_51"></span>[23:52](1030013.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p27"></span> [Rom.
1.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p27.1"></span>[Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="fn_52"></span>[23:53](1030013.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p28"></span> [Gal.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p28.1"></span>[Gal. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="fn_53"></span>[23:54](1030013.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p28.5"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p29"></span> [Deut.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p29.1"></span>[Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="fn_54"></span>[23:55](1030013.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p29.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p30"></span> [Phil.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p30.1"></span>[Phil. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p30.2"></span>
(Vulgate, etc.).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[24:56](1030013.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p30.6"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vi-p31"></span> [1 Cor.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p31.1"></span>[1 Cor.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vi-p31.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](1030014)
