[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030202)  [Next](1030204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter 4.—The Image of God is to Be Sought
in the Immortality of the Rational Soul. How a Trinity is Demonstrated
in the Mind.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p2"></span>6. Therefore neither is that trinity an
image of God, which is not now, nor is that other an image of God, which
then will not be; but we must find in the soul of man, *i.e.*, <span
id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span id="iv.i.xvi.iv-Page_186"></span>the
rational or intellectual soul, that image of the Creator which is
immortally implanted in its immortality. For as the immortality itself
of the soul is spoken with a qualification; since the soul too has its
proper death, when it lacks a blessed life, which is to be called the
true life of the soul; but it is therefore called immortal, because it
never ceases to live with some life or other, even when it is most
miserable;—so, although reason or intellect is at one time torpid in it,
at another appears small, and at another great, yet the human soul is
never anything save rational or intellectual; and hence, if it is made
after the image of God in respect to this, that it is able to use reason
and intellect in order to understand and behold God, then from the
moment when that nature so marvellous and so great began to be, whether
this image be so worn out as to be almost none at all, or whether it be
obscure and defaced, or bright and beautiful, certainly it always is.
Further, too, pitying the defaced condition of its dignity, divine
Scripture tells us, that “although man walks in an image, yet he
disquieteth himself in vain; he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who
shall gather them.” <span id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873.md) It would not
therefore attribute vanity to the image of God, unless it perceived it
to have been defaced. Yet it sufficiently shows that such defacing does
not extend to the taking away its being an image, by saying, “Although
man walks in an image.” Wherefore in both ways that sentence can be
truly enunciated; in that, as it is said, “Although man walketh in an
image, yet he disquieteth himself in vain,” so it may be said, “Although
man disquieteth himself in vain, yet he walketh in an image.” For
although the nature of the soul is great, yet it can be corrupted,
because it is not the highest; and although it can be corrupted, because
it is not the highest, yet because it is capable and can be partaker of
the highest nature, it is a great nature. Let us seek, then, in this
image of God a certain trinity of a special kind, with the aid of Him
who Himself made us after His own image. For no otherwise can we
healthfully investigate this subject, or arrive at any result according
to the wisdom which is from Him. But if the reader will either hold in
remembrance and recollect what we have said of the human soul or mind in
former books, and especially in the tenth, or will carefully re-peruse
it in the passages wherein it is contained, he will not require here any
more lengthy discourse respecting the inquiry into so great a thing.

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p4"></span>7. We said, then, among other things in
the tenth book, that the mind of man knows itself. For the mind knows
nothing so much as that which is close to itself; and nothing is more
close to the mind than itself. We adduced also other evidences, as much
as seemed sufficient, whereby this might be most certainly proved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_873"></span>[186:874](1030203.htm#fr_873.md) <span
id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p3"></span> [Ps.
39.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p3.1"></span>[Ps. xxxix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.i.xvi.iv-p3.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1030204.md)
