[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030260)  [Next](1030262) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 11.—What is Called Evil in the
Universe is But the Absence of Good.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p2"></span>And in the universe, even that which is
called evil, when it is regulated and put in its own place, only
enhances our admiration of the good; for we enjoy and value the good
more when we compare it with the evil. For the Almighty God, who, as
even the heathen acknowledge, has supreme power over all things, being
Himself supremely good, would never permit the existence of anything
evil among His works, if He were not so omnipotent and good that He can
bring good even out of evil. For what is that which we call evil but the
absence of good? In the bodies of animals, disease and wounds mean
nothing but the absence of health; for when a cure is effected, that
does not mean that the evils which were present—namely, the diseases and
wounds—go away from the body and dwell elsewhere: they altogether cease
to exist; for the wound or disease is not a substance, but a defect in
the fleshly substance,—the flesh itself being a substance, and therefore
something good, of which those evils—that is, privations of the good
which we call health—are accidents. Just in the same way, what are
called vices in the soul are nothing but privations of natural good. And
when they are cured, they are not transferred elsewhere: when they cease
to exist in the healthy soul, they cannot exist anywhere else.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](1030262)
