[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030128)  [Next](1030130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xi.v"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter 5.—That These Three are Several in
Themselves, and Mutually All in All.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.v-p2"></span>8. But in these three, when the mind
knows itself and loves itself, there remains a trinity: mind, love,
knowledge; and this trinity is not confounded together by any
commingling: although they are each severally in themselves and mutually
all in all, or each severally in each two, or each two in each.
Therefore all are in all. For certainly the mind is in itself, since it
is called mind in respect to itself: although it is said to be knowing,
or known, or knowable, relatively to its own knowledge; and although
also as <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iv.i.xi.v-Page_129"></span>loving, and loved, or lovable, it is
referred to love, by which it loves itself. And knowledge, although it
is referred to the mind that knows or is known, nevertheless is also
predicated both as known and knowing in respect to itself: for the
knowledge by which the mind knows itself is not unknown to itself. And
although love is referred to the mind that loves, whose love it is;
nevertheless it is also love in respect to itself, so as to exist also
in itself: since love too is loved, yet cannot be loved with anything
except with love, that is with itself. So these things are severally in
themselves. But so are they in each other; because both the mind that
loves is *in* love, and love is in the knowledge of him that loves, and
knowledge is *in* the mind that knows. And each severally is in like
manner in each two, because the mind which knows and loves itself, is in
its own love and knowledge: and the love of the mind that loves and
knows itself, is in the mind and in its knowledge: and the knowledge of
the mind that knows and loves itself is in the mind and in its love,
because it loves itself that knows, and knows itself that loves. And
hence also each two is in each severally, since the mind which knows and
loves itself, is together with its own knowledge in love, and together
with its own love in knowledge; and love too itself and knowledge are
together in the mind, which loves and knows itself. But in what way all
are in all, we have already shown above; since the mind loves itself as
a whole, and knows itself as a whole, and knows its own love wholly, and
loves its own knowledge wholly, when these three things are perfect in
respect to themselves. Therefore these three things are marvellously
inseparable from each other, and yet each of them is severally a
substance, and all together are one substance or essence, whilst they
are mutually predicated relatively. <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_705"></span>[129:706](1030129.htm#fr_705.md) <span
id="iv.i.xi.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xi.v-p3"></span> \[Augustin here illustrates, by the
ternary of mind, love, and knowledge, what the Greek Trinitarians
denominate the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.xi.v-p3.1"></span>περιχώρησις</span> of the divine essence. By
the figure of a circulation, they describe the eternal inbeing and
indwelling of one person in another. This is founded on [John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011.md), [John
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.i.xi.v-p3.2"></span>[John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.i.xi.v-p3.3"></span>;
xvii. 21, 23. “Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in Me? I pray that they all may be one, as thou Father art in Me,
and I in Thee.” Athanasius (*Oratio*, iii. 21) remarks that Christ here
prays that the disciples “may imitate the trinitarian unity of
*essence*, in their unity of *affection*.” Had it been possible for the
disciples to be in the essence of the Father as the Son is, he would
have prayed that they all may be “one in *Thee*,” instead of “one in
Us.”

<span id="iv.i.xi.v-p4"></span>The Platonists, also, employed this
figure of circulatory movement, to explain the self-reflecting and
self-communing nature of the human mind. “It is not possible for us to
know what our souls are, but only by their <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.xi.v-p4.1"></span>κινήσεις κυκλικαὶ</span>, their circular and
reflex motions and converse with themselves, which only can steal from
them their own secrets.” J. Smith: *Immortality of the Soul*, Ch. ii.

<span id="iv.i.xi.v-p5"></span>Augustin’s illustration, however, is
imperfect, because “the three things” which circulate are *not* “each of
them severally a substance.” Only one of them, namely, the mind, is a
substance.—W.G.T.S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](1030130.md)
