[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030195)  [Next](1030197) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter 18.—Why the Son of God Took Man
Upon Himself from the Race of Adam, and from a Virgin.</span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p2"></span>23. For assuredly God could have
taken upon Himself to be man, that in that manhood He might be the
Mediator between God and men, from some other source, and not from the
race of that Adam who bound the human race by his sin; as He did not
create him whom He first created, of the race of some one else.
Therefore He was able, either so, or in any other mode that He would, to
create yet one other, by whom the conqueror of the first might be
conquered. But God judged it better both to take upon Him man through
whom to conquer the enemy of the human race, from the race itself that
had been conquered; and yet to do this of a virgin, whose conception,
not flesh but spirit, not lust but faith, preceded. <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) Nor did that concupiscence of the
flesh intervene, by which the rest of men, who derive original sin, are
propagated and conceived; but holy virginity became pregnant, not by
conjugal intercourse, but by faith,—lust being utterly absent,—so that
that which was born from the root of the first man might derive only the
origin of race, not also of guilt. For there was born, not a nature
corrupted by the contagion of transgression, but the one only remedy of
all such corruptions. There was born, I say, a Man having nothing at
all, and to have nothing at all, of sin; through whom they were to be
born again so as to be freed from sin, who could not be born without
sin. For although conjugal chastity makes a right use of the carnal
concupiscence which is in our members; yet it is liable to motions not
voluntary, by which it shows either that it could not have existed at
all in paradise before sin, or if it did, that it was not then such as
that sometimes it should resist the will. But now we feel it to be such,
that in opposition to the law of the mind, and even if there is no
question of begetting, it works in us the incitement of sexual
intercourse; and if in this men yield to it, then it is satisfied by an
act of sin; if they do not, then it is bridled by an act of refusal:
which two things who could doubt to have been alien from paradise before
sin? For neither did the chastity that then was do anything indecorous,
nor did the pleasure that then was suffer anything unquiet. It was
necessary, therefore, that this carnal concupiscence should be entirely
absent, when the offspring of the Virgin was conceived; in whom the
author of death was to find nothing worthy of death, and yet was to slay
Him in order that he might be conquered by the death of the Author of
life: the conqueror of the first Adam, who held fast the human race,
conquered by the second Adam, and losing the Christian race, freed out
of the human race from human guilt, through Him who was not in the
guilt, although He was of the race; that that deceiver might be
conquered by that race which he had conquered by guilt. And this was so
done, in order that man may not be lifted up, but “that he that glorieth
should glory in the Lord.” <span id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) For
he who was conquered was only man; and he was therefore conquered,
because he lusted proudly to be a god. But He who conquered was both man
and God; and therefore He so conquered, being born of a virgin, because
God in humility did not, as He governs other saints, so govern that Man,
but bare Him \[as a Son\]. These so great gifts of God, and whatever
else there are, which it is too long for us now upon this subject both
to inquire and to discuss, could not exist unless the Word had been made
flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_840"></span>[180:841](1030196.htm#fr_840) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p3"></span> [Luke
1.26-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p3.1"></span>[Luke i.
26-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_841"></span>[180:842](1030196.htm#fr_841) <span
id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p4"></span> [2 Cor.
10.17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p4.1"></span>[2 Cor. x.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xv.xviii-p4.2"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](1030197)
