[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030276)  [Next](1030278.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter 27.—The State of Misery to Which
Adam’s Sin Reduced Mankind, and the Restoration Effected Through the
Mercy of God.</span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxix-p2"></span>Thus, then, matters stood. The whole
mass of the human race was under condemnation, was lying steeped and
wallowing in misery, and was being tossed from one form of evil to
another, and, having joined the faction of the fallen angels, was paying
the well-merited penalty of that impious rebellion. For whatever the
wicked freely do through blind and unbridled lust, and whatever they
suffer against their will in the way of open punishment, this all
evidently pertains to the just wrath of God. But the goodness of the
Creator never fails either to supply life and vital power to the wicked
angels (without which their existence would soon come to an end); or, in
the case of mankind, who spring from a condemned and corrupt stock, to
impart form and life to their seed, to fashion their members, and
through the various seasons of their life, and in the different parts of
the earth, to quicken their senses, and bestow upon them the nourishment
they need. For He judged it better to bring good out of evil, than not
to permit any evil to exist. And if He had determined that in the case
of men, as in the case of the fallen angels, there should be no
restoration to happiness, would it not have been quite just, that the
being who rebelled against God, who in the abuse of his freedom spurned
and transgressed the command of his Creator when he could so easily have
kept it, who defaced in himself the image of his Creator by stubbornly
turning away from His light, who by an evil use of his free-will broke
away from his wholesome bondage to the Creator’s laws,—would it not have
been just that such a being should have been wholly and to all eternity
deserted by God, and left to suffer the everlasting punishment he had so
richly earned? Certainly so God would have done, had He been only just
and not also merciful, and had He not designed that His unmerited mercy
should shine forth the more brightly in contrast with the unworthiness
of its objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](1030278.md)
