[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030388)  [Next](1030390.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter 15.—Of the Method in Which Our
Address Should Be Adapted to Different Classes of Hearers.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p2"></span>23. But now, perhaps, you also demand of
me as a debt that which, previous to the promise which I made, I was
under no obligation to give, namely, that I should not count it
burdensome to unfold some sort of example of the discourse intended, and
to set it before you for your study, just as if I were my<span
id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span id="iv.iii.xvi-Page_299"></span>self
engaged in catechising some individual. Before I do that, however, I
wish you to keep in mind the fact that the mental effort is of one kind
in the case of a person who dictates, with a future reader in his view,
and that it is of quite another kind in the case of a person who speaks
with a present hearer to whom to direct his attention. And further, it
is to be remembered that, in this latter instance in particular, the
effort is of one kind when one is admonishing in private, and when there
is no other person at hand to pronounce judgment on us; whereas it is of
a different order when one is conveying any instruction in public, and
when there stands around him an audience of persons holding dissimilar
opinions; and again, that in this exercise of teaching, the effort will
be of one sort when only a single individual is being instructed, while
all the rest listen, like persons judging or attesting things well known
to them, and that it will be different when all those who are present
wait for what we have to deliver to them; and once more, that, in this
same instance, the effort will be one thing when all are seated, as it
were, in private conference with a view to engaging in some discussion,
and that it will be quite another thing when the people sit silent and
intent on giving their attention to some single speaker who is to
address them from a higher position. It will likewise make a
considerable difference, even when we are discoursing in that style,
whether there are few present or many, whether they are learned or
unlearned, or made up of both classes combined; whether they are
city-bred or rustics, or both the one and the other together; or
whether, again, they are a people composed of all orders of men in due
proportion. For it is impossible but that they will affect in different
ways the person who has to speak to them and discourse with them, and
that the address which is delivered will both bear certain features, as
it were, expressive of the feelings of the mind from which it proceeds,
and also influence the hearers in different ways, in accordance with
that same difference (in the speaker’s disposition), while at the same
time the hearers themselves will influence one another in different ways
by the simple force of their presence with each other. But as we are
dealing at present with the matter of the instruction of the unlearned,
I am a witness to you, as regards my own experience, that I find myself
variously moved, according as I see before me, for the purposes of
catechetical instruction, a highly educated man, a dull fellow, a
citizen, a foreigner, a rich man, a poor man, a private individual, a
man of honors, a person occupying some position of authority, an
individual of this or the other nation, of this or the other age or sex,
one proceeding from this or the other sect, from this or the other
common error,—and ever in accordance with the difference of my feelings
does my discourse itself at once set out, go on, and reach its end. And
inasmuch as, although the same charity is due to all, yet the same
medicine is not to be administered to all, in like manner charity itself
travails with some, is made weak together with others; is at pains to
edify some, tremblingly apprehends being an offense to others; bends to
some, lifts itself erect to others; is gentle to some, severe to others;
to none an enemy, to all a mother. And when one, who has not gone
through the kind of experience to which I refer in the same spirit of
charity, sees us attaining, in virtue of some gift which has been
conferred upon us, and which carries the power of pleasing, a certain
repute of an eulogistic nature in the mouth of the multitude, he counts
us happy on that account. But may God, into whose cognizance the
“groaning of them that are bound enters,” <span
id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424.md) look upon our humility, and our
labor, and forgive us all our sins. <span
id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425.md) Wherefore, if anything in us has so
far pleased you as to make you desirous of hearing from us some remarks
on the subject of the form of discourse which you ought to follow, <span
id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426.md) you should acquire a more thorough
understanding of the matter by contemplating us, and listening to us
when we are actually engaged with these topics, than by a perusal when
we are only dictating them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[299:1425](1030389.htm#fr_1424.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p3"></span> [Ps.
79.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p3.1"></span>[Ps. lxxix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[299:1426](1030389.htm#fr_1425.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p4"></span> Cf. [Ps.
25.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p4.1"></span>[Ps. xxv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[299:1427](1030389.htm#fr_1426.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p5"></span> *Ut aliquam observationem sermonis tui
a nobis audire quæreres*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](1030390.md)
