[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1030449)  [Next](1030451.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.xxiv-p1"></span> 23. But you will say, consider now
whether we ought to believe in religion. For, although we grant that it
is one thing to believe, another to be credulous, it does not follow
that it is no fault to believe in matters of religion. For what if it be
a fault both to believe and to be credulous, as (it is) both to be drunk
and to be a drunkard? Now he who thinks this certain, it seems to me can
have no friend; for, if it is base to believe any thing, either he acts
basely who believes a friend, or in nothing believing a friend I see not
how he can call either him or himself a friend. Here perhaps you may
say, I grant that we must believe something at some time; now make
plain, how in the case of religion it be not base to believe before one
knows. I will do so, if I can. Wherefore I ask of you, which you esteem
the graver fault, to deliver religion to one unworthy, or to believe
what is said by them who deliver it. If you understand not whom I call
unworthy, I call him, who approaches with feigned breast. You grant, as
I suppose, that it is more blameable to unfold unto such an one whatever
holy secrets there are, than to believe religious <span id="page_358">p.
358</span> <span id="iv.vi.xxiv-Page_358"></span>men affirming any thing
on the matter of religion itself. For it would be unbecoming you to make
any other answer. Wherefore now suppose him present, who is about to
deliver to you a religion, in what way shall you assure him, that you
approach with a true mind, and that, so far as this matter is concerned,
there is in you no fraud or feigning? You will say, your own good
conscience that you are no way feigning, asserting this with words as
strong as you can, but yet with words. For you cannot lay open man to
man the hiding places of your soul, so that you may be thoroughly known.
But if he shall say, Lo, I believe you, but is it not more fair that you
also believe me, when, if I hold any truth, you are about to receive, I
about to give, a benefit? what will you answer, save that you must
believe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 24](1030451.md)
