<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](das05)  [Next](das07) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Drums and Shadows*, by Georgia Writer's Project, \[1940\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# Drums and Shadows

## Old Fort

Dusty, windy lanes bordered with rows of squat wooden houses, wide paved
streets lined on each side with paintless one-story frame structures,
the smells of river, fishboats, fertilizer plants and escaping gases,
and overshadowing all, the gigantic gas reservoirs. That is the
impression given by the Negro section of the Old Fort, located in the
extreme northeastern section of Savannah. Here life goes on serenely for
days, months. Then suddenly, as it happened only a short time ago on a
calm Sunday morning, a woman is stabbed in the back and left writhing on
the pavement to die before a swiftly gathering crowd. It was whispered
among the frightened spectators that the death was caused by conjure,
for despite all efforts to remove the knife it remained firmly embedded
in the victim's back.

The streets present a monotonous aspect because of the absence of grass
and trees. Yet the pedestrian is frequently surprised to come upon a
dead-end alley blocked by an old brick tenement house with lovely arched
windows or to find gay flowers in boxes and tin cans on some of the low
stoops. On several corners the houses abruptly give way to small grocery
stores or beer parlors.

There are two Baptist churches and one Sanctified church in the Negro
part of the Old Fort. Although the people are devout believers in all
the tenets of the Christian faith, many of them, particularly the old
ones, are bound by older beliefs and superstitions. There exists among
them a deep

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

rooted fear of the unknown. Spirits, ghosts, and "cunjuh" all powerfully
influence their daily existence.

Young and middle-aged persons, reticent before strangers, appear dubious
and suspicious. They profess great knowledge of conjure and
superstitions, but they hasten to say that they "sho ain't gonuh tell
nobody" what they know about these things. The old inhabitants, more
loquacious, enjoy relating their beliefs and customs to a willing
listener.

Among the older inhabitants is Aunt Mary, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) the daughter of a slave, who remembers the
days when rice fields lay east of the town and it was no unusual sight
to find a big "’gatuh" caught in the rice canal. Early morning finds
Aunt Mary hobbling to her work of scrubbing the entrances to stores. In
going to and from work she always drags a broom behind her. When we
asked the reason for this, she answered, "’Cuz uh dohn wants none uh
deze fixuhs tuh git muh foot track, cuz den dey kin hanl yuh jis lak dey
wants tuh." [7](das26.htm#xref_7)

"Do you really believe that, Aunt Mary? Do you believe in dreams and
ghosts too?"

"I sho does belieb in dreams an ghoses. Ef uh hab suttn dreams, dey sho
comes true. Tuh dream uh fresh poke some uh yuh kin folks gwine die;
fresh beef mean duh det uh some wite pusson yuh knows well. Tub dream uh
a dead pusson is a sho sign uh rain, an anudduh sign uh rain is wen a
suttn place on muh head itches."

The old woman switched her broom around under the other arm and
continued, "As fuh ghoses, ain't uh got tuh belieb in
um? [59](das26.htm#xref_59) Wy, I kin see um muhsef. Yuh see, I wuz bawn
wid a double caul obuh muh face an anybody knows dat a pusson bawn wid a
caul obuh dey face kin sho see ghoses. [4](das26.htm#xref_4) Deah's mo
dan one kine uh ghos. Some come befo yuh natchul an pleasant; den some
kin sho make yuh sked. I kin tell long fo anyting happen wen it gwine
happen. Nuttn ebuh happen tuh me widout me knowin it long fo it
come." [22a](das26.htm#xref_22a),  [22e](das26.htm#xref_22e)

Another old woman <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) can recall when her
slave mother used to carry her on her back to the spring on their
plantation. This woman wears large earrings of gold which she

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

has worn since her mother pierced her ears in childhood. Each wrist is
encircled by a band of copper wire. She smiled and inadvertently touched
the wire as she explained its presence.

"Ef yuh wuks hahd aw does much washin, it heps duh
nerbes." [8](das26.htm#xref_8),  [12](das26.htm#xref_12)

At the mention of "cunjuh" the old woman lit her pipe, smiled
pathetically, and shook her head. As the blue smoke curled upward, she
told of having been conjured and of how it had changed her whole life in
a few short weeks.

"Yeahs ago," she sighed, "I hab a huzbun wut treat me well an uh wuz
libin good. Dis wuz jis fo muh twins wuz bawn. Ise a twin too, an it sho
is bad luck. [67](das26.htm#xref_67) Deah wuz somebody wut want muh
huzbun tuh leab me an go oft wid um, so dey hab me
fix. [15](das26.htm#xref_15) Wen uh come home one day, I step in a hole
by duh doe an deah wuz a bottle fix wid some tings in it. Right den an
deah I took sech a misery in muh lef side an den uh swell up all obuh;
muh hands wuz twice deah
size. [8](das26.htm#xref_8), [12](das26.htm#xref_12), [15](das26.htm#xref_15)
I stay dataway till I fine out wut tuh do. Den I sprinkle black peppuh
an potash in duh hole weah duh bottle wuz an it bile up. Den some friens
wash me off in wiskey ebry day an soon uh wuz all
right. [6](das26.htm#xref_6) But wen duh twins wuz bawn duh boy twin hab
a lill hole right in is lef side weah I hab duh misery frum duh fixin.
He lib nine days fo he die."

"But the person did not succeed in getting your husband after all, did
she?" we asked.

"Yes'm but she sho did. Whoebuh fix me fix muh huzbun too, cuz he go off
an leab me an I know he ain nebuh done dat lessn he bin fix. Muh son die
wen he wuz twenty-tree an wuz a fine lookin boy. Deah wuz so many women
attuh him, lots uh people tink one uh dem fix
im, [15](das26.htm#xref_15) but duh doctuh say he die frum pneumonia.

"I knowd he wuz gwine die cuz I heahd a owl jis a hootin duh day
befo. [44](das26.htm#xref_44) Deah's udduh signs uh det too, sech as ef
yuh sees a buzzud sailin roun duh elements, das a sho sign. Ef a rat eat
yuh dress, yuh musn patch it yuhsef lessn yuh bun duh place fo yuh sew
on it, cuz das a sign uh det. Dat happen right heah in dis house fo muh
faduh die."

She folded her hands in her lap and slowly rocked her chair as she
continued. "Wen a pusson die in duh house, ef

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

yuh take em out fo duh ministuh say a few wuds, den deah spirit will
hant duh house, [36c](das26.htm#xref_36c) cuz dey jis caahn be happy
till dey hab ebryting done propuh an right. [36](das26.htm#xref_36) I
hab heahd spirits roun dis house. Sometime dey call yuh. Wen dey call
yuh, dey done come tuh hant yuh an git yuh tuh go weah dey is. Wen dey
call, yuh mus say, 'I ain ready tuh go yit.'"

The old woman stopped rocking, sat upright, and removed the pipe from
between her stained teeth. "An spirits ain all. Deah's witches. Wy,
deah's a ole uhmun neah yuh wut people say is a witch wut rides
folks. [69](das26.htm#xref_69) We all leab uh lone. We shuts duh doe ef
we sees uh comin. She come lak a nightmeah tuh duh folks wile dey
sleepin. But ef yuh puts duh bruhm cross duh doe, yuh kin keep any witch
out duh ruhm at night. Witches jis caahn cross obuh a bruhmstick."

Another woman <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) was scornful about
conjure. She tossed her head indignantly as she made known that most of
her neighbors for blocks around, her friends, the members of her church,
believed in the infallibility of the root worker.

"Wy," she said, "they all believe that everything that happen tuh
anybody is cause by some root wukuh. [48](das26.htm#xref_48) They don't
leave anything fuh God tuh do. Ef anybody takes sick, yuh'll fine
somebody theah sayin sumpm is wrong with yuh sickness, that somebody
'put down' sumpm fuh yuh. Ef anybody dies roun heah, some root wukuh is
responsible fuh the death. [15](das26.htm#xref_15),
 [69b](das26.htm#xref_69b) Now, me, I don't believe people kin put sumpm
unduh steps aw unduh yuh house that will hahm yuh. Some time ago my son,
my only chile, wuz drownded. Well every time I tun roun some of my
neighbuhs wuz tellin me my son's death wuzn't fair. They say 'somebody
hoodood yuh chile an cause him tuh git drownded.'"

She hastened to add, however, that she did believe "fuh sho" in some
signs and omens, concerning which she has been "plenty sperienced."

"Take fuh instance," she explained, "ef I staht out an have tuh tun
back, I know it's bad luck less I makes a cross mahk an spits in it. I
try tuh keep a woman frum bein the fust pusson tuh come tuh my house on
Monday mawnin even ef I have tuh call in a man passin by. Fuh a woman
tuh be yuh fust visituh on Monday mawnin means bad luck the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

balance of that week. I won't borruh aw len salt, fuh my mothuh alluz
said it wuz bad luck. I believe in all the ole signs I ebuh heahd my
parents talk bout. I wouldn't sweep trash out of the house aftuh dahk
fuh anything cuz it'll sweep yuh luck away. Nevuh shake a tablecloth out
duh doe aftuh dahk cause it means the death of yuh kin. Nevuh sew aw
make a piece fuh a sick pusson aw that pusson will
die. [49](das26.htm#xref_49) An dreams, I sho do believe in em. Jis fo
my son wuz drownded I suttnly have a dream that mean a death in the
fambly."

The next person <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) we interviewed several
blocks away expressed an absolute faith in the return of the dead in
various shapes. This was a man, who spoke with great earnestness of two
experiences he had undergone, one with spirits, the other with a witch.
He, too, had been born with a caul. [4](das26.htm#xref_4)

"Muh fus time tuh see a ghos wuz in a rainstawm. Me an muh brudduh wuz
caught, so we run tuh a ole vacant house an soons we git inside, duh doe
slam shut. We tought it wuz duh win, but wen uh look roun deah wuz
standin in duh cawnuh two men wid no head. I tought muh brudduh see em
too. Wen duh rain stop, we lef. Muh brudduh didn say nuttn, so I say,
'Did you see dem mens in dat house'? He say, 'No, wut mens?' Wen I tole
im, he tought I bin crazy. But lots uh time attuh dat I seen ghos." He
folded his lips and nodded sagely.

"Now bout witches. Yuh know ghos an witches is diffunt. Witches is libin
people an ghos is spirits uh duh dead. I know a ole uhmun ebrybody say
wuz a witch. Well, bery soon she wuz ridin me. [69](das26.htm#xref_69) I
could eben see uh come. Duh winduh--it would go up, an den uh would
begin tuh choke an smudduh till somebody wake me up. I git reel tin an
po. Den cross duh street wuz a man wich wuz complainin bout his wife
bein rid by a witch. It seem lak duh witch would ride me, den go obuh
tuh his house. So he say he would trap uh. He stay up. When he heah his
wife strugglin, he git a axe hanl an begin frailin roun in duh dahk till
he hit sumpm. It let out a screech an a cat run out duh winduh an down
duh paat. So duh nex mawnin duh man git his dog an put im on duh

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

cat's trail. [68](das26.htm#xref_68) Well, suh, bout half a mile down
duh road in duh fence cawnuh wuz ole Malinda Edmonde wid tree rib broke.
She beg im not tuh kill uh, but dat broke up duh witch ridin."

Further verification of the belief in the existence of spirits and
witches was given us by Jack Wilson <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)
who operates a small junk shop in the vicinity. We visited the elderly
Negro in his residence and place of business, a small, queerly shaped
shack that entirely blocks the narrow lane on which it stands. The
lodging is hardly more than a shelter made by driving several long poles
into the ground, suspending on these a frame-work of rope and wire, and
piling on this foundation pieces of tin, iron, cardboard, and other
junk. A small opening left at each end reveals on the inside no
furniture, only some old pipes and pieces of scrap iron, heaps of burlap
sacks, and ragged clothes. Outside is a small vegetable garden, and
clustered around the house in confusion are the odd automobile parts,
lengths of pipe, parts of stoves, rags, and other miscellaneous items
that make up the old man's stock in trade.

Wilson acknowledged a firm belief in the supernatural. He told us, "I
wuz bawn wid spiritual knowledge which gib me duh powuh tuh read duh
mines uh people. [22a](das26.htm#xref_22a),  [22e](das26.htm#xref_22e) I
kin see people wut bin dead many yeahs. Duh dead know wut duh libin is
doin an come roun deah close kin an friens wen dey is in
trouble. [56](das26.htm#xref_56) I kin speak tuh duh dead folk in song
an dey kin unduhstan me.

"I kin see ghos mos any time. Dey seem lak natchul people. Duh way I
know it's a ghos is cuz I kin nebuh ketch up wid um. Dey keep jis a
suttn distance ahead uh me.

"Witches an cunjuh is jis groun wuk. Ef yuh keep way frum um dey sho
caahn hut yuh. Some hab magic powuh wut come tuh um frum way back in
Africa. Muh mothuh use tuh tell me bout slabes jis brung obuh frum
Africa wut hab duh supreme magic powuh. Deah wuz a magic pass wud dat
dey would pass tuh udduhs. Ef dey belieb in dis magic, dey could scape
an fly back tuh Africa. [69c](das26.htm#xref_69c) I hab a uncle wut
could wuk dis magic. He could disappeah lak duh win, jis walk off duh
plantation an stay way fuh weeks at a time. One

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

time he git cawnuhed by duh putrolmun an he jis walk up to a tree an he
say, 'I tink I go intuh dis tree.' Den he disappeah right in duh tree."

These interviews, chosen at random from among the Old Fort Negroes,
afford some small glimpse behind the scenes of this section's placid
daily routine. They give significance to the penny often seen nailed to
the bone-white doorstep and help the outsider to understand the mojo
ring or luck piece worn by almost every man, the silver dime tied around
many a woman's ankle. [8](das26.htm#xref_8),  [12a](das26.htm#xref_12a),
 [12c](das26.htm#xref_12c),  [12d](das26.htm#xref_12d)

Near this section lives a Negro basketmaker <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) who claims that he is carrying on the
tradition of his ancestors. He stated that for generations the men of
his family had engaged in wood carving, basket making, and various
phases of weaving, and that the craft had been passed on from father to
son. [70](das26.htm#xref_70) He himself only makes baskets. White oak
and bulrushes are selected as the material from which to make the
baskets and they are stitched with scrub palmetto. Those made of
bulrushes are of the coil type. A kind of thin rope is made from this
grass which is then twisted around and around and sewn tightly together.
The baskets made from white oak are plaited. [70](das26.htm#xref_70) The
types of baskets include hampers, flat clothes baskets, farm and
shopping baskets, and the popular "fanner" which the Negro venders
balance gracefully on their heads as they walk about the city,
displaying a colorful array of merchandise.

Some years ago an unusual discovery was made near this district when a
boy noticed a carved spoon <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) lying on
top of a rubbish heap. This spoon, which has been carefully preserved,
is made of teak, and, judging from the dark polished surface of the wood
and its general appearance, it might well be more than a century old.
The bowl is shallow and about two by three inches and the whole length
about seven inches. The most unusual feature of the spoon is the carved
figure of the disproportionate little man forming the handle. Of
particular interest are the flat cranium, the exaggerated ears, the
gash-like mouth, the queerly shaped nose, the long dangling

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

arms, and the short tapering legs which appear to be far too small for
the rest of the body. [41b](das26.htm#xref_41b)

Near the Old Fort is the Peace Mission of Father Divine. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) This comparatively new religious sect has an
estimated membership of two million and a local membership of about
fifty. There is nothing prepossessing about the small white building.
The wooden floor is sprinkled with sawdust and except for the piano the
only furniture is several roughly built wooden benches. The walls of the
mission are hung with placards bearing inscriptions, of which the
following are a few: "Peace-the Kingdom of Heaven is not meat and drink,
but joy, peace and good will," "Peace and Good Will to the World,"
"Peace, Father Divine is God, Salutation is Peace."

At about eight o'clock in the evening members begin straggling in, two
or three at a time. They are dressed soberly, with a noticeable lack of
bright colors and ornamentation of any description, as one of the
precepts of the cult is the sacrifice of all worldly possessions. Upon
joining the church they must surrender everything of material value to
Father Divine. The old life is a thing of the past. The convert must
accept new habits, new names, and an entirely new scheme of existence.

The ardor of followers is not dampened by the fact that their leader has
never been known to visit the Savannah branch. They claim that he is
always present spiritually and can in this manner accomplish his
miracles. At the meeting a major part of the service is given over to a
number of testimonials, presented by many of those present. One by one
the converts intone their devotion to Father Divine <span
id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8) and vividly recount what he has done for
them.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

A stout Negro woman bearing the name of Sister Patience Peace <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) gives the following testimonial: "Once it
wuz muh highes ambition tuh know duh tings uh duh worl. I loved cahds an
drink an udduh vices. No day passed wen I wuz not so drunk dat I would
gib out an hab tuh go tuh bed. Now it is not so. I hab nebuh seen duh
Fathuh in duh body, but I know dat he is God, fuh I hab made spiritual
contac wid him. Because uh rightous libin I am now weighin two hundud
pouns. Praise Fathuh."

A thin, wiry little Negro man, <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10) whose
eyes gleam with a fanatical light, speaks next. He gives his name as
Noah's Ark and states that Father Divine has given him the power to
raise his wife from the dead and has caused him to enter upon a new and
sanctified life. Faithful Patience, the wife, is also present and in
turn testifies as to the truth of his statement and as to her own faith
in Father Divine.

Triumphant Virgin <span id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11) happy in the
knowledge that she is now leading a blameless existence, steps forward
and gives the following statement: "I know Fathuh Divine tuh be God cuz
he lifted me out uh duh guttuh and changed me frum a

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

drunkud an all udduh low tings dat I use tuh be. Muh ole name is dead an
now tings reign tru Fathuh Divine. Peace Thanks, Fathuh."

As the evening wears on, more of the devotees join in the chanting and
in the spirited singing of the hymns. Demonstrations become more and
more violent. Several of the congregation, caught in the throes of a
powerful religious intoxication, begin to dance and sway with
abandonment. [19](das26.htm#xref_19) Others in the group encourage the
dancers with a rhythmic clapping of hands and stamping of feet.

On and on the dancers whirl while the piano pounds out its
accompaniment; above the din rises the wailed repetitious version of an
improvised hymn. The participants in the dance seem oblivious to
everything except the series of contortions in which they are indulging.
Eyes half closed, fixed smiles on their faces, every muscle in their
bodies aquiver, they stumble blindly on. Some bump into the wooden
benches, others fall exhausted to the floor. Still the dance goes
on. [46](das26.htm#xref_46)

Over and over can be heard the hoarse chanting of the worshipers as they
continue to give praise to Father Divine, the man who, according to
their own account, was not born in the ordinary manner but was
"combusted" one day in New York City and who was sent to earth to save
his followers from destruction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[2:1](das06.htm#fr_0) Mary Hunter, 548 East St.
Julian Street.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:2](das06.htm#fr_1) Dye Williams, Old Fort.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:1](das06.htm#fr_2) Katie McCarts, 744 Hull
Street.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:1](das06.htm#fr_3) S. B. Holmes, 716 East
Perry Street.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[6:1](das06.htm#fr_4) Jack Wilson, 272 McAlister
Street.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:1](das06.htm#fr_5) John Haynes, 933 Wheaton
Street.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7:2](das06.htm#fr_6) Property of Edward A. Sieg,
128 West Jones Street.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8:1](das06.htm#fr_7) Though the meetings of
Father Divine are common to many parts of the United States, especially
in the North, where white worshippers form a sizable proportion of the
followers of Father Divine, this description accurately portrays the
House as it was found in this community. For this reason it was thought
well to include it.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8:2](das06.htm#fr_8) Father Divine is said to
have been born George Baker on a Hutchinson Island rice plantation near
Savannah about sixty years ago. Sometime in the late 1890's it appears
that he opened a meeting house in the Negro section of the Old Fort,
calling himself "The Son of Righteousness." His activities in the
community abruptly ceased when, after some trouble with the authorities,
he fled from Savannah to escape a <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> gang of
whites who aimed to make him prove himself the reincarnation of Christ
by walking on the Savannah River.

Arriving in Baltimore, Maryland, he joined a religious sect headed by
Father Jehovia. Later, in New York City the new disciple decided to open
his own cult. It was then that he adopted his present name and that his
converts created the maxim "Father Divine is God."

Converts both white and Negro were eager to join the new order. Today
Father Divine computes his followers as being between 21,000,000 and
30,000,000, although outsiders give a more conservative estimate. The
leader travels extensively and "heavens" have been established in
various parts of the country. His weekly income is reputed to be

20,000 and is derived from the many business establishments operated
under his supervision.

He has a fondness for flashy clothing, wears a five dollar gold piece
for a stickpin, and rides about in a pale blue Rolls Royce and a scarlet
monoplane.

The self-styled Messiah has now extended his activities to the field of
Politics, both national and international. There is a variance of public
sentiment concerning him. To followers he appears to be "reincarnated
God," while enemies insist he is a fraud, a hypnotist, and a remarkably
clever actor who is at present growing a little tired of the role he has
chosen to enact.

Robert Allerton Parker, "The Incredible Messiah" (Boston, 1937), pp. 80,
93, 94, 106, 183, 188, 209-36.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9:1](das06.htm#fr_9) Sister Patience Peace, Old
Fort.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[9:2](das06.htm#fr_10) Noah's Ark, Old Fort.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[9:3](das06.htm#fr_11) Triumphant Virgin, Old
Fort.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tin City](das07)

</div>
