<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](das03)  [Next](das05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Drums and Shadows*, by Georgia Writer's Project, \[1940\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

# NOTES TO THE READER

Pronunciation of individual words, elision, and emphasis play almost
equal roles in the Negro speech of this section. Except for the spelling
of surnames, dialect in the interviews has been faithfully transcribed.
Great care has been taken to try to represent the pronunciation, but to
have represented literally the elision and emphasis would have made the
text unintelligible to the average non-scientific reader. Therefore the
elision has been moderated and the emphasis left to the reader.
Diacritical marks have not been used because it was thought it would
give the text too foreign an appearance, and apostrophes commonly used
in dialect have been discarded for simplification. Many variations in
pronunciation occur even in a small area; younger members of a community
speak differently from older, the better educated differently from the
less well educated. Excitement or emotion often throws the speaker back
into a type of speech which ordinarily he no longer uses. Almost
universally *uh* is substituted for *er* and *d* for *th*, though there
are more exceptions to the latter than to the former. An *h* is nearly
always substituted for an *r* following a vowel and *ah* is substituted
for the terminal *re*; thus here becomes *heah*. This latter spelling is
as near as can be achieved, and though the diphthong is present the *e*
is very short. In certain cases persons have learned to pronounce
certain words correctly while other words of the same type will still be
spoken in dialect. *Mother* is a common example of this. The *th* in
this word has often been deliberately learned though the final *er* will
still be

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

pronounced *uh*. Initial syllables are often pronounced differently from
the same syllable occurring in the middle of a sentence. The pronoun *I*
at the beginning of a sentence is almost always pronounced correctly,
whereas *I* in the middle of the sentence is usually pronounced *uh*.
Thus the same word often varies according to its importance and the need
of the speaker for emphasis, and so on, *ad infinitum*. Some of the
above mentioned points may not seem worthy of mention to the student
familiar with white speech of the same section. But because the white
speech has many similarities of pronunciation, it does not make the
recorded speech of these studies any less of a dialect nor any less of a
variation from standard speech.

African parallels will be found in the appendix. These have been grouped
according to subjects and the subjects arranged alphabetically and
numbered consecutively. Text reference numbers (Arabic) refer to the
appendix numbers where pertinent parallels may be found. Where an
appendix number is followed by a letter, the parallel under this heading
is especially noteworthy. Though European parallels could be cited for
many of the cultural patterns, the citations in the appendix have been
limited to African material both because the European material is better
known and because the African parallels suggest interesting lines of
investigation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](das05)

</div>
