<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](das07)  [Next](das09) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Drums and Shadows*, by Georgia Writer's Project, \[1940\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

# Yamacraw <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

Yamacraw takes its name from the little Indian town that Tomochichi,
chief and friend of General Oglethorpe, established on the Savannah
River bluff west of the township of Savannah over two hundred years ago.
Today waterfront industries have pushed the Negro district southward
from the bluff, but it is still so close to the river that some of the
small shanties rattle when winds roar across the water.

In this community the residents are drawn largely from coastal counties
of Georgia and South Carolina. At one time an unruly element gained
Yamacraw the reputation of being the toughest section of Savannah, but
the presence of an unusual number of churches of various denominations
seems to have improved law and order in recent years. Intense religious
interest is aided by pride felt in the fact that the first Negro Baptist
church in America was established here and also that Methodism gained an
earlier start among Yamacraw Negroes than in any other part of the
county.

In spite of the difference in religious doctrines there seem to be
certain common beliefs handed down in families. We found an implicit and
readily asserted faith in the power "tuh do unnatchul ting." Ghosts are
everyday experiences. Root doctors are in constant demand.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

Eighty-year old Martha Page, <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22) a small
and. frail woman, remembers her African grandfather and the strange
"talk he use tuh make wid two udduh slabes on duh plantation."

"Wen dey git tuh gabbin, yuh couldn unnuhstan a wud dey say," Martha
informed us. "Muh gran sho hab funny name fuh call ting, too. He lub tuh
hunt an fish an he use tuh hab a lill piece uh wood wid a string on each
en tuh kill squhrel an hawk wid. He call it he 'wah-hoo bahk.' Sometime
he use tuh sing a song das staht off like dis, 'Dody boda do dandy.' He
say it mean, 'We come tuh make waw tuhday."'

"Did your gran tell you about magic and conjure?" we asked.

"Dat he did. I sho wuz sked ub im wen he use tuh talk bout dem ting he
people in Africa could do. [15](das26.htm#xref_15),
 [22a](das26.htm#xref_22a),  [22e](das26.htm#xref_22e),
 [48](das26.htm#xref_48) Some ub em could make yuh disappeah, he say, an
some could fly all roun duh elements an make yuh do anyting dey wants
yuh tuh do. Wen I growd up, I discobuh dat plenty uh duh tings gran tell
me is sho nuff true."

"You've had personal experiences?" we queried hopefully.

"Me an muh sistuh bote. Witches use tuh ride uh regluh till it seem she
gwine swivel away an die. [69](das26.htm#xref_69) One day a man tell uh
tuh tro salt on duh bed an no witch would bodduh uh. So dat ebenin muh
sistuh sprinkle a heap uh salt on uh cubbuh. [69a](das26.htm#xref_69a)
Soon attuh we git tuh bed, I seen a cat come [68](das26.htm#xref_68)
right in duh doe an look me in duh eye. I try tuh holluh but uh couldn
make a soun. Nex ting I know sistuh wuz poin watuh in muh face.

"I dohn take tuh witches," said Martha Page. "I dohn mine ghos, cuz I
caahn see em as I wuzn bawn wid a caul. [4](das26.htm#xref_4) But I dohn
want no mo sperience wid witches. Das wy uh sprinkle salt down ebry
night uh muh life."

The broom precaution against witches is also believed in among Yamacraw
residents. Martha Major, <span id="fr_23"></span>[2](#fn_23) aged sixty,
related to us the time a witch had "worried"
her. [69](das26.htm#xref_69) She was alone in a basement in an empty
house, as the landlady was out of the city. No sooner had she gone to
bed than she heard "sumpm comin down duh steps."

"It jump on me," she declared, "an it choke me neah tuh

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

det. But I knowd who it wuz. She come tuh see me duh bery nex day but
she ain nebuh been back sence, cuz I put a bruhm, by duh bed."

We noticed that as Martha Major had risen from her chair in excitement
over her story, she had exhibited a slight limp.

"Have you hurt your foot?" we asked.

"Oh, it mos well. Mos all duh wuhrums done crawl out
now." [5](das26.htm#xref_5),  [5c](das26.htm#xref_5c)

"Worms?"

At our astonishment she was instantly on guard.

"Muh foot all right," she said crossly, but her brown face was a mask of
brooding. Finally she volunteered the information that she had been
conjured the previous October, almost six months
past. [15](das26.htm#xref_15)

"I dohn know who done it, but all ub a sudden muh leg begin tuh swell an
swell. I call a regluh doctuh, but he didn seem tuh do no good; so tree
weeks ago I went tuh a root man. [48](das26.htm#xref_48) He gimme sumpm
tuh take an sumpm tuh put in muh bed. [6](das26.htm#xref_6) In a few
days knots come out all obuh muh leg an wuhrums staht tuh crawl out.
Only one knot lef. I guess I soon be well."

Out beyond Yamacraw, where the old brick and dirt streets of the
community give way to the broad, paved Augusta road, an old Negro named
James Cooper has for years conducted a miscellaneous business in a
ramshackle push cart. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) James sells
lunches to the workers at the Savannah Sugar Refinery; he also cobbles
shoes and repairs anything from broken pots to roller skates. Because of
his skill as a wood carver, particularly of walking sticks, he has
become known in the vicinity as "Stick Daddy." A decidedly original
technique is evident in his carving, but he smiled when this was
mentioned.

"I nevuh bin taught," he said. "I took up cahvin as paht time jis fuh
the fun of it. Muh granfathuh, Pharo Cooper, he used tuh make things
frum wood an straw, sech as baskets an cheahs an tables an othuh things
fuh the home. I guess I sawt of inherited it frum, him."

One of "Stick Daddy's" canes is a slender, snake-encircled rod with a
handle made from a large black and white die.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Another, slightly
thicker, is carved with a single crocodile. The third, a heavy stick
topped with a flashlight handle in which the snapshot of a young Negro
girl has been inserted, is artfully decorated with a turtle, a large
crocodile, and a small, sinuous snake. The chief characteristic of
"Stick Daddy's" work is the boldness with which the carved figures,
dark-stained and highly polished, stand out against their unfinished
natural wood background. Very different is another stick that was found
abandoned in an office building in the city. This has a man's head for a
handle but the stick proper is so covered with minute, unpatterned
crisscrosses that the little figure of a man upside down, a horned head
also upside down, and an undetermined object which may be either man or
animal, are noticed only when the cane is carefully studied.

"Stick Daddy," besides being a general repair man and carver, knows a
few "sho cuos" for illnesses.

"I kin make a sho cuo fuh chills an fevuh. Yuh take some cawn fodduh an
boil it an make a tea. Yuh drink some an bathe in some an yuh'll git
well soon. Fuh a cold yuh git some life-evuh-lastin and make a tea tuh
drink, aw git some Jack-O."

We asked about roots.

"I dohn believe in them things," asserted "Stick Daddy." "I dohn believe
in nuthin like that. it's too dangerous. But I do believe in some signs.
Yuh watch em and yuh'll see that they dohn nevuh fail. If somebody
borruh salt frum yuh, 'tis not wise tuh accept it back; 'twill cause
trouble. If yuh throw out stove an chimney cleanin aftuh sundown, 'tis
sho death."

Fred Jones, <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) a tall Negro of nearly
eighty, with brown complexion and piercing eyes, sternly forbade us to
discuss conjure.

"Dohn yuh know," fearfully, "dat yuh might bring trouble on yuhsef? Das
ting ain nobody ought tuh mess wid."

"How do you know that?"

"Ain no mattuh how come I knows. I seen it. I seen pusson wid duh powuh
tuh tun hesef intuh any shape he got a mine tuh. [68](das26.htm#xref_68)
Dey kin cause yuh plenty trouble an duh only

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

ting kin sabe yuh is tuh git tuh a root man on
time." [6](das26.htm#xref_6),  [48](das26.htm#xref_48)

Our surprise and interest drew him in spite of his fears to speak in a
low voice of several instances where he had seen conjure working.

"Deah wuz a man wid duh powuh. [48](das26.htm#xref_48) He draw a ring
roun anudduh man an dat man couldn git out dat ring till duh root man
come an wave tuh um. Den deah wuz a uhmun done up so bad by somebody dat
ants wuz crawlin out tru uh skin. [5c](das26.htm#xref_5c) Wenebuh a
pusson go crazy, wut is dat but conjuh? [15](das26.htm#xref_15)

"I dohn lak tuh talk bout muhsef, but I caahn nebuh fuhgit duh time I
hab a dose put on me by a uhmun uh didn lak. I wuz a good frien ub uh
huzbun an she didn lak fuh us tuh go out tuhgedduh; so she tole me not
tuh come tuh uh house no mo. I ain pay no tention. Well, suh, duh nex
night soon as uh laid down, uh feel muhsef swoon. Ebry night it happen.
Dis ting keep up till uh git sick. I couldn eat an jis git tuh pinin
way. [15](das26.htm#xref_15) Duh doctuh he caahn hep me none. Finally I
went tuh a root man. [48](das26.htm#xref_48) He say right off somebody
done gib me a dose. He say 'I'll be roun tuhnight. Git some money
tuhgedduh cuz I caahn do yuh no good less yuh staht off wid some
silbuh.'

"Wen he come dat night an git duh silbuh, he look all roun duh house an
den dig a hole unduh duh doe step. Deah he fine a bottle. He tro it in
duh fyuh an holluh, 'Git gone, yuh debil.' Attuh dat I git bettuh, but I
ain nebuh bin tuh dat uhmun's house since. An I dohn lak tuh talk about
it."

Another octogenarian, Thomas Smith, <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)
told us that the same magic power that Moses had used when he turned his
rod to a snake before Pharaoh still exists today among Negroes.

"Dat happen in Africa duh Bible say. Ain dat show dat Africa wuz a Ian
uh magic powuh since duh beginnin uh histry? Well den, duh descendants
ub Africans hab duh same gif tuh do unnatchul ting. Ise heahd duh story
uh duh flyin Africans [69c](das26.htm#xref_69c) an I sho belieb it
happen. I know doze wut could make a pot bile widout fyuh. Jis sit it
anyweah on duh flo aw in duh yahd an bile deah meals. Dey could make a
buzzud row a boat an hab a crow fuh pilot.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

"Long yeahs ago deah wuz; a cunjuh man wut could git uh out uh jail by
magic. A frien uh mine at Hilton Head git rested fuh stealin. He sen fuh
duh cunjuh man [48](das26.htm#xref_48) an duh man say, 'Dohn worry. Duh
jedge gwine tun yuh loose.' Wen duh hour uh duh trial come, duh cunjuh
man tell me, 'See dat bud on duh cote house? I sen im up deah. Deah wohn
be no trial.' Sho nuff, wen duh case wuz call fuh, duh jedge git tuh
suchin roun tuhnin up ebryting tuh fine duh chahge gense muh frien.
Attuh wile he git disgusted an tell duh cote, 'Case dismissed. I caahn
fine duh papuhs.' Wen we git outside duh bud done fly away."

Thomas Smith's reference to flying Africans caused us to mention this
story to Carrie Hamilton, <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) whom we
next visited.

"I hab heah uh dem people," said this seventy year old woman, who has
the tall, heavy frame of a plantation hoe hand. "Muh mudduh use tuh tell
me bout em wen we set in duh city mahket sellin vegetubbles an fruit.
She say dat deah wuz a man an he wife an dey git fooled abode a slabe
ship. Fus ting dey know dey wuz sole tuh a plantuh on St. Helena. So one
day wen all duh slabes wuz tuhgedduh, dis man an he wife say, 'We gwine
back home, goodie bye, goodie bye,' an jis like a bud they flew out uh
sight. [69c](das26.htm#xref_69c)

"Muh mudduh use tuh tell me all kine uh ting cuz I wuz bawn wid a
caul [4](das26.htm#xref_4) an wuz; diffrunt frum duh res. Ebry now an
den I see ghos. Dey hab all kine uh shape, sometime no head, sometime no
feet, jis floatin by. [59a](das26.htm#xref_59a) Dey is duh spirits uh
duh dead, but ef yuh dohn meddle in deah business, dey ain gwine meddle
in yoze."

Not only among these older Yamacraw Negroes but among younger residents
we found a solid background of ancestral beliefs and practices, for here
little of modern progress has touched the dirt streets, pebbly walks,
and tumble down houses of another day.

Ellen Dorsey, <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) forty years old, born
in Savannah, gave us a detailed description of the conjure her husband
put on her.

"Me an him couldn git long so I lef im. He went tuh a

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

root doctuh [48](das26.htm#xref_48) fuh him tuh make me come back home.
Den duh root doctuh put me down sick so duh wite people I wuz wukin fuh
would dischahge me. I had pains runnin up an down muh whole body, an I
knowed I wuz cunjuhed but uh wouldn gib in. [15](das26.htm#xref_15) I
call me in a man who use tuh try tuh sell me a han tuh wawd off
cunjuh. [12a](das26.htm#xref_12a),  [12c](das26.htm#xref_12c),
 [12d](das26.htm#xref_12d) He rub muh legs down twice a day, an one
mawnin a big black snake run outuh muh big toe. [5](das26.htm#xref_5)
'Deah goes duh devil,' say duh root man, an frum den on I git bettuh. A
cousin uh mine git a dose once an wen duh root doctuh rub uh all ovuh
wid a cleah liquid, bugs begin crawlin out of uh
skin. [5](das26.htm#xref_5),  [15](das26.htm#xref_15) Duh doctuh say if
she had wait one mo day it would uh bin too late."

"Did your husband ever try any more conjure on you?"

She laughed with great amusement. "He sho did. He went tuh duh same man
dat cuo me an give him thutty dolluhs tuh make me go back tuh him. One
Sunday attuh chuch wen I ain had thought of evuh livin wid muh huzbun
agen, I walked out duh chuch straight tuh muh huzbun's house. An dis
happen," concluded Ellen, "widout duh root man evuh seein me. I didn
know nuthin bout it till long attuh we wuz reconcile."

Evans Brown <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) is only fifty years old.
To see him going daily about his duties as janitor of the West Broad
Street Negro School, no one would suspect unusual powers at work beneath
his good-natured exterior. Yet he not only said that he believed
absolutely in the supernatural but proudly asserted that he could work
magic himself.

"It come natchul tuh me, duh powuh tuh do suttn ting. Since I wuz lill I
could see ghos, sometime two feet off duh groun, sometime walkin. Wen
muh haiah rise on en an hot eah pass muh face, I tun roun an deah's
alluz a ghos. Lots uh time it's duh spirit ub a frien. Many wintuh
mawnins wen I go tuh school early tuh make fyuhs, uh heah doze open an
shut an den uh see duh ghos dat do it. [59](das26.htm#xref_59)

"I didn know I hab powuh tuh do tings till muh mudduh wuz fixed. Yuh
know, a man kin fix a dose fuh a suttn pusson an only dat pusson will
git caught. Fo women wuz in duh house wid muh mudduh, but duh doe knob
wuz dressed fuh

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

huh. All dem women pass out befo she did, all tuhnin duh knob. But wen
she come out, a pain strik uh in duh side. We hab doctuhs but nuttn done
no good. Uh whole side tun black an she die. [15](das26.htm#xref_15)

"Dat cause me tuh make a special study," Evans Brown quietly added, "an
soon uh realize uh wuz bawn wid duh [48](das26.htm#xref_48) powuh. I ain
nebuh use it much, cuz I dohn lak tuh bodduh wid dem ting. But I knowd a
man name Doctuh Buzzud wut git yuh out ub any trouble yuh wuz in. He
would chahge yuh so much an tell yuh tuh hide duh money in a suttn
place. Duh money would disappeah an yuh trouble wid it.

"Duh poeleece rested a man right yuh in Yamacraw. Dey hab him by duh
pants' wais takin him tuh duh box tuh ring up fuh duh wagon. Wen duh
poeleece git tru ringin an tun roun tuh look, dey holdin a ole gray mule
an duh man done disappeah." [68d](das26.htm#xref_68d)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21:1](das08.htm#fr_21) Old Yamacraw has gone.
Since late in 1939 there has been a radical physical change under the
program of the Federal Housing Administration. Two thirds of the
tumble-down brick houses and wooden shanties in the once crowded area
have been replaced by modern concrete buildings with low rentals for
Negro tenants.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22:1](das08.htm#fr_22) Martha Page, 606 Zubly
Street.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[22:2](das08.htm#fr_23) Martha Major, 542 West
York Street.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[23:1](das08.htm#fr_24) James Cooper, Port
Wentworth.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[24:1](das08.htm#fr_25) Fred Jones, 607 West
Congress Street.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[25:1](das08.htm#fr_26) Thomas Smith, 37
Ann-Street.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[26:1](das08.htm#fr_27) Carrie Hamilton, 530
West President Street.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[26:2](das08.htm#fr_28) Ellen Dorsey, 515 West
Congress Street.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[27:1](das08.htm#fr_29) Evans Brown, West Broad
Street School.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Frogtown and Currytown](das09)

</div>
