<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](das17)  [Next](das19.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Drums and Shadows*, by Georgia Writer's Project, \[1940\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

# Sunbury

Our car came to an abrupt stop in the sandy road before the board fence
which enclosed a small group of weather-beaten clapboard houses. We
called to a young Negro girl who lounged in a doorway and she came
forward to see what we wanted. Almost simultaneously there appeared from
the other houses scattered about the clearing a number of other persons.

Two women about thirty-five years old and nine or ten small children all
approached the fence. At first they were rather wary, but their attitude
gradually turned to friendliness and they hung over the high board
fence, talking and laughing in great good humor. Elizabeth
Roberts, <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118.md) the young girl whom we
had first seen, appeared to be the leader of the group.

We were interested to know if these people had river baptisms any more.
"Duh Sunbury Baptis Church an duh Palmyra Baptis Church both hab
baptizins," Elizabeth told us. "Cose it depend on how many folks wants
tuh leab duh Presbyterian Church an jine duh Baptis. Mos ub us is
already baptize."

"Where do they hold the baptisms?" we inquired.

The group all pointed in the direction of the river. "Right Obuh deah in
duh Sunbury Ribbuh," they chorused.

Elizabeth again took the initiative. "All duh candidates is robed in
wite," she explained. "Duh preachuh come frum Savannah an he is dressed
in a long robe. He walk long an

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

duh folks all mahch behine im. Dey goes down tuh duh ribbuh an sing as
dey go. Dey alluz hab duh baptizin wen duh tide is goin out so duh watuh
will wash duh sins away. Attuh dey all gits tuh duh ribbuh, dey stop an
duh preachuh ast duh candidates tuh step fawwud. One by one he dip em in
duh watuh an dey is buried in baptism. Wen dey is all baptize, duh
preachuh pray tuh duh ribbuh an [63](das26.htm#xref_63.md) ast dat all sins
be taken away. Den all duh folks sing an shout an praise duh Lawd."

The little group leaning on the railing nodded in agreement and as if in
memory of the ceremony their bodies swayed rhythmically. As we listened
and watched we could almost see the white robed procession winding to
the river bank; we could almost hear the chanting of the converts as
their sins were washed away.

The conversation turned to burial customs in the section and the women
told us that "settin-ups" were still held for those who died.

"We all sit wid duh body an sing an pray an keep duh spirit company,"
said one of them.

Another added, "At duh fewnul we sing an we puts our hands on duh cawpse
tuh say goodbye. It bad luck not tuh do dis." [31](das26.htm#xref_31.md)

We had heard in other communities that in case of death away from home
the body is brought back to its native town for burial. This custom is
also prevalent in Sunbury, we learned.

"Ebrybody wannuh be buried in deah own town,"' Elizabeth said. "An we
nebuh bury strainjuhs wid our own folks. Ef a strainjuh die yuh, we bury
em in duh strainjah's lot." [3](das26.htm#xref_3.md)

Emma Stevens, <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md) tall and slim, a
baby in her arms and several small children gathered about her, spoke
up, "Yuh got tuh be plenty keahful bout duh spirits. Duh spirit is
hungry jis lak duh pusson. Yuh hab tuh put food in duh ruhm fuh duh
spirit tuh come eat." [58](das26.htm#xref_58.md)

"Dat is duh truth," agreed young Elizabeth. "Ef duh spirit is hungry, it
will sho come back an hant yuh." [58f](das26.htm#xref_58f.md)

This talk of spirits started us on a new train of thought

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

and we were curious to learn of the local theories regarding ghosts and
witches.

"Duh spirit nebuh go in duh groun wid duh body," [56](das26.htm#xref_56.md)
volunteered Emma. "It jis wanduh roun. Dey come out wen duh moon is
noo."

Mary Stevens, <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120.md) whose short, stocky
figure was clad in bright pink and who wore a sailor hat perched
rakishly on her head, stated, "Duh spirits is ebryweah. Dey peah mosly
at duh fus dahk an in duh middle night."

Young Elizabeth, too, had something to say about spirits. "I sees em all
duh time," she said. "Dey dohn hurt yuh none, jis walk long wid yuh an
talk. Some hab duh head on an some hab duh head
off." [59a](das26.htm#xref_59a.md)

From ghosts and shadows of the night the discussion followed its natural
course to even darker powers, such as conjure, evil roots, and counter
charms. The little group glanced slyly at one another. It was in lowered
tones that they volunteered remarks on this subject.

"We do heah bout folks rootin each udduh all duh
time. [15](das26.htm#xref_15.md) Yuh sho hab tuh be keahful. Some folks
weahs a dime aw a penny tied on duh ankle an wen it tun black, dey knows
somebody is tryin tuh root em." [12a](das26.htm#xref_12a.md),
 [12c](das26.htm#xref_12c),  [12d](das26.htm#xref_12d.md)

"What are the conjures made of?" we wanted to know.

"Dey make em uh haiah an nails an frum lots uh tings," we were
told. [10](das26.htm#xref_10.md)

Elizabeth said, "Duh heabiest root I ebuh heard bout waz a cunjuh made
uh some funny oily stuff in a bottle. Duh enemy ketch duh pusson's
spirit in dat bottle an dat wuz a powuhful spell. [8](das26.htm#xref_8.md)
Duh man fell sick an had tuh go tuh a root
doctuh [48](das26.htm#xref_48.md) fo he git cuod."

"Yuh sho hab bad luck ef yuh do a lot uh tings," warned one of the
women. "Nobody ebuh carry a hoe aw a rake tru duh house. Das a bad
sign."

"It's bad luck tuh carry wood on yuh shoulduh tru duh house," was added
to this information.

"But it ain bad luck ef you weahs a Lucky Haht;" interposed Emma.

"And what is a Lucky Heart," we inquired.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

"It's fuh good luck. All duh people roun yuh carries Lucky Hahts and
Lucky Mojoes an sech tings." [8](das26.htm#xref_8.md)

Respecting harvest festivals one of the women said, "I hab heah tell how
dey dohn do dat no mo." [38](das26.htm#xref_38.md)

"We do git tuhgedduh an hab dance an pahties an big suppuhs," stated
another. Her eyes sparkled at the pleasant memory. "We does duh Snake
Hip an duh Buzzud Lope."

The others chorused, "An addalas dance we did duh Fish Tail an duh Fish
Bone an duh Camel Walk." [17](das26.htm#xref_17.md)

All efforts failed to persuade the women to describe these dances.
Evidently thinking of the antics of their neighbors at the recent dance
they laughed repeatedly, shaking their heads and nudging one another but
refusing to be cajoled into a demonstration.

After learning that we wished to record the old customs as far back as
possible, the women suggested that we visit Uncle Jonah, <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121.md) who was the great grandfather of
Elizabeth. In answer to repeated halloos the old man came trudging down
the road. As he drew nearer the car, we could see that he was a spry,
erect little figure, clad in a blue chambray shirt and a pair of dark
trousers. Although he carried a gnarled stick for support, he appeared
to move with considerable rapidity. His salutation was, "Dis is Uncle
Jonah, duh man wut swalluh duh whale."

Uncle Jonah told us that he was eighty-seven years of age and that he
had been born on a plantation on Harris Neck. He had remained there
until after the time "uh duh big raid," he said and he had been in
Sunbury for a period of about sixty years.

When asked if he could remember any of the slaves who had come from
Africa, a faraway expression came into his eyes. Finally he offered,
"Yes'm, I membuh two. Ole man Ben an Sally dey bote come frum Africa.
Dey sho use tuh use some funny wuds. Wen it would tunduh, dey would
alluz say it wuz 'maulin a bumba.'"

Uncle Jonah tried to recall some of the African stories he had heard in
his youth. He knit his brows in deep thought. After a time he said, "I
membuh heahin bout a boatload uh

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nigguhs wut wuz
bring frum Africa. Dey wuz kep hid in duh cabin till. dey git tuh
Sunbury. Wen dey let um out an dey see dey wuzn in Africa, dey jis take
wing an fly back home. Cose now, ma'am, I didn see dis but I heah bout
it many times."

Another story that the old man told us was as follows: "Deah wuz two
countrymen wut bote come frum Africa libin on duh plantation. One ub dem
die an dey bury um widout duh udduh knowin bout it. Pretty soon he lun
bout how he frien die an he make um dig um up. He say he wannuh say a
few wuds tuh um. Dey dig up duh man an he speak tuh um an den put um
back in duh grabe. It wuz all right attuh he say
goodbye." [30](das26.htm#xref_30.md)

"Uncle Jonah," we asked, "do you remember much conjuring in those days?"

The white head nodded slowly. "Yes'm, deah sho wuz cunjuhin, but deah's
mo cunjuhin [15](das26.htm#xref_15.md) in deze days dan deah wuz in doze. I
heah bout it all duh time roun yuh."

Our interview concluded, we set out in search of Siras Bowen, who, we
had been told, carved wooden
tombstones. [70a](das26.htm#xref_70a), [70h](das26.htm#xref_70h.md) We rode
down the sandy, tree-lined road until we came to the Sunbury Baptist
Church, a white frame building set back from the highway against a
background of verdant spreading trees. The Bowen family burial ground
was to the right of the church and here we discovered that Siras' skill
in wood carving was manifested in many unusual markers.

These were wooden images set on graves that were close together. One
resembled a large bird; another represented a snake writhing upon a
stand; and the third was the figure of a man, round and pole-like of
body, with a head that resembled a ball and rudely sculptured
features. [41e](das26.htm#xref_41e.md) Another Bowen marker was of clay
painted yellow; in its surface was roughly cut the outline of an open
hand with a small mirror glittering in the palm.

Most of the graves were decorated with possessions of the departed
persons. [47](das26.htm#xref_47.md) There were many glasses, bottles, and
vases, most of which had been turned a shimmering purple from long
exposure to the sun. For a time we wandered

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

through the little cemetery, reading the inscriptions on the various
tombstones.

The same day we visited another cabin on the dirt road leading back from
Sunbury Bluff. We had already driven past the little two-room shack,
painted green, its dark roof patched in many places, when our attention
was attracted by a stout, middle-aged woman who was sitting on the porch
idly playing with a long, dangerous looking knife. At once we reversed
the gears and rolled backward to a stop. Near the woman was seated the
husky figure of a young girl. She wore but one garment, a faded green
dress which hung raggedly to about the knee. Beneath the skirt were
large muscular legs that were twisted about the rungs of the chair.
Long, staring yellow eyes looked out at us with disturbing, unblinking
fixity. The girl's hair stood out stiffly in a number of tight little
braids. She was slowly, laboriously stringing weights on a fish net.

The older woman spoke at first in a grudging, reserved manner. The girl
continued her work on the fish net, occasionally glancing at us with
that impenetrable expression.

After much persuasion we gained the older woman's confidence and she
spoke to us freely. She, too, attended the baptisms held by members of
the two churches and also remembered various "settin-ups" she had gone
to. She told us that food was usually prepared for the watchers.

"Bread an coffee," she said, "das wut dey gie yuh at a settin-up."

"We thought they ate chicken," we remarked.

"No, dey dohn hab no chicken. Jis bread an coffee."

The subject of food led us to inquire if she knew of any persons who
refused to eat certain things.

"Muh huzbun wohn nebuh eat chicken. Ain nebuh eat it sence he wuz bawn,
an needuh his mudduh befo him." [65](das26.htm#xref_65.md)

"Why is that? Doesn't he like it?"

"Ain no mine wedduh he lak it aw ain lak it. He jis wohn eat it. Lots uh
folks say deah's some food wut dey dohn eat. I nebuh eat rabbit. An none
uh muh folks wouldn eat it needuh. Dey say it wuz no good tuh eat."

The conversation drifted on until the talk of food brought

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

to the woman's mind gala occasions at which she had feasted and danced
in her youth.

"We use tuh dance all duh time tuh duh drums," she said. "We would dance
roun an roun in a succle an clap our hans an sing. Dey would hab duh
dances obuh on St. Catherine Ilun."

"How would you know when they were going to hold a dance?"

"Dey beat duh drums on St. Catherine. [26](das26.htm#xref_26.md) Den dey
heah it at Harris Neck an folks deah tell all ub us yuh bout duh dance.
We all go obuh tuh St. Catherine in a boat an dance an dance till mos
daylight."

When the talk finally turned to roots and other potent elements of
conjure, we were told of a recent incident in the
neighborhood. [15](das26.htm#xref_15.md)

"I sees dis wid muh own eyes," asserted the story-teller. "Deah wuz a
ole man roun yuh wut wuz cunjuhed an hab lots uh trouble wid his eyes.
He dig roun his yahd tuh see ef any dose is buried deah. Attuh a time he
fine a dawl baby buried unduh duh doe step. [8](das26.htm#xref_8.md) Its
two finguhs wuz stuck in its eye. Duh man tro duh dawl in duh ribbuh an
duh trouble disappeah."

She said that she knew of no other recent case of conjure, but it
appeared that both women had had experiences with witches. We were
informed that it was a common occurrence for "folks tuh hab witches ride
um at night." [69](das26.htm#xref_69.md) The girl contributed little to the
conversation, but occasionally nodded her head in agreement when the
older woman made a statement. Only once did she speak, and then it was
to issue a brief sharp rebuke to a very small child who was scampering
naked about the yard.

After a time the older woman, too, sank into a heavy, unresponsive
silence. When she answered our queries at all, it was with a flat, "No,
ma'am, I ain nebuh heahd uh dat," or an exasperating, "Wut, ma'am?"

We left the two women as dusk was falling. Looking back, we saw the
older woman again slowly waving the knife and the girl still in the same
almost motionless pose, her slow methodical work on the fish net
continuing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[105:1](das18.htm#fr_118.md) Elizabeth Roberts,
Sunbury.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[106:1](das18.htm#fr_119.md) Emma Stevens,
Sunbury.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[107:1](das18.htm#fr_120.md) Mary Stevens,
Sunbury.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[108:1](das18.htm#fr_121.md) "Uncle Jonah,"
Sunbury.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Harris Neck](das19.md)

</div>
