<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](das11)  [Next](das13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Drums and Shadows*, by Georgia Writer's Project, \[1940\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

# Tatemville

Extending southwest from Savannah over a widely scattered area is a
section known locally as Tatemville. This settlement is inhabited
largely by Negroes, some of whom are survivals of ante-bellum days.

It is interesting to note that a number of these old people in speaking
of their fellow-slaves frequently prefix "Golla" to the given
name. <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73)

H. H. Miller, <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74) an educated old man of
this community, who has acquired considerable wealth, stated, "I knew
many of the 'Golla' tribesmen who were brought to this country, when I
was a boy. I think some can be found aroun these pahts now."

A palsied old man, William Newkirk, <span id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_75)
who said he was born on the Newkirk place, obligingly replied to
questions concerning root doctors and conjure, "Well, duh root doctuh
wuz all we needed. Dey wuz bettuh dan duh doctuhs now-a-days. Deah wuzn
all uh dis yuh cuttin an wen yuh sick, duh root doctuh would make some
tea an gib yuh aw sumpm tuh rub wid an das all. Den fo yuh know it, yuh
wuz all right. [48a](das26.htm#xref_48a) He would fix tings fuh yuh ef
somebody done put sumpm down fuh yuh. Deah wuz many ways tuh wuk it.
Sometime he would gib yuh sumpm tuh weah wid yuh aw sumpm tuh
take." [6](das26.htm#xref_6)

Spirits are a reality to Esther Jones, <span
id="fr_76"></span>[4](#fn_76) obviously a woman

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

of schooling as evinced by her diction. She is a devout member of the
Adventist Church, her day of worship coming on Saturday instead of the
customary Sunday, a day observed and anticipated by the average Negro.

"Silvia Higgins," Esther testified, "wuz a medium. She talked with
spirits all huh life. [56a](das26.htm#xref_56a),
 [56b](das26.htm#xref_56b) She used the rapping signal. I myself have
seen the work and acts of spirits. I've I seen cheahs and tables move
about a room. And I've seen a woman and a boy come intuh my yahd and
then disappeah, and I know that the woman wuz dead. The boy wuz not dead
but wuz not anywheah in this vicinity. Silvia Higgins wuz my mothuh. She
has been dead thirty-two yeahs."

One of the most interesting Negroes in this settlement is Tonie
Houston, <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77) an old preacher, extremely
gracious of manner and eager to be of help.

"I bin yuh in dis town fo dey wuz no big buildings an duh streets wuz
all dut an deah wuz no pavement."

"Do you remember any of the people brought over from Africa?" we asked.

"Yas, I know heaps ub um. Deah wuz 'Golla' John Wiley, 'Golla' Jim
Bayfield--he wuz bought by Mahse Chahles Lamar, and he sole im to Mr.
McMullen. Den deah wuz 'Golla' Jack, 'Golla' Tom, 'Golla' Silvie,
'Golla' Chahles Carr, 'Golla' Bob, Chahlotte, Cain, an Jeanette, an
'Golla' Alice. Dey wuz all bought by Mr. McMullen."

When asked the meaning of so many "Gollas," he replied, "All duh people
wut come frum Africa aw obuhseas wuz call 'Golla,' and dey talk wuz call
'Golla' talk." His knowledge of their language, gained by association
with the Africans, was scant. Among the words he remembered were
*musungo* tobacco, *mulafo* whiskey, and *sisure* chicken. A cow was
called *gombay* [25g](das26.htm#xref_25g) and a hog *gulluh*.

To questions regarding the utensils, such as buckets, tubs, dishes, and
tools, of these people, he answered, "Dey would make any ting dey
needed. Dey made spoons, trays, buckets. Dey made piggins an mawtuh an
pestle from a lawg ub wood. Dey would make wooden cuttuhs fuh meat an
vegetubble an would dress some uh dem. wid pretty
figyuhs." [70b](das26.htm#xref_70b)

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

For their meetings, he said "Golla" Tom or another would beat the drum
signalling them to gather; then all would sing and dance in a circle to
the accompaniment of the drum. [23](das26.htm#xref_23) The drums of
death would also sound, summoning to the "settin-up" or
wake. [26](das26.htm#xref_26) "Dey would have some hot drinks,"
recounted Tonie Houston, "sech as coffee an tea. [37](das26.htm#xref_37)
Den at duh time fuh buryin, duh drum would beat an all would lay flat on
duh groun on dey faces befo duh body wuz placed in duh grave. Den all
would rise and dance roun duh grave. Wen duh body wuz buried, duh drum
would give signal wen all wuz tuh rise aw fall aw tuh dance aw
sing." [18](das26.htm#xref_18)

As to the magic of conjure, he had been well acquainted with a "cunjuh
man" who, he said, was a native of Africa and could disappear at will.
However, this man, Dick Hamilton, had died three years previously.

There had also been living in Tatemville "Golla" Jones Davis, an
African, who, as affirmed by his relative, Solomon Davis, has not been
heard of since his departure for his native land, some five or six years
ago.

Richard Wright, <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) bent with age and
rheumatism, talked at length about his childhood on the plantation,
where he was one of seventy-five children owned by his "Boss." He
attested to the skill exhibited in that day by the men in wood carving
and the making of farm implements [70d](das26.htm#xref_70d) and by the
women in making cloth.

He was staunch in his belief in signs as he declared, "Deah's many tings
wut's bad luck. Ef we come in duh house wid our hat on we hab tuh go
back an den pull it off an den come in. Wen yuh clean duh house in duh
day an duh flo, git duhty agen by duh night time an yuh sweep duh flo,
Yuh musn sweep duh dut out duh house, but yuh hab tuh sweep it behine
duh doe till mawnin.

"'Tis bad luck fuh girls tuh wistle. It will suttnly lead tuh
misfawchun. Yuh should nevuh put noo bodes on a ole house but yuh should
git a ole bode das good tuh men duh place dat yuh hab tuh fix. An nevuh
put anudduh ruhm on a house das already buil. It sho mean bad luck,
eeduh sickness aw det tuh some uh yuh fambly aw close friens, wen

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

yuh heah duh owl holluh by yuh house. [44](das26.htm#xref_44) Now yuh
kin watch it. I ain see it fail yet.'

The custom of spitting on money is a very old one, it seems. This, he
explained, will cause it to "stick tuh yuh aw it will draw mo tuh yuh."

Strolling down the sandy road with an ax across his shoulder and a dog
at his heels, Jack Waldburg <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) hastily
removed his hat at the sight of us. He is of medium height and slightly
bent; his hair and beard are quite gray but his sprightly appearance
belies the eighty years he aims.

He greeted us cordially, listened attentively to what we had to say, and
answered without hesitation.

"Yes, missis, I bawn an raise in dis paht uh duh country, down at Cherry
Hill in Bryan County. But I bin libin roun yuh bout tutty yeahs. Muh
gran wuz a African. Das weah he come frum an be name wuz Buck Waldburg.
He dahk in culluh an medium high wid strong buil. He hab long haiah. But
granmudduh, she from deah, too, an she feah. She duh one wut lun me tuh
make medicine frum root. [48b](das26.htm#xref_48b) She a midwife an tell
me duh kine tuh use. I dohn make it no mo cuz I ain got a license."

We asked if conjure were practiced by root men.

"No'm, I dohn know nuttn bout cunjuh. Some folks say dey kin wuk it but
it bad an I dohn fool wid um.

"Now spirits is diffunt. Deah is good un an bad
un. [56a](das26.htm#xref_56a) I caahn see um but uh feels um. Sometime
wen folks is comin tuh me I kin tell dey comin fo I see um, an wen yuh
die yuh head tun backwud. [57](das26.htm#xref_57) Soon's yuh die it tun
roun.

"Duh folks frum Africa could see um. Dey natchul bawn in dat way. An
wite dogs! [4c](das26.htm#xref_4c) Dey alluz kin see spirit. Muh brudduh
Simon he bawn wid a caul an he see um an play wid
um. [4](das26.htm#xref_4) Dey would climb trees an he climb attuh um so
muh mudduh give um some tea made frum caul uh women an bline um tuh um."

We endeavored to gain some information as to the ingredients of this tea
but the only explanation was that the concoction was more effective when
made from cauls of women.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

He could remember nothing as to the use of drums at funerals or other
gatherings but his eyes twinkled when we turned the conversation to a
culinary line.

"Ma would make ash cake," he recalled. "She would mix duh cawnmeal, den
open duh oak ashes an spread in some hickory leaves, den put duh
cawnmeal on duh leabes an cubbuh wid mo leabes, den put duh hot ashes an
coals on duh top. Wen it done, she take duh bread frum duh ashes an rub
it wid a rough clawt aw brush an it would be pretty an brown. Dis," he
concluded smacking his lips, "wuz bery fine wid fat meat aw surup."

Justine Singleton <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) believed firmly in
the existence of spirits as verified by her statement. "Yes, wen I wuz
sick muh sistuh das dead come tuh me an I knowd dat it wuz huh an she
done talk tuh me. She tole me tuh git some weepin willuh an bile it an
make a wash fuh muh feet." This, she explained is an excellent remedy
for foot ailments. "I done talk tuh duh spirits many times. Sometime I
gib em sumpm. I caahn tell yuh no mo now cuz I caahn git muh mine
tuhgedduh."

In this locality stands a small one-room structure occupied by an old
man and his dog, between whom there is a touching devotion. in addition
to other means of livelihood, he follows the profession of root doctor.
"I kin cuo any kine uh sickness das put on yuh. An," he added, "I kin
tell wut a man want. Soon's uh see im his spirit come tuh me. I lay down
an sleep an know wen somebody want me. Deah spirit come an wake me. Many
times uh go an fine em lookin fuh me."

This man, whose name is Allen Parker <span id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81)
is unusually adept with his hands, as shown by his skill in mending
clocks, watches, and firearms, in making chairs, baskets, piggins, bread
trays, spoons and forks, [70d](das26.htm#xref_70d) and in carving
figures of such animals as snakes, lizards, frogs, dogs, alligators and
rabbits. [50b](das26.htm#xref_50b)

In reference to native Africans, he declared that he had known many of
them but that few were left in this vicinity although he thought some
might be found around Darien.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

It was with difficulty that Rosanna Williams <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) was persuaded to talk. She was suspicious
and reticent and lived behind tightly locked doors in a house that to
all appearance was deserted. After much coaxing she cast aside some of
her mistrust and grudgingly responded to our friendly gestures.

"Muh name is Rosanna Williams. Muh pa wuz Lonnon Dennerson. He frum duh
ole country. Muh granpa wuz 'Golla' Dennerson, King uh his tribe. Wen
muh pa wuz a lill boy, him an muh granpa wuz fool away wid a red
hankuhchuh. Dey wuz sole tuh Chahls Grant on one uh duh iluns roun
Brunswick. Muh pa wuz six foot tall an on is furud wuz a scah bout dis
big." [14](das26.htm#xref_14) She indicated the end of her forefinger.

We questioned her more closely regarding this mark which from her
description seemed to have been a small scar, oval in shape and slightly
raised.

We had been told by her neighbors that she, too, bore a mark, although
none of them had seen it.

"Did he mark you too, Rosanna?"

She gave us a piercing look, ignored the question, and continued along
another vein. "He eat funny kine uh food. Roas wile locus an mushrubm an
tanyan root. It lak elephanteah an tase like Irish potatuh. He plant
mosly benne an rice. I plant a lill benne ebry yeah too. He use tuh beat
benne seed in mawtuh an pestle, sometime wid a lill shuguh an sometime
wid a lill salt an make a pase. He eat it on bread aw he eat it jis so."

We broached the subject of drums.

"Yes'm, dey use tuh dance tuh drums an dey beat um fuh fewnuls too.

"I wuz too lill tuh membuh anyting wut wuz; said bout muh granpa, but
muh pa wuk on duh fahm fuh is 'boss.' He make lot uh duh tings dey use.
I ain got nuttn wut he had but dis." She brought forth a curious looking
tool resembling a can opener with a hook in the end, which, she said,
her father had used for extracting teeth. He had also been familiar with
various roots and weeds, which he used in the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

preparation of medicines administered to the sick on the
plantation. [48b](das26.htm#xref_48b)

We returned to the subject of the mark, at the mention of which her eyes
suddenly narrowed.

"Wut yuh doin? Is yuh gonuh sen me back tuh Liberia?"

When we assured her that we had no such intention she became complacent
and even voluble.

"Yes'm, he mahk me," she admitted, "on muh ches."

"What did he do it with? What sort of an instrument did he use?" we
asked, vainly trying to conceal our interest.

"I dohn membuh. I wuz too lill."

"But did he tell you why he marked you?" we persisted.

"No'm, he ain say wy. He jis tell me he done it wen Ise lill. I dohn
known wut he do it wid an Ise mos grown fo uh know wut it is an Ise duh
onlies one he mahk. I duh tomboy uh duh fambly an folluh im roun askin
wut duh ole country like."

"Rosanna," we ventured, "would you let us see the scar?"

She hesitated, then cautiously raised her hand to the fastening at the
neck of her dress and, baring her chest, allowed us a glimpse of the
scar. It appeared to be an irregular circle the size of a fifty-cent
piece with faint lines which seemed to run toward the
center. [14](das26.htm#xref_14) Time, however, had obliterated any
design or pattern which it might once have had.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[61:1](das12.htm#fr_73) See Introduction.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[61:2](das12.htm#fr_74) H. H. Miller, 461h and
Pearl Streets.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[61:3](das12.htm#fr_75) William Newkirk
Tatemville.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[61:4](das12.htm#fr_76) Esther Jones, 308 West
46th Street.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[62:1](das12.htm#fr_77) Tonie Houston,
Tatemville.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[63:1](das12.htm#fr_78) Richard Wright,
Tatemville.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[64:1](das12.htm#fr_79) Jack Waldburg,
Tatemville.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[65:1](das12.htm#fr_80) Justine Singleton,
Tatemville.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[65:2](das12.htm#fr_81) Allen Parker,
Tatemville.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[66:1](das12.htm#fr_82) Rosanna Williams,
Tatemville.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: White Bluff](das13)

</div>
