<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](das18)  [Next](das20) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Drums and Shadows*, by Georgia Writer's Project, \[1940\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

# Harris Neck

Turning off from the coastal highway near Riceboro a tree-shaded dirt
road leads to Harris Neck, a remote little settlement connected to the
mainland by a causeway and located about forty-eight miles south of
Savannah. Narrow, ruffed roads curve and turn unexpectedly through the
densely wooded area. Set singly or in little clusters of two or three
and sometimes almost hidden by the trees and foliage are the houses of
the inhabitants. There is a peaceful atmosphere about the entire island;
life flows along in a smoothly gliding stream; the people seem satisfied
for the most part with a simple, uneventful scheme of existence.

The first house we stopped at was that of Ed Thorpe, <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122) a familiar and well liked character in
the section. A small, neatly inscribed placard placed near the gate bore
the owner's name. The attractive house was set well back from the road
in a large grove of oak trees. A whitewashed fence protected the
property.

The old man, who was eighty-three years old, was working in the side
yard adjoining the house. His broad, erect shoulders and his bright
alert eyes made him appear to be much younger than his actual age. He
told us proudly that he had lived in this particular house for
twenty-five years. Then he apologized because his present circumstances
prevented him from having the house and fence repainted.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

We discussed native Africans and Ed Thorpe remembered that his
grandmother had come from Africa.

"She come frum. Africa an uh name wuz Patience Spaulding," he began.
"She tell me dat in Africa she use tuh eat wile tings. I membuh she use
tuh go out in duh woods roun yuh an bring back some kine uh weed wut she
cook. She call it 'lam quato.' It look lak pokeberry tuh me.

"She say all duh people in Africa loves red. Das how dey ketch um. I
mean duh folks wut bring um yuh as slabes. Dey put up a red clawt weah
dey would see it. Wen dey git close tuh duh boat, dey grab um an bring
um yuh. She say das duh way dey ketch huh.

"Wen muh gran pray, she kneel down on duh flo. She bow uh head down tree
time an she say 'Ameen, Ameen, Ameen.'

"Muh gran say deah wuz lots uh cunjuh in Africa. Deah wuz some men wut
could make a pot bile widout fyuh an deah wuz some wut could
fly. [48](das26.htm#xref_48), [69c](das26.htm#xref_69c) She tell me dat
deah wuz witches wut rode folks. [69](das26.htm#xref_69) Dey could take
off deah skins an hang um up an go out as cats. [68](das26.htm#xref_68)
Wen dey come back duh nex mawnin, dey would put on duh skins. Deah is
folks roun heah tuhday wut says dey caahn sleep nights cuz duh witches
ride um.

"Folks say duh road tuh Maringo is hanted. [59](das26.htm#xref_59) I use
tuh lib at Maringo some time back, but I nebuh did see no spirits. Once
I tink I see one. Wen I git closuh, it tan out tuh be a big
dog." [54](das26.htm#xref_54)

Later that day we stopped at a neat whitewashed cottage and talked for a
while with Isaac Basden, <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123) a blind
basketmaker [70a](das26.htm#xref_70a) about sixty years of age. The old
man had learned his trade during his youth before he had gone blind and
now supported himself comfortably in this manner.

We found him sitting in the front room, surrounded by his work. A number
of finished baskets were also in evidence. They varied widely in size
and shape and were all of the coil type. [70i](das26.htm#xref_70i) Many
were fanners, while there were also a number of large round baskets,
about twenty inches in diameter, with matching covers that fitted well
down over the rim. Isaac

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

used bulrushes and grasses for his material and worked with a sure deft
touch that insured sturdy construction.

He remembered that drums had been used for a variety of purposes during
his youth. He said, "I use tuh dance tuh duh
drum. [23](das26.htm#xref_23) I recall wen dey beat duh drum tuh call
duh people on Harris Neck tuhgedduh fuh a dance aw
fewnul. [26](das26.htm#xref_26) Cose, dey hab a diffunt beat wen dey
call um. tuh a settin-up aw fewnul frum. duh one dey use tuh call um tuh
a dance. Deah wuz two kine uh drum. One dey call duh kittle drum, an one
wuz duh bass drum. It stan bout two an a half foot high. Dey use tuh
alluz hab a settin-up wen somebody die. Wen folks would go tuh duh
settin-up, dey would gib um bread an
coffee. [37b](das26.htm#xref_37b), [37c](das26.htm#xref_37c)

"Dey still hole ribbuh baptisms yuh. Dey git tuh duh ribbuh an attuh dey
pray an sing up on duh bank, duh preachuh take duh candidates down in
duh ribbuh. Fo be baptize each ub um, he say a prayuh tuh duh ribbuh an
ax fuh all duh sins tuh be wash away." [63](das26.htm#xref_63)

Remembering what we had been told about the haunted road to Maringo, we
questioned Isaac and he said, "Yes'm, I hab heah bout duh hanted road
tuh Maringo on duh Young Man Road. Lots uh folks say deah is spirits
roun deah. [59](das26.htm#xref_59) Wen yuh try tuh pass duh fawk in duh
road, duh spirits stop yuh sometime an wohn let yuh by. Some uh duh
spirits mus be good, fuh Ise heahd one story bout a man who wuz passin
by an all ub a sudden his hawse jis stop shawt in his tracks. Jis wouldn
go anudduh step. Duh man try an try, but he couldn make duh hawse moob.
Den he see a spirit come long an it take bole ub duh hawse bridle an
lead him long. Duh hawse go right long. Den duh spirit disappeah. I hab
heahd lots uh stories bout dat road but uh nebuh see nuttn muhsef."

Our next interview was an unusually delightful one. Sitting on the front
porch of Liza Basden's <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124) small,
compactly constructed brown house, we listened to her comments about the
prevailing beliefs and customs. The scene before us was restful. The
garden planted at the sides and front of the house was enclosed by a low
wire fence. Within this enclosure a number of dogs and chickens scuttled
about. At a

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

short distance from the house stood an iron pump and an immense rusted
iron pot, probably used in the past for boiling clothes. On all sides as
far as the eye could see were vas stretches of green land, shaded by
massive-trunked, moss-draped trees and covered with an abundance of
semi-tropical foliage and underbrush. Here and there could be glimpsed
the slanting roofs of neighboring houses.

When we first arrived Liza, a pretty golden-skinned, rather heavy-set
woman about eighty years of age, and a small black grandchild were the
only occupants of the porch. She told us she had recently come home from
a visit to children in the North. Presently her husband and a daughter
approached without speaking and sat down unobtrusively in a corner. For
the most part they listened to the conversation, contributing only an
occasional remark.

"I wuz bawn with a caul," Liza told us, pausing in her task of peeling
and eating figs from the pan that she held in her lap. "That means I see
ghos. [4](das26.htm#xref_4) Least I could see em. till aftuh I stop
havin chillun. Then I stop seein em.

"Three of my chillun they bawn with cauls too. They wuz always skedduh
than othuhs. They wuz always fraid of the dahk an nevuh lak tuh go off
by themselfs. I nevuh know jis wut they see."

"What did the ghost that you saw look like?" we inquired.

A reflective expression crossed Liza's round pleasant face and she
nodded her gray head with its neatly pinned braids.

"They peah jis as nachral as anybody. Most of em ain got no heads. Jis
go right along down the path. [59](das26.htm#xref_59) One time I see a
man go right down that path theah. I go out tuh see who he wuz an all of
a sudden he disappeah. Theah wuzn't no foot tracks aw nuthin. I nevuh
see im no mo. I think maybe he wuz gahdin buried
treasure. [61](das26.htm#xref_61)

"Anothuh time I look out in the yahd an theah wuz a hawg jis a eatin up
the cawn. [54b](das26.htm#xref_54b) That wuz the biggest hawg I evuh did
see. He stand theah an keep eatin an eatin. I run an tell muh huzbun an
he drop wut he wuz doin an come runnin. Wen we git theah, the hawg done
disappeah. Theah wuzn't no sign of im an the cawn wuz all right theah.
It didn't look lak anybody bin eatin on it uhtall.

"Then one time I see a crowd of cows in the
field. [54b](das26.htm#xref_54b)

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Theah wuz a big bull in the middle. They wuz jis a cuttin down the cawn.
Theah wuz a big empty space weah they have already eat. I run tuh weah
muh brothuh wuz an tell in, tuh come quick. We run weah the cows wuz but
wen we git theah, they have all vanished. They wuz all gone. Theah wuz
no tracks an all the cawn wuz grown back. All of a sudden I feel a
terrible pain. I could hahdly git tuh the house. That's the way it is
bout the spirits. Ef yuh tell yuh see em an they disappeah an no one
else can see em, then it cause yuh tuh git sick."

After a while Liza remembered an incident that had been related to her
by her grandfather and she told us, "Muh gran, he see a deah come down
the bluff. He run quick an jump on his back. The deah run all aroun the
woods. He teah an scratch an try tuh shake muh gran off. He couldn do
it. Finally he run intuh the rivuh. Muh gran jump off an make it tuh the
sho. He wuz so tired he wuz mos dead."

Was there no protection against the visits of these creatures from the
spirit world, we wanted to know. Ah of the little group assembled on the
porch shook their heads and mumbled a reply.

"Yes'm, mos of the folks carry sumpm fuh
pruhtection," [8](das26.htm#xref_8) said Liza. "These keep othuh folks
frum wukin cunjuh on em too. They's made of haiah, an
nails, [10](das26.htm#xref_10) an graveyahd dut, [9](das26.htm#xref_9)
sometimes from pieces of cloth an string. They tie em all up in a lill
bag. Some of em weahs it roun the wrist, some of em weahs it roun the
neck, [11b](das26.htm#xref_11b) an some weahs a dime on the ankle. Then
ef somebody put down cunjuh fuh em it tun black
an [12a](das26.htm#xref_12a),  [12c](das26.htm#xref_12c),
 [12d](das26.htm#xref_12d) they git anothuh one tuh wawd off the evil."
Some of em has a frizzled chicken in the yahd. People do say they kin
dig up cunjuh an keep it frum wukin gense yuh. [13a](das26.htm#xref_13a)

"Yuh heah all the time bout folks wut is cunjuhed. They gits crippled up
an ef they dohn do nuthin bout it, some of em
dies." [15](das26.htm#xref_15)

We asked if river baptisms were still held in the section and Liza
answered, "Yes'm, they hole the baptisms right down yonduh in the rivuh.
They always hole em on the ebb tide; that's so the sins be washed away.
All the pruhcession mahch down tuh the rivuh. The preachuh leads the
way. Fus

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

the preachuh Stan on the bank an pray. Then he take the candidates one
by one an dip em in the watuh. Then he make a prayuh fuh the rivuh tuh
wash away the sins. [63](das26.htm#xref_63) I call that prayuh 'the
matrinal.'"

Liza was unable to explain just what this term meant, but she said it
was always applied to the prayer to the river. She told us, too, that
"settin-ups" were held for those who died and that the mourners sat up
all night with the body and sang and prayed. "In the ole days they
always use tuh beat the drum at the funeral an they still does it
tuhday. As they take the body tuh the graveyahd, they beat the drum as
they move long. [24](das26.htm#xref_24) They put the body in the grave.
Then they mahch roun an sing an beat the drum."

We had been told that several midwives rendered services to those
residing in the section. We asked Liza about this and she told us, "Anna
Johnson, she's my sistuh. She's a midwife an she tends tuh lots of folks
roun heah. Those midwifes sho knows wut tuh do. [48](das26.htm#xref_48)
They use a shahp knife aw sizzuhs tuh cut the pain. Once wen I wuz in
pain a midwife put a peah of sizzuhs unduh muh pilluh. All of a sudden
the pain stop right quick. The pain wuz cut right
off." [12b](das26.htm#xref_12b)

Josephine Stephens, <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125) one of the
older residents of the island, lived a short distance from Liza Basden.
Her house was set back several hundred yards from the highway in the
midst of a large field. There was no pathway and in order to get to the
house we had to cut directly through the field. As we neared the gate at
the front of the house a tall gaunt woman, who we learned was
Josephine's daughter, ran to meet us, It appeared that the mother had
been ill for some time past and the younger woman had been caring for
her.

As we talked with Josephine, the daughter stood in an adjoining room,
ironing clothes. She stopped every now and then to take part in the
conversation. The two women were utterly different types. Josephine,
dressed becomingly in a blue and white checked gingham outfit, was the
antebellum type of Negro. The daughter, tall, thin and dashing, and
probably in her forties, represented a more modern era. She had on a
blue checked sport shirt, a white skirt upon the

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

surface of which was the dim outline of the trade name of a flour mill,
and a pair of shiny black satin bedroom slippers. Her two front teeth
were gold and shone and sparkled as she talked. Two large gold hoop
earrings dangled beneath her close cropped straightened hair.

"I bin wukin ovuh at St. Simon," she explained to us. "Befo that I had a
good job up Nawth. My mothuh git sick tho, an she need me tuh take keah
of huh. That's why I come heah an stay. She gittin tuh be long in yeahs
an caahn do so well by uhsef."

The mother did not know exactly how old she was but said she had been
about fourteen at the close of the War between the States. We questioned
her about her recollections of early days, but her memory was rather
clouded. She answered pleasantly, however, and when she was not talking
to us mumbled softly to herself.

"I do know dat folks bawn wid a caul kin see
spirits," [4](das26.htm#xref_4) she admitted. "Plenty uh folks roun yuh
say duh spirits peah tuh um." [59](das26.htm#xref_59)

When we inquired about drums being beaten at funerals, she shook her
head stubbornly and refused to say anything on the subject.

The daughter, overhearing the conversation, paused in her task of
ironing, and said, "Yes'm. Dasso. They beats the drum tuhday at the
fewnul. [24](das26.htm#xref_24) Specially ef yuh blongs tuh a
awganization, they goes right along in the fewnul pruhcession an beats
the drum as they mahch. I remembuh heahin bout in the ole days they beat
out messages on the drum. [26](das26.htm#xref_26) Let the folks know wen
sumpm wuz bout tuh happen. Wen they give a dance ovuh on St. Catherine,
they beat the drum tuh let the folks heah know bout it."

At a funeral, the bottles and dishes and other possessions belonging to
the departed person were left on the grave, the Women informed us. "The
spirit need these," [47](das26.htm#xref_47) the younger woman explained,
"jis lak wen they's live. Evrybody mahch roun the grave in a succle an
shout an pray."

We inquired if some people in the section were afraid to eat certain
foods. Once more Josephine shook her head in negation.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

The obliging daughter who listened intently to everything that was said
again interceded. "I do heah bout that. Theah is some folks wut caahn
eat suttn foods. They say it's bad luck an they nevuh do eat it. Right
now theah's lots of foods wut some folks dohn
eat." [65](das26.htm#xref_65)

At this point in the conversation the older woman brightened and told us
about the harvest festivals held during plantation days.

"We hab big feas. Ebrybody bring some ub duh fus crops. We all gib tanks
fuh duh crop an we dance an sing." [38](das26.htm#xref_38)

Shortly after this she again fell to mumbling and muttering
unintelligibly and seemed unwilling to be drawn again into the
conversation. She did confide in us that she had lived in her house for
over fifty-eight years and she proudly displayed her immaculate blue
outfit which she said her daughter had recently purchased for her. As it
was growing late and we had other interviews to obtain in the vicinity,
we concluded our visit. The two women urged us to return soon. Setting
out again to make an uncertain jagged path across the field, we looked
back and saw Josephine, a rather tragic tall figure huddled at the end
of the porch. The daughter waved gaily. Her gold earrings glinted in the
sun.

When we found Anna Johnson, <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) she
was standing in the front yard of Ed Thorpe's talking with a tall
middle-aged woman who, we later learned, was Rosa Sallins, <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127) her niece and Liza Basden's daughter.

The two women walked over to the car and greeted us. We inquired about
the various methods the midwife employed and she said, "Tuh cut a pain
yuh use a shahp instrument, lak a knife, aw a peah of sizzuhs. Yuh put
it unduh duh pilluh on duh bed. Duh pusson who is sick musn see yuh do
it aw it wohn wuk. Sometime yuh use a smoothin ion. Dat cut duh pain
too." [12b](das26.htm#xref_12b)

Rosa, who had been rather impatiently waiting an opportunity to speak,
now offered, "Lots ub duh chillun bawn wid a caul. Ef dey is bawn wid a
caul, dey kin see spirits." [4](das26.htm#xref_4)

The midwife looked solemn. "Folks hab tuh be mighty

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

keahful wen duh chile is bawn lak dat. Ef dey dohn do sumpm bout it, duh
chile will be hanted all its life. It'll alluz be fraid uh
ghos." [59](das26.htm#xref_59)

"What can be done so that the child won't be haunted?" we asked.

"Dey dry duh caul an make a tea out ub it an hab duh chile drink
it. [8](das26.htm#xref_8) Den all duh ebil will disappeah. Duh chile
will see ghos, but dey will nebuh hahm um an he wohn be afraid ub um."

Rosa exposed her large white teeth in a broad smile. "I wuz bawn wid
teet. Had two front teet wen I wuz bawn." [66](das26.htm#xref_66)

Neither Rosa nor the midwife knew the significance of this unusual
occurrence, though both women thought it was probably a good luck sign.

Anna was reminded of some old remedies that she had found beneficial to
teething babies. "Yuh take a alligatuh tusk an clean it an shine it an
hang it roun duh neck uh duh chile," she explained. "Den yuh kin take
duh foot ub a groun mole. I fuhgits wich one it is. Wich is it, Rosa?"

"Dohn mattuh wich one it is jis so long its duh foefoot."

"Yuh dry it, put it in a sack made out ub a new piece uh clawt an hang
it roun duh baby's neck. [8](das26.htm#xref_8),  [12](das26.htm#xref_12)
Sho heps wid duh teethin. I knows plenty bout cuos lak dat," she
concluded. "I ain lak deze root folks, dough, das alluz fixin people."

Rosa agreed with her aunt. "Sho is plenty rootin yuh. It goin on all duh
time. Deah's plenty uh root people wut is alluz wukin gense
folks." [15](das26.htm#xref_15)

"Dey git a grudge gense yuh an put down sumpm fuh yuh," supplemented
Anna, "an pretty soon yuh dohn know yuh ownsef."

"Sometime dey put it in yuh food," this from Rosa again. "Ef yuh got a
enemy, yuh dohn dare eat wut yuh lak. Nubuh know wen deah's sumpm in duh
food, an ef deah is, yuh sho wohn las. Cose ef yuh weahs a han, it'll
wahn yuh an keep duh cunjuh frum wukkin. [12a](das26.htm#xref_12a),
 [12c](das26.htm#xref_12c),  [12d](das26.htm#xref_12d) Lots uh folks
carries some kine uh chahm all duh time." [8](das26.htm#xref_8)

"Some uh our folks yuh keep frizzle chicken. Dey dig up cunjuh wut is
laid down fuh yuh an let yuh know wen somebody is aftuh
yuh." [13a](das26.htm#xref_13a)

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

The midwife told us that she had recently returned to Harris Neck, after
having lived for many years in Waycross. We asked her which community
she preferred, and she said, "I lak it in Waycross, missus. Duh two
places jis ain nuttn lak. Tings is sho diffunt yuh. Duh folks jis dohn
ack duh same. Yuh wouldn even know dey wuz human. Soon as kin Ise goin
back tuh Waycross. I jis dohn lak it heah."

The conversation turned to drums and in regard to this subject Rosa
spoke up emphatically. "Yes'm, I membuh bout how some time back dey use
tuh beat out messages on duh drum. [26](das26.htm#xref_26) Dat wuz tuh
let us know wen deah wuz tuh be a dance aw a frolic. Wen dey hab a dance
obuh on St. Catherines, dey beat duh drum tuh tell us bout it. Duh soun
would carry obuh duh watuh an we would heah it plain as anyting. Den duh
folks heah beat duh drum tuh let em know bout it in udduh settlements."

The women also spoke of drums in connection with death customs. They
told us that they were still beaten by those in the procession
accompanying the body to the grave. [24](das26.htm#xref_24)

"Ebrybody put duh hans on duh body tuh say
goodbye," [31](das26.htm#xref_31) Rosa told us.

"Yuh speak tuh duh pusson, too, an tell um a las message," said Anna.

"Yuh put dishes an bottles an all duh pretty pieces wut dey lak on duh
grabe. [47](das26.htm#xref_47) Yuh alluz break deze tings fo yuh put um
down." [47a](das26.htm#xref_47a)

We wanted to know the reason for doing this, for we had been informed on
other occasions that it was done so that no one would be tempted to
steal.

Rosa, however, stated an entirely different motive.

"Yuh break duh dishes so dat duh chain will be broke, Yuh see, duh one
pusson is dead an ef yuh dohn break duh tings, den duh udduhs in duh
fambly will die too. Dey will folluh right long. Folks alluz hab two
fewnuls. We hab one wen dey die an den once a yeah we hab a suhvice fuh
ebrybody wut died durin duh yeah. [42](das26.htm#xref_42) Duh preachuh
say a prayuh fuhrum all."

From this source we obtained added verification of the fact that river
baptisms were still held.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

"We alluz baptize on duh ebb tide," said Rosa. "Duh watuh washes duh sin
away. Duh preachuh pray up on duh bank an den wen he baptize duh
candidate, he pray tuh duh ribbuh tuh take away duh
sins." [63](das26.htm#xref_63)

Later in the conversation the women recalled harvest
festivals [38](das26.htm#xref_38) that had been held many years before.
"Dat wuz allaz a big time." Anna's rather somber face lit up at the
remembrance of the festive occasion. "Ebrybody bring some ub duh fus
crop tuh duh chuch an we prepeahs a big feas. We pray an gib tanks fuh
duh crop an pray fuh duh nex yeah. We all eat an sing an dance. One uh
duh dances call duh Buzzud Lope. [17](das26.htm#xref_17) We still dance
dat tuhday."

Rosa told us proudly that she was a granddaughter of Katherine Basden
who had been recognized as a leader among the Negroes in the section.

"Me an muh brudduh wuz muh granmudduh's favorites," she said. "She alluz
said she lak us bettuhn all duh udduh chillun. Wen I wuz only bout
twelve yeahs ole, she tell me wen I grow up I would take huh place an
carry on duh wuk she wuz doin."

Moving her powerful shoulders in rhythm and clapping her hands together,
the woman sang us a song that her grandmother had crooned to new-born
babies as she held them in her arms. The words were, for the most part,
indistinguishable. Over and over we caught one repeated phrase, "nikki
yimi, nikki yimi."

"Muh granmudduh wuz took very sick. She knew she wuz gonuh die. Dat wuz
jis wen muh oldes chile wuz bawn. Muh granmudduh jis refuse tuh die fo
she seen me an duh baby. She say she hab tuh see us fo she die. Ebry day
she ax fuhrus. She git weakuh an weakuh but she jis wohn die. Wen duh
baby wuz a few days ole, I git dress an go tuh see uh. Fus I wuz fraid
tuh bring duh baby intuh duh sick ruhm fuh dey say it bad luck fuh
somebody bout tuh die tuh look at a baby. Sometime duh baby die too. I
tell dis tuh muh gran an she laugh at me an tell me she ain gonuh take
duh baby wid uh. Den I bring duh baby in an she sing tuh uh an hole uh
in uh ahms. She tell me she wuz gonuh die now an dat I wuz tuh continue
uh wuk wid duh folks yuh. Right attuh dat she die."

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

For a while longer the woman chatted on in a friendly manner, discussing
various incidents that had taken place ill tho neighborhood. In parting
they presented us graciously with some fresh figs from the garden and
asked us to visit them again whenever we returned to the settlement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[113:1](das19.htm#fr_122) Ed Thorpe, Harris
Neck.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[114:1](das19.htm#fr_123) Isaac Basden, Harris
Neck.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[115:1](das19.htm#fr_124) Liza Basden, Harris
Neck.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[118:1](das19.htm#fr_125) Josephine Stephens,
Harris Neck.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[120:1](das19.htm#fr_126) Anna Johnson, Harris
Neck.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[120:2](das19.htm#fr_127) Rosa Sallins, Harris
Neck.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pine Barren Near Eulonia](das20)

</div>
