[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Christ**</span> Anointed, the Greek translation of the
Hebrew word rendered "Messiah" (q.v.), the official title of our Lord,
occurring five hundred and fourteen times in the New Testament. It
denotes that he was anointed or consecrated to his great redemptive work
as Prophet, Priest, and King of his people. He is Jesus the Christ ([Act
17:3](../kjv/act017.htm#003); [Act 18:5](../kjv/act018.htm#005); [Mat
22:42](../kjv/mat022.htm#042)), the Anointed One. He is thus spoken of
by Isaiah ([Isa 61:1](../kjv/isa061.htm#001)), and by Daniel ([Dan
9:24](../kjv/dan009.htm#024)), who styles him "Messiah the Prince." The
Messiah is the same person as "the seed of the woman" ([Gen
3:15](../kjv/gen003.htm#015)), "the seed of Abraham" ([Gen
22:18](../kjv/gen022.htm#018)), the "Prophet like unto Moses" ([Deu
18:15](../kjv/deu018.htm#015)), "the priest after the order of
Melchizedek" ([Psa 110:4](../kjv/psa110.htm#004)), "the rod out of the
stem of Jesse" ([Isa 11:1](../kjv/isa011.htm#001), [Isa
11:10](../kjv/isa011.htm#010)), the "Immanuel," the virgin's son ([Isa
7:14](../kjv/isa007.htm#014)), "the branch of Jehovah" ([Isa
4:2](../kjv/isa004.htm#002)), and "the messenger of the covenant" ([Mal
3:1](../kjv/mal003.htm#001)). This is he "of whom Moses in the law and
the prophets did write." The Old Testament Scripture is full of
prophetic declarations regarding the Great Deliverer and the work he was
to accomplish. Jesus the Christ is Jesus the Great Deliverer, the
Anointed One, the Saviour of men. This name denotes that Jesus was
divinely appointed, commissioned, and accredited as the Saviour of men
([Heb 5:4](../kjv/heb005.htm#004); [Isa 11:2](../kjv/isa011.htm#002);
[Isa 49:6](../kjv/isa049.htm#006); [Joh 5:37](../kjv/joh005.htm#037);
[Act 2:22](../kjv/act002.htm#022)). To believe that "Jesus is the
Christ" is to believe that he is the Anointed, the Messiah of the
prophets, the Saviour sent of God, that he was, in a word, what he
claimed to be. This is to believe the gospel, by the faith of which
alone men can be brought unto God. That Jesus is the Christ is the
testimony of God, and the faith of this constitutes a Christian ([Co1
12:3](../kjv/co1012.htm#003); [Jo1 5:1](../kjv/jo1005.htm#001)).

<span id="001">**Christs, False**</span> Our Lord warned his disciples
that they would arise ([Mat 24:24](../kjv/mat024.htm#024)). It is said
that no fewer than twenty-four persons have at different times appeared
(the last in 1682) pretending to be the Messiah of the prophets.

<span id="002">**Christian**</span> The name given by the Greeks or
Romans, probably in reproach, to the followers of Jesus. It was first
used at Antioch. The names by which the disciples were known among
themselves were "brethren," "the faithful," "elect," "saints,"
"believers." But as distinguishing them from the multitude without, the
name "Christian" came into use, and was universally accepted. This name
occurs but three times in the New Testament ([Act
11:26](../kjv/act011.htm#026); [Act 26:28](../kjv/act026.htm#028); [Pe1
4:16](../kjv/pe1004.htm#016)).

<span id="003">**Chronicles**</span> The words of the days, ([Kg1
14:19](../kjv/kg1014.htm#019); [Ch1 27:24](../kjv/ch1027.htm#024)), the
daily or yearly records of the transactions of the kingdom; events
recorded in the order of time.

<span id="004">**Chronicles, Books of**</span> The two books were
originally one. They bore the title in the Massoretic Hebrew Dibre
hayyamim, i.e., "Acts of the Days." This title was rendered by Jerome in
his Latin version "Chronicon," and hence "Chronicles." In the Septuagint
version the book is divided into two, and bears the title Paraleipomena,
i.e., "things omitted," or "supplements", because containing many things
omitted in the Books of Kings. The contents of these books are
comprehended under four heads. (1.)The first nine chapters of Book I.
contain little more than a list of genealogies in the line of Israel
down to the time of David. (2.) The remainder of the first book contains
a history of the reign of David. (3.) The first nine chapters of Book
II. contain the history of the reign of Solomon. (4.) The remaining
chapters of the second book contain the history of the separate kingdom
of Judah to the time of the return from Babylonian Exile. The time of
the composition of the Chronicles was, there is every ground to
conclude, subsequent to the Babylonian Exile, probably between 450 and
435 B.C. The contents of this twofold book, both as to matter and form,
correspond closely with this idea. The close of the book records the
proclamation of Cyrus permitting the Jews to return to their own land,
and this forms the opening passage of the Book of Ezra, which must be
viewed as a continuation of the Chronicles. The peculiar form of the
language, being Aramaean in its general character, harmonizes also with
that of the books which were written after the Exile. The author was
certainly contemporary with Zerubbabel, details of whose family history
are given ([Ch1 3:19](../kjv/ch1003.htm#019)). The time of the
composition being determined, the question of the authorship may be more
easily decided. According to Jewish tradition, which was universally
received down to the middle of the seventeenth century, Ezra was
regarded as the author of the Chronicles. There are many points of
resemblance and of contact between the Chronicles and the Book of Ezra
which seem to confirm this opinion. The conclusion of the one and the
beginning of the other are almost identical in expression. In their
spirit and characteristics they are the same, showing thus also an
identity of authorship. In their general scope and design these books
are not so much historical as didactic. The principal aim of the writer
appears to be to present moral and religious truth. He does not give
prominence to political occurences, as is done in Samuel and Kings, but
to ecclesiastical institutions. "The genealogies, so uninteresting to
most modern readers, were really an important part of the public records
of the Hebrew state. They were the basis on which not only the land was
distributed and held, but the public services of the temple were
arranged and conducted, the Levites and their descendants alone, as is
well known, being entitled and first fruits set apart for that purpose."
The "Chronicles" are an epitome of the sacred history from the days of
Adam down to the return from Babylonian Exile, a period of about 3,500
years. The writer gathers up "the threads of the old national life
broken by the Captivity." The sources whence the chronicler compiled his
work were public records, registers, and genealogical tables belonging
to the Jews. These are referred to in the course of the book ([Ch1
27:24](../kjv/ch1027.htm#024); [Ch1 29:29](../kjv/ch1029.htm#029); [Ch2
9:29](../kjv/ch2009.htm#029); [Ch2 12:15](../kjv/ch2012.htm#015); [Ch2
13:22](../kjv/ch2013.htm#022); [Ch2 20:34](../kjv/ch2020.htm#034); [Ch2
24:27](../kjv/ch2024.htm#027); [Ch2 26:22](../kjv/ch2026.htm#022); [Ch2
32:32](../kjv/ch2032.htm#032); [Ch2 33:18](../kjv/ch2033.htm#018), [Ch2
33:19](../kjv/ch2033.htm#019); [Ch2 27:7](../kjv/ch2027.htm#007); [Ch2
35:25](../kjv/ch2035.htm#025)). There are in Chronicles, and the books
of Samuel and Kings, forty parallels, often verbal, proving that the
writer both knew and used these records ([Ch1
17:18](../kjv/ch1017.htm#018); compare [Sa2
7:18](../kjv/sa2007.htm#018); 1 Chr. 19; compare 2 Sam. 10, etc.). As
compared with Samuel and Kings, the Book of Chronicles omits many
particulars there recorded ([Sa2 6:20](../kjv/sa2006.htm#020); [Sa2
9:1](../kjv/sa2009.htm#001); 11; 14-19, etc.), and includes many things
peculiar to itself (1 Chr. 12; 22; 23-26; 27; 28; 29, etc.). Twenty
whole chapters, and twenty-four parts of chapters, are occupied with
matter not found elsewhere. It also records many things in fuller
detail, as (e.g.) the list of David's heroes (1 Chr. 12:1-37), the
removal of the ark from Kirjath-jearim to Mount Zion ([Ch1
13:1](../kjv/ch1013.htm#001); 15:2-24; 16:4-43; compare 2 Sam. 6),
Uzziah's leprosy and its cause ([Ch2 26:16](../kjv/ch2026.htm#016);
compare [Kg2 15:5](../kjv/kg2015.htm#005)), etc. It has also been
observed that another peculiarity of the book is that it substitutes
modern and more common expressions for those that had then become
unusual or obsolete. This is seen particularly in the substitution of
modern names of places, such as were in use in the writer's day, for the
old names; thus Gezer ([Ch1 20:4](../kjv/ch1020.htm#004)) is used
instead of Gob ([Sa2 21:18](../kjv/sa2021.htm#018)), etc. The Books of
Chronicles are ranked among the khethubim or hagiographa. They are
alluded to, though not directly quoted, in the New Testament ([Heb
5:4](../kjv/heb005.htm#004); [Mat 12:42](../kjv/mat012.htm#042); [Mat
23:35](../kjv/mat023.htm#035); [Luk 1:5](../kjv/luk001.htm#005); [Luk
11:31](../kjv/luk011.htm#031), [Luk 11:51](../kjv/luk011.htm#051)).

<span id="005">**Chronicles of King David**</span> ([Ch1
27:24](../kjv/ch1027.htm#024)) were statistical state records; one of
the public sources from which the compiler of the Books of Chronicles
derived information on various public matters.

<span id="006">**Chronology**</span> Is the arrangement of facts and
events in the order of time. The writers of the Bible themselves do not
adopt any standard era according to which they date events. Sometimes
the years are reckoned, e.g., from the time of the Exodus ([Num
1:1](../kjv/num001.htm#001); [Num 33:38](../kjv/num033.htm#038); [Kg1
6:1](../kjv/kg1006.htm#001)), and sometimes from the accession of kings
([Kg1 15:1](../kjv/kg1015.htm#001), [Kg1 15:9](../kjv/kg1015.htm#009),
[Kg1 15:25](../kjv/kg1015.htm#025), [Kg1 15:33](../kjv/kg1015.htm#033),
etc.), and sometimes again from the return from Exile ([Ezr
3:8](../kjv/ezr003.htm#008)). Hence in constructing a system of Biblical
chronology, the plan has been adopted of reckoning the years from the
ages of the patriarchs before the birth of their firstborn sons for the
period from the Creation to Abraham. After this period other data are to
be taken into account in determining the relative sequence of events.
See table, as to the patriarchal period, there are three principal
systems of chronology: (1) that of the Hebrew text, (2) that of the
Septuagint version, and (3) that of the Samaritan Pentateuch. Hebrew
Text Septuagint Version Samaritan Pentateuch Patriarch Lived years
before birth of first son Lived after birth of first son Total life
Lived years before birth of first son Lived after birth of first son
Total life Lived years before birth of first son Lived after birth of
first son Total life Adam 130 800 930 230 700 930 130 800 930 Seth 105
807 912 205 707 912 105 807 912 Enos 90 815 905 190 715 905 90 815 905
Cainan 70 840 910 170 740 910 70 840 910 Mahalaleel 65 830 895 165 730
895 65 830 895 Jared 162 800 962 162 800 962 62 785 947 Enoch 65 300 365
165 200 365 65 300 365 Methuselah 187 782 969 187 782 969 67 653 720
Lamech 182 595 777 188 565 753 53 600 653 From Adam to the birth of Noah
1056 1662 707 From birth of Noah to the Flood 600 600 600 From Adam to
the Flood 1656 2262 1307 The Samaritan and the Septuagint have
considerably modified the Hebrew chronology. This modification some
regard as having been wilfully made, and to be rejected. The same system
of variations is observed in the chronology of the period between the
Flood and Abraham. See table following: Hebrew Septuagint Samaritan From
the birth of Arphaxad, 2 years after the flood, to the birth of Terah.
220 1000 870 From the birth of Terah to the birth of Abraham 130 70 72
The Septuagint fixes on seventy years as the age of Terah at the birth
of Abraham, from [Gen 11:26](../kjv/gen011.htm#026); but a comparison of
[Gen 11:32](../kjv/gen011.htm#032) and [Act 7:4](../kjv/act007.htm#004)
with [Gen 12:4](../kjv/gen012.htm#004) shows that when Terah died, at
the age of two hundred and five years, Abraham was seventy-five years,
and hence Terah must have been one hundred and thirty years when Abraham
was born. Thus, including the two years from the Flood to the birth of
Arphaxad, the period from the Flood to the birth of Abraham was three
hundred and fifty-two years. The next period is from the birth of
Abraham to the Exodus. This, according to the Hebrew, extends to five
hundred and five years. The difficulty here is as to the four hundred
and thirty years mentioned [Exo 12:40](../kjv/exo012.htm#040), [Exo
12:41](../kjv/exo012.htm#041); [Gal 3:17](../kjv/gal003.htm#017). These
years are regarded by some as dating from the covenant with Abraham
(Gen. 15), which was entered into soon after his sojourn in Egypt;
others, with more probability, reckon these years from Jacob's going
down into Egypt. (See EXODUS.) In modern times the systems of Biblical
chronology that have been adopted are chiefly those of Ussher and Hales.
The former follows the Hebrew, and the latter the Septuagint mainly.
Archbishop Ussher's (died 1656) system is called the short chronology.
It is that given on the margin of the Authorized Version, but is really
of no authority, and is quite uncertain. See table: System of Biblical
Chronology Ussher B.C. Hales B.C. Creation 4004 5411 Flood 2348 3155
Abram leaves Haran 1921 2078 Exodus 1491 1648 Destruction of the Temple
588 586 See Chronological Tables - The Old Testament to the Death of
Solomon - 4004 B.C.-976 B.C. See Chronological Tables - The Kingdoms of
Judah and Israel - 976 B.C.-918 B.C. See Chronological Tables - The
Kingdoms of Judah and Israel - 918 B.C.-883 B.C. See Chronological
Tables - The Kingdoms of Judah and Israel - 883 B.C.-705 B.C. See
Chronological Tables - The Kingdoms of Judah and Israel - 697 B.C.-588
B.C. See Chronological Tables - The Kingdoms of Judah and Israel - 562
B.C.-332 B.C. See Chronological Tables - Chronology According to the
Assyrian Inscriptions - 858 B.C.-606 B.C. See Chronological Tables -
Between the Testaments - 331 B.C.-4 B.C. See Chronological Tables - The
New Testament History - 4 B.C.-A.D. 98 To show at a glance the different
ideas of the date of the creation, it may be interesting to note the
following: From Creation to 1894. According to Ussher, 5,898; Hales,
7,305; Zunz (Hebrew reckoning), 5,882; Septuagint (Perowne), 7,305;
Rabbinical, 5,654; Panodorus, 7,387; Anianus, 7,395; Constantinopolitan,
7,403; Eusebius, 7,093; Scaliger, 5,844; Dionysius (from whom we take
our Christian era), 7,388; Maximus, 7,395; Syncellus and Theophanes,
7,395; Julius Africanus, 7,395; Jackson, 7,320.

<span id="007">**Chrysoprasus**</span> Golden leek, a precious stone of
the colour of leek's juice, a greenish-golden colour ([Rev
21:20](../kjv/rev021.htm#020)).

<span id="008">**Chub**</span> The name of a people in alliance with
Egypt in the time of Nebuchadnezzar. The word is found only in [Eze
30:5](../kjv/eze030.htm#005). They were probably a people of Northern
Africa, or of the lands near Egypt in the south.

<span id="009">**Chun**</span> One of the cities of Hadarezer, king of
Syria. David procured brass (i.e., bronze or copper) from it for the
temple ([Ch1 18:8](../kjv/ch1018.htm#008)). It is called Berothai in
[Sa2 8:8](../kjv/sa2008.htm#008); probably the same as Berothah in [Eze
47:16](../kjv/eze047.htm#016).
