[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Achor**</span> Trouble , a valley near Jericho, so
called in consequence of the trouble which the sin of Achan caused
Israel ([Jos 7:24](../kjv/jos007.htm#024), [Jos
7:26](../kjv/jos007.htm#026)). The expression "valley of Achor" probably
became proverbial for that which caused trouble, and when Isaiah ([Isa
65:10](../kjv/isa065.htm#010)) refers to it he uses it in this sense:
"The valley of Achor, a place for herds to lie down in;" i.e., that
which had been a source of calamity would become a source of blessing.
Hosea also ([Hos 2:15](../kjv/hos002.htm#015)) uses the expression in
the same sense: "The valley of Achor for a door of hope;" i.e., trouble
would be turned into joy, despair into hope. This valley has been
identified with the Wady Kelt.

<span id="001">**Achsah**</span> Anklet, Caleb's only daughter ([Ch1
2:49](../kjv/ch1002.htm#049)). She was offered in marriage to the man
who would lead an attack on the city of Debir, or Kirjath-sepher. This
was done by Othniel (q.v.), who accordingly obtained her as his wife
([Jos 15:16](../kjv/jos015.htm#016); [Jdg 1:9](../kjv/jdg001.htm#009)).

<span id="002">**Achshaph**</span> Fascination, a royal city of the
Canaanites, in the north of Palestine ([Jos
11:1](../kjv/jos011.htm#001); [Jos 12:20](../kjv/jos012.htm#020); [Jos
19:25](../kjv/jos019.htm#025)). It was in the eastern boundary of the
tribe of Asher, and is identified with the modern ruined village of
Kesaf or Yasif, N. E. of Accho.

<span id="003">**Achzib**</span> Falsehood. (1.) A town in the
Shephelah, or plain country of Judah ([Jos
15:44](../kjv/jos015.htm#044)); probably the same as Chezib of [Gen
38:5](../kjv/gen038.htm#005) = Ain Kezbeh. (2.) A Phoenician city (the
Gr. Ecdippa ), always retained in their possession though assigned to
the tribe of Asher ([Jos 19:29](../kjv/jos019.htm#029); [Jdg
1:31](../kjv/jdg001.htm#031)). It is identified with the modern es-Zib,
on the Mediterranean, about 8 miles north of Accho.

<span id="004">**Acre**</span> Is the translation of a word ( tse'med ),
which properly means a yoke, and denotes a space of ground that may be
plowed by a yoke of oxen in a day. It is about an acre of our measure
([Isa 5:10](../kjv/isa005.htm#010); [Sa1 14:14](../kjv/sa1014.htm#014)).

<span id="005">**Acts of the Apostles**</span> The title now given to
the fifth and last of the historical books of the New Testament. The
author styles it a "treatise" ([Act 1:1](../kjv/act001.htm#001)). It was
early called "The Acts," "The Gospel of the Holy Ghost," and "The Gospel
of the Resurrection." It contains properly no account of any of the
apostles except Peter and Paul. John is noticed only three times; and
all that is recorded of James, the son of Zebedee, is his execution by
Herod. It is properly therefore not the history of the "Acts of the
Apostles," a title which was given to the book at a later date, but of
"Acts of Apostles," or more correctly, of "Some Acts of Certain
Apostles." As regards its authorship, it was certainly the work of Luke,
the "beloved physician" (compare [Luk 1:1](../kjv/luk001.htm#001); [Act
1:1](../kjv/act001.htm#001)). This is the uniform tradition of
antiquity, although the writer nowhere makes mention of himself by name.
The style and idiom of the Gospel of Luke and of the Acts, and the usage
of words and phrases common to both, strengthen this opinion. The writer
first appears in the narrative in [Act 16:11](../kjv/act016.htm#011),
and then disappears till Paul's return to Philippi two years afterwards,
when he and Paul left that place together ([Act
20:6](../kjv/act020.htm#006)), and the two seem henceforth to have been
constant companions to the end. He was certainly with Paul at Rome (Acts
28; [Col 4:14](../kjv/col004.htm#014)). Thus he wrote a great portion of
that history from personal observation. For what lay beyond his own
experience he had the instruction of Paul. If, as is very probable, 2
Timothy was written during Paul's second imprisonment at Rome, Luke was
with him then as his faithful companion to the last ([Ti2
4:11](../kjv/ti2004.htm#011)). Of his subsequent history we have no
certain information. The design of Luke's Gospel was to give an
exhibition of the character and work of Christ as seen in his history
till he was taken up from his disciples into heaven; and of the Acts, as
its sequel, to give an illustration of the power and working of the
gospel when preached among all nations, "beginning at Jerusalem." The
opening sentences of the Acts are just an expansion and an explanation
of the closing words of the Gospel. In this book we have just a
continuation of the history of the church after Christ's ascension. Luke
here carries on the history in the same spirit in which he had commenced
it. It is only a book of beginnings, a history of the founding of
churches, the initial steps in the formation of the Christian society in
the different places visited by the apostles. It records a cycle of
"representative events." All through the narrative we see the
ever-present, all-controlling power of the ever-living Saviour. He
worketh all and in all in spreading abroad his truth among men by his
Spirit and through the instrumentality of his apostles. The time of the
writing of this history may be gathered from the fact that the narrative
extends down to the close of the second year of Paul's first
imprisonment at Rome. It could not therefore have been written earlier
than A.D. 61 or 62, nor later than about the end of A.D. 63. Paul was
probably put to death during his second imprisonment, about A.D. 64, or,
as some think, 66. The place where the book was written was probably
Rome, to which Luke accompanied Paul. The key to the contents of the
book is in [Act 1:8](../kjv/act001.htm#008), "Ye shall be witnesses unto
me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the
uttermost part of the earth." After referring to what had been recorded
in a "former treatise" of the sayings and doings of Jesus Christ before
his ascension, the author proceeds to give an account of the
circumstances connected with that event, and then records the leading
facts with reference to the spread and triumphs of Christianity over the
world during a period of about thirty years. The record begins with
Pentecost (A.D. 33) and ends with Paul's first imprisonment (A.D. 63 or
64). The whole contents of the book may be divided into these three
parts: (1.) Chaps. 1-12, describing the first twelve years of the
Christian church. This section has been entitled "From Jerusalem to
Antioch." It contains the history of the planting and extension of the
church among the Jews by the ministry of Peter. (2.) Chaps. 13-21,
Paul's missionary journeys, giving the history of the extension and
planting of the church among the Gentiles. (3.) Chaps. 21-28, Paul at
Rome, and the events which led to this. Chaps. 13-28 have been entitled
"From Antioch to Rome." In this book it is worthy of note that no
mention is made of the writing by Paul of any of his epistles. This may
be accounted for by the fact that the writer confined himself to a
history of the planting of the church, and not to that of its training
or edification. The relation, however, between this history and the
epistles of Paul is of such a kind, i.e., brings to light so many
undesigned coincidences, as to prove the genuineness and authenticity of
both, as is so ably shown by Paley in his Horce Paulince. "No ancient
work affords so many tests of veracity; for no other has such numerous
points of contact in all directions with contemporary history, politics,
and topography, whether Jewish, or Greek, or Roman." Lightfoot. (See
PAUL.)

<span id="006">**Adah**</span> Ornament. (1.) The first of Lamech's two
wives, and the mother of Jabal and Jubal ([Gen
4:19](../kjv/gen004.htm#019), [Gen 4:20](../kjv/gen004.htm#020), [Gen
4:23](../kjv/gen004.htm#023)). (2.) The first of Esau's three wives, the
daughter of Elon the Hittite ([Gen 36:2](../kjv/gen036.htm#002), [Gen
36:4](../kjv/gen036.htm#004)), called also Bashemath ([Gen
26:34](../kjv/gen026.htm#034)).

<span id="007">**Adam**</span> Red, a Babylonian word, the generic name
for man, having the same meaning in the Hebrew and the Assyrian
languages. It was the name given to the first man, whose creation, fall,
and subsequent history and that of his descendants are detailed in the
first book of Moses (Gen. 1:27 - 5:32). "God created man \[Heb., Adam \]
in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female
created he them." Adam was absolutely the first man whom God created. He
was formed out of the dust of the earth (and hence his name), and God
breathed into this nostrils the breath of life, and gave him dominion
over all the lower creatures ([Gen 1:26](../kjv/gen001.htm#026); [Gen
2:7](../kjv/gen002.htm#007)). He was placed after his creation in the
Garden of Eden, to cultivate it, and to enjoy its fruits under this one
prohibition: "Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shalt
not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
die." The first recorded act of Adam was his giving names to the beasts
of the field and the fowls of the air, which God brought to him for this
end. Thereafter the Lord caused a deep sleep to fall upon him, and while
in an unconscious state took one of his ribs, and closed up his flesh
again; and of this rib he made a woman, whom he presented to him when he
awoke. Adam received her as his wife, and said, "This is now bone of my
bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was
taken out of Man." He called her Eve, because she was the mother of all
living. Being induced by the tempter in the form of a serpent to eat the
forbidden fruit, Eve persuaded Adam, and he also did eat. Thus man fell,
and brought upon himself and his posterity all the sad consequences of
his transgression. The narrative of the Fall comprehends in it the great
promise of a Deliverer ([Gen 3:15](../kjv/gen003.htm#015)), the "first
gospel" message to man. They were expelled from Eden, and at the east of
the garden God placed a flame, which turned every way, to prevent access
to the tree of life (Gen. 3). How long they were in Paradise is matter
of mere conjecture. Shortly after their expulsion Eve brought forth her
first-born, and called him Cain. Although we have the names of only
three of Adam's sons, viz., Cain, Abel, and Seth yet it is obvious that
he had several sons and daughters ([Gen 5:4](../kjv/gen005.htm#004)). He
died aged 930 years. Adam and Eve were the progenitors of the whole
human race. Evidences of varied kinds are abundant in proving the unity
of the human race. The investigations of science, altogether independent
of historical evidence, lead to the conclusion that God "hath made of
one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth"
([Act 17:26](../kjv/act017.htm#026). Compare [Rom
5:12](../kjv/rom005.htm#012); 1 Cor. 15:22-49).

<span id="008">**Adam, a Type**</span> The apostle Paul speaks of Adam
as "the figure of him who was to come." On this account our Lord is
sometimes called the second Adam. This typical relation is described in
[Rom 5:14](../kjv/rom005.htm#014).

<span id="009">**Adam, the City of**</span> Is referred to in [Jos
3:16](../kjv/jos003.htm#016). It stood "beside Zarethan," on the west
bank of Jordan ([Kg1 4:12](../kjv/kg1004.htm#012)). At this city the
flow of the water was arrested and rose up "upon an heap" at the time of
the Israelites' passing over ([Jos 3:16](../kjv/jos003.htm#016)).
