[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Candle**</span> Heb. ner , [Job
18:6](../kjv/job018.htm#006); [Job 29:3](../kjv/job029.htm#003); [Psa
18:28](../kjv/psa018.htm#028); [Pro 24:20](../kjv/pro024.htm#020), in
all which places the Revised Version and margin of Authorized Version
have "lamp," by which the word is elsewhere frequently rendered. The
Hebrew word denotes properly any kind of candle or lamp or torch. It is
used as a figure of conscience ([Pro 20:27](../kjv/pro020.htm#027)), of
a Christian example ([Mat 5:14](../kjv/mat005.htm#014), [Mat
5:15](../kjv/mat005.htm#015)), and of prosperity ([Job
21:17](../kjv/job021.htm#017); [Pro 13:9](../kjv/pro013.htm#009)).

<span id="001">**Candlestick**</span> The lamp-stand, "candelabrum,"
which Moses was commanded to make for the tabernacle, according to the
pattern shown him. Its form is described in [Exo
25:31](../kjv/exo025.htm#031); [Exo 37:17](../kjv/exo037.htm#017), and
may be seen represented on the Arch of Titus at Rome. It was among the
spoils taken by the Romans from the temple of Jerusalem (A.D. 70). It
was made of fine gold, and with the utensils belonging to it was a
talent in weight. The tabernacle was a tent without windows, and thus
artificial light was needed. This was supplied by the candlestick,
which, however, served also as a symbol of the church or people of God,
who are "the light of the world." The light which "symbolizes the
knowledge of God is not the sun or any natural light, but an artificial
light supplied with a specially prepared oil; for the knowledge of God
is in truth not natural nor common to all men, but furnished over and
above nature." This candlestick was placed on the south side of the Holy
Place, opposite the table of shewbread ([Exo
27:21](../kjv/exo027.htm#021); [Exo 30:7](../kjv/exo030.htm#007), [Exo
30:8](../kjv/exo030.htm#008); [Lev 24:3](../kjv/lev024.htm#003); [Sa1
3:3](../kjv/sa1003.htm#003)). It was lighted every evening, and was
extinguished in the morning. In the morning the priests trimmed the
seven lamps, borne by the seven branches, with golden snuffers, carrying
away the ashes in golden dishes ([Exo 25:38](../kjv/exo025.htm#038)),
and supplying the lamps at the same time with fresh oil. What ultimately
became of the candlestick is unknown. In Solomon's temple there were ten
separate candlesticks of pure gold, five on the right and five on the
left of the Holy Place ([Kg1 7:49](../kjv/kg1007.htm#049); [Ch2
4:7](../kjv/ch2004.htm#007)). Their structure is not mentioned. They
were carried away to Babylon ([Jer 52:19](../kjv/jer052.htm#019)). In
the temple erected after the Exile there was again but one candlestick,
and like the first, with seven branches. It was this which was
afterwards carried away by Titus to Rome, where it was deposited in the
Temple of Peace. When Genseric plundered Rome, he is said to have
carried it to Carthage (A.D. 455). It was recaptured by Belisarius (A.D.
533), and carried to Constantinople and thence to Jerusalem, where it
finally disappeared.

<span id="002">**Cane**</span> A tall sedgy plant with a hollow stem,
growing in moist places. In [Isa 43:24](../kjv/isa043.htm#024); [Jer
6:20](../kjv/jer006.htm#020), the Hebrew word Kaneh is thus rendered,
giving its name to the plant. It is rendered "reed" in [Kg1
14:15](../kjv/kg1014.htm#015); [Job 40:21](../kjv/job040.htm#021); [Isa
19:6](../kjv/isa019.htm#006); [Isa 35:7](../kjv/isa035.htm#007). In [Psa
68:30](../kjv/psa068.htm#030) the expression "company of spearmen" is in
the margin and the Revised Version "beasts of the reeds," referring
probably to the crocodile or the hippopotamus as a symbol of Egypt. In
[Kg2 18:21](../kjv/kg2018.htm#021); [Isa 36:6](../kjv/isa036.htm#006);
[Eze 29:6](../kjv/eze029.htm#006), [Eze 29:7](../kjv/eze029.htm#007),
the reference is to the weak, fragile nature of the reed. (See CALAMUS.)

<span id="003">**Canker**</span> A gangrene or mortification which
gradually spreads over the whole body ([Ti2
2:17](../kjv/ti2002.htm#017)). In [Jam 5:3](../kjv/jam005.htm#003)
"cankered" means "rusted" (R.V.) or tarnished.

<span id="004">**Cankerworm**</span> Heb. yelek ), "the licking locust,"
which licks up the grass of the field; probably the locust at a certain
stage of its growth, just as it emerges from the caterpillar state ([Joe
1:4](../kjv/joe001.htm#004); [Joe 2:25](../kjv/joe002.htm#025)). The
word is rendered "caterpillar" in [Psa 105:34](../kjv/psa105.htm#034);
[Jer 51:14](../kjv/jer051.htm#014), [Jer 51:17](../kjv/jer051.htm#017)
(but R.V. "canker-worm"). "It spoileth and fleeth away" ([Nah
3:16](../kjv/nah003.htm#016)), or as some read the passage, "The
cankerworm putteth off \[i.e., the envelope of its wings\], and fleeth
away."

<span id="005">**Canneh**</span> Mentioned only in [Eze
27:23](../kjv/eze027.htm#023). (See CALNEH.)

<span id="006">**Canon**</span> This word is derived from a Hebrew and
Greek word denoting a reed or cane. Hence it means something straight,
or something to keep straight; and hence also a rule, or something ruled
or measured. It came to be applied to the Scriptures, to denote that
they contained the authoritative rule of faith and practice, the
standard of doctrine and duty. A book is said to be of canonical
authority when it has a right to take a place with the other books which
contain a revelation of the Divine will. Such a right does not arise
from any ecclesiastical authority, but from the evidence of the inspired
authorship of the book. The canonical (i.e., the inspired) books of the
Old and New Testaments, are a complete rule, and the only rule, of faith
and practice. They contain the whole supernatural revelation of God to
men. The New Testament Canon was formed gradually under divine guidance.
The different books as they were written came into the possession of the
Christian associations which began to be formed soon after the day of
Pentecost; and thus slowly the canon increased till all the books were
gathered together into one collection containing the whole of the
twenty-seven New Testament inspired books. Historical evidence shows
that from about the middle of the second century this New Testament
collection was substantially such as we now possess. Each book contained
in it is proved to have, on its own ground, a right to its place; and
thus the whole is of divine authority. The Old Testament Canon is
witnessed to by the New Testament writers. Their evidence is conclusive.
The quotations in the New from the Old are very numerous, and the
references are much more numerous. These quotations and references by
our Lord and the apostles most clearly imply the existence at that time
of a well-known and publicly acknowledged collection of Hebrew writings
under the designation of "The Scriptures;" "The Law and the Prophets and
the Psalms;" "Moses and the Prophets," etc. The appeals to these books,
moreover, show that they were regarded as of divine authority, finally
deciding all questions of which they treat; and that the whole
collection so recognized consisted only of the thirty-nine books which
we now posses. Thus they endorse as genuine and authentic the canon of
the Jewish Scriptures. The Septuagint Version (q.v.) also contained
every book we now have in the Old Testament Scriptures. As to the time
at which the Old Testament canon was closed, there are many
considerations which point to that of Ezra and Nehemiah, immediately
after the return from Babylonian exile. (See BIBLE, EZRA, QUOTATIONS.)

<span id="007">**Capernaum**</span> Nahum's town, a Galilean city
frequently mentioned in the history of our Lord. It is not mentioned in
the Old Testament. After our Lord's expulsion from Nazareth ([Mat
4:13](../kjv/mat004.htm#013); Luke 4:16-31), Capernaum became his "own
city." It was the scene of many acts and incidents of his life ([Mat
8:5](../kjv/mat008.htm#005), [Mat 8:14](../kjv/mat008.htm#014), [Mat
8:15](../kjv/mat008.htm#015); [Mat 9:2](../kjv/mat009.htm#002), [Mat
9:10](../kjv/mat009.htm#010); 15:1-20; [Mar
1:32](../kjv/mar001.htm#032), etc.). The impenitence and unbelief of its
inhabitants after the many evidences our Lord gave among them of the
truth of his mission, brought down upon them a heavy denunciation of
judgement ([Mat 11:23](../kjv/mat011.htm#023)). It stood on the western
shore of the Sea of Galilee. The "land of Gennesaret," near, if not in,
which it was situated, was one of the most prosperous and crowded
districts of Palestine. This city lay on the great highway from Damascus
to Acco and Tyre. It has been identified with Tell Hum, about two miles
south-west of where the Jordan flows into the lake. Here are extensive
ruins of walls and foundations, and also the remains of what must have
been a beautiful synagogue, which it is conjectured may have been the
one built by the centurion ([Luk 7:5](../kjv/luk007.htm#005)), in which
our Lord frequently taught ([Joh 6:59](../kjv/joh006.htm#059); [Mar
1:21](../kjv/mar001.htm#021); [Luk 4:33](../kjv/luk004.htm#033)). Others
have conjectured that the ruins of the city are to be found at Khan
Minyeh, some three miles further to the south on the shore of the lake.
"If Tell Hum be Capernaum, the remains spoken of are without doubt the
ruins of the synagogue built by the Roman centurion, and one of the most
sacred places on earth. It was in this building that our Lord gave the
well-known discourse in John 6; and it was not without a certain strange
feeling that on turning over a large block we found the pot of manna
engraved on its face, and remembered the words, 'I am that bread of
life: your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.'" The
Recovery of Jerusalem.

<span id="008">**Caphtor**</span> A chaplet, the original seat of the
Philistines ([Deu 2:23](../kjv/deu002.htm#023); [Jer
47:4](../kjv/jer047.htm#004); [Amo 9:7](../kjv/amo009.htm#007)). The
name is found written in hieroglyphics in the temple of Kom Ombos in
Upper Egypt. But the exact situation of Caphtor is unknown, though it is
supposed to be Crete, since the Philistines seem to be meant by the
"Cherethites" in [Sa1 30:14](../kjv/sa1030.htm#014) (see also [Sa2
8:18](../kjv/sa2008.htm#018)). It may, however, have been a part of
Egypt, the Caphtur in the north Delta, since the Caphtorim were of the
same race as the Mizraite people ([Gen 10:14](../kjv/gen010.htm#014);
[Ch1 1:12](../kjv/ch1001.htm#012)).

<span id="009">**Cappadocia**</span> The easternmost and the largest
province of Asia Minor. Christianity very early penetrated into this
country ([Pe1 1:1](../kjv/pe1001.htm#001)). On the day of Pentecost
there were Cappadocians at Jerusalem ([Act 2:9](../kjv/act002.htm#009)).
