[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Bezek**</span> Lightning. (1.) The residence of
Adoni-bezek, in the lot of Judah ([Jdg 1:5](../kjv/jdg001.htm#005)). It
was in the mountains, not far from Jerusalem. Probably the modern
Bezkah, 6 miles south-east of Lydda. (2.) The place where Saul numbered
the forces of Israel and Judah ([Sa1 11:8](../kjv/sa1011.htm#008));
somewhere in the centre of the country, near the Jordan valley. Probably
the modern Ibzik, 13 miles north-east of Shechem.

<span id="001">**Bezer**</span> Ore of gold or silver. (1.) A city of
the Reubenites; one of the three cities of refuge on the east of Jordan
([Deu 4:43](../kjv/deu004.htm#043); [Jos 20:8](../kjv/jos020.htm#008)).
It has been identified with the modern ruined village of Burazin, some
12 miles north of Heshbon; also with Kasur-el-Besheir, 2 miles
south-west of Dibon. (2.) A descendant of Asher ([Ch1
7:37](../kjv/ch1007.htm#037)).

<span id="002">**Bible**</span> The English form of the Greek name
Biblia , meaning "books," the name which in the fifth century began to
be given to the entire collection of sacred books, the "Library of
Divine Revelation." The name Bible was adopted by Wickliffe, and came
gradually into use in our English language. The Bible consists of
sixty-six different books, composed by many different writers, in three
different languages, under different circumstances; writers of almost
every social rank, statesmen and peasants, kings, herdsmen, fishermen,
priests, tax-gatherers, tentmakers; educated and uneducated, Jews and
Gentiles; most of them unknown to each other, and writing at various
periods during the space of about 1600 years: and yet, after all, it is
only one book dealing with only one subject in its numberless aspects
and relations, the subject of man's redemption. It is divided into the
Old Testament, containing thirty-nine books, and the New Testament,
containing twenty-seven books. The names given to the Old in the
writings of the New are "the scriptures" ([Mat
21:42](../kjv/mat021.htm#042)), "scripture" ([Pe2
1:20](../kjv/pe2001.htm#020)), "the holy scriptures" ([Rom
1:2](../kjv/rom001.htm#002)), "the law" ([Joh
12:34](../kjv/joh012.htm#034)), "the law of Moses, the prophets, and the
psalms" ([Luk 24:44](../kjv/luk024.htm#044)), "the law and the prophets"
([Mat 5:17](../kjv/mat005.htm#017)), "the old covenant" ([Co2
3:14](../kjv/co2003.htm#014), R.V.). There is a break of 400 years
between the Old Testament and the New. (See APOCRYPHA.) The Old
Testament is divided into three parts: (1.) The Law (Torah), consisting
of the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses. (2.) The Prophets, consisting
of (a.) the former, namely, Joshua, Judges, the Books of Samuel, and the
Books of Kings; (b.) the latter, namely, the greater prophets, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, and the twelve minor prophets. (3.)The
Hagiographa, or holy writings, including the rest of the books. These
were ranked in three divisions:, (a.) The Psalms, Proverbs, and Job,
distinguished by the Hebrew name, a word formed of the initial letters
of these books, emeth, meaning truth. (b.) Canticles, Ruth,
Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther, called the five rolls, as being
written for the synagogue use on five separate rolls. (c.) Daniel, Ezra,
Nehemiah, and 1 and 2 Chronicles. Between the Old and the New Testament
no addition was made to the revelation God had already given. The period
of New Testament revelation, extending over a century, began with the
appearance of John the Baptist. The New Testament consists of (1.) the
historical books, viz., the Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles; (2.)
the Epistles; and (3.) the book of prophecy, the Revelation. The
division of the Bible into chapters and verses is altogether of human
invention, designed to facilitate reference to it. The ancient Jews
divided the Old Testament into certain sections for use in the synagogue
service, and then at a later period, in the ninth century A.D., into
verses. Our modern system of chapters for all the books of the Bible was
introduced by Cardinal Hugo about the middle of the thirteenth century
(he died 1263). The system of verses for the New Testament was
introduced by Stephens in 1551, and generally adopted, although neither
Tyndale's nor Coverdale's English translation of the Bible has verses.
The division is not always wisely made, yet it is very useful. (See
VERSIONS.)

<span id="003">**Bier**</span> The frame on which dead bodies were
conveyed to the grave ([Luk 7:14](../kjv/luk007.htm#014)).

<span id="004">**Bigtha**</span> Garden, or gift of fortune, one of the
seven eunuchs or chamberlains who had charge of the harem of Ahasuerus
([Est 1:10](../kjv/est001.htm#010)).

<span id="005">**Bigthan**</span> One of the eunuchs who "kept the door"
in the court of Ahasuerus. With Teresh he conspired against the king's
life. Mordecai detected the conspiracy, and the culprits were hanged
([Est 2:21](../kjv/est002.htm#021); [Est 6:1](../kjv/est006.htm#001)).

<span id="006">**Bildad**</span> Son of contention, one of Job's
friends. He is called "the Shuhite," probably as belonging to Shuah, a
district in Arabia, in which Shuah, the sixth son of Abraham by Keturah,
settled ([Gen 25:2](../kjv/gen025.htm#002)). He took part in each of the
three controversies into which Job's friends entered with him ([Job
8:1](../kjv/job008.htm#001); [Job 18:1](../kjv/job018.htm#001); [Job
25:1](../kjv/job025.htm#001)), and delivered three speeches, very severe
and stern in their tone, although less violent than those of Zophar, but
more so than those of Eliphaz.

<span id="007">**Bilgah**</span> Cheerful. (1.)The head of the fifteenth
sacerdotal course for the temple service ([Ch1
24:14](../kjv/ch1024.htm#014)). (2.) A priest who returned from Babylon
with Zerubbabel ([Neh 12:5](../kjv/neh012.htm#005), [Neh
12:18](../kjv/neh012.htm#018)).

<span id="008">**Bilhah**</span> Faltering; bashful, Rachel's handmaid,
whom she gave to Jacob ([Gen 29:29](../kjv/gen029.htm#029)). She was the
mother of Dan and Naphtali ([Gen 30:3](../kjv/gen030.htm#003)). Reuben
was cursed by his father for committing adultery with her ([Gen
35:22](../kjv/gen035.htm#022); [Gen 49:4](../kjv/gen049.htm#004)). He
was deprived of the birth-right, which was given to the sons of Joseph.

<span id="009">**Bilshan**</span> Son of the tongue; i.e., "eloquent", a
man of some note who returned from the Captivity with Zerubbabel ([Ezr
2:2](../kjv/ezr002.htm#002); [Neh 7:7](../kjv/neh007.htm#007)).
