[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Dagon**</span> Little fish; diminutive from dag = a
fish, the fish-god; the national god of the Philistines ([Jdg
16:23](../kjv/jdg016.htm#023)). This idol had the body of a fish with
the head and hands of a man. It was an Assyrio-Babylonian deity, the
worship of which was introduced among the Philistines through Chaldea.
The most famous of the temples of Dagon were at Gaza ([Jdg
16:23](../kjv/jdg016.htm#023)) and Ashdod ([Sa1
5:1](../kjv/sa1005.htm#001)). (See FISH.)

<span id="001">**Dagon's House**</span> ([Sa1
5:2](../kjv/sa1005.htm#002)), or Bethdagon, as elsewhere rendered ([Jos
15:41](../kjv/jos015.htm#041); [Jos 19:27](../kjv/jos019.htm#027)), was
the sanctuary or temple of Dagon. The Beth-dagon of [Jos
15:41](../kjv/jos015.htm#041) was one of the cities of the tribe of
Judah, in the lowland or plain which stretches westward. It has not been
identified. The Beth-dagon of [Jos 19:27](../kjv/jos019.htm#027) was one
of the border cities of Asher. That of [Ch1
10:10](../kjv/ch1010.htm#010) was in the western half-tribe of Manasseh,
where the Philistines, after their victory at Gilboa, placed Saul's head
in the temple of their god. (Compare [Sa1 31:8](../kjv/sa1031.htm#008).)

<span id="002">**Daily Sacrifice**</span> ([Dan
8:12](../kjv/dan008.htm#012); [Dan 11:31](../kjv/dan011.htm#031); [Dan
12:11](../kjv/dan012.htm#011)), a burnt offering of two lambs of a year
old, which were daily sacrificed in the name of the whole Israelitish
people upon the great altar, the first at dawn of day, and the second at
evening ([Dan 9:21](../kjv/dan009.htm#021)), or more correctly, "between
the two evenings." (See SACRIFICE.)

<span id="003">**Dale, The King's**</span> The name of a valley, the
alternative for "the valley of Shaveh" (q.v.), near the Dead Sea, where
the king of Sodom met Abraham ([Gen 14:17](../kjv/gen014.htm#017)). Some
have identified it with the southern part of the valley of Jehoshaphat,
where Absalom reared his family monument ([Sa2
18:18](../kjv/sa2018.htm#018)).

<span id="004">**Dalmanutha**</span> A place on the west of the Sea of
Galilee, mentioned only in [Mar 8:10](../kjv/mar008.htm#010). In the
parallel passage it is said that Christ came "into the borders of
Magdala" ([Mat 15:39](../kjv/mat015.htm#039)). It is plain, then, that
Dalmanutha was near Magdala, which was probably the Greek name of one of
the many Migdols (i.e., watch-towers) on the western side of the lake of
Gennesaret. It has been identified in the ruins of a village about a
mile from Magdala, in the little open valley of 'Ain-el-Barideh , "the
cold fountain," called el-Mejdel, possibly the "Migdal-el" of [Jos
19:38](../kjv/jos019.htm#038).

<span id="005">**Dalmatia**</span> A mountainous country on the eastern
shore of the Adriatic, a part of the Roman province of Illyricum. It
still bears its ancient name. During Paul's second imprisonment at Rome,
Titus left him to visit Dalmatia ([Ti2 4:10](../kjv/ti2004.htm#010)) for
some unknown purpose. Paul had himself formerly preached in that region
([Rom 15:19](../kjv/rom015.htm#019)). The present Emperor of Austria
bears, among his other titles, that of "King of Dalmatia."

<span id="006">**Damaris**</span> A heifer, an Athenian woman converted
to Christianity under the preaching of Paul ([Act
17:34](../kjv/act017.htm#034)). Some have supposed that she may have
been the wife of Dionysius the Areopagite.

<span id="007">**Damascus**</span> Activity, the most ancient of
Oriental cities; the capital of Syria ([Isa 7:8](../kjv/isa007.htm#008);
[Isa 17:3](../kjv/isa017.htm#003)); situated about 133 miles to the
north of Jerusalem. Its modern name is Esh-Sham; i.e., "the East." The
situation of this city is said to be the most beautiful of all Western
Asia. It is mentioned among the conquests of the Egyptian king Thothmes
III. (1500 B.C.), and in the Amarna tablets (1400 B.C.). It is first
mentioned in Scripture in connection with Abraham's victory over the
confederate kings under Chedorlaomer ([Gen
14:15](../kjv/gen014.htm#015)). It was the native place of Abraham's
steward ([Gen 15:2](../kjv/gen015.htm#002)). It is not again noticed
till the time of David, when "the Syrians of Damascus came to succour
Hadadezer" (q.v.), [Sa2 8:5](../kjv/sa2008.htm#005); [Ch1
18:5](../kjv/ch1018.htm#005). In the reign of Solomon, Rezon became
leader of a band who revolted from Hadadezer ([Kg1
11:23](../kjv/kg1011.htm#023)), and betaking themselves to Damascus,
settled there and made their leader king. There was a long war, with
varying success, between the Israelites and Syrians, who at a later
period became allies of Israel against Judah ([Kg2
15:37](../kjv/kg2015.htm#037)). The Syrians were at length subdued by
the Assyrians, the city of Damascus was taken and destroyed, and the
inhabitants carried captive into Assyria ([Kg2
16:7](../kjv/kg2016.htm#007); compare [Isa 7:8](../kjv/isa007.htm#008)).
In this, prophecy was fulfilled ([Isa 17:1](../kjv/isa017.htm#001); [Amo
1:4](../kjv/amo001.htm#004); [Jer 49:24](../kjv/jer049.htm#024)). The
kingdom of Syria remained a province of Assyria till the capture of
Nineveh by the Medes (625 B.C.), when it fell under the conquerors.
After passing through various vicissitudes, Syria was invaded by the
Romans (64 B.C.), and Damascus became the seat of the government of the
province. In A.D. 37 Aretas, the king of Arabia, became master of
Damascus, having driven back Herod Antipas. This city is memorable as
the scene of Saul's conversion (Acts 9:1-25). The street called
"Straight," in which Judas lived, in whose house Saul was found by
Ananias, is known by the name Sultany, or "Queen's Street." It is the
principal street of the city. Paul visited Damascus again on his return
from Arabia ([Gal 1:16](../kjv/gal001.htm#016), [Gal
1:17](../kjv/gal001.htm#017)). Christianity was planted here as a centre
([Act 9:20](../kjv/act009.htm#020)), from which it spread to the
surrounding regions. In A.D. 634 Damascus was conquered by the growing
Mohammedan power. In A.D. 1516 it fell under the dominion of the Turks,
its present rulers. It is now the largest city in Asiatic Turkey.
Christianity has again found a firm footing within its walls.

<span id="008">**Damnation**</span> In [Rom
13:2](../kjv/rom013.htm#002), means "condemnation," which comes on those
who withstand God's ordinance of magistracy. This sentence of
condemnation comes not from the magistrate, but from God, whose
authority is thus resisted. In [Co1 11:29](../kjv/co1011.htm#029) (R.V.,
"judgment") this word means condemnation, in the sense of exposure to
severe temporal judgments from God, as the following verse explains. In
[Rom 14:23](../kjv/rom014.htm#023) the word "damned" means "condemned"
by one's own conscience, as well as by the Word of God. The apostle
shows here that many things which are lawful are not expedient; and that
in using our Christian liberty the question should not simply be, Is
this course I follow lawful? but also, can I follow it without doing
injury to the spiritual interests of a brother in Christ? He that
"doubteth", i.e., is not clear in his conscience as to "meats", will
violate his conscience "if he eat," and in eating is condemned; and thus
one ought not so to use his liberty as to lead one who is "weak" to
bring upon himself this condemnation.

<span id="009">**Dan**</span> A judge. (1.) The fifth son of Jacob. His
mother was Bilhah, Rachel's maid ([Gen 30:6](../kjv/gen030.htm#006),
"God hath judged me", Heb. dananni ). The blessing pronounced on him by
his father was, "Dan shall judge his people" ([Gen
49:16](../kjv/gen049.htm#016)), probably in allusion to the judgeship of
Samson, who was of the tribe of Dan. The tribe of Dan had their place in
the march through the wilderness on the north side of the tabernacle
([Num 2:25](../kjv/num002.htm#025), [Num 2:31](../kjv/num002.htm#031);
[Num 10:25](../kjv/num010.htm#025)). It was the last of the tribes to
receive a portion in the Land of Promise. Its position and extent are
described in [Jos 19:40](../kjv/jos019.htm#040). The territory of Dan
extended from the west of that of Ephraim and Benjamin to the sea. (2.)
It was a small territory, but was very fertile. It included in it, among
others, the cities of Lydda, Ekron, and Joppa, which formed its northern
boundary. But this district was too limited. "Squeezed into the narrow
strip between the mountains and the sea, its energies were great beyond
its numbers." Being pressed by the Amorites and the Philistines, whom
they were unable to conquer, they longed for a wider space. They
accordingly sent out five spies from two of their towns, who went north
to the sources of the Jordan, and brought back a favourable report
regarding that region. "Arise," they said, "be not slothful to go, and
to possess the land," for it is "a place where there is no want of any
thing that is in the earth" ([Jdg 18:10](../kjv/jdg018.htm#010)). On
receiving this report, 600 Danites girded on their weapons of war, and
taking with them their wives and their children, marched to the foot of
Hermon, and fought against Leshem, and took it from the Sidonians, and
dwelt therein, and changed the name of the conquered town to Dan ([Jos
19:47](../kjv/jos019.htm#047)). This new city of Dan became to them a
new home, and was wont to be spoken of as the northern limit of
Palestine, the length of which came to be denoted by the expression
"from Dan to Beersheba", i.e., about 144 miles. But like Lot under a
similar temptation, they seem to have succumbed to the evil influences
around them, and to have sunk down into a condition of semi-heathenism
from which they never emerged. The mounds of ruins which mark the site
of the city show that it covered a considerable extent of ground. But
there remains no record of any noble deed wrought by the degenerate
tribe. Their name disappears from the roll-book of the natural and the
spiritual Israel.", Manning's Those Holy Fields. This old border city
was originally called Laish. Its modern name is Tell el-Kady, "Hill of
the Judge." It stands about four miles below Caesarea Philippi, in the
midst of a region of surpassing richness and beauty. (2.) This name
occurs in [Eze 27:19](../kjv/eze027.htm#019), Authorize Version; but the
words there, "Dan also," should be simply, as in the Revised Version,
"Vedan," an Arabian city, from which various kinds of merchandise were
brought to Tyre. Some suppose it to have been the city of Aden in
Arabia. (See MAHANEH-DAN.) See map, Showing the Territory of Dan See
also map, Showing the Territory of Asher
