[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Hebrew of the Hebrews**</span> One whose parents are
both Hebrews ([Phi 3:5](../kjv/phi003.htm#005); [Co2
11:22](../kjv/co2011.htm#022)); a genuine Hebrew.

<span id="001">**Hebrews**</span> ([Act 6:1](../kjv/act006.htm#001))
were the Hebrew-speaking Jews, as distinguished from those who spoke
Greek. (See GREEKS.)

<span id="002">**Hebrew language**</span> The language of the Hebrew
nation, and that in which the Old Testament is written, with the
exception of a few portions in Chaldee. In the Old Testament it is only
spoken of as "Jewish" ([Kg2 18:26](../kjv/kg2018.htm#026), [Kg2
18:28](../kjv/kg2018.htm#028); [Isa 36:11](../kjv/isa036.htm#011), [Isa
36:13](../kjv/isa036.htm#013); [Ch2 32:18](../kjv/ch2032.htm#018)). This
name is first used by the Jews in times subsequent to the close of the
Old Testament. It is one of the class of languages called Semitic,
because they were chiefly spoken among the descendants of Shem. When
Abraham entered Canaan it is obvious that he found the language of its
inhabitants closely allied to his own. Isaiah ([Isa
19:18](../kjv/isa019.htm#018)) calls it "the language of Canaan."
Whether this language, as seen in the earliest books of the Old
Testament, was the very dialect which Abraham brought with him into
Canaan, or whether it was the common tongue of the Canaanitish nations
which he only adopted, is uncertain; probably the latter opinion is the
correct one. For the thousand years between Moses and the Babylonian
exile the Hebrew language underwent little or no modification. It
preserves all through a remarkable uniformity of structure. From the
first it appears in its full maturity of development. But through
intercourse with Damascus, Assyria, and Babylon, from the time of David,
and more particularly from the period of the Exile, it comes under the
influence of the Aramaic idiom, and this is seen in the writings which
date from this period. It was never spoken in its purity by the Jews
after their return from Babylon. They now spoke Hebrew with a large
admixture of Aramaic or Chaldee, which latterly became the predominant
element in the national language. The Hebrew of the Old Testament has
only about six thousand words, all derived from about five hundred
roots. Hence the same word has sometimes a great variety of meanings. So
long as it was a living language, and for ages after, only the
consonants of the words were written. This also has been a source of
difficulty in interpreting certain words, for the meaning varies
according to the vowels which may be supplied. The Hebrew is one of the
oldest languages of which we have any knowledge. It is essentially
identical with the Phoenician language. (See MOABITE STONE.) The Semitic
languages, to which class the Hebrew and Phoenician belonged, were
spoken over a very wide area: in Babylonia, Mesopotamia, Syria,
Palestine and Arabia, in all the countries from the Mediterranean to the
borders of Assyria, and from the mountains of Armenia to the Indian
Ocean. The rounded form of the letters, as seen in the Moabite stone,
was probably that in which the ancient Hebrew was written down to the
time of the Exile, when the present square or Chaldean form was adopted.

<span id="003">**Hebrews, Epistle to**</span> (1.) Its canonicity. All
the results of critical and historical research to which this epistle
has been specially subjected abundantly vindicate its right to a place
in the New Testament canon among the other inspired books. (2.) Its
authorship. A considerable variety of opinions on this subject has at
different times been advanced. Some have maintained that its author was
Silas, Paul's companion. Others have attributed it to Clement of Rome,
or Luke, or Barnabas, or some unknown Alexandrian Christian, or Apollos;
but the conclusion which we think is best supported, both from internal
and external evidence, is that Paul was its author. There are, no doubt,
many difficulties in the way of accepting it as Paul's; but we may at
least argue with Calvin that there can be no difficulty in the way of
"embracing it without controversy as one of the apostolic epistles."
(3.) Date and place of writing. It was in all probability written at
Rome, near the close of Paul's two years' imprisonment ([Heb
13:19](../kjv/heb013.htm#019), [Heb 13:24](../kjv/heb013.htm#024)). It
was certainly written before the destruction of Jerusalem ([Heb
13:10](../kjv/heb013.htm#010)). (4.) To whom addressed. Plainly it was
intended for Jewish converts to the faith of the gospel, probably for
the church at Jerusalem. The subscription of this epistle is, of course,
without authority. In this case it is incorrect, for obviously Timothy
could not be the bearer of it ([Heb 13:23](../kjv/heb013.htm#023)). (5.)
Its design was to show the true end and meaning of the Mosaic system,
and its symbolical and transient character. It proves that the Levitical
priesthood was a "shadow" of that of Christ, and that the legal
sacrifices prefigured the great and all-perfect sacrifice he offered for
us. It explains that the gospel was designed, not to modify the law of
Moses, but to supersede and abolish it. Its teaching was fitted, as it
was designed, to check that tendency to apostatize from Christianity and
to return to Judaism which now showed itself among certain Jewish
Christians. The supreme authority and the transcendent glory of the
gospel are clearly set forth, and in such a way as to strengthen and
confirm their allegiance to Christ. (6.) It consists of two parts: (a)
doctrinal (Heb. 1 - 10:18), (b) and practical (Heb. 10:19 - 13:25).
There are found in it many references to portions of the Old Testament.
It may be regarded as a treatise supplementary to the Epistles to the
Romans and Galatians, and as an inspired commentary on the book of
Leviticus.

<span id="004">**Hebron**</span> A community; alliance. (1.) A city in
the south end of the valley of Eshcol, about midway between Jerusalem
and Beersheba, from which it is distant about 20 miles in a straight
line. It was built "seven years before Zoan in Egypt" ([Gen
13:18](../kjv/gen013.htm#018); [Num 13:22](../kjv/num013.htm#022)). It
still exists under the same name, and is one of the most ancient cities
in the world. Its earlier name was Kirjath-arba ([Gen
23:2](../kjv/gen023.htm#002); [Jos 14:15](../kjv/jos014.htm#015); [Jos
15:3](../kjv/jos015.htm#003)). But "Hebron would appear to have been the
original name of the city, and it was not till after Abraham's stay
there that it received the name Kirjath-arba, who \[i.e., Arba\] was not
the founder but the conqueror of the city, having led thither the tribe
of the Anakim, to which he belonged. It retained this name till it came
into the possession of Caleb, when the Israelites restored the original
name Hebron" (Keil, Com.). The name of this city does not occur in any
of the prophets or in the New Testament. It is found about forty times
in the Old. It was the favourite home of Abraham. Here he pitched his
tent under the oaks of Mamre, by which name it came afterwards to be
known; and here Sarah died, and was buried in the cave of Machpelah
([Gen 23:17](../kjv/gen023.htm#017)), which he bought from Ephron the
Hittite. From this place the patriarch departed for Egypt by way of
Beersheba ([Gen 37:14](../kjv/gen037.htm#014); [Gen
46:1](../kjv/gen046.htm#001)). It was taken by Joshua and given to Caleb
([Jos 10:36](../kjv/jos010.htm#036), [Jos 10:37](../kjv/jos010.htm#037);
[Jos 12:10](../kjv/jos012.htm#010); [Jos 14:13](../kjv/jos014.htm#013)).
It became a Levitical city and a city of refuge ([Jos
20:7](../kjv/jos020.htm#007); [Jos 21:11](../kjv/jos021.htm#011)). When
David became king of Judah this was his royal residence, and he resided
here for seven and a half years ([Sa2 5:5](../kjv/sa2005.htm#005)); and
here he was anointed as king over all Israel ([Sa2
2:1](../kjv/sa2002.htm#001), [Sa2 2:11](../kjv/sa2002.htm#011); [Kg1
2:11](../kjv/kg1002.htm#011)). It became the residence also of the
rebellious Absalom ([Sa2 15:10](../kjv/sa2015.htm#010)), who probably
expected to find his chief support in the tribe of Judah, now called
el-Khulil. In one part of the modern city is a great mosque, which is
built over the grave of Machpelah. The first European who was permitted
to enter this mosque was the Prince of Wales in 1862. It was also
visited by the Marquis of Bute in 1866, and by the late Emperor
Frederick of Germany (then Crown-Prince of Prussia) in 1869. One of the
largest oaks in Palestine is found in the valley of Eshcol, about 3
miles north of the town. It is supposed by some to be the tree under
which Abraham pitched his tent, and is called "Abraham's oak." (See
OAK.) (2.) The third son of Kohath the Levite ([Exo
6:18](../kjv/exo006.htm#018); [Ch1 6:2](../kjv/ch1006.htm#002), [Ch1
6:18](../kjv/ch1006.htm#018)). (3.) [Ch1 2:42](../kjv/ch1002.htm#042),
[Ch1 2:43](../kjv/ch1002.htm#043). (4.) A town in the north border of
Asher ([Jos 19:28](../kjv/jos019.htm#028)).

<span id="005">**Hegai**</span> Eunuch, had charge of the harem of
Ahasuerus ([Est 2:8](../kjv/est002.htm#008)).

<span id="006">**Heifer**</span> Heb. 'eglah , ([Deu
21:4](../kjv/deu021.htm#004), [Deu 21:6](../kjv/deu021.htm#006); [Jer
46:20](../kjv/jer046.htm#020)). Untrained to the yoke ([Hos
10:11](../kjv/hos010.htm#011)); giving milk ([Isa
7:21](../kjv/isa007.htm#021)); ploughing ([Jdg
14:18](../kjv/jdg014.htm#018)); treading out grain ([Jer
50:11](../kjv/jer050.htm#011)); unsubdued to the yoke an emblem of Judah
([Isa 15:5](../kjv/isa015.htm#005); [Jer 48:34](../kjv/jer048.htm#034)).
Heb. parah ([Gen 41:2](../kjv/gen041.htm#002); [Num
19:2](../kjv/num019.htm#002)). Bearing the yoke ([Hos
4:16](../kjv/hos004.htm#016)); "heifers of Bashan" ([Amo
4:1](../kjv/amo004.htm#001)), metaphorical for the voluptuous females of
Samaria. The ordinance of sacrifice of the "red heifer" described in
[Num 19:1](../kjv/num019.htm#001); compare [Heb
9:13](../kjv/heb009.htm#013).

<span id="007">**Heir**</span> Under the patriarchs the property of a
father was divided among the sons of his legitimate wives ([Gen
21:10](../kjv/gen021.htm#010); [Gen 24:36](../kjv/gen024.htm#036); [Gen
25:5](../kjv/gen025.htm#005)), the eldest son getting a larger portion
than the rest. The Mosaic law made specific regulations regarding the
transmission of real property, which are given in detail in [Deu
21:17](../kjv/deu021.htm#017); [Num 27:8](../kjv/num027.htm#008); [Num
36:6](../kjv/num036.htm#006); [Num 27:9](../kjv/num027.htm#009).
Succession to property was a matter of right and not of favour. Christ
is the "heir of all things" ([Heb 1:2](../kjv/heb001.htm#002); [Col
1:15](../kjv/col001.htm#015)). Believers are heirs of the "promise," "of
righteousness," "of the kingdom," "of the world," "of God," "joint
heirs" with Christ ([Gal 3:29](../kjv/gal003.htm#029); [Heb
6:17](../kjv/heb006.htm#017); [Heb 11:7](../kjv/heb011.htm#007); [Jam
2:5](../kjv/jam002.htm#005); [Rom 4:13](../kjv/rom004.htm#013); [Rom
8:17](../kjv/rom008.htm#017)).

<span id="008">**Helah**</span> Rust, ([Ch1 4:5](../kjv/ch1004.htm#005),
[Ch1 4:7](../kjv/ch1004.htm#007)), one of the wives of Ashur.

<span id="009">**Helam**</span> Place of abundance, a place on the east
of Jordan and west of the Euphrates where David gained a great victory
over the Syrian army ([Sa2 10:16](../kjv/sa2010.htm#016)), which was
under the command of Shobach. Some would identify it with Alamatta, near
Nicephorium.
