[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Eben-ezer**</span> Stone of help, the memorial stone
set up by Samuel to commemorate the divine assistance to Israel in their
great battle against the Philistines, whom they totally routed ([Sa1
7:7](../kjv/sa1007.htm#007)) at Aphek, in the neighbourhood of Mizpeh,
in Benjamin, near the western entrance of the pass of Beth-horon. On
this very battle-field, twenty years before, the Philistines routed the
Israelites, "and slew of the army in the field about four thousand men"
([Sa1 4:1](../kjv/sa1004.htm#001), [Sa1 4:2](../kjv/sa1004.htm#002);
here, and at [Sa1 5:1](../kjv/sa1005.htm#001), called "Eben-ezer" by
anticipation). In this extremity the Israelites fetched the ark out of
Shiloh and carried it into their camp. The Philistines a second time
immediately attacked them, and smote them with a very great slaughter,
"for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen. And the ark of God
was taken" ([Sa1 4:10](../kjv/sa1004.htm#010)). And now in the same
place the Philistines are vanquished, and the memorial stone is erected
by Samuel (q.v.). The Plot where the stone was erected was somewhere
"between Mizpeh and Shen." Some have identified it with the modern Beit
Iksa, a conspicuous and prominent position, apparently answering all the
necessary conditions; others with Dier Aban, 3 miles east of 'Ain Shems
.

<span id="001">**Eber**</span> Beyond. (1.). The third post-duluvian
patriarch after Shem ([Gen 10:24](../kjv/gen010.htm#024); [Gen
11:14](../kjv/gen011.htm#014)). He is regarded as the founder of the
Hebrew race ([Gen 10:21](../kjv/gen010.htm#021); [Num
24:24](../kjv/num024.htm#024)). In [Luk 3:35](../kjv/luk003.htm#035) he
is called Heber. (2.) One of the seven heads of the families of the
Gadites ([Ch1 5:13](../kjv/ch1005.htm#013)). (3.) The oldest of the
three sons of Elpaal the Benjamite ([Ch1 8:12](../kjv/ch1008.htm#012)).
(4.) One of the heads of the families of Benjamites in Jerusalem ([Ch1
8:22](../kjv/ch1008.htm#022)). (5.) The head of the priestly family of
Amok in the time of Zerubbabel ([Neh 12:20](../kjv/neh012.htm#020)).

<span id="002">**Ebony**</span> A black, hard wood, brought by the
merchants from India to Tyre ([Eze 27:15](../kjv/eze027.htm#015)). It is
the heart-wood, brought by Diospyros ebenus, which grows in Ceylon and
Southern India.

<span id="003">**Ebronah**</span> Passage, one of the stations of the
Israelites in their wanderings ([Num 33:34](../kjv/num033.htm#034), [Num
33:35](../kjv/num033.htm#035)). It was near Ezion-geber.

<span id="004">**Ecbatana**</span> ([Ezr 6:2](../kjv/ezr006.htm#002)
marg.). (See ACHMETHA.)

<span id="005">**Ecclesiastes**</span> The Greek rendering of the Hebrew
Koheleth , which means "Preacher." The old and traditional view of the
authorship of this book attributes it to Solomon. This view can be
satisfactorily maintained, though others date it from the Captivity. The
writer represents himself implicitly as Solomon ([Ecc
1:12](../kjv/ecc001.htm#012)). It has been appropriately styled The
Confession of King Solomon. "The writer is a man who has sinned in
giving way to selfishness and sensuality, who has paid the penalty of
that sin in satiety and weariness of life, but who has through all this
been under the discipline of a divine education, and has learned from it
the lesson which God meant to teach him." "The writer concludes by
pointing out that the secret of a true life is that a man should
consecrate the vigour of his youth of God." The key-note of the book is
sounded in [Ecc 1:2](../kjv/ecc001.htm#002), "Vanity of vanities! saith
the Preacher, Vanity of vanities! all is vanity!" i.e., all man's
efforts to find happiness apart from God are without result.

<span id="006">**Eclipse**</span> Of the sun alluded to in [Amo
8:9](../kjv/amo008.htm#009); [Mic 3:6](../kjv/mic003.htm#006); [Zac
14:6](../kjv/zac014.htm#006); [Joe 2:10](../kjv/joe002.htm#010).
Eclipses were regarded as tokens of God's anger ([Joe
3:15](../kjv/joe003.htm#015); [Job 9:7](../kjv/job009.htm#007)). The
darkness at the crucifixion has been ascribed to an eclipse ([Mat
27:45](../kjv/mat027.htm#045)); but on the other hand it is argued that
the great intensity of darkness caused by an eclipse never lasts for
more than six minutes, and this darkness lasted for three hours.
Moreover, at the time of the Passover the moon was full, and therefore
there could not be an eclipse of the sun, which is caused by an
interposition of the moon between the sun and the earth.

<span id="007">**Ed**</span> Witness, a word not found in the original
Hebrew, nor in the LXX. and Vulgate, but added by the translators in the
Authorized Version, also in the Revised Version, of [Jos
22:34](../kjv/jos022.htm#034). The words are literally rendered: "And
the children of Reuben and the children of Gad named the altar. It is a
witness between us that Jehovah is God." This great altar stood probably
on the east side of the Jordan, in the land of Gilead, "over against the
land of Canaan." After the division of the Promised Land, the tribes of
Reuben and Gad and the half-tribe of manasseh, on returning to their own
settlements on the east of Jordan ([Jos 22:1](../kjv/jos022.htm#001)),
erected a great altar, which they affirmed, in answer to the challenge
of the other tribes, was not for sacrifice, but only as a witness ( 'Ed
) or testimony to future generations that they still retained the same
interest in the nation as the other tribes.

<span id="008">**Edar**</span> Tower of the flock, a tower between
Bethlehem and Hebron, near which Jacob first halted after leaving
Bethlehem ([Gen 35:21](../kjv/gen035.htm#021)). In [Mic
4:8](../kjv/mic004.htm#008) the word is rendered "tower of the flock"
(marg., "Edar"), and is used as a designation of Bethlehem, which
figuratively represents the royal line of David as sprung from
Bethlehem.

<span id="009">**Eden**</span> Delight. (1.) The garden in which our
first parents dwelt ([Gen 2:8](../kjv/gen002.htm#008)). No geographical
question has been so much discussed as that bearing on its site. It has
been placed in Armenia, in the region west of the Caspian Sea, in Media,
near Damascus, in Palestine, in Southern Arabia, and in Babylonia. The
site must undoubtedly be sought for somewhere along the course of the
great streams the Tigris and the Euphrates of Western Asia, in "the land
of Shinar" or Babylonia. The region from about lat. 33 degrees 30' to
lat. 31 degrees, which is a very rich and fertile tract, has been by the
most competent authorities agreed on as the probable site of Eden. "It
is a region where streams abound, where they divide and re-unite, where
alone in the Mesopotamian tract can be found the phenomenon of a single
river parting into four arms, each of which is or has been a river of
consequence." Among almost all nations there are traditions of the
primitive innocence of our race in the garden of Eden. This was the
"golden age" to which the Greeks looked back. Men then lived a "life
free from care, and without labour and sorrow. Old age was unknown; the
body never lost its vigour; existence was a perpetual feast without a
taint of evil. The earth brought forth spontaneously all things that
were good in profuse abundance." (2.) One of the markets whence the
merchants of Tyre obtained richly embroidered stuffs ([Eze
27:23](../kjv/eze027.htm#023)); the same, probably, as that mentioned in
[Kg2 19:12](../kjv/kg2019.htm#012), and [Isa
37:12](../kjv/isa037.htm#012), as the name of a region conquered by the
Assyrians. (3.) Son of Joah, and one of the Levites who assisted in
reforming the public worship of the sanctuary in the time of Hezekiah
([Ch2 29:12](../kjv/ch2029.htm#012)).
