[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Parchment**</span> A skin prepared for writing on; so
called from Pergamos (q.v.), where this was first done ([Ti2
4:13](../kjv/ti2004.htm#013)).

<span id="001">**Pardon**</span> The forgiveness of sins granted freely
([Isa 43:25](../kjv/isa043.htm#025)), readily ([Neh
9:17](../kjv/neh009.htm#017); [Psa 86:5](../kjv/psa086.htm#005)),
abundantly ([Isa 55:7](../kjv/isa055.htm#007); [Rom
5:20](../kjv/rom005.htm#020)). Pardon is an act of a sovereign, in pure
sovereignty, granting simply a remission of the penalty due to sin, but
securing neither honour nor reward to the pardoned. Justification
(q.v.), on the other hand, is the act of a judge, and not of a
sovereign, and includes pardon and, at the same time, a title to all the
rewards and blessings promised in the covenant of life.

<span id="002">**Parlour**</span> (from the Fr. parler, "to speak")
denotes an "audience chamber," but that is not the import of the Hebrew
word so rendered. It corresponds to what the Turks call a kiosk, as in
[Jdg 3:20](../kjv/jdg003.htm#020) (the "summer parlour"), or as in the
margin of the Revised Version ("the upper chamber of cooling"), a small
room built on the roof of the house, with open windows to catch the
breeze, and having a door communicating with the outside by which
persons seeking an audience may be admitted. While Eglon was resting in
such a parlour, Ehud, under pretense of having a message from God to
him, was admitted into his presence, and murderously plunged his dagger
into his body ([Jdg 3:21](../kjv/jdg003.htm#021), [Jdg
3:22](../kjv/jdg003.htm#022)). The "inner parlours" in [Ch1
28:11](../kjv/ch1028.htm#011) were the small rooms or chambers which
Solomon built all round two sides and one end of the temple ([Kg1
6:5](../kjv/kg1006.htm#005)), "side chambers;" or they may have been, as
some think, the porch and the holy place. In [Sa1
9:22](../kjv/sa1009.htm#022) the Revised Version reads "guest chamber,"
a chamber at the high place specially used for sacrificial feasts.

<span id="003">**Parmashta**</span> Strong-fisted, a son of Haman, slain
in Shushan ([Est 9:9](../kjv/est009.htm#009)).

<span id="004">**Parmenas**</span> Constant, one of the seven "deacons"
([Act 6:5](../kjv/act006.htm#005)).

<span id="005">**Parshandatha**</span> An interpreter of the law, the
eldest of Haman's sons, slain in Shushan ([Est
9:7](../kjv/est009.htm#007)).

<span id="006">**Parthians**</span> Were present in Jerusalem at
Pentecost ([Act 2:9](../kjv/act002.htm#009)). Parthia lay on the east of
Media and south of Hyrcania, which separated it from the Caspian Sea. It
corresponded with the western half of the modern Khorasan, and now forms
a part of Persia.

<span id="007">**Partridge**</span> (Heb. kore , i.e., "caller"). This
bird, unlike our own partridge, is distinguished by "its ringing
call-note, which in early morning echoes from cliff to cliff amidst the
barrenness of the wilderness of Judea and the glens of the forest of
Carmel" hence its Hebrew name. This name occurs only twice in Scripture.
In [Sa1 26:20](../kjv/sa1026.htm#020) "David alludes to the mode of
chase practiced now, as of old, when the partridge, continuously chased,
was at length, when fatigued, knocked down by sticks thrown along the
ground." It endeavours to save itself "by running, in preference to
flight, unless when suddenly started. It is not an inhabitant of the
plain or the corn-field, but of rocky hill-sides" (Tristram's Nat.
Hist.). In [Jer 17:11](../kjv/jer017.htm#011) the prophet is
illustrating the fact that riches unlawfully acquired are precarious and
short-lived. The exact nature of the illustration cannot be precisely
determined. Some interpret the words as meaning that the covetous man
will be as surely disappointed as the partridge which gathers in eggs,
not of her own laying, and is unable to hatch them; others (Tristram),
with more probability, as denoting that the man who enriches himself by
unjust means "will as surely be disappointed as the partridge which
commences to sit, but is speedily robbed of her hopes of a brood" by her
eggs being stolen away from her. The commonest partridge in Palestine is
the Caccabis saxatilis, the Greek partridge. The partridge of the
wilderness ( Ammo-perdix heyi ) is a smaller species. Both are
essentially mountain and rock birds, thus differing from the English
partridge, which loves cultivated fields.

<span id="008">**Paruah**</span> Flourishing, the father of Jehoshaphat,
appointed to provide monthly supplies for Solomon from the tribe of
Issachar ([Kg1 4:17](../kjv/kg1004.htm#017)).

<span id="009">**Parvaim**</span> The name of a country from which
Solomon obtained gold for the temple ([Ch2 3:6](../kjv/ch2003.htm#006)).
Some have identified it with Ophir, but it is uncertain whether it is
even the name of a place. It may simply, as some think, denote "Oriental
regions."
