[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**No**</span> Or No-Amon, the home of Amon, the name of
Thebes, the ancient capital of what is called the Middle Empire, in
Upper or Southern Egypt. "The multitude of No" ([Jer
46:25](../kjv/jer046.htm#025)) is more correctly rendered, as in the
Revised Version, "Amon of No", i.e., No, where Jupiter Amon had his
temple. In [Eze 30:14](../kjv/eze030.htm#014), [Eze
30:16](../kjv/eze030.htm#016) it is simply called "No;" but in [Eze
30:15](../kjv/eze030.htm#015) the name has the Hebrew Hamon prefixed to
it, "Hamon No." This prefix is probably the name simply of the god
usually styled Amon or Ammon. In [Nah 3:8](../kjv/nah003.htm#008) the
"populous No" of the Authorized Version is in the Revised Version
correctly rendered "No-Amon." It was the Diospolis or Thebes of the
Greeks, celebrated for its hundred gates and its vast population. It
stood on both sides of the Nile, and is by some supposed to have
included Karnak and Luxor. In grandeur and extent it can only be
compared to Nineveh. It is mentioned only in the prophecies referred to,
which point to its total destruction. It was first taken by the
Assyrians in the time of Sargon ([Isa 20:1](../kjv/isa020.htm#001)). It
was afterwards "delivered into the hand" of Nebuchadnezzar and
Assurbani-pal ([Jer 46:25](../kjv/jer046.htm#025), [Jer
46:26](../kjv/jer046.htm#026)). Cambyses, king of the Persians (525
B.C.), further laid it waste by fire. Its ruin was completed (B.C. 81)
by Ptolemy Lathyrus. The ruins of this city are still among the most
notable in the valley of the Nile. They have formed a great storehouse
of interesting historic remains for more than two thousand years. "As I
wandered day after day with ever-growing amazement amongst these relics
of ancient magnificence, I felt that if all the ruins in Europe,
classical, Celtic, and medieval, were brought together into one centre,
they would fall far short both in extent and grandeur of those of this
single Egyptian city." Manning, The Land of the Pharaohs.

<span id="001">**Noadiah**</span> Meeting with the Lord. (1.) A Levite
who returned from Babylon ([Ezr 8:33](../kjv/ezr008.htm#033)). (2.) A
false prophetess who assisted Tobiah and Sanballat against the Jews
([Neh 6:14](../kjv/neh006.htm#014)). Being bribed by them, she tried to
stir up discontent among the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and so to
embarrass Nehemiah in his great work of rebuilding the ruined walls of
the city.

<span id="002">**Noah**</span> (1.) Rest, (Heb. Noah ) the grandson of
Methuselah ([Gen 5:25](../kjv/gen005.htm#025)), who was for two hundred
and fifty years contemporary with Adam, and the son of Lamech, who was
about fifty years old at the time of Adam's death. This patriarch is
rightly regarded as the connecting link between the old and the new
world. He is the second great progenitor of the human family. The words
of his father Lamech at his birth ([Gen 5:29](../kjv/gen005.htm#029))
have been regarded as in a sense prophetical, designating Noah as a type
of Him who is the true "rest and comfort" of men under the burden of
life ([Mat 11:28](../kjv/mat011.htm#028)). He lived five hundred years,
and then there were born unto him three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth
([Gen 5:32](../kjv/gen005.htm#032)). He was a "just man and perfect in
his generation," and "walked with God" (Compare [Eze
14:14](../kjv/eze014.htm#014), [Eze 14:20](../kjv/eze014.htm#020)). But
now the descendants of Cain and of Seth began to intermarry, and then
there sprang up a race distinguished for their ungodliness. Men became
more and more corrupt, and God determined to sweep the earth of its
wicked population ([Gen 6:7](../kjv/gen006.htm#007)). But with Noah God
entered into a covenant, with a promise of deliverance from the
threatened deluge ([Gen 6:18](../kjv/gen006.htm#018)). He was
accordingly commanded to build an ark ([Gen
6:14](../kjv/gen006.htm#014)) for the saving of himself and his house.
An interval of one hundred and twenty years elapsed while the ark was
being built ([Gen 6:3](../kjv/gen006.htm#003)), during which Noah bore
constant testimony against the unbelief and wickedness of that
generation ([Pe1 3:18](../kjv/pe1003.htm#018); [Pe2
2:5](../kjv/pe2002.htm#005)). When the ark of "gopher-wood" (mentioned
only here) was at length completed according to the command of the Lord,
the living creatures that were to be preserved entered into it; and then
Noah and his wife and sons and daughters-in-law entered it, and the
"Lord shut him in" ([Gen 7:16](../kjv/gen007.htm#016)). The
judgment-threatened now fell on the guilty world, "the world that then
was, being overflowed with water, perished" ([Pe2
3:6](../kjv/pe2003.htm#006)). The ark floated on the waters for one
hundred and fifty days, and then rested on the mountains of Ararat ([Gen
8:3](../kjv/gen008.htm#003), [Gen 8:4](../kjv/gen008.htm#004)); but not
for a considerable time after this was divine permission given him to
leave the ark, so that he and his family were a whole year shut up
within it ([Gen 8:6](../kjv/gen008.htm#006)). On leaving the ark Noah's
first act was to erect an altar, the first of which there is any
mention, and offer the sacrifices of adoring thanks and praise to God,
who entered into a covenant with him, the first covenant between God and
man, granting him possession of the earth by a new and special charter,
which remains in force to the present time (Gen. 8:21 - 9:17). As a sign
and witness of this covenant, the rainbow was adopted and set apart by
God, as a sure pledge that never again would the earth be destroyed by a
flood. But, alas! Noah after this fell into grievous sin ([Gen
9:21](../kjv/gen009.htm#021)); and the conduct of Ham on this sad
occasion led to the memorable prediction regarding his three sons and
their descendants. Noah "lived after the flood three hundred and fifty
years, and he died" ([Gen 9:28](../kjv/gen009.htm#028)). (See DELUGE).
(2.) Motion, (Heb. No'ah ) one of the five daughters of Zelophehad ([Num
26:33](../kjv/num026.htm#033); [Num 27:1](../kjv/num027.htm#001); [Num
36:11](../kjv/num036.htm#011); [Jos 17:3](../kjv/jos017.htm#003)).

<span id="003">**Nob**</span> High place, a city of the priests, first
mentioned in the history of David's wanderings ([Sa1
21:1](../kjv/sa1021.htm#001)). Here the tabernacle was then standing,
and here Ahimelech the priest resided. (See AHIMELECH.) From [Isa
10:28](../kjv/isa010.htm#028) it seems to have been near Jerusalem. It
has been identified by some with el-Isawiyeh, one mile and a half to the
north-east of Jerusalem. But according to [Isa
10:28](../kjv/isa010.htm#028) it was on the south of Geba, on the road
to Jerusalem, and within sight of the city. This identification does not
meet these conditions, and hence others (as Dean Stanley) think that it
was the northern summit of Mount Olivet, the place where David
"worshipped God" when fleeing from Absalom ([Sa2
15:32](../kjv/sa2015.htm#032)), or more probably (Conder) that it was
the same as Mizpeh (q.v.), [Jdg 20:1](../kjv/jdg020.htm#001); [Jos
18:26](../kjv/jos018.htm#026); [Sa1 7:16](../kjv/sa1007.htm#016), at
Nebi Samwil, about 5 miles north-west of Jerusalem. After being supplied
with the sacred loaves of showbread, and girding on the sword of
Goliath, which was brought forth from behind the ephod, David fled from
Nob and sought refuge at the court of Achish, the king of Gath, where he
was cast into prison. (Compare Ps. 34 and [Psa
56:1](../kjv/psa056.htm#001), titles.)

<span id="004">**Nobah**</span> Howling. (1.) [Num
32:42](../kjv/num032.htm#042). (2.) The name given to Kenath (q.v.) by
Nobah when he conquered it. It was on the east of Gilead ([Jdg
8:11](../kjv/jdg008.htm#011)).

<span id="005">**Nobleman**</span> (Gr. basilikos , i.e., "king's man"),
an officer of state ([Joh 4:49](../kjv/joh004.htm#049)) in the service
of Herod Antipas. He is supposed to have been the Chuza, Herod's
steward, whose wife was one of those women who "ministered unto the Lord
of their substance" ([Luk 8:3](../kjv/luk008.htm#003)). This officer
came to Jesus at Cana and besought him to go down to Capernaum and heal
his son, who lay there at the point of death. Our Lord sent him away
with the joyful assurance that his son was alive.

<span id="006">**Nod**</span> Exile; wandering; unrest, a name given to
the country to which Cain fled ([Gen 4:16](../kjv/gen004.htm#016)). It
lay on the east of Eden.

<span id="007">**Nodab**</span> Noble, probably a tribe descended from
one of the sons of Ishmael, with whom the trans-Jordanic tribes made war
([Ch1 5:19](../kjv/ch1005.htm#019)).

<span id="008">**Nogah**</span> Splendour, one of David's sons, born at
Jerusalem ([Ch1 3:7](../kjv/ch1003.htm#007)).

<span id="009">**Noph**</span> The Hebrew name of an Egyptian city ([Isa
19:13](../kjv/isa019.htm#013); [Jer 2:16](../kjv/jer002.htm#016); [Jer
44:1](../kjv/jer044.htm#001); [Jer 46:14](../kjv/jer046.htm#014), [Jer
46:19](../kjv/jer046.htm#019); [Eze 30:13](../kjv/eze030.htm#013), [Eze
30:16](../kjv/eze030.htm#016)). In [Hos 9:6](../kjv/hos009.htm#006) the
Hebrew name is Moph , and is translated " Memphis ," which is its Greek
and Latin form. It was one of the most ancient and important cities of
Egypt, and stood a little to the south of the modern Cairo, on the
western bank of the Nile. It was the capital of Lower Egypt. Among the
ruins found at this place is a colossal statue of Rameses the Great.
(See MEMPHIS.)
