[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Man of Sin**</span> A designation of Antichrist given
in [Th2 2:3](../kjv/th2002.htm#003), usually regarded as descriptive of
the Papal power; but "in whomsoever these distinctive features are
found, whoever wields temporal and spiritual power in any degree similar
to that in which the man of sin is here described as wielding it, he, be
he pope or potentate, is beyond all doubt a distinct type of
Antichrist."

<span id="001">**Manaen**</span> Consoler, a Christian teacher at
Antioch. Nothing else is known of him beyond what is stated in [Act
13:1](../kjv/act013.htm#001), where he is spoken of as having been
brought up with (Gr. syntrophos ; rendered in R.V. "foster brother" of)
Herod, i.e., Herod Antipas, the tetrach, who, with his brother
Archelaus, was educated at Rome.

<span id="002">**Manasseh**</span> Who makes to forget. "God hath made
me forget" (Heb. nashshani ), [Gen 41:51](../kjv/gen041.htm#051). (1.)
The elder of the two sons of Joseph. He and his brother Ephraim were
afterwards adopted by Jacob as his own sons ([Gen
48:1](../kjv/gen048.htm#001)). There is an account of his marriage to a
Syrian ([Ch1 7:14](../kjv/ch1007.htm#014)); and the only thing
afterwards recorded of him is, that his grandchildren were "brought up
upon Joseph's knees" ([Gen 50:23](../kjv/gen050.htm#023); R.V., "born
upon Joseph's knees") i.e., were from their birth adopted by Joseph as
his own children. The tribe of Manasseh was associated with that of
Ephraim and Benjamin during the wanderings in the wilderness. They
encamped on the west side of the tabernacle. According to the census
taken at Sinai, this tribe then numbered 32,200 ([Num
1:10](../kjv/num001.htm#010), [Num 1:35](../kjv/num001.htm#035); [Num
2:20](../kjv/num002.htm#020), [Num 2:21](../kjv/num002.htm#021)). Forty
years afterwards its numbers had increased to 52,700 ([Num
26:34](../kjv/num026.htm#034), [Num 26:37](../kjv/num026.htm#037)), and
it was at this time the most distinguished of all the tribes. The half
of this tribe, along with Reuben and Gad, had their territory assigned
them by Moses on the east of the Jordan ([Jos
13:7](../kjv/jos013.htm#007)); but it was left for Joshua to define the
limits of each tribe. This territory on the east of Jordan was more
valuable and of larger extent than all that was allotted to the nine and
a half tribes in the land of Palestine. It is sometimes called "the land
of Gilead," and is also spoken of as "on the other side of Jordan." The
portion given to the half tribe of Manasseh was the largest on the east
of Jordan. It embraced the whole of Bashan. It was bounded on the south
by Mahanaim, and extended north to the foot of Lebanon. Argob, with its
sixty cities, that "ocean of basaltic rocks and boulders tossed about in
the wildest confusion," lay in the midst of this territory. The whole
"land of Gilead" having been conquered, the two and a half tribes left
their wives and families in the fortified cities there, and accompanied
the other tribes across the Jordan, and took part with them in the wars
of conquest. The allotment of the land having been completed, Joshua
dismissed the two and a half tribes, commending them for their heroic
service (Josh. 22:1-34). Thus dismissed, they returned over Jordan to
their own inheritance. (See ED.) On the west of Jordan the other half of
the tribe of Manasseh was associated with Ephraim, and they had their
portion in the very centre of Palestine, an area of about 1,300 square
miles, the most valuable part of the whole country, abounding in springs
of water. Manasseh's portion was immediately to the north of that of
Ephraim ([Jos 16:1](../kjv/jos016.htm#001)). Thus the western Manasseh
defended the passes of Esdraelon as the eastern kept the passes of the
Hauran. (2.) The only son and successor of Hezekiah on the throne of
Judah. He was twelve years old when he began to reign ([Kg2
21:1](../kjv/kg2021.htm#001)), and he reigned fifty-five years (698-643
B.C.). Though he reigned so long, yet comparatively little is known of
this king. His reign was a continuation of that of Ahaz, both in
religion and national polity. He early fell under the influence of the
heathen court circle, and his reign was characterized by a sad relapse
into idolatry with all its vices, showing that the reformation under his
father had been to a large extent only superficial ([Isa
7:10](../kjv/isa007.htm#010); [Kg2 21:10](../kjv/kg2021.htm#010)). A
systematic and persistent attempt was made, and all too successfully, to
banish the worship of Jehovah out of the land. Amid this wide-spread
idolatry there were not wanting, however, faithful prophets (Isaiah,
Micah) who lifted up their voice in reproof and in warning. But their
fidelity only aroused bitter hatred, and a period of cruel persecution
against all the friends of the old religion began. "The days of Alva in
Holland, of Charles IX. in France, or of the Covenanters under Charles
II. in Scotland, were anticipated in the Jewish capital. The streets
were red with blood." There is an old Jewish tradition that Isaiah was
put to death at this time ([Kg2 21:16](../kjv/kg2021.htm#016); [Kg2
24:3](../kjv/kg2024.htm#003), [Kg2 24:4](../kjv/kg2024.htm#004); [Jer
2:30](../kjv/jer002.htm#030)), having been sawn asunder in the trunk of
a tree. Ps. 49, 73, 77, [Psa 140:1](../kjv/psa140.htm#001), and [Psa
141:1](../kjv/psa141.htm#001) seem to express the feelings of the pious
amid the fiery trials of this great persecution. Manasseh has been
called the "Nero of Palestine." Esarhaddon, Sennacherib's successor on
the Assyrian throne, who had his residence in Babylon for thirteen years
(the only Assyrian monarch who ever reigned in Babylon), took Manasseh
prisoner (681 B.C.) to Babylon. Such captive kings were usually treated
with great cruelty. They were brought before the conqueror with a hook
or ring passed through their lips or their jaws, having a cord attached
to it, by which they were led. This is referred to in [Ch2
33:11](../kjv/ch2033.htm#011), where the Authorized Version reads that
Esarhaddon "took Manasseh among the thorns;" while the Revised Version
renders the words, "took Manasseh in chains;" or literally, as in the
margin, "with hooks." (Compare [Kg2 19:28](../kjv/kg2019.htm#028).) The
severity of Manasseh's imprisonment brought him to repentance. God heard
his cry, and he was restored to his kingdom ([Ch2
33:11](../kjv/ch2033.htm#011)). He abandoned his idolatrous ways, and
enjoined the people to worship Jehovah; but there was no thorough
reformation. After a lengthened reign extending through fifty-five
years, the longest in the history of Judah he died, and was buried in
the garden of Uzza, the "garden of his own house" ([Kg2
21:17](../kjv/kg2021.htm#017), [Kg2 21:18](../kjv/kg2021.htm#018); [Ch2
33:20](../kjv/ch2033.htm#020)), and not in the city of David, among his
ancestors. He was succeeded by his son Amon. In [Jdg
18:30](../kjv/jdg018.htm#030) the correct reading is "Moses," and not
"Manasseh." The name "Manasseh" is supposed to have been introduced by
some transcriber to avoid the scandal of naming the grandson of Moses
the great lawgiver as the founder of an idolatrous religion.

<span id="003">**Mandrakes**</span> Hebrew dudaim; i.e., "love-plants",
occurs only in [Gen 30:14](../kjv/gen030.htm#014) and [Sol
7:13](../kjv/sol007.htm#013). Many interpretations have been given of
this word dudaim. It has been rendered "violets," "Lilies," "jasmines,"
"truffles or mushrooms," "flowers," the "citron," etc. The weight of
authority is in favour of its being regarded as the Mandragora
officinalis of botanists, "a near relative of the night-shades, the
'apple of Sodom' and the potato plant." It possesses stimulating and
narcotic properties ([Gen 30:14](../kjv/gen030.htm#014)). The fruit of
this plant resembles the potato-apple in size, and is of a pale orange
colour. It has been called the "love-apple." The Arabs call it "Satan's
apple." It still grows near Jerusalem, and in other parts of Palestine.

<span id="004">**Maneh**</span> Portion ([Eze
45:12](../kjv/eze045.htm#012)), rendered "pound" ([Kg1
10:17](../kjv/kg1010.htm#017); [Ezr 2:69](../kjv/ezr002.htm#069); [Neh
7:71](../kjv/neh007.htm#071), [Neh 7:72](../kjv/neh007.htm#072)), a
weight variously estimated, probably about 21/2 or 3 lb. A maneh of gold
consisted of a hundred common shekels (q.v.). (Compare [Kg1
10:17](../kjv/kg1010.htm#017), and [Ch2 9:16](../kjv/ch2009.htm#016)).

<span id="005">**Manger**</span> ([Luk 2:7](../kjv/luk002.htm#007), [Luk
2:12](../kjv/luk002.htm#012), [Luk 2:16](../kjv/luk002.htm#016)), the
name (Gr. phatne , rendered "stall" in [Luk
13:15](../kjv/luk013.htm#015)) given to the place where the infant
Redeemer was laid. It seems to have been a stall or crib for feeding
cattle. Stables and mangers in our modern sense were in ancient times
unknown in the East. The word here properly denotes "the ledge or
projection in the end of the room used as a stall on which the hay or
other food of the animals of travelers was placed." (See INN.)

<span id="006">**Manna**</span> Heb. man-hu , "What is that?" the name
given by the Israelites to the food miraculously supplied to them during
their wanderings in the wilderness (Ex. 16:15-35). The name is commonly
taken as derived from man, an expression of surprise, "What is it?" but
more probably it is derived from manan, meaning "to allot," and hence
denoting an "allotment" or a "gift." This "gift" from God is described
as "a small round thing," like the "hoar-frost on the ground," and "like
coriander seed," "of the colour of bdellium," and in taste "like wafers
made with honey." It was capable of being baked and boiled, ground in
mills, or beaten in a mortar ([Exo 16:23](../kjv/exo016.htm#023); [Num
11:7](../kjv/num011.htm#007)). If any was kept over till the following
morning, it became corrupt with worms; but as on the Sabbath none fell,
on the preceding day a double portion was given, and that could be kept
over to supply the wants of the Sabbath without becoming corrupt.
Directions concerning the gathering of it are fully given ([Exo
16:16](../kjv/exo016.htm#016), [Exo 16:33](../kjv/exo016.htm#033); [Deu
8:3](../kjv/deu008.htm#003) 16). It fell for the first time after the
eighth encampment in the desert of Sin, and was daily furnished, except
on the Sabbath, for all the years of the wanderings, till they encamped
at Gilgal, after crossing the Jordan, when it suddenly ceased, and where
they "did eat of the old corn of the land; neither had the children of
Israel manna any more" ([Jos 5:12](../kjv/jos005.htm#012)). They now no
longer needed the "bread of the wilderness." This manna was evidently
altogether a miraculous gift, wholly different from any natural product
with which we are acquainted, and which bears this name. The manna of
European commerce comes chiefly from Calabria and Sicily. It drops from
the twigs of a species of ash during the months of June and July. At
night it is fluid and resembles dew, but in the morning it begins to
harden. The manna of the Sinaitic peninsula is an exudation from the
"manna-tamarisk" tree (Tamarix mannifera), the el-tarfah of the Arabs.
This tree is found at the present day in certain well-watered valleys in
the peninsula of Sinai. The manna with which the people of Israel were
fed for forty years differs in many particulars from all these natural
products. Our Lord refers to the manna when he calls himself the "true
bread from heaven" ([Joh 6:31](../kjv/joh006.htm#031), [Joh
6:48](../kjv/joh006.htm#048)). He is also the "hidden manna" ([Rev
2:17](../kjv/rev002.htm#017); compare [Joh 6:49](../kjv/joh006.htm#049),
[Joh 6:51](../kjv/joh006.htm#051)).

<span id="007">**Manoah**</span> Rest, a Danite, the father of Samson
(Judg. 13:1-22, and [Jdg 14:2](../kjv/jdg014.htm#002)).

<span id="008">**Manslayer**</span> One who was guilty of accidental
homicide, and was entitled to flee to a city of refuge ([Num
35:6](../kjv/num035.htm#006), [Num 35:12](../kjv/num035.htm#012), [Num
35:22](../kjv/num035.htm#022), [Num 35:23](../kjv/num035.htm#023)), his
compulsory residence in which terminated with the death of the high
priest. (See CITY OF REFUGE.)

<span id="009">**Mantle**</span> (1.) Heb. 'addereth , a large
over-garment. This word is used of Elijah's mantle ([Kg1
19:13](../kjv/kg1019.htm#013), [Kg1 19:19](../kjv/kg1019.htm#019); [Kg2
2:8](../kjv/kg2002.htm#008), [Kg2 2:13](../kjv/kg2002.htm#013), etc.),
which was probably a sheepskin. It appears to have been his only
garment, a strip of skin or leather binding it to his loins. 'Addereth
twice occurs with the epithet "hairy" ([Gen
25:25](../kjv/gen025.htm#025); [Zac 13:4](../kjv/zac013.htm#004), R.V.).
It is the word denoting the "goodly Babylonish garment" which Achan
coveted ([Jos 7:21](../kjv/jos007.htm#021)). (2.) Heb. me'il ,
frequently applied to the "robe of the ephod" ([Exo
28:4](../kjv/exo028.htm#004), [Exo 28:31](../kjv/exo028.htm#031); [Lev
8:7](../kjv/lev008.htm#007)), which was a splendid under tunic wholly of
blue, reaching to below the knees. It was woven without seam, and was
put on by being drawn over the head. It was worn not only by priests but
by kings ([Sa1 24:4](../kjv/sa1024.htm#004)), prophets ([Sa1
15:27](../kjv/sa1015.htm#027)), and rich men ([Job
1:20](../kjv/job001.htm#020); [Job 2:12](../kjv/job002.htm#012)). This
was the "little coat" which Samuel's mother brought to him from year to
year to Shiloh ([Sa1 2:19](../kjv/sa1002.htm#019)), a miniature of the
official priestly robe. (3.) Semikah , "a rug," the garment which Jael
threw as a covering over Sisera ([Jdg 4:18](../kjv/jdg004.htm#018)). The
Hebrew word occurs nowhere else in Scripture. (4.) Maataphoth , plural,
only in [Isa 3:22](../kjv/isa003.htm#022), denoting a large exterior
tunic worn by females. (See DRESS.)
