[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Neck**</span> Used sometimes figuratively. To "lay down
the neck" ([Rom 16:4](../kjv/rom016.htm#004)) is to hazard one's life.
Threatenings of coming judgments are represented by the prophets by
their laying bands upon the people's necks ([Deu
28:48](../kjv/deu028.htm#048); [Isa 10:27](../kjv/isa010.htm#027); [Jer
27:2](../kjv/jer027.htm#002)). Conquerors put their feet on the necks of
their enemies as a sign of their subjection ([Jos
10:24](../kjv/jos010.htm#024); [Sa2 22:41](../kjv/sa2022.htm#041)).

<span id="001">**Necromancer**</span> ([Deu
15:11](../kjv/deu015.htm#011)), i.e., "one who interrogates the dead,"
as the word literally means, with the view of discovering the secrets of
futurity (Compare [Sa1 28:7](../kjv/sa1028.htm#007)). (See DIVINATION.)

<span id="002">**Nedabiah**</span> Moved of Jehovah, one of the sons of
Jeconiah ([Ch1 3:18](../kjv/ch1003.htm#018)).

<span id="003">**Needle**</span> Used only in the proverb, "to pass
through a needle's eye" ([Mat 19:24](../kjv/mat019.htm#024); [Mar
10:25](../kjv/mar010.htm#025); [Luk 18:25](../kjv/luk018.htm#025)). Some
interpret the expression as referring to the side gate, close to the
principal gate, usually called the "eye of a needle" in the East; but it
is rather to be taken literally. The Hebrew females were skilled in the
use of the needle ([Exo 28:39](../kjv/exo028.htm#039); [Exo
26:36](../kjv/exo026.htm#036); [Jdg 5:30](../kjv/jdg005.htm#030)).

<span id="004">**Neginah**</span> In the title of [Psa
61:1](../kjv/psa061.htm#001), denotes the music of stringed instruments
([Sa1 16:16](../kjv/sa1016.htm#016); [Isa
38:20](../kjv/isa038.htm#020)). It is the singular form of Neginoth.

<span id="005">**Neginoth**</span> I.e., songs with instrumental
accompaniment, found in the titles of [Psa 4:1](../kjv/psa004.htm#001);
[Psa 6:1](../kjv/psa006.htm#001); [Psa 54:1](../kjv/psa054.htm#001); 55;
[Psa 67:1](../kjv/psa067.htm#001); [Psa 76:1](../kjv/psa076.htm#001);
rendered "stringed instruments," [Hab 3:19](../kjv/hab003.htm#019), A.V.
It denotes all kinds of stringed instruments, as the "harp," "psaltery,"
"viol," etc. The "chief musician on Neginoth" is the leader of that part
of the temple choir which played on stringed instruments.

<span id="006">**Nehelamite**</span> The name given to a false prophet
Shemaiah, who went with the captives to Babylon ([Jer
29:24](../kjv/jer029.htm#024), [Jer 29:31](../kjv/jer029.htm#031), [Jer
29:32](../kjv/jer029.htm#032)). The origin of the name is unknown. It is
rendered in the marg, "dreamer."

<span id="007">**Nehemiah**</span> Comforted by Jehovah. (1.) [Ezr
2:2](../kjv/ezr002.htm#002); [Neh 7:7](../kjv/neh007.htm#007). (2.) [Neh
3:16](../kjv/neh003.htm#016). (3.) The son of Hachaliah ([Neh
1:1](../kjv/neh001.htm#001)), and probably of the tribe of Judah. His
family must have belonged to Jerusalem ([Neh
2:3](../kjv/neh002.htm#003)). He was one of the "Jews of the
dispersion," and in his youth was appointed to the important office of
royal cup-bearer at the palace of Shushan. The king, Artaxerxes
Longimanus, seems to have been on terms of friendly familiarity with his
attendant. Through his brother Hanani, and perhaps from other sources
([Neh 1:2](../kjv/neh001.htm#002); [Neh 2:3](../kjv/neh002.htm#003)), he
heard of the mournful and desolate condition of the Holy City, and was
filled with sadness of heart. For many days he fasted and mourned and
prayed for the place of his fathers' sepulchers. At length the king
observed his sadness of countenance and asked the reason of it. Nehemiah
explained it all to the king, and obtained his permission to go up to
Jerusalem and there to act as tirshatha, or governor of Judea. He went
up in the spring of 446 B.C. (eleven years after Ezra), with a strong
escort supplied by the king, and with letters to all the pashas of the
provinces through which he had to pass, as also to Asaph, keeper of the
royal forests, directing him to assist Nehemiah. On his arrival he set
himself to survey the city, and to form a plan for its restoration; a
plan which he carried out with great skill and energy, so that the whole
was completed in about six months. He remained in Judea for thirteen
years as governor, carrying out many reforms, notwithstanding much
opposition that he encountered ([Neh 13:11](../kjv/neh013.htm#011)). He
built up the state on the old lines, "supplementing and completing the
work of Ezra," and making all arrangements for the safety and good
government of the city. At the close of this important period of his
public life, he returned to Persia to the service of his royal master at
Shushan or Ecbatana. Very soon after this the old corrupt state of
things returned, showing the worthlessness to a large extent of the
professions that had been made at the feast of the dedication of the
walls of the city (Neh. 12. See EZRA). Malachi now appeared among the
people with words of stern reproof and solemn warning; and Nehemiah
again returned from Persia (after an absence of some two years), and was
grieved to see the widespread moral degeneracy that had taken place
during his absence. He set himself with vigour to rectify the flagrant
abuses that had sprung up, and restored the orderly administration of
public worship and the outward observance of the law of Moses. Of his
subsequent history we know nothing. Probably he remained at his post as
governor till his death (about 413 B.C.) in a good old age. The place of
his death and burial is, however, unknown. "He resembled Ezra in his
fiery zeal, in his active spirit of enterprise, and in the piety of his
life: but he was of a bluffer and a fiercer mood; he had less patience
with transgressors; he was a man of action rather than a man of thought,
and more inclined to use force than persuasion. His practical sagacity
and high courage were very markedly shown in the arrangement with which
he carried through the rebuilding of the wall and balked the cunning
plans of the 'adversaries.' The piety of his heart, his deeply religious
spirit and constant sense of communion with and absolute dependence upon
God, are strikingly exhibited, first in the long prayer recorded in [Neh
1:5](../kjv/neh001.htm#005), and secondly and most remarkably in what
have been called his 'interjectional prayers', those short but moving
addresses to Almighty God which occur so frequently in his writings, the
instinctive outpouring of a heart deeply moved, but ever resting itself
upon God, and looking to God alone for aid in trouble, for the
frustration of evil designs, and for final reward and acceptance"
(Rawlinson). Nehemiah was the last of the governors sent from the
Persian court. Judea after this was annexed to the satrapy of
Coele-Syria, and was governed by the high priest under the jurisdiction
of the governor of Syria, and the internal government of the country
became more and more a hierarchy.

<span id="008">**Nehemiah, Book of**</span> The author of this book was
no doubt Nehemiah himself. There are portions of the book written in the
first person (Neh. 1-7; 12:27-47, and [Neh
12:13](../kjv/neh012.htm#013)). But there are also portions of it in
which Nehemiah is spoken of in the third person (Neh. 8; 9; 10). It is
supposed that these portions may have been written by Ezra; of this,
however, there is no distinct evidence. These portions had their place
assigned them in the book, there can be no doubt, by Nehemiah. He was
the responsible author of the whole book, with the exception of [Neh
12:11](../kjv/neh012.htm#011), [Neh 12:22](../kjv/neh012.htm#022), [Neh
12:23](../kjv/neh012.htm#023). The date at which the book was written
was probably about 431-430 B.C., when Nehemiah had returned the second
time to Jerusalem after his visit to Persia. The book, which may
historically be regarded as a continuation of the book of Ezra, consists
of four parts. (1.) An account of the rebuilding of the wall of
Jerusalem, and of the register Nehemiah had found of those who had
returned from Babylon (Neh. 1 - 7). (2.) An account of the state of
religion among the Jews during this time (Neh. 8 - 10). (3.) Increase of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem; the census of the adult male population,
and names of the chiefs, together with lists of priests and Levites
(Neh. 11:1 - 12:26). (4.) Dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, the
arrangement of the temple officers, and the reforms carried out by
Nehemiah (Neh. 12:27 - Neh. 13). This book closes the history of the Old
Testament. Malachi the prophet was contemporary with Nehemiah.

<span id="009">**Nehiloth**</span> Only in the title of [Psa
5:1](../kjv/psa005.htm#001). It is probably derived from a root meaning
"to bore," "perforate," and hence denotes perforated wind instruments of
all kinds. The psalm may be thus regarded as addressed to the conductor
of the temple choir which played on flutes and such-like instruments.
