[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Phebe**</span> A "deaconess of the church at Cenchrea,"
the port of Corinth. She was probably the bearer of Paul's epistle to
the Romans. Paul commended her to the Christians at Rome; "for she hath
been," says he, "a succourer of many, and of myself also" ([Rom
16:1](../kjv/rom016.htm#001), [Rom 16:2](../kjv/rom016.htm#002)).

<span id="001">**Phenice**</span> Properly Phoenix a palmtree (as in the
R.V.), a town with a harbour on the southern side of Crete ([Act
27:12](../kjv/act027.htm#012)), west of the Fair Havens. It is now
called Lutro.

<span id="002">**Phenicia**</span> ([Act 21:2](../kjv/act021.htm#002)) =
Phenice ([Act 11:19](../kjv/act011.htm#019); [Act
15:3](../kjv/act015.htm#003); R.V., Phoenicia), Gr. phoinix , "a palm",
the land of palm-trees; a strip of land of an average breadth of about
20 miles along the shores of the Mediterranean, from the river
Eleutherus in the north to the promontory of Carmel in the south, about
120 miles in length. This name is not found in the Old Testament, and in
the New Testament it is mentioned only in the passages above referred
to. "In the Egyptian inscriptions Phoenicia is called Keft, the
inhabitants being Kefa; and since Keft-ur, or 'Greater Phoenicia,' was
the name given to the delta of the Nile from the Phoenician colonies
settled upon it, the Philistines who came from Caphtor or Keft-ur must
have been of Phoenician origin" (Compare [Deu
2:23](../kjv/deu002.htm#023); [Jer 47:4](../kjv/jer047.htm#004); [Amo
9:7](../kjv/amo009.htm#007))., Sayce's Bible and the Monuments.
Phoenicia lay in the very centre of the old world, and was the natural
entrepot for commerce with foreign nations. It was the "England of
antiquity." "The trade routes from all Asia converged on the Phoenician
coast; the centres of commerce on the Euphrates and Tigris forwarding
their goods by way of Tyre to the Nile, to Arabia, and to the west; and,
on the other hand, the productions of the vast regions bordering the
Mediterranean passing through the Canaanite capital to the eastern
world." It was "situate at the entry of the sea, a merchant of the
people for many isles" ([Eze 27:3](../kjv/eze027.htm#003), [Eze
27:4](../kjv/eze027.htm#004)). The far-reaching commercial activity of
the Phoenicians, especially with Tarshish and the western world,
enriched them with vast wealth, which introduced boundless luxury and
developed among them a great activity in all manner of arts and
manufactures. (See TYRE.) The Phoenicians were the most enterprising
merchants of the old world, establishing colonies at various places, of
which Carthage was the chief. They were a Canaanite branch of the race
of Ham, and are frequently called Sidonians, from their principal city
of Sidon. None could "skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians" ([Kg1
5:6](../kjv/kg1005.htm#006)). King Hiram rendered important service to
Solomon in connection with the planning and building of the temple,
casting for him all the vessels for the temple service, and the two
pillars which stood in the front of the porch, and "the molten sea"
([Kg1 7:21](../kjv/kg1007.htm#021)). Singular marks have been found by
recent exploration on the great stones that form the substructure of the
temple. These marks, both painted and engraved, have been regarded as
made by the workmen in the quarries, and as probably intended to
indicate the place of these stones in the building. "The Biblical
account ([Kg1 5:17](../kjv/kg1005.htm#017), [Kg1
5:18](../kjv/kg1005.htm#018)) is accurately descriptive of the massive
masonry now existing at the southeastern angle (of the temple area), and
standing on the native rock 80 feet below the present surface. The Royal
Engineers found, buried deeply among the rubbish of many centuries,
great stones, costly and hewed stones, forming the foundation of the
sanctuary wall; while Phoenician fragments of pottery and Phoenician
marks painted on the massive blocks seem to proclaim that the stones
were prepared in the quarry by the cunning workmen of Hiram, the king of
Tyre." (See TEMPLE.) The Phoenicians have been usually regarded as the
inventors of alphabetic writing. The Egyptians expressed their thoughts
by certain symbols, called "hieroglyphics", i.e., sacred carvings, so
styled because used almost exclusively on sacred subjects. The recent
discovery, however, of inscriptions in Southern Arabia (Yemen and
Hadramaut), known as Hemyaritic, in connection with various philogical
considerations, has led some to the conclusion that the Phoenician
alphabet was derived from the Mineans (admitting the antiquity of the
kingdom of Ma'in , [Jdg 10:12](../kjv/jdg010.htm#012); [Ch2
26:7](../kjv/ch2026.htm#007)). Thus the Phoenician alphabet ceases to be
the mother alphabet. Sayce thinks "it is more than possible that the
Egyptians themselves were emigrants from Southern Arabia." (See MOABITE
STONE.) "The Phoenicians were renowned in ancient times for the
manufacture of glass, and some of the specimens of this work that have
been preserved are still the wonder of mankind... In the matter of
shipping, whether ship-building be thought of or traffic upon the sea,
the Phoenicians surpassed all other nations." "The name Phoenicia is of
uncertain origin, though it may be derived from Fenkhu, the name given
in the Egyptian inscriptions to the natives of Palestine. Among the
chief Phoenician cities were Tyre and Sidon, Gebal north of Beirut,
Arvad or Arados and Zemar."

<span id="003">**Phicol**</span> Great, the chief captain of the army of
Abimelech, the Philistine king of Gerar. He entered into an alliance
with Abraham with reference to a certain well which, from this
circumstance, was called Beersheba (q.v.), "the well of the oath" ([Gen
21:22](../kjv/gen021.htm#022), [Gen 21:32](../kjv/gen021.htm#032); [Gen
26:26](../kjv/gen026.htm#026)).

<span id="004">**Philadelphia**</span> Brotherly love, a city of Lydia
in Asia Minor, about 25 miles south-east of Sardis. It was the seat of
one of the "seven churches" ([Rev 3:7](../kjv/rev003.htm#007)). It came
into the possession of the Turks in A.D. 1392. It has several times been
nearly destroyed by earthquakes. It is still a town of considerable
size, called Allahshehr, "the city of God."

<span id="005">**Philemon**</span> An inhabitant of Colosse, and
apparently a person of some note among the citizens ([Col
4:9](../kjv/col004.htm#009); [Plm 1:2](../kjv/plm001.htm#002)). He was
brought to a knowledge of the gospel through the instrumentality of Paul
([Plm 1:19](../kjv/plm001.htm#019)), and held a prominent place in the
Christian community for his piety and beneficence ([Plm
1:4](../kjv/plm001.htm#004)). He is called in the epistle a
"fellow-labourer," and therefore probably held some office in the church
at Colosse; at all events, the title denotes that he took part in the
work of spreading a knowledge of the gospel.

<span id="006">**Philemon, Epistle to**</span> Was written from Rome at
the same time as the epistles to the Colossians and Ephesians, and was
sent also by Onesimus. It was addressed to Philemon and the members of
his family. It was written for the purpose of interceding for Onesimus
(q.v.), who had deserted his master Philemon and been "unprofitable" to
him. Paul had found Onesimus at Rome, and had there been instrumental in
his conversion, and now he sends him back to his master with this
letter. This epistle has the character of a strictly private letter, and
is the only one of such epistles preserved to us. "It exhibits the
apostle in a new light. He throws off as far as possible his apostolic
dignity and his fatherly authority over his converts. He speaks simply
as Christian to Christian. He speaks, therefore, with that peculiar
grace of humility and courtesy which has, under the reign of
Christianity, developed the spirit of chivalry and what is called 'the
character of a gentleman,' certainly very little known in the old Greek
and Roman civilization" (Dr. Barry). (See SLAVE.)

<span id="007">**Philetus**</span> Amiable, with Hymenaeus, at Ephesus,
said that the "resurrection was past already" ([Ti2
2:17](../kjv/ti2002.htm#017), [Ti2 2:18](../kjv/ti2002.htm#018)). This
was a Gnostic heresy held by the Nicolaitanes. (See ALEXANDER \[4\].)

<span id="008">**Philip**</span> Lover of horses. (1.) One of the twelve
apostles; a native of Bethsaida, "the city of Andrew and Peter" ([Joh
1:44](../kjv/joh001.htm#044)). He readily responded to the call of Jesus
when first addressed to him ([Joh 1:43](../kjv/joh001.htm#043)), and
forthwith brought Nathanael also to Jesus ([Joh
1:45](../kjv/joh001.htm#045), [Joh 1:46](../kjv/joh001.htm#046)). He
seems to have held a prominent place among the apostles ([Mat
10:3](../kjv/mat010.htm#003); [Mar 3:18](../kjv/mar003.htm#018); [Joh
6:5](../kjv/joh006.htm#005); [Joh 12:21](../kjv/joh012.htm#021), [Joh
12:22](../kjv/joh012.htm#022); [Joh 14:8](../kjv/joh014.htm#008), [Joh
14:9](../kjv/joh014.htm#009); [Act 1:13](../kjv/act001.htm#013)). Of his
later life nothing is certainly known. He is said to have preached in
Phrygia, and to have met his death at Hierapolis. (2.) One of the
"seven" ([Act 6:5](../kjv/act006.htm#005)), called also "the evangelist"
([Act 21:8](../kjv/act021.htm#008), [Act 21:9](../kjv/act021.htm#009)).
He was one of those who were "scattered abroad" by the persecution that
arose on the death of Stephen. He went first to Samaria, where he
laboured as an evangelist with much success ([Act
8:5](../kjv/act008.htm#005)). While he was there he received a divine
command to proceed toward the south, along the road leading from
Jerusalem to Gaza. These towns were connected by two roads. The one
Philip was directed to take was that which led through Hebron, and
thence through a district little inhabited, and hence called "desert."
As he traveled along this road he was overtaken by a chariot in which
sat a man of Ethiopia, the eunuch or chief officer of Queen Candace, who
was at that moment reading, probably from the Septuagint version, a
portion of the prophecies of Isaiah ([Isa 53:6](../kjv/isa053.htm#006),
[Isa 53:7](../kjv/isa053.htm#007)). Philip entered into conversation
with him, and expounded these verses, preaching to him the glad tidings
of the Saviour. The eunuch received the message and believed, and was
forthwith baptized, and then "went on his way rejoicing." Philip was
instantly caught away by the Spirit after the baptism, and the eunuch
saw him no more. He was next found at Azotus, whence he went forth in
his evangelistic work till he came to Caesarea. He is not mentioned
again for about twenty years, when he is still found at Caesarea ([Act
21:8](../kjv/act021.htm#008)) when Paul and his companions were on the
way to Jerusalem. He then finally disappears from the page of history.
(3.) Mentioned only in connection with the imprisonment of John the
Baptist ([Mat 14:3](../kjv/mat014.htm#003); [Mar
6:17](../kjv/mar006.htm#017); [Luk 3:19](../kjv/luk003.htm#019)). He was
the son of Herod the Great, and the first husband of Herodias, and the
father of Salome. (See HEROD PHILIP I.) (4.) The "tetrarch of Ituraea"
([Luk 3:1](../kjv/luk003.htm#001)); a son of Herod the Great, and
brother of Herod Antipas. The city of Caesarea-Philippi was named partly
after him ([Mat 16:13](../kjv/mat016.htm#013); [Mar
8:27](../kjv/mar008.htm#027)). (See HEROD PHILIP II.)

<span id="009">**Philippi**</span> (1.) Formerly Crenides, "the
fountain," the capital of the province of Macedonia. It stood near the
head of the Sea, about 8 miles north-west of Kavalla. It is now a ruined
village, called Philibedjik. Philip of Macedonia fortified the old
Thracian town of Crenides, and called it after his own name Philippi
(359-336 B.C.). In the time of the Emperor Augustus this city became a
Roman colony, i.e., a military settlement of Roman soldiers, there
planted for the purpose of controlling the district recently conquered.
It was a "miniature Rome," under the municipal law of Rome, and governed
by military officers, called duumviri, who were appointed directly from
Rome. Having been providentially guided thither, here Paul and his
companion Silas preached the gospel and formed the first church in
Europe. (See LYDIA.) This success stirred up the enmity of the people,
and they were "shamefully entreated" (Acts 16:9-40; [Th1
2:2](../kjv/th1002.htm#002)). Paul and Silas at length left this city
and proceeded to Amphipolis (q.v.). (2.) When Philip the tetrarch, the
son of Herod, succeeded to the government of the northern portion of his
kingdom, he enlarged the city of Paneas, and called it Caesarea, in
honour of the emperor. But in order to distinguish it from the Caesarea
on the sea coast, he added to it subsequently his own name, and called
it Caesarea-Philippi (q.v.).
