[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Olive-tree**</span> Is frequently mentioned in
Scripture. The dove from the ark brought an olive-branch to Noah ([Gen
8:11](../kjv/gen008.htm#011)). It is mentioned among the most notable
trees of Palestine, where it was cultivated long before the time of the
Hebrews ([Deu 6:11](../kjv/deu006.htm#011); [Deu
8:8](../kjv/deu008.htm#008)). It is mentioned in the first Old Testament
parable, that of Jotham ([Jdg 9:9](../kjv/jdg009.htm#009)), and is named
among the blessings of the "good land," and is at the present day the
one characteristic tree of Palestine. The oldest olive-trees in the
country are those which are enclosed in the Garden of Gethsemane. It is
referred to as an emblem of prosperity and beauty and religious
privilege ([Psa 52:8](../kjv/psa052.htm#008); [Jer
11:16](../kjv/jer011.htm#016); [Hos 14:6](../kjv/hos014.htm#006)). The
two "witnesses" mentioned in [Rev 11:4](../kjv/rev011.htm#004) are
spoken of as "two olive trees standing before the God of the earth."
(Compare [Zac 4:3](../kjv/zac004.htm#003), [Zac
4:11](../kjv/zac004.htm#011).) The "olive-tree, wild by nature" ([Rom
11:24](../kjv/rom011.htm#024)), is the shoot or cutting of the good
olive-tree which, left ungrafted, grows up to be a "wild olive." In [Rom
11:17](../kjv/rom011.htm#017) Paul refers to the practice of grafting
shoots of the wild olive into a "good" olive which has become
unfruitful. By such a process the sap of the good olive, by pervading
the branch which is "grafted in," makes it a good branch, bearing good
olives. Thus the Gentiles, being a "wild olive," but now "grafted in,"
yield fruit, but only through the sap of the tree into which they have
been grafted. This is a process "contrary to nature" ([Rom
11:24](../kjv/rom011.htm#024)).

<span id="001">**Olives, Mount of**</span> So called from the olive
trees with which its sides are clothed, is a mountain ridge on the east
of Jerusalem ([Kg1 11:7](../kjv/kg1011.htm#007); [Eze
11:23](../kjv/eze011.htm#023); [Zac 14:4](../kjv/zac014.htm#004)), from
which it is separated by the valley of Kidron. It is first mentioned in
connection with David's flight from Jerusalem through the rebellion of
Absalom ([Sa2 15:30](../kjv/sa2015.htm#030)), and is only once again
mentioned in the Old Testament, in [Zac 14:4](../kjv/zac014.htm#004). It
is, however, frequently alluded to ([Kg1 11:7](../kjv/kg1011.htm#007);
[Kg2 23:13](../kjv/kg2023.htm#013); [Neh 8:15](../kjv/neh008.htm#015);
[Eze 11:23](../kjv/eze011.htm#023)). It is frequently mentioned in the
New Testament ([Mat 21:1](../kjv/mat021.htm#001); [Mat
26:30](../kjv/mat026.htm#030), etc.). It now bears the name of Jebel
et-Tur, i.e., "Mount of the Summit;" also sometimes called Jebel
ez-Zeitun, i.e., "Mount of Olives." It is about 200 feet above the level
of the city. The road from Jerusalem to Bethany runs as of old over this
mount. It was on this mount that Jesus stood when he wept over
Jerusalem. "No name in Scripture," says Dr. Porter, "calls up
associations at once so sacred and so pleasing as that of Olivet. The
'mount' is so intimately connected with the private, the devotional life
of the Saviour, that we read of it and look at it with feelings of
deepest interest and affection. Here he often sat with his disciples,
telling them of wondrous events yet to come, of the destruction of the
Holy City; of the sufferings, the persecution, and the final triumph of
his followers (Matt. 24). Here he gave them the beautiful parables of
the ten virgins and the five talents (Matt. 25); here he was wont to
retire on each evening for meditation, and prayer, and rest of body,
when weary and harassed by the labours and trials of the day ([Luk
21:37](../kjv/luk021.htm#037)); and here he came on the night of his
betrayal to utter that wonderful prayer, 'O my Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but as
thou wilt' ([Mat 26:39](../kjv/mat026.htm#039)). And when the cup of
God's wrath had been drunk, and death and the grave conquered, he led
his disciples out again over Olivet as far as to Bethany, and after a
parting blessing ascended to heaven ([Luk 24:50](../kjv/luk024.htm#050),
[Luk 24:51](../kjv/luk024.htm#051); [Act 1:12](../kjv/act001.htm#012))."
This mount, or rather mountain range, has four summits or peaks: (1.)
the "Galilee" peak, so called from a tradition that the angels stood
here when they spoke to the disciples ([Act
1:11](../kjv/act001.htm#011)); (2.) the "Mount of Ascension," the
supposed site of that event, which was, however, somewhere probably
nearer Bethany ([Luk 24:51](../kjv/luk024.htm#051), [Luk
24:52](../kjv/luk024.htm#052)); (3.) the "Prophets," from the catacombs
on its side, called "the prophets' tombs;" and (4.) the "Mount of
Corruption," so called because of the "high places" erected there by
Solomon for the idolatrous worship of his foreign wives ([Kg1
11:7](../kjv/kg1011.htm#007); [Kg2 23:13](../kjv/kg2023.htm#013); Vulg.,
"Mount of Offense").

<span id="002">**Olympas**</span> A Roman Christian whom Paul salutes
([Rom 16:15](../kjv/rom016.htm#015)).

<span id="003">**Omar**</span> Eloquent, the son of Eliphaz, who was
Esau's eldest son ([Gen 36:11](../kjv/gen036.htm#011)).

<span id="004">**Omega**</span> ([Rev 1:8](../kjv/rev001.htm#008)), the
last letter in the Greek alphabet. (See ALPHA.)

<span id="005">**Omer**</span> A handful, one-tenth of an ephah = half a
gallon dry measure ([Exo 16:22](../kjv/exo016.htm#022), [Exo
16:32](../kjv/exo016.htm#032), [Exo 16:33](../kjv/exo016.htm#033), [Exo
16:36](../kjv/exo016.htm#036)) = "tenth deal."

<span id="006">**Omri**</span> Servant of Jehovah. When Elah was
murdered by Zimri at Tirzah ([Kg1 16:15](../kjv/kg1016.htm#015)), Omri,
his captain, was made king (931 B.C.). For four years there was
continued opposition to his reign, Tibni, another claimant to the
throne, leading the opposing party; but at the close of that period all
his rivals were defeated, and he became king of Israel, "Tibni died and
Omri reigned" (927 B.C.). By his vigour and power he gained great
eminence and consolidated the kingdom. He fixed his dynasty on the
throne so firmly that it continued during four succeeding reigns. Tirza
was for six years the seat of his government. He then removed the
capital to Samaria (q.v.), where he died, and was succeeded by his son
Ahab. "He wrought evil in the eyes of the Lord, and did worse than all
that were before him." Beth-omri, "the house" or "city of Omri," is the
name usually found on Assyrian inscriptions for Samaria. In the stele of
Mesha (the "Moabite stone"), which was erected in Moab about twenty or
thirty years after Omri's death, it is recorded that Omri oppressed Moab
till Mesha delivered the land: "Omri, king of Israel, oppressed Moab
many days, for Chemosh was angry with his land. His son succeeded him,
and he also said, I will oppress Moab" (Compare [Kg2
1:1](../kjv/kg2001.htm#001); [Kg2 3:4](../kjv/kg2003.htm#004), [Kg2
3:5](../kjv/kg2003.htm#005)). The "Moabite stone" also records that
"Omri took the land of Medeba, and occupied it in his day and in the
days of his son forty years."

<span id="007">**On**</span> Light; the sun, ([Gen
41:45](../kjv/gen041.htm#045), [Gen 41:50](../kjv/gen041.htm#050)), the
great seat of sun-worship, called also Beth-shemesh ([Jer
43:13](../kjv/jer043.htm#013)) and Aven ([Eze
30:17](../kjv/eze030.htm#017)), stood on the east bank of the Nile, a
few miles north of Memphis, and near Cairo, in the north-east. The
Vulgate and the LXX. Versions have "Heliopolis" ("city of the sun")
instead of On in Genesis and of Aven in Ezekiel. The "city of
destruction" Isaiah speaks of ([Isa 19:18](../kjv/isa019.htm#018), marg.
"of Heres;" Heb. 'Ir-ha-heres , which some MSS. read Ir-ha-heres , i.e.,
"city of the sun") may be the name given to On, the prophecy being that
the time will come when that city which was known as the "city of the
sun-god" shall become the "city of destruction" of the sun-god, i.e.,
when idolatry shall cease, and the worship of the true God be
established. In ancient times this city was full of obelisks dedicated
to the sun. Of these only one now remains standing. "Cleopatra's Needle"
was one of those which stood in this city in front of the Temple of Tum,
i.e., "the sun." It is now erected on the Thames Embankment, London. "It
was at On that Joseph wooed and won the dark-skinned Asenath, the
daughter of the high priest of its great temple." This was a noted
university town, and here Moses gained his acquaintance with "all the
wisdom of the Egyptians."

<span id="008">**Onan**</span> Strong, the second son of Judah ([Gen
38:4](../kjv/gen038.htm#004); compare [Deu 25:5](../kjv/deu025.htm#005);
[Mat 22:24](../kjv/mat022.htm#024)). He died before the going down of
Jacob and his family into Egypt.

<span id="009">**Onesimus**</span> Useful, a slave who, after robbing
his master Philemon (q.v.) at Colosse, fled to Rome, where he was
converted by the apostle Paul, who sent him back to his master with the
epistle which bears his name. In it he beseeches Philemon to receive his
slave as a "faithful and beloved brother." Paul offers to pay to
Philemon anything his slave had taken, and to bear the wrong he had done
him. He was accompanied on his return by Tychicus, the bearer of the
Epistle to the Colossians ([Plm 1:16](../kjv/plm001.htm#016), [Plm
1:18](../kjv/plm001.htm#018)). The story of this fugitive Colossian
slave is a remarkable evidence of the freedom of access to the prisoner
which was granted to all, and "a beautiful illustration both of the
character of St. Paul and the transfiguring power and righteous
principles of the gospel."
