[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Night-hawk**</span> (Heb. tahmas ) occurs only in the
list of unclean birds ([Lev 11:16](../kjv/lev011.htm#016); [Deu
14:15](../kjv/deu014.htm#015)). This was supposed to be the night-jar
(Caprimulgus), allied to the swifts. The Hebrew word is derived from a
root meaning "to scratch or tear the face," and may be best rendered, in
accordance with the ancient versions, "an owl" (Strix flammea). The
Revised Version renders "night-hawk."

<span id="001">**Nile**</span> Dark; blue, not found in Scripture, but
frequently referred to in the Old Testament under the name of Sihor,
i.e., "the black stream" ([Isa 23:3](../kjv/isa023.htm#003); [Jer
2:18](../kjv/jer002.htm#018)) or simply "the river" ([Gen
41:1](../kjv/gen041.htm#001); [Exo 1:22](../kjv/exo001.htm#022), etc.)
and the "flood of Egypt" ([Amo 8:8](../kjv/amo008.htm#008)). It consists
of two rivers, the White Nile, which takes its rise in the Victoria
Nyanza, and the Blue Nile, which rises in the Abyssinian Mountains.
These unite at the town of Khartoum, whence it pursues its course for
1,800 miles, and falls into the Mediterranean through its two branches,
into which it is divided a few miles north of Cairo, the Rosetta and the
Damietta branch. (See EGYPT.)

<span id="002">**Nimrah**</span> Pure, a city on the east of Jordan
([Num 32:3](../kjv/num032.htm#003)); probably the same as Beth-nimrah
([Jos 13:27](../kjv/jos013.htm#027)). It has been identified with the
Nahr Nimrin, at one of the fords of Jordan, not far from Jericho.

<span id="003">**Nimrim, Waters of**</span> The stream of the leopards,
a stream in Moab ([Isa 15:6](../kjv/isa015.htm#006); [Jer
48:34](../kjv/jer048.htm#034)); probably the modern Wady en-Nemeirah, a
rich, verdant spot at the south-eastern end of the Dead Sea.

<span id="004">**Nimrod**</span> Firm, a descendant of Cush, the son of
Ham. He was the first who claimed to be a "mighty one in the earth."
Babel was the beginning of his kingdom, which he gradually enlarged
([Gen 10:8](../kjv/gen010.htm#008)). The "land of Nimrod" ([Mic
5:6](../kjv/mic005.htm#006)) is a designation of Assyria or of Shinar,
which is a part of it.

<span id="005">**Nimshi**</span> Saved. Jehu was "the son of
Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi" ([Kg2 9:2](../kjv/kg2009.htm#002);
compare [Kg1 19:16](../kjv/kg1019.htm#016)).

<span id="006">**Nineveh**</span> First mentioned in [Gen
10:11](../kjv/gen010.htm#011), which is rendered in the Revised Version,
"He \[i.e., Nimrod\] went forth into Assyria and builded Nineveh." It is
not again noticed till the days of Jonah, when it is described ([Jon
3:3](../kjv/jon003.htm#003); [Jon 4:11](../kjv/jon004.htm#011)) as a
great and populous city, the flourishing capital of the Assyrian empire
([Kg2 19:36](../kjv/kg2019.htm#036); [Isa
37:37](../kjv/isa037.htm#037)). The book of the prophet Nahum is almost
exclusively taken up with prophetic denunciations against this city. Its
ruin and utter desolation are foretold ([Nah
1:14](../kjv/nah001.htm#014); [Nah 3:19](../kjv/nah003.htm#019), etc.).
Zephaniah also ([Zep 2:13](../kjv/zep002.htm#013)) predicts its
destruction along with the fall of the empire of which it was the
capital. From this time there is no mention of it in Scripture till it
is named in gospel history ([Mat 12:41](../kjv/mat012.htm#041); [Luk
11:32](../kjv/luk011.htm#032)). This "exceeding great city" lay on the
eastern or left bank of the river Tigris, along which it stretched for
some 30 miles, having an average breadth of 10 miles or more from the
river back toward the eastern hills. This whole extensive space is now
one immense area of ruins. Occupying a central position on the great
highway between the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean, thus uniting the
East and the West, wealth flowed into it from many sources, so that it
became the greatest of all ancient cities. About 633 B.C. the Assyrian
empire began to show signs of weakness, and Nineveh was attacked by the
Medes, who subsequently, about 625 B.C., being joined by the Babylonians
and Susianians, again attacked it, when it fell, and was razed to the
ground. The Assyrian empire then came to an end, the Medes and
Babylonians dividing its provinces between them. "After having ruled for
more than six hundred years with hideous tyranny and violence, from the
Caucasus and the Caspian to the Persian Gulf, and from beyond the Tigris
to Asia Minor and Egypt, it vanished like a dream" ([Nah
2:6](../kjv/nah002.htm#006)). Its end was strange, sudden, tragic. It
was God's doing, his judgment on Assyria's pride ([Isa
10:5](../kjv/isa010.htm#005)). Forty years ago our knowledge of the
great Assyrian empire and of its magnificent capital was almost wholly a
blank. Vague memories had indeed survived of its power and greatness,
but very little was definitely known about it. Other cities which had
perished, as Palmyra, Persepolis, and Thebes, had left ruins to mark
their sites and tell of their former greatness; but of this city,
imperial Nineveh, not a single vestige seemed to remain, and the very
place on which it had stood was only matter of conjecture. In
fulfillment of prophecy, God made "an utter end of the place." It became
a "desolation." In the days of the Greek historian Herodotus, 400 B.C.,
it had become a thing of the past; and when Xenophon the historian
passed the place in the "Retreat of the Ten Thousand," the very memory
of its name had been lost. It was buried out of sight, and no one knew
its grave. It is never again to rise from its ruins. At length, after
being lost for more than two thousand years, the city was dis-entombed.
A little more than forty years ago the French consul at Mosul began to
search the vast mounds that lay along the opposite bank of the river.
The Arabs whom he employed in these excavations, to their great
surprise, came upon the ruins of a building at the mound of Khorsabad,
which, on further exploration, turned out to be the royal palace of
Sargon, one of the Assyrian kings. They found their way into its
extensive courts and chambers, and brought forth from its hidden depths
many wonderful sculptures and other relics of those ancient times. The
work of exploration has been carried on almost continuously by M. Botta,
Sir Henry Layard, George Smith, and others, in the mounds of Nebi-Yunus,
Nimrud, Koyunjik, and Khorsabad, and a vast treasury of specimens of old
Assyrian art has been exhumed. Palace after palace has been discovered,
with their decorations and their sculptured slabs, revealing the life
and manners of this ancient people, their arts of war and peace, the
forms of their religion, the style of their architecture, and the
magnificence of their monarchs. The streets of the city have been
explored, the inscriptions on the bricks and tablets and sculptured
figures have been read, and now the secrets of their history have been
brought to light. One of the most remarkable of recent discoveries is
that of the library of King Assur-bani-pal, or, as the Greek historians
call him, Sardanapalos, the grandson of Sennacherib (q.v.). (See
ASNAPPER.) This library consists of about ten thousand flat bricks or
tablets, all written over with Assyrian characters. They contain a
record of the history, the laws, and the religion of Assyria, of the
greatest value. These strange clay leaves found in the royal library
form the most valuable of all the treasuries of the literature of the
old world. The library contains also old Accadian documents, which are
the oldest extant documents in the world, dating as far back as probably
about the time of Abraham. (See SARGON.) "The Assyrian royalty is,
perhaps, the most luxurious of our century \[reign of Assur-bani-pa\]..
Its victories and conquests, uninterrupted for one hundred years, have
enriched it with the spoil of twenty peoples. Sargon has taken what
remained to the Hittites; Sennacherib overcame Chaldea, and the
treasures of Babylon were transferred to his coffers; Esarhaddon and
Assur-bani-pal himself have pillaged Egypt and her great cities, Sais,
Memphis, and Thebes of the hundred gates... Now foreign merchants flock
into Nineveh, bringing with them the most valuable productions from all
countries, gold and perfume from South Arabia and the Chaldean Sea,
Egyptian linen and glass-work, carved enamels, goldsmiths' work, tin,
silver, Phoenician purple; cedar wood from Lebanon, unassailable by
worms; furs and iron from Asia Minor and Armenia" (Ancient Egypt and
Assyria, by G. Maspero, page 271). The bas-reliefs, alabaster slabs, and
sculptured monuments found in these recovered palaces serve in a
remarkable manner to confirm the Old Testament history of the kings of
Israel. The appearance of the ruins shows that the destruction of the
city was due not only to the assailing foe but also to the flood and the
fire, thus confirming the ancient prophecies concerning it. "The recent
excavations," says Rawlinson, "have shown that fire was a great
instrument in the destruction of the Nineveh palaces. Calcined
alabaster, charred wood, and charcoal, colossal statues split through
with heat, are met with in parts of the Nineveh mounds, and attest the
veracity of prophecy." Nineveh in its glory was ([Jon
3:4](../kjv/jon003.htm#004)) an "exceeding great city of three days'
journey", i.e., probably in circuit. This would give a circumference of
about 60 miles. At the four corners of an irregular quadrangle are the
ruins of Kouyunjik, Nimrud, Karamless and Khorsabad. These four great
masses of ruins, with the whole area included within the parallelogram
they form by lines drawn from the one to the other, are generally
regarded as composing the whole ruins of Nineveh.

<span id="007">**Nisan**</span> Month of flowers, ([Neh
2:1](../kjv/neh002.htm#001)) the first month of the Jewish sacred year.
(See ABIB.) Assyrian nisannu, "beginning."

<span id="008">**Nisroch**</span> Probably connected with the Hebrew
word nesher, an eagle. An Assyrian god, supposed to be that represented
with the head of an eagle. Sennacherib was killed in the temple of this
idol ([Kg2 19:37](../kjv/kg2019.htm#037); [Isa
37:38](../kjv/isa037.htm#038)).

<span id="009">**Nitre**</span> ([Pro 25:20](../kjv/pro025.htm#020);
R.V. marg., "soda"), properly "natron," a substance so called because,
rising from the bottom of the Lake Natron in Egypt, it becomes dry and
hard in the sun, and is the soda which effervesces when vinegar is
poured on it. It is a carbonate of soda, not saltpetre, which the word
generally denotes ([Jer 2:22](../kjv/jer002.htm#022); R.V. "lye").
