[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Judgment Seat**</span> ([Mat
27:19](../kjv/mat027.htm#019)), a portable tribunal (Gr. bema ) which
was placed according as the magistrate might direct, and from which
judgment was pronounced. In this case it was placed on a tessellated
pavement, probably in front of the procurator's residence. (See
GABBATHA.)

<span id="001">**Judith**</span> Jewess, the daughter of Beeri the
Hittite, and one of Esau's wives ([Gen 26:34](../kjv/gen026.htm#034)),
elsewhere called Aholibamah ([Gen 36:2](../kjv/gen036.htm#002)).

<span id="002">**Julia**</span> A Christian woman at Rome to whom Paul
sent his salutations ([Rom 16:15](../kjv/rom016.htm#015)), supposed to
be the wife of Philologus.

<span id="003">**Julius**</span> The centurion of the Augustan cohort,
or the emperor's body-guard, in whose charge Paul was sent prisoner to
Rome ([Act 27:1](../kjv/act027.htm#001), [Act
27:3](../kjv/act027.htm#003), [Act 27:43](../kjv/act027.htm#043)). He
entreated Paul "courteously," showing in many ways a friendly regard for
him.

<span id="004">**Junia**</span> ([Rom 16:7](../kjv/rom016.htm#007)), a
Christian at Rome to whom Paul sends salutations along with Andronicus.

<span id="005">**Juniper**</span> (Heb. rothem ), called by the Arabs
retem , and known as Spanish broom; ranked under the genus genista. It
is a desert shrub, and abounds in many parts of Palestine. In the
account of his journey from Akabah to Jerusalem, Dr. Robinson says:
"This is the largest and most conspicuous shrub of these deserts,
growing thickly in the water-courses and valleys. Our Arabs always
selected the place of encampment, if possible, in a spot where it grew,
in order to be sheltered by it at night from the wind; and during the
day, when they often went on in advance of the camels, we found them not
infrequently sitting or sleeping under a bush of retem to shelter them
from the sun. It was in this very desert, a day's journey from
Beersheba, that the prophet Elijah lay down and slept beneath the same
shrub" ([Kg1 19:4](../kjv/kg1019.htm#004), [Kg1
19:5](../kjv/kg1019.htm#005)). It afforded material for fuel, and also
in cases of extremity for human food ([Psa
120:4](../kjv/psa120.htm#004); [Job 30:4](../kjv/job030.htm#004)). One
of the encampments in the wilderness of Paran is called Rithmah, i.e.,
"place of broom" ([Num 33:18](../kjv/num033.htm#018)). "The Bedawin of
Sinai still burn this very plant into a charcoal which throws out the
most intense heat."

<span id="006">**Jupiter**</span> The principal deity of the ancient
Greeks and Romans. He was worshipped by them under various epithets.
Barnabas was identified with this god by the Lycaonians ([Act
14:12](../kjv/act014.htm#012)), because he was of stately and commanding
presence, as they supposed Jupiter to be. There was a temple dedicated
to this god outside the gates of Lystra ([Act
14:13](../kjv/act014.htm#013)).

<span id="007">**Justice**</span> Is rendering to every one that which
is his due. It has been distinguished from equity in this respect, that
while justice means merely the doing what positive law demands, equity
means the doing of what is fair and right in every separate case.

<span id="008">**Justice of God**</span> That perfection of his nature
whereby he is infinitely righteous in himself and in all he does, the
righteousness of the divine nature exercised in his moral government. At
first God imposes righteous laws on his creatures and executes them
righteously. Justice is not an optional product of his will, but an
unchangeable principle of his very nature. His legislative justice is
his requiring of his rational creatures conformity in all respects to
the moral law. His rectoral or distributive justice is his dealing with
his accountable creatures according to the requirements of the law in
rewarding or punishing them ([Psa 89:14](../kjv/psa089.htm#014)). In
remunerative justice he distributes rewards ([Jam
1:12](../kjv/jam001.htm#012); [Ti2 4:8](../kjv/ti2004.htm#008)); in
vindictive or punitive justice he inflicts punishment on account of
transgression ([Th2 1:6](../kjv/th2001.htm#006)). He cannot, as being
infinitely righteous, do otherwise than regard and hate sin as
intrinsically hateful and deserving of punishment. "He cannot deny
himself" ([Ti2 2:13](../kjv/ti2002.htm#013)). His essential and eternal
righteousness immutably determines him to visit every sin as such with
merited punishment.

<span id="009">**Justification**</span> A forensic term, opposed to
condemnation. As regards its nature, it is the judicial act of God, by
which he pardons all the sins of those who believe in Christ, and
accounts, accepts, and treats them as righteous in the eye of the law,
i.e., as conformed to all its demands. In addition to the pardon (q.v.)
of sin, justification declares that all the claims of the law are
satisfied in respect of the justified. It is the act of a judge and not
of a sovereign. The law is not relaxed or set aside, but is declared to
be fulfilled in the strictest sense; and so the person justified is
declared to be entitled to all the advantages and rewards arising from
perfect obedience to the law ([Rom 5:1](../kjv/rom005.htm#001)). It
proceeds on the imputing or crediting to the believer by God himself of
the perfect righteousness, active and passive, of his Representative and
Surety, Jesus Christ ([Rom 10:3](../kjv/rom010.htm#003)). Justification
is not the forgiveness of a man without righteousness, but a declaration
that he possesses a righteousness which perfectly and for ever satisfies
the law, namely, Christ's righteousness ([Co2
5:21](../kjv/co2005.htm#021); [Rom 4:6](../kjv/rom004.htm#006)). The
sole condition on which this righteousness is imputed or credited to the
believer is faith in or on the Lord Jesus Christ. Faith is called a
"condition," not because it possesses any merit, but only because it is
the instrument, the only instrument by which the soul appropriates or
apprehends Christ and his righteousness ([Rom
1:17](../kjv/rom001.htm#017); [Rom 3:25](../kjv/rom003.htm#025), [Rom
3:26](../kjv/rom003.htm#026); [Rom 4:20](../kjv/rom004.htm#020), [Rom
4:22](../kjv/rom004.htm#022); [Phi 3:8](../kjv/phi003.htm#008); [Gal
2:16](../kjv/gal002.htm#016)). The act of faith which thus secures our
justification secures also at the same time our sanctification (q.v.);
and thus the doctrine of justification by faith does not lead to
licentiousness ([Rom 6:2](../kjv/rom006.htm#002)). Good works, while not
the ground, are the certain consequence of justification ([Rom
6:14](../kjv/rom006.htm#014); [Rom 7:6](../kjv/rom007.htm#006)). (See
GALATIANS, EPISTLE TO.)
