[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Uphaz**</span> Probably another name for Ophir ([Jer
10:9](../kjv/jer010.htm#009)). Some, however, regard it as the name of
an Indian colony in Yemen, southern Arabia; others as a place on or near
the river Hyphasis (now the Ghana), the south-eastern limit of the
Punjaub.

<span id="001">**Ur**</span> Light, or the moon city, a city "of the
Chaldees," the birthplace of Haran ([Gen 11:28](../kjv/gen011.htm#028),
[Gen 11:31](../kjv/gen011.htm#031)), the largest city of Shinar or
northern Chaldea, and the principal commercial centre of the country as
well as the centre of political power. It stood near the mouth of the
Euphrates, on its western bank, and is represented by the mounds (of
bricks cemented by bitumen) of el-Mugheir, i.e., "the bitumined," or
"the town of bitumen," now 150 miles from the sea and some 6 miles from
the Euphrates, a little above the point where it receives the Shat
el-Hie, an affluent from the Tigris. It was formerly a maritime city, as
the waters of the Persian Gulf reached thus far inland. Ur was the port
of Babylonia, whence trade was carried on with the dwellers on the gulf,
and with the distant countries of India, Ethiopia, and Egypt. It was
abandoned about 500 B.C., but long continued, like Erech, to be a great
sacred cemetery city, as is evident from the number of tombs found
there. (See ABRAHAM.) The oldest king of Ur known to us is Ur-Ba'u
(servant of the goddess Ba'u ), as Hommel reads the name, or Ur-Gur , as
others read it. He lived some twenty-eight hundred years B.C., and took
part in building the famous temple of the moon-god Sin in Ur itself. The
illustration here given represents his cuneiform inscription, written in
the Sumerian language, and stamped upon every brick of the temple in Ur.
It reads: " Ur-Ba'u , king of Ur, who built the temple of the moon-god."
"Ur was consecrated to the worship of Sin, the Babylonian moon-god. It
shared this honour, however, with another city, and this city was Haran,
or Harran. Harran was in Mesopotamia, and took its name from the
highroad which led through it from the east to the west. The name is
Babylonian, and bears witness to its having been founded by a Babylonian
king. The same witness is still more decisively borne by the worship
paid in it to the Babylonian moon-god and by its ancient temple of Sin.
Indeed, the temple of the moon-god at Harran was perhaps even more
famous in the Assyrian and Babylonian world than the temple of the moon
god at Ur. "Between Ur and Harran there must, consequently, have been a
close connection in early times, the record of which has not yet been
recovered. It may be that Harran owed its foundation to a king of Ur; at
any rate the two cities were bound together by the worship of the same
deity, the closest and most enduring bond of union that existed in the
ancient world. That Terah should have migrated from Ur to Harran,
therefore, ceases to be extraordinary. If he left Ur at all, it was the
most natural place to which to go. It was like passing from one court of
a temple into another. "Such a remarkable coincidence between the
Biblical narrative and the evidence of archaeological research cannot be
the result of chance. The narrative must be historical; no writer of
late date, even if he were a Babylonian, could have invented a story so
exactly in accordance with what we now know to have been the truth. For
a story of the kind to have been the invention of Palestinian tradition
is equally impossible. To the unprejudiced mind there is no escape from
the conclusion that the history of the migration of Terah from Ur to
Harran is founded on fact" (Sayce).

<span id="002">**Uriah**</span> The Lord is my light. (1.) A Hittite,
the husband of Bathsheba, whom David first seduced, and then after
Uriah's death married. He was one of the band of David's mighty men."
The sad story of the cruel wrongs inflicted upon him by David and of his
mournful death are simply told in the sacred record (2 Sam. 11:2 -
12:26). (See BATH-SHEBA; DAVID.) (2.) A priest of the house of Ahaz
([Isa 8:2](../kjv/isa008.htm#002)). (3.) The father of Meremoth,
mentioned in [Ezr 8:33](../kjv/ezr008.htm#033).

<span id="003">**Uriel**</span> God is my light. (1.) A Levite of the
family of Kohath ([Ch1 6:24](../kjv/ch1006.htm#024)). (2.) The chief of
the Kohathites at the time when the ark was brought up to Jerusalem
([Ch1 15:5](../kjv/ch1015.htm#005), [Ch1 15:11](../kjv/ch1015.htm#011)).
(3.) The father of Michaiah, one of Rehoboam's wives, and mother of
Abijah ([Ch2 13:2](../kjv/ch2013.htm#002)).

<span id="004">**Urijah**</span> The lord is my light. (1.) A high
priest in the time of Ahaz ([Kg2 16:10](../kjv/kg2016.htm#010)), at
whose bidding he constructed an idolatrous altar like one the king had
seen at Damascus, to be set up instead of the brazen altar. (2.) One of
the priests who stood at the right hand of Ezra's pulpit when he read
and expounded the law ([Neh 8:4](../kjv/neh008.htm#004)). (3.) A prophet
of Kirjath-jearim in the reign of Jehoiakim, king of Judah ([Jer
26:20](../kjv/jer026.htm#020)). He fled into Egypt from the cruelty of
the king, but having been brought back he was beheaded and his body
"cast into the graves of the common people."

<span id="005">**Urim**</span> Lights (Vulg."doctrina;" LXX.
"revelation"). See THUMMIM.

<span id="006">**Usury**</span> The sum paid for the use of money, hence
interest; not, as in the modern sense, exorbitant interest. The Jews
were forbidden to exact usury ([Lev 25:36](../kjv/lev025.htm#036), [Lev
25:37](../kjv/lev025.htm#037)), only, however, in their dealings with
each other ([Deu 23:19](../kjv/deu023.htm#019), [Deu
23:20](../kjv/deu023.htm#020)). The violation of this law was viewed as
a great crime ([Psa 15:5](../kjv/psa015.htm#005); [Pro
28:8](../kjv/pro028.htm#008); [Jer 15:10](../kjv/jer015.htm#010)). After
the Return, and later, this law was much neglected ([Neh
5:7](../kjv/neh005.htm#007), [Neh 5:10](../kjv/neh005.htm#010)).

<span id="007">**Uz**</span> Fertile land. (1.) The son of Aram, and
grandson of Shem ([Gen 10:23](../kjv/gen010.htm#023); [Ch1
1:17](../kjv/ch1001.htm#017)). (2.) One of the Horite "dukes" in the
land of Edom ([Gen 36:28](../kjv/gen036.htm#028)). (3.) The eldest son
of Nahor, Abraham's brother ([Gen 22:21](../kjv/gen022.htm#021), R.V.).

<span id="008">**Uz, The Land of**</span> Where Job lived ([Job
1:1](../kjv/job001.htm#001); [Jer 25:20](../kjv/jer025.htm#020); [Lam
4:21](../kjv/lam004.htm#021)), probably somewhere to the east or
south-east of Palestine and north of Edom. It is mentioned in Scripture
only in these three passages.

<span id="009">**Uzal**</span> A wanderer, a descendant of Joktan ([Gen
10:27](../kjv/gen010.htm#027); [Ch1 1:21](../kjv/ch1001.htm#021)), the
founder apparently of one of the Arab tribes; the name also probably of
the province they occupied and of their chief city.
