[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Samson**</span> Of the sun, the son of Manoah, born at
Zorah. The narrative of his life is given in Judg. 13 - 16. He was a
"Nazarite unto God" from his birth, the first Nazarite mentioned in
Scripture ([Jdg 13:3](../kjv/jdg013.htm#003); compare Num. 6:1-21). The
first recorded event of his life was his marriage with a Philistine
woman of Timnath ([Jdg 14:1](../kjv/jdg014.htm#001)). Such a marriage
was not forbidden by the law of Moses, as the Philistines did not form
one of the seven doomed Canaanite nations ([Exo
34:11](../kjv/exo034.htm#011); [Deu 7:1](../kjv/deu007.htm#001)). It
was, however, an ill-assorted and unblessed marriage. His wife was soon
taken from him and given "to his companion" ([Jdg
14:20](../kjv/jdg014.htm#020)). For this Samson took revenge by burning
the "standing corn of the Philistines" ([Jdg
15:1](../kjv/jdg015.htm#001)), who, in their turn, in revenge "burnt her
and her father with fire." Her death he terribly avenged ([Jdg
15:7](../kjv/jdg015.htm#007)). During the twenty years following this he
judged Israel; but we have no record of his life. Probably these twenty
years may have been simultaneous with the last twenty years of Eli's
life. After this we have an account of his exploits at Gaza ([Jdg
16:1](../kjv/jdg016.htm#001)), and of his infatuation for Delilah, and
her treachery (Judg. 16:4-20), and then of his melancholy death ([Jdg
16:21](../kjv/jdg016.htm#021)). He perished in the last terrible
destruction he brought upon his enemies. "So the dead which he slew at
his death were more \[in social and political importance = the elite of
the people\] than they which he slew in his life." "Straining all his
nerves, he bowed: As with the force of winds and waters pent, When
mountains tremble, those two massy pillars With horrible convulsion to
and fro He tugged, he shook, till down they came, and drew The whole
roof after them, with burst of thunder Upon the heads of all who sat
beneath, Lords, ladies, captains, counsellors, or priests, Their choice
nobility and flower." Milton's Samson Agonistes .

<span id="001">**Samuel**</span> Heard of God. The peculiar
circumstances connected with his birth are recorded in [Sa1
1:20](../kjv/sa1001.htm#020). Hannah, one of the two wives of Elkanah,
who came up to Shiloh to worship before the Lord, earnestly prayed to
God that she might become the mother of a son. Her prayer was graciously
granted; and after the child was weaned she brought him to Shiloh and
consecrated him to the Lord as a perpetual Nazarite (1 Sam. 1:23 -
2:11). Here his bodily wants and training were attended to by the women
who served in the tabernacle, while Eli cared for his religious culture.
Thus, probably, twelve years of his life passed away. "The child Samuel
grew on, and was in favour both with the Lord, and also with men" ([Sa1
2:26](../kjv/sa1002.htm#026); compare [Luk
2:52](../kjv/luk002.htm#052)). It was a time of great and growing
degeneracy in Israel ([Jdg 21:19](../kjv/jdg021.htm#019); [Sa1
2:12](../kjv/sa1002.htm#012), [Sa1 2:22](../kjv/sa1002.htm#022)). The
Philistines, who of late had greatly increased in number and in power,
were practically masters of the country, and kept the people in
subjection ([Sa1 10:5](../kjv/sa1010.htm#005); [Sa1
13:3](../kjv/sa1013.htm#003)). At this time new communications from God
began to be made to the pious child. A mysterious voice came to him in
the night season, calling him by name, and, instructed by Eli, he
answered, "Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth." The message that came
from the Lord was one of woe and ruin to Eli and his profligate sons.
Samuel told it all to Eli, whose only answer to the terrible
denunciations ([Sa1 3:11](../kjv/sa1003.htm#011)) was, "It is the Lord;
let him do what seemeth him good", the passive submission of a weak
character, not, in his case, the expression of the highest trust and
faith. The Lord revealed himself now in divers manners to Samuel, and
his fame and his influence increased throughout the land as of one
divinely called to the prophetical office. A new period in the history
of the kingdom of God now commenced. The Philistine yoke was heavy, and
the people, groaning under the wide-spread oppression, suddenly rose in
revolt, and "went out against the Philistines to battle." A fierce and
disastrous battle was fought at Aphek, near to Ebenezer ([Sa1
4:1](../kjv/sa1004.htm#001), [Sa1 4:2](../kjv/sa1004.htm#002)). The
Israelites were defeated, leaving 4,000 dead "in the field." The chiefs
of the people thought to repair this great disaster by carrying with
them the ark of the covenant as the symbol of Jehovah's presence. They
accordingly, without consulting Samuel, fetched it out of Shiloh to the
camp near Aphek. At the sight of the ark among them the people "shouted
with a great shout, so that the earth rang again." A second battle was
fought, and again the Philistines defeated the Israelites, stormed their
camp, slew 30,000 men, and took the sacred ark. The tidings of this
fatal battle was speedily conveyed to Shiloh; and so soon as the aged
Eli heard that the ark of God was taken, he fell backward from his seat
at the entrance of the sanctuary, and his neck brake, and he died. The
tabernacle with its furniture was probably, by the advice of Samuel, now
about twenty years of age, removed from Shiloh to some place of safety,
and finally to Nob, where it remained many years ([Sa1
21:1](../kjv/sa1021.htm#001)). The Philistines followed up their
advantage, and marched upon Shiloh, which they plundered and destroyed
(compare [Jer 7:12](../kjv/jer007.htm#012); [Psa
78:59](../kjv/psa078.htm#059)). This was a great epoch in the history of
Israel. For twenty years after this fatal battle at Aphek the whole land
lay under the oppression of the Philistines. During all these dreary
years Samuel was a spiritual power in the land. From Ramah, his native
place, where he resided, his influence went forth on every side among
the people. With unwearied zeal he went up and down from place to place,
reproving, rebuking, and exhorting the people, endeavouring to awaken in
them a sense of their sinfulness, and to lead them to repentance. His
labours were so far successful that "all the house of Israel lamented
after the Lord." Samuel summoned the people to Mizpeh, one of the
loftiest hills in Central Palestine, where they fasted and prayed, and
prepared themselves there, under his direction, for a great war against
the Philistines, who now marched their whole force toward Mizpeh, in
order to crush the Israelites once for all. At the intercession of
Samuel God interposed in behalf of Israel. Samuel himself was their
leader, the only occasion in which he acted as a leader in war. The
Philistines were utterly routed. They fled in terror before the army of
Israel, and a great slaughter ensued. This battle, fought probably about
1095 B.C., put an end to the forty years of Philistine oppression. In
memory of this great deliverance, and in token of gratitude for the help
vouchsafed, Samuel set up a great stone in the battlefield, and called
it "Ebenezer," saying, "Hitherto hath the Lord helped us" ([Sa1
7:1](../kjv/sa1007.htm#001)). This was the spot where, twenty years
before, the Israelites had suffered a great defeat, when the ark of God
was taken. This victory over the Philistines was followed by a long
period of peace for Israel ([Sa1 7:13](../kjv/sa1007.htm#013), [Sa1
7:14](../kjv/sa1007.htm#014)), during which Samuel exercised the
functions of judge, going "from year to year in circuit" from his home
in Ramah to Bethel, thence to Gilgal (not that in the Jordan valley, but
that which lay to the west of Ebal and Gerizim), and returning by Mizpeh
to Ramah. He established regular services at Shiloh, where he built an
altar; and at Ramah he gathered a company of young men around him and
established a school of the prophets. The schools of the prophets, thus
originated, and afterwards established also at Gibeah, Bethel, Gilgal,
and Jericho, exercised an important influence on the national character
and history of the people in maintaining pure religion in the midst of
growing corruption. They continued to the end of the Jewish
commonwealth. Many years now passed, during which Samuel exercised the
functions of his judicial office, being the friend and counsellor of the
people in all matters of private and public interest. He was a great
statesman as well as a reformer, and all regarded him with veneration as
the "seer," the prophet of the Lord. At the close of this period, when
he was now an old man, the elders of Israel came to him at Ramah ([Sa1
8:4](../kjv/sa1008.htm#004), [Sa1 8:5](../kjv/sa1008.htm#005), [Sa1
8:19](../kjv/sa1008.htm#019)); and feeling how great was the danger to
which the nation was exposed from the misconduct of Samuel's sons, whom
he had invested with judicial functions as his assistants, and had
placed at Beersheba on the Philistine border, and also from a threatened
invasion of the Ammonites, they demanded that a king should be set over
them. This request was very displeasing to Samuel. He remonstrated with
them, and warned them of the consequences of such a step. At length,
however, referring the matter to God, he acceded to their desires, and
anointed Saul (q.v.) to be their king ([Sa1
11:15](../kjv/sa1011.htm#015)). Before retiring from public life he
convened an assembly of the people at Gilgal (1 Sam. 12), and there
solemnly addressed them with reference to his own relation to them as
judge and prophet. The remainder of his life he spent in retirement at
Ramah, only occasionally and in special circumstances appearing again in
public (1 Sam. 13, 15) with communications from God to king Saul. While
mourning over the many evils which now fell upon the nation, he is
suddenly summoned (1 Sam. 16) to go to Bethlehem and anoint David, the
son of Jesse, as king over Israel instead of Saul. After this little is
known of him till the time of his death, which took place at Ramah when
he was probably about eighty years of age. "And all Israel gathered
themselves together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at
Ramah" ([Sa1 25:1](../kjv/sa1025.htm#001)), not in the house itself, but
in the court or garden of his house. (Compare [Kg2
21:18](../kjv/kg2021.htm#018); [Ch2 33:20](../kjv/ch2033.htm#020); [Kg1
2:34](../kjv/kg1002.htm#034); [Joh 19:41](../kjv/joh019.htm#041).)
Samuel's devotion to God, and the special favour with which God regarded
him, are referred to in [Jer 15:1](../kjv/jer015.htm#001) and [Psa
99:6](../kjv/psa099.htm#006).

<span id="002">**Samuel, Books of**</span> The LXX. translators regarded
the books of Samuel and of Kings as forming one continuous history,
which they divided into four books, which they called "Books of the
Kingdom." The Vulgate version followed this division, but styled them
"Books of the Kings." These books of Samuel they accordingly called the
"First" and "Second" Books of Kings, and not, as in the modern
Protestant versions, the "First" and "Second" Books of Samuel. The
authors of the books of Samuel were probably Samuel, Gad, and Nathan.
Samuel penned the first twenty-four chapters of the first book. Gad, the
companion of David ([Sa1 22:5](../kjv/sa1022.htm#005)), continued the
history thus commenced; and Nathan completed it, probably arranging the
whole in the form in which we now have it ([Ch1
29:29](../kjv/ch1029.htm#029)). The contents of the books. The first
book comprises a period of about a hundred years, and nearly coincides
with the life of Samuel. It contains (1.) the history of Eli (1 Sam. 1 -
4); (2.) the history of Samuel (1 Sam. 5 - 12); (3.) the history of
Saul, and of David in exile (1 Sam. 13 - 31). The second book,
comprising a period of perhaps fifty years, contains a history of the
reign of David (1.) over Judah (2 Sam. 1 - 4), and (2.) over all Israel
(2 Sam. 5 - 24), mainly in its political aspects. The last four chapters
of Second Samuel may be regarded as a sort of appendix recording various
events, but not chronologically. These books do not contain complete
histories. Frequent gaps are met with in the record, because their
object is to present a history of the kingdom of God in its gradual
development, and not of the events of the reigns of the successive
rulers. It is noticeable that the section (2 Sam. 11:2 - 12:29)
containing an account of David's sin in the matter of Bathsheba is
omitted in the corresponding passage in [Ch1
20:1](../kjv/ch1020.htm#001).

<span id="003">**Sanballat**</span> Held some place of authority in
Samaria when Nehemiah went up to Jerusalem to rebuild its ruined walls.
He vainly attempted to hinder this work ([Neh
2:10](../kjv/neh002.htm#010), [Neh 2:19](../kjv/neh002.htm#019); [Neh
4:1](../kjv/neh004.htm#001); 6). His daughter became the wife of one of
the sons of Joiada, a son of the high priest, much to the grief of
Nehemiah ([Neh 13:28](../kjv/neh013.htm#028)).

<span id="004">**Sanctification**</span> Involves more than a mere moral
reformation of character, brought about by the power of the truth: it is
the work of the Holy Spirit bringing the whole nature more and more
under the influences of the new gracious principles implanted in the
soul in regeneration. In other words, sanctification is the carrying on
to perfection the work begun in regeneration, and it extends to the
whole man ([Rom 6:13](../kjv/rom006.htm#013); [Co2
4:6](../kjv/co2004.htm#006); [Col 3:10](../kjv/col003.htm#010); [Jo1
4:7](../kjv/jo1004.htm#007); [Co1 6:19](../kjv/co1006.htm#019)). It is
the special office of the Holy Spirit in the plan of redemption to carry
on this work ([Co1 6:11](../kjv/co1006.htm#011); [Th2
2:13](../kjv/th2002.htm#013)). Faith is instrumental in securing
sanctification, inasmuch as it (1.) secures union to Christ ([Gal
2:20](../kjv/gal002.htm#020)), and (2.) brings the believer into living
contact with the truth, whereby he is led to yield obedience "to the
commands, trembling at the threatenings, and embracing the promises of
God for this life and that which is to come." Perfect sanctification is
not attainable in this life ([Kg1 8:46](../kjv/kg1008.htm#046); [Pro
20:9](../kjv/pro020.htm#009); [Ecc 7:20](../kjv/ecc007.htm#020); [Jam
3:2](../kjv/jam003.htm#002); [Jo1 1:8](../kjv/jo1001.htm#008)). See
Paul's account of himself in [Rom 7:14](../kjv/rom007.htm#014); [Phi
3:12](../kjv/phi003.htm#012); and [Ti1 1:15](../kjv/ti1001.htm#015);
also the confessions of David ([Psa 19:12](../kjv/psa019.htm#012), [Psa
19:13](../kjv/psa019.htm#013); 51), of Moses ([Psa
90:8](../kjv/psa090.htm#008)), of Job ([Job
42:5](../kjv/job042.htm#005), [Job 42:6](../kjv/job042.htm#006)), and of
Daniel (Dan. 9:3-20). "The more holy a man is, the more humble,
self-renouncing, self-abhorring, and the more sensitive to every sin he
becomes, and the more closely he clings to Christ. The moral
imperfections which cling to him he feels to be sins, which he laments
and strives to overcome. Believers find that their life is a constant
warfare, and they need to take the kingdom of heaven by storm, and watch
while they pray. They are always subject to the constant chastisement of
their Father's loving hand, which can only be designed to correct their
imperfections and to confirm their graces. And it has been notoriously
the fact that the best Christians have been those who have been the
least prone to claim the attainment of perfection for themselves.",
Hodge's Outlines.

<span id="005">**Sanctuary**</span> Denotes, (1.) the Holy Land ([Exo
15:17](../kjv/exo015.htm#017); compare [Psa
114:2](../kjv/psa114.htm#002)); (2.) the temple ([Ch1
22:19](../kjv/ch1022.htm#019); [Ch2 29:21](../kjv/ch2029.htm#021)); (3.)
the tabernacle ([Exo 25:8](../kjv/exo025.htm#008); [Lev
12:4](../kjv/lev012.htm#004); [Lev 21:12](../kjv/lev021.htm#012)); (4.)
the holy place, the place of the Presence (Gr. hieron , the
temple-house; not the naos, which is the temple area, with its courts
and porches), [Lev 4:6](../kjv/lev004.htm#006); [Eph
2:21](../kjv/eph002.htm#021), R.V., marg.; (5.) God's holy habitation in
heaven ([Psa 102:19](../kjv/psa102.htm#019)). In the final state there
is properly "no sanctuary" ([Rev 21:22](../kjv/rev021.htm#022)), for God
and the Lamb "are the sanctuary" (R.V., "temple"). All is there hallowed
by the Divine Presence; all is sanctuary.

<span id="006">**Sandals**</span> Mentioned only in [Mar
6:9](../kjv/mar006.htm#009) and [Act 12:8](../kjv/act012.htm#008). The
sandal was simply a sole, made of wood or palm-bark, fastened to the
foot by leather straps. Sandals were also made of seal-skin ([Eze
16:10](../kjv/eze016.htm#010); lit. tahash, "leather;" A.V., "badger's
skin;" R.V., "sealskin," or marg., "porpoise-skin"). (See SHOE.)

<span id="007">**Sanhedrim**</span> More correctly Sanhedrin (Gr.
synedrion ), meaning "a sitting together," or a "council." This word
(rendered "council," A.V.) is frequently used in the New Testament ([Mat
5:22](../kjv/mat005.htm#022); [Mat 26:59](../kjv/mat026.htm#059); [Mar
15:1](../kjv/mar015.htm#001), etc.) to denote the supreme judicial and
administrative council of the Jews, which, it is said, was first
instituted by Moses, and was composed of seventy men ([Num
11:16](../kjv/num011.htm#016), [Num 11:17](../kjv/num011.htm#017)). But
that seems to have been only a temporary arrangement which Moses made.
This council is with greater probability supposed to have originated
among the Jews when they were under the domination of the Syrian kings
in the time of the Maccabees. The name is first employed by the Jewish
historian Josephus. This "council" is referred to simply as the "chief
priests and elders of the people" ([Mat 26:3](../kjv/mat026.htm#003),
[Mat 26:47](../kjv/mat026.htm#047), [Mat 26:57](../kjv/mat026.htm#057),
[Mat 26:59](../kjv/mat026.htm#059); [Mat 27:1](../kjv/mat027.htm#001),
[Mat 27:3](../kjv/mat027.htm#003), [Mat 27:12](../kjv/mat027.htm#012),
[Mat 27:20](../kjv/mat027.htm#020), etc.), before whom Christ was tried
on the charge of claiming to be the Messiah. Peter and John were also
brought before it for promulgating heresy (Acts. 4:1-23; 5:17-41); as
was also Stephen on a charge of blasphemy ([Act
6:12](../kjv/act006.htm#012)), and Paul for violating a temple by-law
([Act 22:30](../kjv/act022.htm#030); [Act 23:1](../kjv/act023.htm#001)).
The Sanhedrin is said to have consisted of seventy-one members, the high
priest being president. They were of three classes (1.) the chief
priests, or heads of the twenty-four priestly courses (1 Chr. 24), (2.)
the scribes, and (3.) the elders. As the highest court of judicature,
"in all causes and over all persons, ecclesiastical and civil, supreme,"
its decrees were binding, not only on the Jews in Palestine, but on all
Jews wherever scattered abroad. Its jurisdiction was greatly curtailed
by Herod, and afterwards by the Romans. Its usual place of meeting was
within the precincts of the temple, in the hall "Gazith," but it
sometimes met also in the house of the high priest ([Mat
26:3](../kjv/mat026.htm#003)), who was assisted by two vice-presidents.

<span id="008">**Sansannah**</span> A palm branch, or a thorn bush, a
town in the south (the negeb) of Judah ([Jos
15:31](../kjv/jos015.htm#031)); called also Hazar-susah ([Jos
19:5](../kjv/jos019.htm#005)), or Hazar-susim ([Ch1
4:31](../kjv/ch1004.htm#031)).

<span id="009">**Saph**</span> Extension, the son of the giant whom
Sibbechai slew ([Sa2 21:18](../kjv/sa2021.htm#018)); called also Sippai
([Ch1 20:4](../kjv/ch1020.htm#004)).
