[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Bible](../index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="000">**Salt, The city of**</span> One of the cities of Judah
([Jos 15:62](../kjv/jos015.htm#062)), probably in the Valley of Salt, at
the southern end of the Dead Sea.

<span id="001">**Salt, Valley of**</span> A place where it is said David
smote the Syrians ([Sa2 8:13](../kjv/sa2008.htm#013)). This valley (the
Arabah) is between Judah and Edom on the south of the Dead Sea. Hence
some interpreters would insert the words, "and he smote Edom," after the
words, "Syrians" in the above text. It is conjectured that while David
was leading his army against the Ammonites and Syrians, the Edomites
invaded the south of Judah, and that David sent Joab or Abishai against
them, who drove them back and finally subdued Edom. (Compare title to
[Psa 60:1](../kjv/psa060.htm#001).) Here also Amaziah "slew of Edom ten
thousand men" ([Kg2 14:7](../kjv/kg2014.htm#007); compare [Kg2
8:20](../kjv/kg2008.htm#020) and [Ch2 25:5](../kjv/ch2025.htm#005)).

<span id="002">**Salutation**</span> "Eastern modes of salutation are
not infrequently so prolonged as to become wearisome and a positive
waste of time. The profusely polite Arab asks so many questions after
your health, your happiness, your welfare, your house, and other things,
that a person ignorant of the habits of the country would imagine there
must be some secret ailment or mysterious sorrow oppressing you, which
you wished to conceal, so as to spare the feelings of a dear,
sympathizing friend, but which he, in the depth of his anxiety, would
desire to hear of. I have often listened to these prolonged salutations
in the house, the street, and the highway, and not infrequently I have
experienced their tedious monotony, and I have bitterly lamented useless
waste of time" (Porter, Through Samaria, etc.). The work on which the
disciples were sent forth was one of urgency, which left no time for
empty compliments and prolonged greetings ([Luk
10:4](../kjv/luk010.htm#004)).

<span id="003">**Salvation**</span> This word is used of the deliverance
of the Israelites from the Egyptians ([Exo
14:13](../kjv/exo014.htm#013)), and of deliverance generally from evil
or danger. In the New Testament it is specially used with reference to
the great deliverance from the guilt and the pollution of sin wrought
out by Jesus Christ, "the great salvation" ([Heb
2:3](../kjv/heb002.htm#003)). (See REDEMPTION; REGENERATION.)

<span id="004">**Samaria**</span> A watch-mountain or a watch-tower. In
the heart of the mountains of Israel, a few miles north-west of Shechem,
stands the "hill of Shomeron," a solitary mountain, a great "mamelon."
It is an oblong hill, with steep but not inaccessible sides, and a long
flat top. Omri, the king of Israel, purchased this hill from Shemer its
owner for two talents of silver, and built on its broad summit the city
to which he gave the name of "Shomeron", i.e., Samaria, as the new
capital of his kingdom instead of Tirzah ([Kg1
16:24](../kjv/kg1016.htm#024)). As such it possessed many advantages.
Here Omri resided during the last six years of his reign. As the result
of an unsuccessful war with Syria, he appears to have been obliged to
grant to the Syrians the right to "make streets in Samaria", i.e.,
probably permission to the Syrian merchants to carry on their trade in
the Israelite capital. This would imply the existence of a considerable
Syrian population. "It was the only great city of Palestine created by
the sovereign. All the others had been already consecrated by
patriarchal tradition or previous possession. But Samaria was the choice
of Omri alone. He, indeed, gave to the city which he had built the name
of its former owner, but its especial connection with himself as its
founder is proved by the designation which it seems Samaria bears in
Assyrian inscriptions, Beth-khumri ('the house or palace of Omri')."
Stanley. Samaria was frequently besieged. In the days of Ahab, Benhadad
II. came up against it with thirty-two vassal kings, but was defeated
with a great slaughter (1 Kings 20:1-21). A second time, next year, he
assailed it; but was again utterly routed, and was compelled to
surrender to Ahab ([Kg1 20:28](../kjv/kg1020.htm#028)), whose army, as
compared with that of Benhadad, was no more than "two little flocks of
kids." In the days of Jehoram this Benhadad again laid siege to Samaria,
during which the city was reduced to the direst extremities. But just
when success seemed to be within their reach, they suddenly broke up the
siege, alarmed by a mysterious noise of chariots and horses and a great
army, and fled, leaving their camp with all its contents behind them.
The famishing inhabitants of the city were soon relieved with the
abundance of the spoil of the Syrian camp; and it came to pass,
according to the word of Elisha, that "a measure of fine flour was sold
for a shekel, and two measures of barely for a shekel, in the gates of
Samaria" (2 Kings 7:1-20). Shalmaneser invaded Israel in the days of
Hoshea, and reduced it to vassalage. He laid siege to Samaria (723
B.C.), which held out for three years, and was at length captured by
Sargon, who completed the conquest Shalmaneser had begun ([Kg2
18:9](../kjv/kg2018.htm#009); [Kg2 17:3](../kjv/kg2017.htm#003)), and
removed vast numbers of the tribes into captivity. (See SARGON.) The
city, after passing through various vicissitudes, was given by the
emperor Augustus to Herod the Great, who rebuilt it, and called it
Sebaste (Gr. form of Augustus ) in honour of the emperor. In the New
Testament the only mention of it is in [Act 8:5](../kjv/act008.htm#005),
where it is recorded that Philip went down to the city of Samaria and
preached there. It is now represented by the hamlet of Sebustieh,
containing about three hundred inhabitants. The ruins of the ancient
town are all scattered over the hill, down the sides of which they have
rolled. The shafts of about one hundred of what must have been grand
Corinthian columns are still standing, and attract much attention,
although nothing definite is known regarding them. (Compare [Mic
1:6](../kjv/mic001.htm#006).) In the time of Christ, Western Palestine
was divided into three provinces, Judea, Samaria, and Galilee. Samaria
occupied the centre of Palestine ([Joh 4:4](../kjv/joh004.htm#004)). It
is called in the Talmud the "land of the Cuthim," and is not regarded as
a part of the Holy Land at all. It may be noticed that the distance
between Samaria and Jerusalem, the respective capitals of the two
kingdoms, is only 35 miles in a direct line.

<span id="005">**Samaritans**</span> The name given to the new and mixed
inhabitants whom Esarhaddon (677 B.C.), the king of Assyria, brought
from Babylon and other places and settled in the cities of Samaria,
instead of the original inhabitants whom Sargon (721 B.C.) had removed
into captivity ([Kg2 17:24](../kjv/kg2017.htm#024); compare [Ezr
4:2](../kjv/ezr004.htm#002), [Ezr 4:9](../kjv/ezr004.htm#009), [Ezr
4:10](../kjv/ezr004.htm#010)). These strangers (compare [Luk
17:18](../kjv/luk017.htm#018)) amalgamated with the Jews still remaining
in the land, and gradually abandoned their old idolatry and adopted
partly the Jewish religion. After the return from the Captivity, the
Jews in Jerusalem refused to allow them to take part with them in
rebuilding the temple, and hence sprang up an open enmity between them.
They erected a rival temple on Mount Gerizim, which was, however,
destroyed by a Jewish king (130 B.C.). They then built another at
Shechem. The bitter enmity between the Jews and Samaritans continued in
the time of our Lord: the Jews had "no dealings with the Samaritans"
([Joh 4:9](../kjv/joh004.htm#009); compare [Luk
9:52](../kjv/luk009.htm#052), [Luk 9:53](../kjv/luk009.htm#053)). Our
Lord was in contempt called "a Samaritan" ([Joh
8:48](../kjv/joh008.htm#048)). Many of the Samaritans early embraced the
gospel (John 4:5-42; [Act 8:25](../kjv/act008.htm#025); [Act
9:31](../kjv/act009.htm#031); [Act 15:3](../kjv/act015.htm#003)). Of
these Samaritans there still remains a small population of about one
hundred and sixty, who all reside in Shechem, where they carefully
observe the religious customs of their fathers. They are the "smallest
and oldest sect in the world."

<span id="006">**Samaritan Pentateuch**</span> On the return from the
Exile, the Jews refused the Samaritans participation with them in the
worship at Jerusalem, and the latter separated from all fellowship with
them, and built a temple for themselves on Mount Gerizim. This temple
was razed to the ground more than one hundred years B.C. Then a system
of worship was instituted similar to that of the temple at Jerusalem. It
was founded on the Law, copies of which had been multiplied in Israel as
well as in Judah. Thus the Pentateuch was preserved among the
Samaritans, although they never called it by this name, but always "the
Law," which they read as one book. The division into five books, as we
now have it, however, was adopted by the Samaritans, as it was by the
Jews, in all their priests' copies of "the Law," for the sake of
convenience. This was the only portion of the Old Testament which was
accepted by the Samaritans as of divine authority. The form of the
letters in the manuscript copies of the Samaritan Pentateuch is
different from that of the Hebrew copies, and is probably the same as
that which was in general use before the Captivity. There are other
peculiarities in the writing which need not here be specified. There are
important differences between the Hebrew and the Samaritan copies of the
Pentateuch in the readings of many sentences. In about two thousand
instances in which the Samaritan and the Jewish texts differ, the LXX.
agrees with the former. The New Testament also, when quoting from the
Old Testament, agrees as a rule with the Samaritan text, where that
differs from the Jewish. Thus [Exo 12:40](../kjv/exo012.htm#040) in the
Samaritan reads, "Now the sojourning of the children of Israel and of
their fathers which they had dwelt in the land of Canaan and in Egypt
was four hundred and thirty years" (compare [Gal
3:17](../kjv/gal003.htm#017)). It may be noted that the LXX. has the
same reading of this text.

<span id="007">**Samgar-nebo**</span> Be gracious, O Nebo! or a
cup-bearer of Nebo, probably the title of Nergal-sharezer, one of the
princes of Babylon ([Jer 39:3](../kjv/jer039.htm#003)).

<span id="008">**Samos**</span> An island in the Aegean Sea, which Paul
passed on his voyage from Assos to Miletus ([Act
20:15](../kjv/act020.htm#015)), on his third missionary journey. It is
about 27 miles long and 20 broad, and lies about 42 miles south-west of
Smyrna.

<span id="009">**Samothracia**</span> An island in the Aegean Sea, off
the coast of Thracia, about 32 miles distant. This Thracian Samos was
passed by Paul on his voyage from Troas to Neapolis ([Act
16:11](../kjv/act016.htm#011)) on his first missionary journey. It is
about 8 miles long and 6 miles broad. Its modern name is Samothraki.
