[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lgc07)  [Next](lgc09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267T84E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Cuchulain of Muirthemne*, by Lady Augusta Gregory, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

# V.

### THE CHAMPIONSHIP OF ULSTER

AFTER they were gone back to Emain after Bricriu's feast, a quarrel
began between Conall and Laegaire and Cuchulain about the Champion's
Portion, and Conchubar and the chief men of Ulster came between them to
settle it. And Conchubar bade them to go to Cruachan in Connaught, to
have the matter judged by Ailell and by Maeve. "And if that fails you,"
he said, "what you have to do is *to* go to Curoi, son of Daire, at
Slieve Mis, in Munster. And it is a true judgment he will give, for he
is just and fair-minded, his house is open to guests, his hand is good
in battle, in leading he is a king. He will give you a right judgment,
but it is only a brave man will ask it from him, for be is wise in all
sorts of enchantments, and can do things that no other man can do."

"We will go first to Cruachan," said Cuchulain. "I agree to that," said
Laegaire. "Let us go then," said Conall Cearnach. "Let horses be
brought, and your chariot yoked, Conall," said Cuchulain; "and go on the
first*."* "I would not like that," said Conall. "That is no wonder,"
said Cuchulain, "for every one knows the awkwardness of your horses, and
the unsteadiness of your chariot; it is so heavy that each of the wheels
raises the sod on each side wherever it goes, the way

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

that for the length of a year it is easy for the men of Ulster to know
the track it has left after it."

"Do you hear that, Laegaire?" said Conall "It is for you to go first."
"Do not begin to mock at me," said Laegaire, "for I am good at crossing
fords, and I am ready to go up and face a storm of spears before any
man. But do not put me beside chariot kings till I practise going
through hard and narrow places, and racing against single chariots, till
the champion of a single chariot will be afraid to pass me."

With that Laegaire had his chariot yoked, and leaped into it. He drove
over Magh da Gabal, the Plain of the Two Forks, over Bernaid na Foraire,
the Gap of the Watch, over the Ford of Carpat Fergus, over the Ford of
the Morrigu, to Caerthund Cluana da Dam, the Rowan Meadow of the Two
Oxen, in the Fews of Firbuide; by the four ways, past Dundealgan across
Magh Slicech, the Peeled Plain, westward by Bregia. And it was not long
till Conall Cearnach followed after him, and many of the chief men of
Ulster with them.

But Cuchulain stayed behind the others, amusing the women of Ulster with
his feats. He did nine feats with apples, nine with spears, and nine
with knives, without ever letting one touch the other. And he took three
times fifty needles from the women, and threw them up, one after the
other, so that each needle went into the eye of the other, and in that
way they were all joined together. Then he gave every woman her needle
back into her own hand.

But Laeg, son of Riangabra, went to look for him, and reproached him,
and said: "You pitiful squinter, your courage has gone from you! The
Champion's Portion is lost to you, the men of Ulster have got to
Cruachan before this." "I never thought of it, my Laeg," said Cuchulain;
"but yoke the chariot for me now." So Laeg yoked it, and they set out on
their journey. By

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

that time the men of Ulster were come to Magh Breagh, the Fine Meadow;
but Cuchulain, after he was roused up by Laeg, travelled so fast, and
the Grey of Macha and the Black Sainglain went racing in such a way with
his chariot across the whole province of Conchubar, across Slieve Fuad
and the plain of Bregia, that he came up with the others before they
came to Cruachan.

The noise the whole troop made was so great, going at such speed as they
did, that a great shaking came on Cruachan, and the arms fell from the
racks to the ground, and the whole of the dun began to shake, so that
every man was trembling like a rush in a stream. On that Maeve said:
"Since the day I first came to Cruachan I never before heard thunder,
there being no clouds in the sky." Then Findabair of the Fair Eyebrows,
daughter of Ailell and of Maeve, went up, for she had a bird's sight, to
her sunny parlour over the great door of the fort, to tell them what was
coming.

"Dear mother," she said, "I see a chariot coming over the plain." "Tell
me what is its appearance," said Maeve, "and the colour of its horses,
and the appearance of the man that sits in it." "I see well," said
Findabair, "the two horses that are in the chariot. Two fiery dappled
greys, of the one colour, shape, and goodness, having the one speed,
keeping the one pace; their ears pricked, their heads high, their
nostrils broad, foreheads broad, manes and tails curled, thin-sided,
wide-chested, galloping together. The chariot is made of fine wood with
wicker-work newly polished, the yoke curved, with silver ornaments on
it; it has two black wheels, soft looped yellow reins. I see in the
chariot a big stout man, with reddish yellow hair, with long forked
beard. He has a soft purple coat about him, and it striped with bright
gold. His bronze shield is edged with gold; there is a five-pronged
javelin at his wrist, a cover of strange birds' feathers over his head."

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

"I know well who that man is," said Maeve, and it is what she said: "A
companion of kings, an old bestower of victories, a storm of war, a
flame of judgment, a long knife of victory that will cut us to pieces,
mighty Laegaire of the Red Hand. His sword cuts through men as a knife
cuts through a leek; his stroke is the back stroke of the wave to the
land. And I swear by the gods my people swear by," she said, "if it is
in anger and for fighting Laegaire Buadach is coming at us, that as
leeks are cut close to the ground with a sharp knife, the same way we
will be cut down, as many of us as are in Cruachan, unless we smooth
down his anger by giving in to everything he asks."

"Good mother," said Findabair, "I see another chariot as good as the
first coming over the plain." "Tell me what is its appearance," said
Maeve.

"I see," she said, "yoked to the chariot, on the one side a red horse,
taking strong, high strides across fords and splashes, over banks and
gaps, over plains and hollows, with the quickness of birds that the
quick eye loses in following. On the other side a bay horse of great
strength; it is at full speed he races over the plain, between stones
and hard places; he finds no hindrance in the land of oaks, hurrying on
his way. A chariot of fine wood with wicker-work, on two wheels of
bright bronze; its pole bright with silver, its frame very high and
creaking, having a curved, firm yoke, with looped yellow reins.

"In the chariot a fair man, with wavy, hanging hair; his face white and
red, his vest clean and white, his cloak blue and crimson, his shield
brown with yellow bosses, its edge worked with bronze. In his hand a
bright spear; a cover of the feathers of strange birds over the wicker
frame of his chariot"

"I know who that man is," said Maeve, and she said then: "The growling
of a lion; a flame that can cut

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

like a sharpened stone; he heaps head on head, battle on battle. As a
trout is cut upon red sandstone, so would the son of Finchoem cut us if
he came on us in anger.

"For, by the oath of my people," she said, "as a speckled fish is beaten
upon a shining red stone with iron rods, so would we be broken by Conall
Cearnach, if he came against us."

"I see another chariot coming over the plain," said Findabair. "Tell me
what its appearance is," said Maeve. "I see two horses of the one size
and beauty, the one fierceness and speed, with ears pricked, heads high,
spirited and powerful, with fine nostrils, wide foreheads, mane and tail
curled, leaping together. The one grey, handsome, with broad thighs,
eager, leaping, thundering, and trampling. As he goes, his fierce hoofs
throw up sods of earth like a flock of swift birds after him. As he
gallops on his way, he breathes out a blast of hot breath, a fire comes
from his curbed jaws. The other, dark, small-headed, well-shaped,
broad-hoofed, thin-sided, high-couraged, broad-backed, sure-footed,
spirited; he takes long strides in the race; he leaps over streams, he
throws off heaviness, he crosses the plains of the middle valley. They
come together with fast, joyful steps, moving over the plain like a
swift mountain mist, or like the speed of a hill hind, or like a hare on
level ground, or like the rushing of a loud wind in winter.

"The chariot is of fine wood with wicker-work, having two iron wheels, a
bright silver pole with bronze ornaments, a frame very high and creaking
strengthened with iron, a curved yoke overlaid with gold, two soft
looped yellow reins.

"I see in the chariot a dark, sad man, comeliest of the men of Ireland.
A pleated crimson tunic about him, fastened at the breast with a brooch
of inlaid gold; a long-sleeved linen cloak on him with a white hood

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

embroidered with flame-red gold. His eyebrows as black as the blackness
of a spit, seven lights in his eyes, seven colours about his bead, love
and fire in his look. Across his knees there lies a gold-hilted sword,
there is a blood-red spear ready to his hand, a sharp-tempered blade
with a shaft of wood. Over his shoulders a crimson shield with a rim of
silver, overlaid with shapes of beasts in gold.

"There is before him in the chariot a driver, a very thin, tall,
freckled man; very bright red hair, kept back from his face with a
golden thread, a cup of gold at each side of his head. A short cloak
about him with sleeves opening at the two elbows; in his hand a goad of
red gold to guide his horses."

"That is truly a drop before a downpour," said Maeve. "I know well who
that man is." And it is what she said: "Like the sound of an angry sea,
like a great moving wave, with the madness of a wild beast that is
vexed, he leaps through his enemies in the crash of battle, they hear
their death in his shout. He heaps deed upon deed, head upon head; his
is a name to be put in songs. As fresh malt is ground in the mill, so
shall we be ground by Cuchulain.

"For I swear by the oath of my people," she said, "that as a mill of ten
spokes grinds very hard malt, so he, with only himself, would grind us
to dust and to gravel, if we had the whole province with us, unless his
anger and his heat go down.

"And what way are the rest of the men of Ulster coming?" she said. And
Findabair answered her, and it is what she said: "Hand to hand, arm to
arm, side to side, shoulder to shoulder, wheel to wheel, axle to axle,
that is the way they are coming. Their horses are coming on us like
thunder on the roof, like heavy waves stirred by the storm; the
trampling of their feet makes the earth shake under them."

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

And Maeve said, "Let our women be ready before them with vats of cold
water; let the beds be made ready, bring the best of food, the best of
ale. Open the courtyard, have a welcome before them, and surely they
will not harm us."

Then Maeve went out by the high door of the dun into the courtyard, and
three limes fifty young girls attending her, with three vats of cold
water to cool the beat of the three heroes in front of the rest. And she
gave them their choice, would each man have a house for himself, or
would they have one house for the three? "A house for each to himself,"
said Cuchulain. And when the rest of the men of Ulster came, Ailell and
Maeve with their whole household went out and bade them welcome. "We are
well pleased with the welcome," said Sencha for them.

After that, they all came into the fort and into the palace. They went
round from one door to the other, and there was room for them all, and
the musicians were playing music while everything was being made ready.
And Conchubar, and Fergus, son of Rogh, were in Ailell's division, with
nine others along with them, and there was a great feast made ready
then, and they stopped there the length of three days and three nights.

At the end of that time Ailell asked Conchubar what was the business
that had brought them there. And Sencha told him the whole story, about
the quarrel of the women as to who should walk first, and the quarrel of
their husbands for the Champion's Portion. "And they were not satisfied
to be judged by anyone but yourself," he said. Ailell did not seem to be
well pleased at that. "Indeed, it was no friend of mine that left this
judgment on me," he said. "There is no better judge than yourself," said
Sencha. "Well," said Ailell, "you must give me time to think upon it."
"Do not make too much delay," said Sencha, "for we cannot spare

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

our heroes long from us." "Three days and three nights will be enough
for me," said Ailell. "That much will not break friendship," said
Sencha.

With that the men of Ulster went home to Emain, leaving Laegaire and
Conall and Cuchulain to be judged by Ailell, and they left their
blessing with Ailell and with Maeve, and their curse with Bricriu,
because it was he had first started the quarrel.

 

That night the three heroes were given as good a feast as before, but
they were put to eat it in a room by themselves. When night came on,
three enchanted monsters, with the shape of cats, were let out from the
cave that was in the hill of the Sidhe at Cruachan, to attack them. When
Conall and Laegaire saw them, they got up into the rafters, leaving
their food after them, and there they stayed till morning. Cuchulain did
not leave his place, but when one of the monsters came to attack him, he
gave a blow of his sword at its head; but the sword slipped off as if
from a stone. Then the monster stayed quiet, and Cuchulain sat there
through the night watching it. With the break of day the cats were gone,
and Ailell came in and saw what way the three heroes were. "Are you not
satisfied to give the Championship to Cuchulain, after this?" he said.
"We are not," said Conall and Laegaire; "it is not against beasts we are
used to fight, but against men."

Then Maeve said to them, "Go and spend the night with my foster-father,
Ercol, and his wife Garmna." So they went, but first they were given
their choice of food for their horses. Conall and Laegaire chose oats
two years old for theirs, but Cuchulain chose barley grain for his. Then
they set out, racing all the way, and Cuchulain winning the race.

Ercol and Garmna bade them welcome, and they knew it was to try them
they had been sent there, so

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

they sent them out that night, one after the other, to fight with the
witches of the valley.

Laegaire went first, but he could not stand against them, and he came
back, and left his arms and his clothes with them.

Then Conall went, and he was driven back, and left his spear with them,
but he brought his sword that was his best weapon away with him.

Then Cuchulain went down into the valley and the witches screamed at him
and attacked him, and he and they fought together till his spear was in
splinters, his shield broken and his clothes torn off him. The witches
were beating him and getting the better of him, but Laeg saw it, and he
called out "O Cuchulain," he said, "you poor coward, you squinting
clown! Your courage is gone from you, witches to be beating you!" Then
great anger came on Cuchulain, and he turned on the witches and cut and
gashed them till the valley was filled with their blood, and he brought
away their cloaks of battle with him, and went back to the house where
his comrades were. And Garmna and her daughter Buan made much of him and
bade him welcome.

They slept there that night, and the next day Ercol challenged them to
come one by one, each man with his horse, to fight against himself and
his horse. Laegaire was the first to go against him, and his horse was
killed by Ercol's horse, and he himself was overcome by Ercol, so that
he took to flight, and did not stop till he got back to Cruachan, and he
brought the story there that both his companions had been killed by
Ercol. Conall was the next to run away, after his horse being killed by
Ercol's horse; and his servant Rathand was drowned in the river as he
ran, and it takes its name after him, Snam Rathand, from that day.

But the Grey of Macha, killed Ercol's horse, and Cuchulain put down
Ercol and tied him behind his

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

chariot and set out for Cruachan. And Buan, Garmna's daughter, ran out
after the chariot for love of Cuchulain to follow him*.* And she knew
the track of his chariot, for it was no roundabout track it used to
take, but to be breaking through gaps or going over them; and in
following it at last she gave a great leap and fell, and her forehead
struck against a rock, and she died; and it is from this the place was
given the name of Buan's Grave.

And when Conall and Cuchulain got back to Cruachan, they found the
people of the dun keening them, for by the report Laegaire brought, they
were sure they had been killed.

Then Ailell went to his inner room, and leaned his back against the
wall, for he was not quiet in his mind, and he knew there was danger in
whatever judgment he might give; and he had not eaten or slept for three
days and three nights. Then Maeve said to him, "It is a coward you are,
and if you do not settle this matter I will settle it myself." "It is
hard for me to give judgment," said Ailell, "it is a misfortune for any
one to have to do it." "It is easy enough," said Maeve, "for Laegaire
and Conall Cearnach are as different as bronze and silver, and Conall
Cearnach and Cuchulain are as different as silver and red gold."

After a while, when Maeve had searched her mind, Laegaire Buadach was
called to her. "Welcome, Laegaire Buadach," she said, "it is right for
you to have the Champion's Portion. We give you the headship of the
heroes of Ireland from this out, and the Champion's Portion, and along
with that this cup of bronze, having a bird in raised silver on the
bottom. Take it with you as a token of the judgement, but let no one see
it till you come to Conchubar and his Red Branch at the end of the day.
When the Champion's Portion is set out, then bring out your cup in the
presence of all the great men

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

of Ulster, and not one of them will dispute it with you any more, for
they will know by this token that the Championship has been given to
you." With that, the cup was given to him with its full of rich wine,
and he drank it off at a draught "Now you have the Championship," said
Maeve; "and I wish you may enjoy it a hundred years at the head of all
Ulster."

So Laegaire left her, and Conall Cearnach was called up to the queen.
"Welcome, Conall Cearnach," she said; "it is right for us to give you
the Champion's Portion, and a silver cup along with it, having a bird on
the bottom in raised gold." And she said the same to him as she had said
to Laegaire before.

Then Conall went away, and a messenger was sent to bring Cuchulain.
"Come up to speak with the king and queen," said the messenger.

Cuchulain was playing chess at the time with Laeg, his chariot-driver.
"I am not a fool to be mocked at," he said, and he hurled one of the
chessmen at the messenger, and hit him between the eyes, so that it is
hardly he could get back to Ailell and Maeve.

"By my word," said Maeve, "this Cuchulain is hard to deal with." And
then she came down herself to Cuchulain, and put her two arms round his
neck. "Give your flattery to some other one," said Cuchulain.

But Maeve said, "Great son of Ulster, flame of the heroes of Ireland,
there is no flattery in our mind when it is you we have to do with. For
if all the heroes of Ireland should come here, it is to you we would
give the Champion's Portion, for as to bravery and a great name, and as
to youth and great deeds, it is well-known that you are far beyond all
the men of Ireland."

Cuchulain rose up then, and went with Maeve into the palace, and Ailell
gave him a great welcome. And he was given a gold cup full of wine, and
it having on the bottom of it a bird in precious stones. "Now, you

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

have the Championship," said Maeve, "and it is my wish you may enjoy it
a hundred years at the head of all the heroes of Ulster." "And besides
that," Ailell and Maeve said, "it is our judgment, that as much as you
are beyond the heroes of Ulster, so far is your wife beyond their wives.
And we think it right that she should walk before the women of Ulster
when they go together into the drinking-hall."

Then Cuchulain drank at one draught the full of the cup, and bade
farewell to the king and the queen and the whole household. And he went
till he came to Emain Macha at the end of the day. and there was no one
among the men of Ulster would venture to ask news of any of the three
until the time came to eat and to drink in the great hall.

When the feast was laid out, they all stopped their arguing and their
talking, and gave themselves up to eating and to enjoyment. It was
Sualtim, son of Roig, father of Cuchulain, was attending the feast that
night, and Conchubar's great vat had been filled for it. The
distributors began serving out the meat, but at first they kept back the
Champion's Portion. Then Dubthach of the Chafer Tongue said, "Why is not
the Champion's Portion given to one of these three heroes that are come
back from Cruachan? They must surely have brought some token with them,
that we may know which one is to have it."

Upon that, Laegaire Buadach rose up and held out the bronze cup with the
silver bird on it. "The Champion's Portion is mine," he said, "and no
one can dispute it with me."

"That is not so," said Conall Cearnach; "here is my token. Yours is a
bronze cup but mine is a silver cup. You see by the difference in them
it is to me the Champion's Portion belongs."

"It belongs to neither of you," said Cuchulain, and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

he rose up and he said, "It was only to deceive you and to keep up the
quarrel between us, the king and queen we went to gave you those. It is
to me the Champion's Portion belongs, for you see my token, that it is
far above the others."

With that he lifted high up the cup of red gold, with the bird on it of
precious stones, and all the men in the feasting-hall saw it. "It is I
myself that will get the Championship," he said, "if I get fair play."
"It is yours indeed," said Conchubar, and Fergus, and all the chief men.
"It is yours by the judgment of Ailell and Maeve." "I swear by the oath
of my people," said Laegaire, "that the cup you have with you was not
given to you, but bought. You gave riches and treasures for it to Ailell
and Maeve, the way the Championship would not go to any other person;
but by my hand of valour," he said, "that judgment shall not stand."

Then, with their swords drawn, they sprang at one another, but Conchubar
went between them, and then they let down their hands and sheathed their
swords. "It is best," said Sencha, "for you to go to Curoi for
judgement." "We agree to that," said they.

So on the morning of the morrow, the three--Cuchulain, Conall, and
Laegaire--set out for Curoi's dun. At the gate of the dun they unyoked
their chariots, and they went into the courtyard, and Blanad, daughter
of Mind, Curoi's wife, gave them a good welcome. Curoi was not at home
that night, but knowing, by his enchantments, they would come, he had
left instructions with his wife how to entertain them; and she did
according to his wish, giving them water for washing, and drinks for
refreshing, and beds of the best, so that they were well satisfied.

When bedtime came, Blanad told them they were each to take a night to
watch the fort, till Curoi would

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

come back. "And it is what he said, that you should take your turn
according to age."

Now in whatever part of the world Curoi was, he made a spell every night
over the dun, so that it went round like a mill, and no entrance could
be found in it after the setting of the sun.

The first night Laegaire Buadach took the watch, for be was the oldest
of the three. As he was keeping watch, towards the end of the night he
saw a great shadow coming towards him from the sea westward. Very huge
and ugly and terrible he thought it, and it took the shape of a giant
and reached up to the sky, and the shining of the sea could be seen
between its legs. It is how it came, its hands full of what had the
appearance of stripped oaks, and each of them enough for a load of six
horses; and he hurled one of them at Laegaire, but it went past him. He
did this two or three times, but the beam did not reach either the skin
or the shield of Laegaire. Then Laegaire hurled a spear at him, and it
did not hit him.

He stretched out his hand then to Laegaire, and the length of it reached
the three ridges that were between them while they were throwing at one
another and he gripped hold of him. Big and strong as Laegaire was, he
fitted like a child of a year old into his hand.

The giant turned him round between his two palms as a chessman is turned
in a groove, and then he threw him half dead over the wall of the fort,
into a heap of mud. There was no opening there, and the people inside
the dun thought he had leaped over from outside, as a challenge to the
others to do the same.

There they stayed until the end of the day, and at the fall of night
Conall went out to take the watch, as he was older than Cuchulain.
Everything happened as it did to Laegaire the first night And when the
third night came, Cuchulain went into the seat of the watch.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

When midnight was come he heard a noise, and by the light of the cold
moon he saw nine grey shapes coming towards him over the marsh. "Stop,"
said Cuchulain, "who is there? If they are friends, let them not stir;
if they are enemies, let them come on." Then they raised a great shout
at him, and Cuchulain rushed at them and attacked them, so that the nine
fell dead to the ground, and he cut their heads off and made a heap of
them, and sat down again to keep the watch. Another nine and then
another shouted at him, but he made an end of the three nines, and made
one heap of their heads and their arms.

While he was watching on through the night, tired and downhearted, he
heard a sound rising from the lake, like the sound of a very heavy sea.
However tired he was, his mind would not let him keep quiet, without
going to see what was the cause of that great noise he heard. Then he
saw a great worm coming up from the lake, and it raised itself into the
air over him and made for the dun, and opened its mouth, and it seemed
to him that one of the houses would fit into its gullet.

Then Cuchulain with one leap reached its head and put his arm round its
neck, and stretched his hand across its gullet, and tore the monster's
heart out and threw it to the ground. Then the beast fell down, and
Cuchulain hacked it with his sword, and made little bits of it, and
brought the head along with him to the heap of skulls. He was sitting
there, towards the break of day, worn out and discouraged, and he saw
the great shadow shaped like a giant coming to him westward from the
sea. "This is a bad night," he said. 'It will be worse for you yet,"
said Cuchulain. Then he threw one of the beams at Cuchulain, but it
passed by him, and he did that two or three times, but it did not reach
either his shield or his skin. Then he stretched out his hand to grip
Cuchulain as he did the others, but Cuchulain

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

leaped his salmon leap at the head of the monster, with his drawn sword,
and brought him down. "Life for life, Cuchulain," he said, and with that
he vanished and was no more seen.

Then Cuchulain wondered to himself how his fellows had made their leap
over the fort, for the wall was big and broad and high, and twice he
tried it and failed. Then anger came on him, and he went a good way back
and made a run, and with the dint of the anger that was on him, and the
courage of his heart and of his mind, he hardly took the dew off the
tips of the grass in the run, and he made one leap over the wall, and
lit in the middle, at the door of the house. Then he went in through the
door and gave a sigh. And Blanad, wife of Curoi, said, "That is not the
sigh of a beaten man, but a conqueror's sigh of triumph." For the
daughter of the King of the Isle of the Men of Falga knew well all
Cuchulain had gone through that night.

"The Champion's Portion must now go to Cuchulain," she said to the
others; "for you see by this that you are not equal to him." "We do not
agree to that," said they; "for we know it was one of his friends among
the Sidhe came to put us down and to put us out of the Championship. We
will not give up for that," they said.

Then she gave them a message she had from Curoi, that the three
champions were to go back to Emain, until he would bring his judgment
there himself. So they bade her farewell, and went back to the Red
Branch.

 

It was a good while after this, as the men of Ulster were in Emain,
tired. after the gathering and the games, Conchubar and Fergus, son of
Rogh, with the chief men, went from the field of sports outside, and sat
down in the house of the Red Branch; but Cuchulain was not

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

there that night, or Conall Cearnach, but all the rest of the chief
heroes were in it.

As they were sitting there towards evening, and the day wearing to its
close, they saw a big awkward fellow, very ugly, coming to them into the
hail. It seemed to them as if none of the men of Ulster could reach to
half his height. He was frightful to look at next his skin he had an old
cow's hide, and a grey cloak around him, and over him be had a great
spreading branch the size of a winter shed under which thirty cattle
could find shelter. Ravenous yellow eyes he had, and in his right hand
an axe weighing fifty cauldrons of melted metal, its sharpness such that
it would cut through hairs, if the wind would blow them against its
edge.

He went over and leaned against the branched beam that was beside the
fire.

"Who are you at all?" said Dubthach of the Chafer Tongue. "Is there no
other place for you in the hall that you come up here? Is it to be
candlestick to the house you want, or is it to set the house on fire you
want?"

"Uath, the Stranger, is my name," said he; "and neither of those things
is the thing I want The thing I want is the thing I cannot find, and I
after going through the world of Ireland and the whole world looking for
it, and that is a man that will keep his word and will hold to his
agreement with me."

"What agreement is that?" said Fergus. "Here is this axe," he said, "and
the man into whose hands it is put is to cut off my head to-day, I to
cut his head off to-morrow. And as you men of Ulster have a name beyond
the men of all countries for strength and skill, for courage, for
greatness, for highmindedness, for behaviour, for truth and generosity,
for worthiness, let you find one among you that will hold to his word

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

and keep to his bargain. Conchubar I put aside because of his kingship,
and Fergus, son of Rogh, for the same reason. But outside these two,
come, whichever of you will venture, he to cut off my head to-night, I
to cut off his head to-morrow night"

"It is not right for dishonour to be put on a whole province," said
Fergus, "for the want of one man that will keep his word." "Sure there
is no champion here after these two are left out," said Dubthach. "By my
word, there will be one this moment," said Laegaire, and he leaped out
on the floor of the hail. "Stoop down, clown, that I may cut off your
head to-night, you to cut off mine to-morrow night." "By the oath of my
people," said Dubthach, "it is no good prospect you have if the man
killed to-night comes to kill you to-morrow."

Then Uath put spells on the edge of the axe and laid his neck down on a
block, and Laegaire struck a blow across it with the axe, till it went
into the block underneath, and the head fell on the floor and the house
was filled with the blood. But presently Uath rose up and gathered his
head and his axe to his breast and went out from the hall, his neck
streaming with blood, so that there was terror on all the people in the
house.

"I swear," said Dubthach, "if this stranger, being killed, comes back
to-morrow night, he will not leave a man alive in Ulster."

Back be came the next night to have his agreement kept. But Laegaire's
heart failed him, and be was nowhere to be found. But Conall Cearnach
was in the hall, and he said he would make a new agreement with him. So
all happened the same as the night before, but when Uath came the next
day, it was the same with Conall as with Laegaire, his heart failed him
when it came to the keeping of his bargain.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

Cuchulain was there that night when Uath came in and began to reproach
and to mock at them all. "As for you, men of Ulster," he said, "all your
courage and your daring is gone from you; you covet a great name, but
you are not able to earn it. Where is that poor squinting fellow that is
called Cuchulain," he said, "till I see if his word is any better than
the word of the others?" "I will keep my word without any agreement,"
said Cuchulain. "That is likely, you miserable fly, it is in great fear
of death you are."

On that, Cuchulain made a leap towards him and gave him a blow with the
axe, and hurled his head to the top rafter of the hail, so that the
whole house shook.

On the morrow the men of Ulster were watching Cuchulain to see if he
would break his word to the stranger, as the others had done. As
Cuchulain sat there waiting for him, they saw that he was very
down-hearted, and they made sure his life was at its end, and that they
might as well begin keening him. And then Cuchulain said to Conchubar,
and there was hanging of the head on him, "Do not go from this till my
agreement is fulfilled, for death is coming to me, but I would sooner
meet with death than break my word."

They were there till the close of day, and then they saw Uath coming.
"Where is Cuchulain?" he said. "Here I am," be answered. "It is dull
your speech is to-night," said the stranger; "it is in great fear of
death you are. But however great your fear, you have not failed me."

Then Cuchulain went to him and laid his head on the block. "Stretch out
your head better," said he. "You are keeping me in torment," said
Cuchulain; "put an end to me quickly. For last night," he said, "by my
oath, I made no delay with you." Then he

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

stretched out his neck, and Uath raised his axe till it reached the
rafters of the hail, and the creaking of the old hide that was about
him, and the crashing of the axe through the rafters, was like the loud
noise of a wood in a stormy night. But when the axe came down, it was
with its blunt side, and it was the floor it struck, so that Cuchulain
was not touched at all. And all the chief men of Ulster were standing
around looking on, and they saw on the moment that it was no strange
clown was in it, but Curoi, son of Daire, that had come to try the
heroes through his enchantments.

"Rise up, Cuchulain," he said. "Of all the heroes of Ulster, whatever
may be their daring, there is not one to compare with you in courage and
in bravery and in truth. The Championship of the heroes of Ireland is
yours from this out, and the Champion's Portion with it, and to your
wife the first place among all the women of Ulster. And whoever tries to
put himself before you after this," he said, "I swear by the oath my
people swear by, his own life will be in danger."

With that he left them. And this was the end of the Women's War of
Words, and of the quarrel among the heroes for the Championship of
Ulster.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The High King of Ireland](lgc09)
