[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sds13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Secret Door to Success*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE INNER MEANING OF SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS

I have been asked to give a Metaphysical interpretation of Snow White
and the Seven Dwarfs, one of Grimm's Fairy Tales.

It is amazing how this picture, a fairy story, swept sophisticated New
York, and the whole country, due to Walt Disney's genius.

This fairy tale was supposed to be for children, but men and women have
packed the theatre. It is because fairy tales come down from old legends
of Persia, India and Egypt, which are founded on Truth.

Snow White, the little Princess, has a cruel stepmother, who is jealous
of her. This cruel stepmother idea appeal also in "Cinderella."

Nearly everyone has a cruel step-mother. THE CRUEL STEP-MOTHER IS A
NEGATIVE THOUGHT-FORM YOU HAVE BUILT UP IN THE SUBCONSCIOUS.

Snow White's cruel step-mother is jealous of her and always keeps her in
rags and in the background.

ALL CRUEL THOUGHT FORMS DO THIS.

The cruel step-mother consults her magic mirror every day, saying:
"Magic mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?" One day the
mirror replies: "Thou Queen, mayst fair and beauteous be, but Snow White
is lovelier far than thee." This enrages the Queen, so she decides to
send Snow White to the forest to be killed by one of her servants.
However, the servant's heart melts when Snow White begs for her life, so
he leaves her in the woods. The woods are filled with terrifying animals
and many pitfalls and dangers. She falls in terror to the ground, and
while there, a most unusual spectacle presents itself. Scores of the
most delightful little animals and birds creep up and surround her.
Rabbits, squirrels, deer, beavers, raccoons, etc. She opens her eyes and
greets them with pleasure; they are so friendly and attractive. She
tells her story and they lead her to a little house which she makes her
home. NOW THESE FRIENDLY BIRDS AND ANIMALS SYMBOLIZE OUR INTUITIVE LEADS
OR HUNCHES, WHICH ARE ALWAYS READY TO "GET YOU OUT OF THE WOODS."

The little house proves to be the home of the Seven Dwarfs. Everything
is in disorder, so Snow White and her animal friends begin to clean the
house. The squirrels dust with their tails, the birds hang things up,
using the little deer's horns for a hat-rack. When the seven dwarfs come
home from their work of digging gold, they discover the change and at
last find Snow White asleep on one of the beds. In the morning she tells
her story, remains with them to keep house and cook their meals, and is
very happy. THE SEVEN DWARFS SYMBOLIZE THE PROTECTIVE FORCES ALL ABOUT
US.

In the meantime, the cruel step-mother consults her mirror and it says
to her: "Over the hills in the green wood shade, where the Seven Dwarfs
their dwelling have made, there Snow White is hiding her head, and she,
is lovelier far, Oh, Queen than thee." This infuriates the Queen; so she
starts off disguised as an old hag, with a poisoned apple for Snow
White. She finds her in the house of the Seven Dwarfs and tempts her
with the big, red luscious apple. The birds and animals endeavor to tell
her not to touch it. THEY TRY TO GIVE HER THE HUNCH NOT TO EAT IT. They
rush around in dismay, but Snow White can't resist the apple, she takes
one bite and falls, apparently dead. Now all the little birds and
animals rush off to bring the Seven Dwarfs to the rescue; but too late,
Snow White lies lifeless. They all bow their little heads in grief. Then
suddenly the Prince appears, kisses Snow White, and she comes to life.
They are married and live happily ever after. The Queen, the cruel
step-mother, is swept away by a terrific storm, THE OLD THOUGHT-FORM IS
DISSOLVED AND DISSIPATED FOREVER. THE PRINCE SYMBOLIZES THE DIVINE PLAN
OF YOUR LIFE. WHEN IT WAKES YOU UP YOU LIVE HAPPILY EVER AFTER.

This is the fairy story which has enthralled New York and the whole
country.

Find out what form of tyranny your cruel stepmother is taking in your
subconscious. It is some negative conviction which works out in all your
affairs.

We hear people saying: "My good always comes to me too late." "I've lost
so many opportunities!" We must reverse the thought and say repeatedly:
"*I am wide awake to my good, I never miss a trick*."

WE MUST DROWN OUT THE DREARY SUGGESTIONS OF THE CRUEL STEPMOTHER.
*ETERNAL VIGILANCE IS THE PRICE OF FREEDOM FROM THESE NEGATIVE
THOUGHT-FORMS*.

 

\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~\~

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>Nothing can hinder, nothing can delay the manifestation of the Divine Plan of my life.</p>
<p>The Light of Lights streams on my pathway, revealing the Open Road of Fulfillment!</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

 

 
