[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax03)  [Next](lax05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter IV: Ketill goes to Scotland, A.D. 890

Ketill Flatnose brought his ship to Scotland, and was well received by
the great men there; for he was a renowned man, and of high birth. They
offered him there such station as he would like to take, and Ketill and
his company of kinsfolk settled down there all except Thorstein, his
daughter's son, who forthwith betook himself to warring, and harried
Scotland far and wide, and was always victorious. Later on he made peace
with the Scotch, and got for his own one-half of Scotland. He had for
wife Thurid, daughter of Eyvind, and sister of Helgi the Lean. The
Scotch did not keep the peace long, but treacherously murdered him. Ari
Thorgils' son the Wise, writing of his death, says that he fell in
Caithness. Unn the Deepminded was in Caithness when her son Thorstein
fell. When she heard that Thorstein was dead, and her father had
breathed his last, she deemed she would have no prospering in store
there. So she had a ship built secretly in a wood, and when it was ready
built she arrayed it, and had great wealth withal; and she took with her
all her kinsfolk who were left alive; and men deem that scarce may an
example be found that any one, a woman only, has ever got out of such a
state of war with so much wealth and so great a following. From this it
may be seen how peerless among women she was. Unn had with her many men
of great worth and high birth. A man named Koll was one of the worthiest
amongst her followers, chiefly owing to his descent, he being by title a
"Hersir". There was also in the journey with Unn a man named Hord, and
he too was also a man of high birth and of great worth. When she was
ready, Unn took her ship to the Orkneys; there she stayed a little
while, and there she married off Gro, the daughter of Thorstein the Red.
She was the mother of Greilad, who married Earl Thorfinn, the son of
Earl Turf-Einar, son of Rognvald Mere-Earl. Their son was Hlodvir, the
father of Earl Sigurd, the father of Earl Thorfinn, and from them come
all the kin of the Orkney Earls. After that Unn steered her ship to the
Faroe Isles, and stayed there for some time. There she married off
another daughter of Thorstein, named Olof, and from her sprung the
noblest race of that land, who are called the Gate-Beards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Unn goes to Iceland, A.D. 895](lax05)
