[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax13)  [Next](lax15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XIV: The Murder of Hall, Ingjald's Brother

Ingald was the name of a man. He lived in Sheepisles, that lie out in
Broad-firth. He was called Sheepisles' Priest. He was rich, and a mighty
man of his hand. Hall was the name of his brother. He was big, and had
the makings of a man in him; he was, however, a man of small means, and
looked upon by most people as an unprofitable sort of man. The brothers
did not usually agree very well together. Ingjald thought Hall did not
shape himself after the fashion of doughty men, and Hall thought Ingjald
was but little minded to lend furtherance to his affairs. There is a
fishing place in Broadfirth called Bjorn isles. These islands lie many
together, and were profitable in many ways. At that time men went there
a great deal for the fishing, and at all seasons there were a great many
men there. Wise men set great store by people in outlying
fishing-stations living peacefully together, and said that it would be
unlucky for the fishing if there was any quarrelling; and most men gave
good heed to this. It is told how one summer Hall, the brother of
Ingjald, the Sheepisles' Priest, came to Bjorn isles for fishing. He
took ship as one of the crew with a man called Thorolf. He was a
Broadfirth man, and was well-nigh a penniless vagrant, and yet a brisk
sort of a man. Hall was there for some time, and palmed himself off as
being much above other men. It happened one evening when they were come
to land, Hall and Thorolf, and began to divide the catch, that Hall
wished both to choose and to divide, for he thought himself the greater
man of the two. Thorolf would not give in, and there were some high
words, and sharp things were said on both sides, as each stuck to his
own way of thinking. So Hall seized up a chopper that lay by him, and
was about to heave it at Thorolf's head, but men leapt between them and
stopped Hall; but he was of the maddest, and yet unable to have his way
as at this time. The catch of fish remained undivided. Thorolf betook
himself away that evening, and Hall took possession of the catch that
belonged to them both, for then the odds of might carried the day. Hall
now got another man in Thorolf's place in the boat, and went on fishing
as before. Thorolf was ill-contented with his lot, for he felt he had
come to shame in their dealings together; yet he remained in the islands
with the determination to set straight the humble plight to which he had
been made to bow against his will. Hall, in the meantime, did not fear
any danger, and thought that no one would dare to try to get even with
him in his own country. So one fair-weather day it happened that Hall
rowed out, and there were three of them together in the boat. The fish
bit well through the day, and as they rowed home in the evening they
were very merry. Thorolf kept spying about Hall's doings during the day,
and is standing in the landing-place when Hall came to land. Hall rowed
in the forehold of the boat, and leapt overboard, intending to steady
the boat; and as he jumped to land Thorolf happens to be standing near,
and forthwith hews at him, and the blow caught him on his neck against
the shoulder, and off flew his head. Thorolf fled away after that, and
Hall's followers were all in a flurried bustle about him. The story of
Hall's murder was told all over the islands, and every one thought it
was indeed great news; for the man was of high birth, although he had
had little good luck. Thorolf now fled from the islands, for he knew no
man there who would shelter him after such a deed, and he had no kinsmen
he could expect help from; while in the neighbourhood were men from whom
it might be surely looked for that they would beset his life, being
moreover men of much power, such as was Ingjald, the Sheepisles' Priest,
the brother of Hall. Thorolf got himself ferried across to the mainland.
He went with great secrecy. Nothing is told of his journey, until one
evening he came to Goddistead. Vigdis, the wife of Thord Goddi, was some
sort of relation to Thorolf, and on that account he turned towards that
house. Thorolf had also heard before how matters stood there, and how
Vigdis was endowed with a good deal more courage than Thord, her
husband. And forthwith the same evening that Thorolf came to Goddistead
he went to Vigdis to tell her his trouble, and to beg her help.

Vigdis answered his pleading in this way: "I do not deny our
relationship, and in this way alone I can look upon the deed you have
done, that I deem you in no way the worser man for it. Yet this I see,
that those who shelter you will thereby have at stake their lives and
means, seeing what great men they are who will be taking up the
blood-suit. And Thord," she said, "my husband, is not much of a warrior;
but the counsels of us women are mostly guided by little foresight if
anything is wanted. Yet I am loath to keep aloof from you altogether,
seeing that, though I am but a woman, you have set your heart on finding
some shelter here."

After that Vigdis led him to an outhouse, and told him to wait for her
there, and put a lock on the door. Then she went to Thord, and said, "A
man has come here as a guest, named Thorolf. He is some sort of relation
of mine, and I think he will need to dwell here some long time if you
will allow it."

Thord said he could not away with men coming to put up at his house, but
bade him rest there over the next day if he had no trouble on hand, but
otherwise he should be off at his swiftest. Vigdis answered, "I have
offered him already to stay on, and I cannot take back my word, though
he be not in even friendship with all men."

After that she told Thord of the slaying of Hall, and that Thorolf who
was come there was the man who had killed him. Thord was very
cross-grained at this, and said he well knew how that Ingjald would take
a great deal of money from him for the sheltering that had been given
him already, seeing that doors here have been locked after this man.
Vigdis answered, "Ingjald shall take none of your money for giving one
night's shelter to Thorolf, and he shall remain here all this winter
through"

Thord said, "In this manner you can checkmate me most thoroughly, but it
is against my wish that a man of such evil luck should stay here."

Still Thorolf stayed there all the winter. Ingjald, who had to take up
the blood-suit for his brother, heard this, and so arrayed him for a
journey into the Dales at the end of the winter, and ran out a ferry of
his whereon they went twelve together. They sailed from the west with a
sharp northwest wind, and landed in Salmon-river-Mouth in the evening.
They put up their ferryboat, and came to Goddistead in the evening,
arriving there not unawares, and were cheerfully welcomed. Ingjald took
Thord aside for a talk with him, and told him his errand, and said he
had heard of Thorolf, the slayer of his brother, being there. Thord said
there was no truth in that. Ingjald bade him not to deny it. "Let us
rather come to a bargain together: you give up the man, and put me to no
toil in the matter of getting at him. I have three marks of silver that
you shall have, and I will overlook the offences you have brought on
your hands for the shelter given to Thorolf."

Thord thought the money fair, and had now a promise of acquittal of the
offences for which he had hitherto most dreaded and for which he would
have to abide sore loss of money. So he said, "I shall no doubt hear
people speak ill of me for this, none the less this will have to be our
bargain." They slept until it wore towards the latter end of the night,
when it lacked an hour of day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV: Thorolf's Escape with Asgaut the Thrall](lax15)
