[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax22)  [Next](lax24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXIII: The Marriage of Olaf Peacock and Thorgerd, the Daughter of Egil, A.D. 959

It is told how one day the father and son, Hoskuld and Olaf, went forth
from their booth to find Egil. Egil greeted them well, for he and
Hoskuld knew each other very well by word of mouth. Hoskuld now broaches
the wooing on behalf of Olaf, and asks for the hand of Thorgerd. She was
also at the Thing. Egil took the matter well, and said he had always
heard both father and son well spoken of, "and I also know, Hoskuld,"
said Egil, "that you are a highborn man and of great worth, and Olaf is
much renowned on account of his journey, and it is no wonder that such
men should look high for a match, for he lacks neither family nor good
looks; but yet this must be talked over with Thorgerd, for it is no
man's task to get Thorgerd for wife against her will."

Hoskuld said, "I wish, Egil, that you would talk this over with your
daughter."

Egil said that that should be done. Egil now went away to find his
daughter, and they talked together: "There is here a man named Olaf, who
is Hoskuld's son, and he is now one of the most renowned of men.
Hoskuld, his father, has broached a wooing on behalf of Olaf, and has
sued for your hand; and I have left that matter mostly for you to deal
with. Now I want to know your answer. But it seems to me that it behoves
you to give a good answer to such a matter, for this match is a noble
one."

Thorgerd answered, "I have often heard you say that you love me best of
all your children, but now it seems to me you make that a falsehood if
you wish me to marry the son of a bondswoman, however goodly and great a
dandy he may be,"

Egil said, "In this matter you are not so well up, as in others. Have
you not heard that he is the son of the daughter of Myrkjartan, king of
Ireland? So that he is much higher born on his mother's side than on his
father's, which, however, would be quite good enough for us."

Thorgerd would not see this; and so they dropped the talk, each being
somewhat of a different mind. The next day Egil went to Hoskuld's booth.
Hoskuld gave him a good welcome, and so they fell a-talking together.
Hoskuld asked how this wooing matter had sped. Egil held out but little
hope, and told him all that had come to pass. Hoskuld said it looked
like a closed matter, "Yet I think you have behaved well."

Olaf did not hear this talk of theirs. After that Egil went away. Olaf
now asks, "How speeds the wooing?"

Hoskuld said, "It pointed to slow speed on her side."

Olaf said, "It is now as I told you, father, that I should take it very
ill if in answer (to the wooing) I should have to take shaming words,
seeing that the broaching of the wooing gives undue right to the wooed.
And now I shall have my way so far, that this shall not drop here. For
true is the saw, that 'others' errands eat the wolves'; and now I shall
go straight-way to Egil's booth."

Hoskuld bade him have his own way. Olaf now dressed himself in this way,
that he had on the scarlet clothes King Harald had given him, and a
golden helmet on his head, and the gold-adorned sword in his hand that
King Myrkjartan had given him. Then Hoskuld and Olaf went to Egil's
booth. Hoskuld went first, and Olaf followed close on his heels. Egil
greeted him well, and Hoskuld sat down by him, but Olaf stood up and
looked about him. He saw a woman sitting on the dais in the booth, she
was goodly and had the looks of one of high degree, and very well
dressed. He thought to himself this must be Thorgerd, Egil's daughter.
Olaf went up to the dais and sat down by her. Thorgerd greeted the man,
and asked who he was. Olaf told his own and his father's name, and "You
must think it very bold that the son of a slave should dare to sit down
by you and presume to talk to you!"

She said, "You cannot but mean that you must be thinking you have done
deeds of greater daring than that of talking to women."

Then they began to talk together, and they talked all day. But nobody
heard their conversation. And before they parted Egil and Hoskuld were
called to them; and the matter of Olaf's wooing was now talked over
again, and Thorgerd came round to her father's wish. Now the affair was
all easily settled and the betrothal took place. The honour was conceded
to the Salmon-river-Dale men that the bride should be brought home to
them, for by law the bridegroom should have gone to the bride's home to
be married. The wedding was to take place at Hoskuldstead when seven
weeks summer had passed. After that Egil and Hoskuld separated. The
father and son rode home to Hoskuldstead, and all was quiet the rest of
the summer. After that things were got ready for the wedding at
Hoskuldstead, and nothing was spared, for means were plentiful. The
guests came at the time settled and the Burgfirthmen mustered in a great
company. Egil was there, and Thorstein, his son. The bride was in the
journey too, and with her a chosen company out of all the countryside.
Hoskuld had also a great company awaiting them. The feast was a brave
one, and the guests were seen off with good gifts on leaving. Olaf gave
to Egil the sword, Myrkjartan's gift, and Egil's brow brightened greatly
at the gift. Nothing in the way of tidings befell, and every one went
home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIV: The Building of Herdholt, A.D. 962](lax24)
