[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax28)  [Next](lax30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXIX: Olaf's Second Journey to Norway, A.D. 975

It is told how one spring Olaf broke the news to Thorgerd that he wished
to go out voyaging -- "And I wish you to look after our household and
children."

Thorgerd said she did not much care about doing that; but Olaf said he
would have his way. He bought a ship that stood up in the West, at
Vadill. Olaf started during the summer, and brought his ship to
Hordaland. There, a short way inland, lived a man whose name was
Giermund Roar, a mighty man and wealthy, and a great Viking; he was an
evil man to deal with, but had now settled down in quiet at home, and
was of the bodyguard of Earl Hakon. The mighty Giermund went down to his
ship and soon recognised Olaf, for he had heard him spoken of before.
Giermund bade Olaf come and stay with him, with as many of his men as he
liked to bring. Olaf accepted his invitation, and went there with seven
men. The crew of Olaf went into lodgings about Hordaland. Giermund
entertained Olaf well. His house was a lofty one, and there were many
men there, and plenty of amusement all the winter. And towards the end
of the winter Olaf told Giermund the reason of his voyage, which was
that he wished to get for himself some house-timber, and said he set
great store by obtaining timber of a choice kind. Giermund said, "Earl
Hakon has the best of woods, and I know quite well if you went to see
him you would be made welcome to them, for the Earl receives well, men
who are not half so well-bred as you, Olaf, when they go to see him."

In the spring Olaf got ready to go and find Hakon Earl; and the Earl
gave him exceeding good welcome, and bade Olaf stay with him as long as
he liked. Olaf told the Earl the reason of his journey, "And I beg this
of you, sir, that you give us permission to cut wood for house-building
from your forests."

The Earl answered, "You are welcome to load your ship with timber, and I
will give it you. For I think it no everyday occurrence when such men as
you come from Iceland to visit me."

At parting the Earl gave him a gold-inlaid axe, and the best of
keepsakes it was; and therewith they parted in the greatest friendship.
Giermund in the meantime set stewards over his estates secretly, and
made up his mind to go to Iceland in the summer in Olaf's ship. He kept
this secret from every one. Olaf knew nothing about it till Giermund
brought his money to Olaf's ship, and very great wealth it was. Olaf
said, "You should not have gone in my ship if I had known of this
beforehand, for I think there are those in Iceland for whom it would be
better never to have seen you. But since you have come with so much
goods, I cannot drive you out like a straying cur."

Giermund said, "I shall not return for all your high words, for I mean
to be your passenger."

Olaf and his got on board, and put out to sea. They had a good voyage
and made Broadfirth, and they put out their gangways and landed at
Salmon-river-Mouth. Olaf had the wood taken out of his ship, and the
ship put up in the shed his father had made. Olaf then asked Giermund to
come and stay with him. That summer Olaf had a fire-hall built at
Herdholt, a greater and better than had ever been seen before. Noble
legends were painted on its wainscoting and in the roof, and this was so
well done that the hall was thought even more beautiful when the
hangings were not up. Giermund did not meddle with everyday matters, but
was uncouth to most people. He was usually dressed in this way -- he
wore a scarlet kirtle below and a grey cloak outside, and a bearskin cap
on his head, and a sword in his hand. This was a great weapon and good,
with a hilt of walrus tooth, with no silver on it; the brand was sharp,
and no rust would stay thereon. This sword he called Footbiter, and he
never let it out of his hands. Giermund had not been there long before
he fell in love with Thurid, Olaf's daughter, and proposed to Olaf for
her hand; but he gave him a straight refusal. Then Giermund gave some
money to Thorgerd with a view to gaining the match. She took the money,
for it was offered unstintedly. Then Thorgerd broached the matter to
Olaf, and said she thought their daughter could not be better married,
"for he is a very brave man, wealthy and high-mettled."

Then Olaf answered, "I will not go against you in this any more than in
other things, though I would sooner marry Thurid to some one else."

Thorgerd went away and thought her business had sped well, and now told
Giermund the upshot of it. He thanked her for her help and her
determination, and Giermund broached the wooing a second time to Olaf,
and now won the day easily. After that Giermund and Thurid were
betrothed, and the wedding was to be held at the end of the winter at
Herdholt. The wedding feast was a very crowded one, for the new hall was
finished. Ulf Uggason was of the bidden guests, and he had made a poem
on Olaf Hoskuldson and of the legends that were painted round the hall,
and he gave it forth at the feast. This poem is called the "House Song",
and is well made. Olaf rewarded him well for the poem. Olaf gave great
gifts to all the chief men who came. Olaf was considered to have gained
in renown by this feast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: About Giermund and Thurid, A.D. 978](lax30)
