[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax38)  [Next](lax40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIX: Of Kjartan's Friendship for Bolli

At that time, as concerning the strife between Hrut and Thorleik, it was
ever the greatest gossip throughout the Broadfirth-Dales how that Hrut
had had to abide a heavy lot at the hands of Kotkell and his sons. Then
Osvif spoke to Gudrun and her brothers, and bade them call to mind
whether they thought now it would have been the best counsel aforetime
then and there to have plunged into the danger of dealing with such
"hellmen" (terrible people) as Kotkell and his were. Then said Gudrun,
"He is not counsel-bereft, father, who has the help of thy counsel."

Olaf now abode at his manor in much honour, and all his sons are at home
there, as was Bolli, their kinsman and foster-brother. Kjartan was
foremost of all the sons of Olaf. Kjartan and Bolli loved each other the
most, and Kjartan went nowhere that Bolli did not follow. Often Kjartan
would go to the Saelingdale- spring, and mostly it happened that Gudrun
was at the spring too. Kjartan liked talking to Gudrun, for she was both
a woman of wits and clever of speech. It was the talk of all folk that
of all men who were growing up at the time Kjartan was the most even
match for Gudrun. Between Olaf and Osvif there was also great
friendship, and often they would invite one another, and not the less
frequently so when fondness was growing up between the young folk. One
day when Olaf was talking to Kjartan, he said: "I do not know why it is
that I always take it to heart when you go to Laugar and talk to Gudrun.
It is not because I do not consider Gudrun the foremost of all other
women, for she is the one among womenkind whom I look upon as a
thoroughly suitable match for you. But it is my foreboding, though I
will not prophesy it, that we, my kinsmen and I, and the men of Laugar
will not bring altogether good luck to bear on our dealings together."

Kjartan said he would do nothing against his father's will where he
could help himself, but he hoped things would turn out better than he
made a guess to. Kjartan holds to his usual ways as to his visits (to
Laugar), and Bolli always went with him, and so the next seasons passed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL: Kjartan and Bolli Voyage to Norway, A.D. 999](lax40)
