[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax33)  [Next](lax35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXXIV: Gudrun's First Marriage, A.D. 989

Thorvald was the name of a man, son of Halldor Garpsdale's Priest. He
lived at Garpsdale in Gilsfirth, a wealthy man, but not much of a hero.
At the Thing he wooed Gudrun, Osvif's daughter, when she was fifteen
years old. The matter was not taken up in a very adverse manner, yet
Osvif said that against the match it would tell, that he and Gudrun were
not of equal standing. Thorvald spoke gently, and said he was wooing a
wife, not money. After that Gudrun was betrothed to Thorvald, and Osvif
settled alone the marriage contract, whereby it was provided that Gudrun
should alone manage their money affairs straightway when they came into
one bed, and be entitled to one- half thereof as her own, whether their
married life were long or short. He should also buy her jewels, so that
no woman of equal wealth should have better to show. Yet he should
retain his farm-stock unimpaired by such purchases. And now men ride
home from the Thing. Gudrun was not asked about it, and took it much to
heart; yet things went on quietly. The wedding was at Garpsdale, in
Twinmonth (latter part of August to the latter part of September).
Gudrun loved Thorvald but little, and was extravagant in buying finery.
There was no jewel so costly in all the Westfirths that Gudrun did not
deem it fitting that it should be hers, and rewarded Thorvald with anger
if he did not buy it for her, however dear it might be. Thord, Ingun's
son, made himself very friendly with Thorvald and Gudrun, and stayed
with them for long times together, and there was much talk of the love
of Thord and Gudrun for each other. Once upon a time Gudrun bade
Thorvald buy a gift for her, and Thorvald said she showed no moderation
in her demands, and gave her a box on the ear.

Then said Gudrun, "Now you have given me that which we women set great
store by having to perfection -- a fine colour in the cheeks -- and
thereby have also taught me how to leave off importuning you."

That same evening Thord came there. Gudrun told him about the shameful
mishandling, and asked him how she should repay it. Thord smiled, and
said: "I know a very good counsel for this: make him a shirt with such a
large neck-hole that you may have a good excuse for separating from him,
because he has a low neck like a woman."

Gudrun said nothing against this, and they dropped their talk. That same
spring Gudrun separated herself from Thorvald, and she went home to
Laugar. After that the money was divided between Gudrun and Thorvald,
and she had half of all the wealth, which now was even greater than
before (her marriage). They had lived two winters together. That same
spring Ingun sold her land in Crookfirth, the estate which was
afterwards called Ingunstead, and went west to Skalmness. Glum Geirison
had formerly had her for wife, as has been before written. At that time
Hallstein the Priest lived at Hallsteinness, on the west side of
Codfirth. He was a mighty man, but middling well off as regards friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV: Gudrun's Second Marriage, A.D. 991](lax35)
