[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax29)  [Next](lax31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XXX: About Giermund and Thurid, A.D. 978

Giermund and Thurid did not get on very well together, and little love
was lost between them on either side. When Giermund had stayed with Olaf
three winters he wished to go away, and gave out that Thurid and his
daughter Groa should remain behind. This little maid was by then a year
old, and Giermund would not leave behind any money for them. This the
mother and daughter liked very ill, and told Olaf so. Olaf said, "What
is the matter now, Thorgerd? Is the Eastman now not so bounteous as he
was that autumn when he asked for the alliance?"

They could get Olaf to do nothing, for he was an easygoing man, and said
the girl should remain until she wished to go, or knew how in some way
to shift for herself. At parting Olaf gave Giermund the merchant ship
all fitted out. Giermund thanked him well therefor, and said it was a
noble gift. Then he got on board his ship, and sailed out of the
Salmon-river-Mouth by a northeast breeze, which dropped as they came out
to the islands. He now lies by Oxe-isle half a month without a fair wind
rising for a start. At that time Olaf had to leave home to look after
his foreshore drifts. Then Thurid, his daughter, called to his
house-carles, and bade them come with her. She had the maid Groa with
her, and they were a party of ten together. She lets run out into the
water a ferryboat that belonged to Olaf, and Thurid bade them sail and
row along Hvammfirth, and when they came out to the islands she bade
them put out the cock-boat that was in the ferry. Thurid got into the
boat with two men, and bade the others take care of the ship she left
behind until she returned. She took the little maid in her arms, and
bade the men row across the current until they should reach the ship (of
Giermund). She took a gimlet out of the boat's locker, and gave it to
one of her companions, and bade him go to the cockle-boat belonging to
the merchant ship and bore a hole in it so as to disable it if they
needed it in a hurry. Then she had her self put ashore with the little
maid still in her arms. This was at the hour of sunrise. She went across
the gangway into the ship, where all men were asleep. She went to the
hammock where Giermund slept. His sword Footbiter hung on a peg pole.
Thurid now sets the little maid in the hammock, and snatched off
Footbiter and took it with her. Then she left the ship and rejoined her
companions. Now the little maid began to cry, and with that Giermund
woke up and recognised the child, and thought he knew who must be at the
bottom of this. He springs up wanting to seize his sword, and misses it,
as was to be expected, and then went to the gunwale, and saw that they
were rowing away from the ship. Giermund called to his men, and bade
them leap into the cockle-boat and row after them. They did so, but when
they got a little way they found how the coal-blue sea poured into them,
so they went back to the ship. Then Giermund called Thurid and bade her
come back and give him his sword Footbiter, "and take your little maid,
and with her as much money as you like."

Thurid answered, "Would you rather than not have the sword back?"

Giermund answered, "I would give a great deal of money before I should
care to let my sword go."

Thurid answered, "Then you shall never have it again, for you have in
many ways behaved cowardly towards me, and here we shall part for good."

Then Giermund said, "Little luck will you get with the sword."

Thurid said she would take the risk of that.

"Then I lay thereon this spell," said Giermund, "that this sword shall
do to death the man in your family in whom will be the greatest loss,
and who will least deserve it."

After that Thurid went home to Herdholt. Olaf had then come home, and
showed his displeasure at her deed, yet all was quiet. Thurid gave
Bolli, her cousin, the sword Footbiter, for she loved him in no way less
than her brothers. Bolli bore that sword for a long time after. After
this Giermund got a favourable wind, and sailed out to sea, and came to
Norway in the autumn. They sailed one night on to some hidden rocks
before Stade, and then Giermund and all his crew perished. And that is
the end of all there is to tell about Giermund.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI: Thurid's Second Marriage, A.D. 982](lax31)
