[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax42)  [Next](lax44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XLIII: Kjartan comes back to Iceland, A.D.1001

A little after this Bolli talked to his uncle Olaf, and said, "It has
come to this, uncle, that I have it in mind to settle down and marry,
for I am now grown up to man's estate. In this matter I should like to
have the assistance of your words and your backing-up, for most of the
men hereabouts are such as will set much store by your words."

Olaf replied, "Such is the case with most women, I am minded to think,
that they would be fully well matched in you for a husband. And I take
it you have not broached this matter without first having made up your
mind as to where you mean to come down."

Bolli said, "I shall not go beyond this countryside to woo myself a wife
whilst there is such an goodly match so near at hand. My will is to woo
Gudrun, Osvif's daughter, for she is now the most renowned of women."

Olaf answered, "Ah, that is just a matter with which I will have nothing
to do. To you it is in no way less well known, Bolli, than to me, what
talk there was of the love between Kjartan and Gudrun; but if you have
set your heart very much on this, I will put no hindrance in the way if
you and Osvif settle the matter between you. But have you said anything
to Gudrun about it?"

Bolli said that he had once hinted at it, but that she had not given
much heed to it, "but I think, however, that Osvif will have most to say
in the matter."

Olaf said Bolli could go about the business as it pleased himself. Not
very long after Bolli rode from home with Olaf's sons, Halldor and
Steinthor; there were twelve of them together. They rode to Laugar, and
Osvif and his song gave them a good welcome. Bolli said he wished to
speak to Osvif, and he set forth his wooing, and asked for the hand of
Gudrun, his daughter. Osvif answered in this wise, "As you know, Bolli,
Gudrun is a widow, and has herself to answer for her, but, as for
myself, I shall urge this on."

Osvif now went to see Gudrun, and told her that Bolli Thorleikson had
come there, "and has asked you in marriage; it is for you now to give
the answer to this matter. And herein I may speedily make known my own
will, which is, that Bolli will not be turned away if my counsel shall
avail."

Gudrun answered, "You make a swift work of looking into this matter;
Bolli himself once bespoke it before me, and I rather warded it off, and
the same is still upper-most in my mind."

Osvif said, "Many a man will tell you that this is spoken more in
overweening pride than in wise forethought if you refuse such a man as
is Bolli. But as long as I am alive, I shall look out for you, my
children, in all affairs which I know better how to see through things
than you do."

And as Osvif took such a strong view of the matter, Gudrun, as far as
she was concerned, would not give an utter refusal, yet was most
unwilling on all points. The sons of Osvif's urged the matter on
eagerly, seeing what great avail an alliance with Bolli would be to
them; so the long and short of the matter was that the betrothal took
place then and there, and the wedding was to be held at the time of the
winter nights. (1) Thereupon Bolli rode home and told this settlement to
Olaf, who did not hide his displeasure thereat. Bolli stayed on at home
till he was to go to the wedding. He asked his uncle to it, but Olaf
accepted it nowise quickly, though, at last, he yielded to the prayers
of Bolli. It was a noble feast this at Laugar. Bolli stayed there the
winter after. There was not much love between Gudrun and Bolli so far as
she was concerned. When the summer came, and ships began to go and come
between Iceland and Norway, the tidings spread to Norway that Iceland
was all Christian. King Olaf was very glad at that, and gave leave to go
to Iceland unto all those men whom he had kept as hostages, and to fare
whenever they liked. Kjartan answered, for he took the lead of all those
who had been hostages, "Have great thanks, Lord King, and this will be
the choice we take, to go and see Iceland this summer."

Then King Olaf said, "I must not take back my word, Kjartan, yet my
order pointed rather to other men than to yourself, for in my view you,
Kjartan, have been more of a friend than a hostage through your stay
here. My wish would be, that you should not set your heart on going to
Iceland though you have noble relations there; for, I take it, you could
choose for yourself such a station in life in Norway, the like of which
would not be found in Iceland."

Then Kjartan answered, "May our Lord reward you, sire, for all the
honours you have bestowed on me since I came into your power, but I am
still in hopes that you will give leave to me, no less than to the
others you have kept back for a while."

The king said so it should be, but avowed that it would be hard for him
to get in his place any untitled man such as Kjartan was. That winter
Kalf Asgeirson had been in Norway and had brought, the autumn before,
west-away from England, the ship and merchandise he and Kjartan had
owned. And when Kjartan had got leave for his journey to Iceland Kalf
and he set themselves to get the ship ready. And when the ship was all
ready Kjartan went to see Ingibjorg, the king's sister. She gave him a
cheery welcome, and made room for him to sit beside her, and they fell
a-talking together, and Kjartan tells Ingibjorg that he has arranged his
journey to Iceland.

Then Ingibjorg said, "I am minded to think, Kjartan, that you have done
this of your own wilfulness rather than because you have been urged by
men to go away from Norway and to Iceland."

But thenceforth words between them were drowned in silence. Amidst this
Ingibjorg turns to a "mead-cask" that stood near her, and takes out of
it a white coif in-woven with gold and gives it to Kjartan, saying, that
it was far too good for Gudrun Osvif's daughter to fold it round her
head, yet "you will give her the coif as a bridal gift, for I wish the
wives of the Icelanders to see as much as that she with whom you have
had your talks in Norway comes of no thrall's blood." It was in a pocket
of costly stuff, and was altogether a most precious thing. "Now l shall
not go to see you off," said Ingibjorg. "Fare you well, and hail!"

After that Kjartan stood up and embraced Ingibjorg, and people told it
as a true story that they took it sorely to heart being parted. And now
Kjartan went away and unto the king, and told the king he now was ready
for his journey. Then the king led Kjartan to his ship and many men with
him, and when they came to where the ship was floating with one of its
gangways to land, the king said, "Here is a sword, Kjartan, that you
shall take from me at our parting; let this weapon be always with you,
for my mind tells me you will never be a 'weapon-bitten' man if you bear
this sword."

It was a most noble keepsake, and much ornamented. Kjartan thanked the
king with fair words for all the honour and advancement he had bestowed
on him while he had been in Norway. Then the king spoke, "This I will
bid you, Kjartan, that you keep your faith well."

After that they parted, the king and Kjartan in dear friendship, and
Kjartan stepped on board his ship. The king looked after him and said,
"Great is the worth of Kjartan and his kindred, but to cope with their
fate is not an easy matter."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV: Kjartan comes home, A.D. 1001](lax44)
