[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax50)  [Next](lax52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LI: Osvif's Sons are Banished

Kjartan's body lay in state for a week in Herdholt. Thorstein Egilson
had had a church built at Burg. He took the body of Kjartan home with
him, and Kjartan was buried at Burg. The church was newly consecrated,
and as yet hung in white. Now time wore on towards the Thorness Thing,
and the award was given against Osvif's sons, who were all banished the
country. Money was given to pay the cost of their going into exile, but
they were forbidden to come back to Iceland so long as any of Olaf's
sons, or Asgeir, Kjartan's son, should be alive. For Gudlaug, the son of
Osvif's sister, no weregild (atonement) should be paid, because of his
having set out against, and laid ambush for, Kjartan, neither should
Thorolf have any compensation for the wounds he had got. Olaf would not
let Bolli be prosecuted, and bade him ransom himself with a fine. This
Halldor and Steinthor, and all the sons of Olaf, liked mightily ill, and
said it would go hard with Bolli if he was allowed to stay in the same
countryside as themselves. Olaf said that would work well enough as long
as he was on his legs.

There was a ship in Bjornhaven which belonged to Audun Cable- hound. He
was at the Thing, and said, "As matters stand, the guilt of these men
will be no less in Norway, so long as any of Kjartan's friends are
alive."

Then Osvif said, "You, Cable-hound, will be no soothsayer said, in this
matter, for my sons will be highly accounted of among men of high
degree, whilst you, Cable-hound, will pass, this summer, into the power
of trolls."

Audun Cable-hound went out a voyage that summer and the ship was wrecked
amongst the Faroe Isles and every man's child on board perished, and
Osvif's prophecy was thought to have come thoroughly home. The sons of
Osvif went abroad that summer, and none ever came back again. In such a
manner the blood-suit came to an end that Olaf was held to have shown
himself all the greater a man, because where it was due, in the case of
the sons of Osvif, to wit, he drove matters home to the very bone, but
spared Bolli for the sake of their kinship. Olaf thanked men well for
the help they had afforded him. By Olaf's counsel Bolli bought the land
at Tongue. It is told that Olaf lived three winters after Kjartan was
slain. After he was dead his sons shared the inheritance he left behind.
Halldor took over the manor of Herdholt. Thorgerd, their mother, lived
with Halldor; she was most hatefully-minded towards Bolli, and thought
the reward he paid for his fostering a bitter one.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LII: The Killing of Thorkell of Goat-Peaks](lax52)
