[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax49)  [Next](lax51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter L: The End of Hrefna. The Peace Settled, A.D. 1003

Olaf went to meet Kjartan's body. He sent men south to Burg to tell
Thorstein Egilson these tidings, and also that he would have his help
for the blood-suit; and if any great men should band themselves together
against him with the sons of Osvif, he said he wanted to have the whole
matter in his own hands. The same message he sent north to Willowdale,
to Gudmund, his son-in-law, and to the sons of Asgeir; with the further
information that he had charged as guilty of the slaying of Kjartan all
the men who had taken part in the ambush, except Ospak, son of Osvif,
for he was already under outlawry because of a woman who was called
Aldis, the daughter of Holmganga-Ljot of Ingjaldsand. Their son was Ulf,
who later became a marshal to King Harold Sigurdsson, and had for wife
Jorunn, the daughter of Thorberg. Their son was Jon, father of Erlend
the Laggard, the father of Archbishop Eystein. Olaf had proclaimed that
the blood-suit should be taken into court at Thorness Thing. He had
Kjartan's body brought home, and a tent was rigged over it, for there
was as yet no church built in the Dales. But when Olaf heard that
Thorstein had bestirred him swiftly and raised up a band of great many
men, and that the Willowdale men had done likewise, he had men gathered
together throughout all the Dales, and a great multitude they were. The
whole of this band Olaf sent to Laugar, with this order: "It is my will
that you guard Bolli if he stand in need thereof, and do it no less
faithfully than if you were following me; for my mind misgives me that
the men from beyond this countryside, whom, coming soon, we shall be
having on our hands, will deem that they have somewhat of a loss to make
up with Bolli."

And when he had put the matter in order in this manner, Thorstein, with
his following, and also the Willowdale men, came on, all wild with rage.
Hall Gudmund's son and Kalf Asgeirson egged them on most to go and force
Bolli to let search be made for the sons of Osvif till they should be
found, for they could be gone nowhere out of the countryside. But
because Olaf set himself so much against their making a raid on Laugar,
messages of peace were borne between the two parties, and Bolli was most
willing, and bade Olaf settle all terms on his behalf, and Osvif said it
was not in his power to speak against this, for no help had come to him
from Snorri the Priest. A peace meeting, therefore, took place at
Lea-Shaws, and the whole case was laid freely in Olaf's hand. For the
slaughter of Kjartan there were to come such fines and penalties as Olaf
liked. Then the peace meeting came to an end. Bolli, by the counsel of
Olaf, did not go to this meeting. The award should be made known at
Thorness Thing. Now the Meremen and Willowdale men rode to Herdholt.
Thorstein Kuggison begged for Asgeir, son of Kjartan, to foster, as a
comfort to Hrefna. Hrefna went north with her brothers, and was much
weighed down with grief, nevertheless she bore her sorrow with dignity,
and was easy of speech with every man. Hrefna took no other husband
after Kjartan. She lived but a little while after coming to the north;
and the tale goes that she died of a broken heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LI: Osvif's Sons are Banished](lax51)
