[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax54)  [Next](lax56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LV: The Death of Bolli

After that they rode away from home out of Herdholt, the nine of them
together, Thorgerd making the tenth. They rode up along the foreshore
and so to Lea-shaws during the early part of the night. They did not
stop before they got to Saelingsdale in the early morning tide. There
was a thick wood in the valley at that time. Bolli was there in the
out-dairy, as Halldor had heard. The dairy stood near the river at the
place now called Bolli's-tofts. Above the dairy there is a large hill
rise stretching all the way down to Stackgill. Between the mountain
slope above and the hill-rise there is a wide meadow called Barm; it was
there Bolli's house-carles were working. Halldor and his companions rode
across Ran-meads unto Oxgrove, and thence above Hammer- Meadow, which
was right against the dairy. They knew there were many men at the dairy,
so they got off their horses with a view to biding the time when the men
should leave the dairy for their work. Bolli's shepherd went early that
morning after the flocks up into the mountain side, and from there he
saw the men in the wood as well as the horses tied up, and misdoubted
that those who went on the sly in this manner would be no men of peace.
So forthwith he makes for the dairy by the straightest cut in order to
tell Bolli that men were come there. Halldor was a man of keen sight. He
saw how that a man was running down the mountain side and making for the
dairy. He said to his companions that "That must surely be Bolli's
shepherd, and he must have seen our coming; so we must go and meet him,
and let him take no news to the dairy."

They did as he bade them. An Brushwood-belly went the fastest of them
and overtook the man, picked him up, and flung him down. Such was that
fall that the lad's backbone was broken. After that they rode to the
dairy. Now the dairy was divided into two parts, the sleeping-room and
the byre. Bolli had been early afoot in the morning ordering the men to
their work, and had lain down again to sleep when the house-carles went
away. In the dairy therefore there were left the two, Gudrun and Bolli.
They awoke with the din when they got off their horses, and they also
heard them talking as to who should first go on to the dairy to set on
Bolli. Bolli knew the voice of Halldor, as well as that of sundry more
of his followers. Bolli spoke to Gudrun, and bade her leave the dairy
and go away, and said that their meeting would not be such as would
afford her much pastime. Gudrun said she thought such things alone would
befall there worthy of tidings as she might be allowed to look upon, and
held that she would be of no hurt to Bolli by taking her stand near to
him. Bolli said that in this matter he would have his way, and so it was
that Gudrun went out of the dairy; she went down over the brink to a
brook that ran there, and began to wash some linen. Bolli was now alone
in the dairy; he took his weapon, set his helm on his head, held a
shield before him, and had his sword, Footbiter, in his hand: he had no
mail coat. Halldor and his followers were talking to each other outside
as to how they should set to work, for no one was very eager to go into
the dairy.

Then said An Brushwood-belly, "There are men here in this train nearer
in kinship to Kjartan than I am, but not one there will be in whose mind
abides more steadfastly than in mine the event when Kjartan lost his
life. When I was being brought more dead than alive home to Tongue, and
Kjartan lay slain, my one thought was that I would gladly do Bolli some
harm whenever I should get the chance. So I shall be the first to go
into the dairy."

Then Thorstein the Black answered, "Most valiantly is that spoken; but
it would be wiser not to plunge headlong beyond heed, so let us go
warily now, for Bolli will not be standing quiet when he is beset; and
however underhanded he may be where he is, you may make up your mind for
a brisk defence on his part, strong and skilled at arms as he is. He
also has a sword that for a weapon is a trusty one."

Then An went into the dairy hard and swift, and held his shield over his
head, turning forward the narrower part of it. Bolli dealt him a blow
with Footbiter, and cut off the tail-end of the shield, and clove An
through the head down to the shoulder, and forthwith he gat his death.
Then Lambi went in; he held his shield before him, and a drawn sword in
his hand. In the nick of time Bolli pulled Footbiter out of the wound,
whereat his shield veered aside so as to lay him open to attack. So
Lambi made a thrust at him in the thigh, and a great wound that was.
Bolli hewed in return, and struck Lambi's shoulder, and the sword flew
down along the side of him, and he was rendered forthwith unfit to
fight, and never after that time for the rest of his life was his arm
any more use to him. At this brunt Helgi, the son of Hardbein, rushed in
with a spear, the head of which was an ell long, and the shaft bound
with iron. When Bolli saw that he cast away his sword, and took his
shield in both hands, and went towards the dairy door to meet Helgi.
Helgi thrust at Bolli with the spear right through the shield and
through him. Now Bolli leaned up against the dairy wall, and the men
rushed into the dairy, Halldor and his brothers, to wit, and Thorgerd
went into the dairy as well.

Then spoke Bolli, "Now it is safe, brothers, to come nearer than
hitherto you have done," and said he weened that defence now would be
but short.

Thorgerd answered his speech, and said there was no need to shrink from
dealing unflinchingly with Bolli, and bade them "walk between head and
trunk". Bolli stood still against the dairy wall, and held tight to him
his kirtle lest his inside should come out. Then Steinthor Olafson leapt
at Bolli, and hewed at his neck with a large axe just above his
shoulders, and forthwith his head flew off. Thorgerd bade him "hale
enjoy hands", and said that Gudrun would have now a while a red hair to
trim for Bolli. After that they went out of the dairy. Gudrun now came
up from the brook, and spoke to Halldor, and asked for tidings of what
had befallen in their dealings with Bolli. They told her all that bad
happened. Gudrun was dressed in a kirtle of "nam"- stuff (1) and a
tight-fitting woven bodice, a high bent coif on her head, and she had
tied a scarf round her with dark-blue stripes, and fringed at the ends.
Helgi Hardbienson went up to Gudrun, and caught hold of the scarf end,
and wiped the blood off the spear with it, the same spear with which he
had thrust Bolli through. Gudrun glanced at him and smiled slightly.

Then Halldor said, "That was blackguardly and gruesomely done."

Helgi bade him not be angry about it, "For I am minded to think that
under this scarf end is the undoer of my life."

Then they took their horses and rode away. Gudrun went along with them
talking with them for a while, and then she turned back.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVI: Bolli Bollison is born, A.D. 1006-7](lax56)
