[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax63)  [Next](lax65) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXIV: The Death of Helgi, A.D. 1019

Thorgils and his followers, as soon as they were on horseback, set off
at a hard ride, and rode now out of the wood. They saw four men riding
away from the dairy, and they rode very fast too. Seeing this, some of
Thorgils' companions said they had better ride after them at their
swiftest.

Then said Thorleik Bollison, "We will just go to the dairy and see what
men are there, for I think it less likely that these be Helgi and his
followers. It seems to me that those are only women."

A good many of them gainsaid this. Thorgils said that Thorleik should
rule in the matter, for he knew that he was a very farsighted man. They
now turned to the dairy. Hrapp rode first, shaking the spear-stick he
carried in his hand, and thrusting it forward in front of himself, and
saying now was high time to try one's self. Helgi and his followers were
not aware of anything till Thorgils and his company had surrounded the
dairy. Helgi and his men shut the door, and seized their weapons. Hrapp
leapt forthwith upon the roof of the dairy, and asked if old Reynard was
in.

Helgi answered, "You will come to take for granted that he who is here
within is somewhat hurtful, and will know how to bite near the warren."

And forthwith Helgi thrust his spear out through the window and through
Hrapp, so that he fell dead to earth from the spear. Thorgils bade the
others go heedfully and beware of mishaps, "for we have plenty of means
wherewith to get the dairy into our power, and to overcome Helgi, placed
as he is now, for I am given to think that here but few men are gathered
together."

The dairy was rigged over one roof beam, resting on two gables so that
the ends the beam stuck out beyond each gable; there was a single turf
thatch on the house, which had not yet grown together. Then Thorgils
told some of his men to go to the beam ends, and pull them so hard that
either the beam should break or else the rafters should slip in off it,
but others were to guard the door lest those within should try and get
out. Five they were, Helgi and his within the dairy -- Hardbein, his
son, to wit, he was twelve years old -- his shepherd and two other men,
who had come to him that summer, being outlaws -- one called Thorgils,
and the other Eyjolf. Thorstein the Black and Svein, . son of Alf o'
Dales, stood before the door. The rest of the company were tearing the
roof off the dairy. Hunbogi the Strong and the sons of Armod took one
end of the beam, Thorgils, Lambi, and Gudrun's sons the other end. They
now pull hard at the beam till it broke asunder in the middle; just at
this Hardbein thrust a halberd out through where the door was broken,
and the thrust struck the steel cap of Thorstein the Black and stuck in
his forehead, and that was a very great wound. Then Thorstein said, as
was true, that there were men before them. Next Helgi leapt so boldly
out of the door so that those nearest shrunk aback. Thorgils was
standing near, and struck after him with a sword, and caught him on the
shoulder and made a great wound. Helgi turned to meet him, and had a
wood-axe in his hand, and said, "Still the old one will dare to look at
and face weapons," and therewith he flung the axe at Thorgils, and the
axe struck his foot, and a great wond that was. And when Bolli saw this
he leapt forward at Helgi with Footbiter in his hand, and thrust Helgi
through with it, and that was his deathblow. Helgi's followers leapt out
of the dairy forthwith, and Hardbein with them. Thorleik Bollison turned
against Eyjolf, who was a strong man. Thorleik struck him with his
sword, and it caught him on the leg above the knee and cut off his leg,
and he fell to earth dead. Hunbogi the Strong went to meet Thorgils, and
dealt a blow at him with an axe, and it struck the back of him, and cut
him asunder in the middle. Thord Cat was standing near where Hardbein
leapt out, and was going to set upon him straightway, but Bolli rushed
forward when he saw it, and bade no harm be done to Hardbein. "No man
shall do a dastard's work here, and Hardbein shall have life and limbs
spared."

Helgi had another son named Skorri. He was brought up at England in
Reekdale the southernmost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXV: Of Gudrun's Deceit](lax65)
