[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax76)  [Next](lax78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXXVII: Return of Bolli, A.D. 1030

When four winters were passed from the drowning of Thorkell Eyjolfson a
ship came into Islefirth belonging to Bolli Bollison, most of the crew
of which were Norwegians. Bolli brought out with him much wealth, and
many precious things that lords abroad had given him. Bolli was so great
a man for show when he came back from this journey that,:he would wear
no clothe but of scarlet and fur, and all his weapons were bedight with
gold: he was called Bolli the Grand. He made it known to his
ship-masters that he was going west to his own country-sides, and he
left his ship and goods in the hands of his crew. Bolli rode from the
ship with twelve men, and all his followers were dressed in scarlet, and
rode on gilt saddles, and all were they a trusty band, though Bolli was
peerless among them. He had on the clothes of fur which the Garth-king
had given him, he had over all a scarlet cape; and he had Footbiter girt
on him, the hilt of which was dight with gold, and the grip woven with
gold, he had a gilded helmet on his head, and a red shield on his flank,
with a knight painted on it in gold. He had a dagger in his hand, as is
the custom in foreign lands; and whenever they took quarters the women
paid heed to nothing but gazing at Bolli and his grandeur, and that of
his followers. In this state Bolli rode into the western parts all the
way till he came to Holyfell with his following. Gudrun was very glad to
see her son. Bolli did not stay there long till he rode up to
Saelingsdale Tongue to see Snorri, his father-in-law, and his wife
Thordis, and their meeting was exceeding joyful. Snorri asked Bolli to
stay with him with as many of his men as he liked. Bolli accepted the
invitation gratefully, and was with Snorri all the winter, with the men
who had ridden from the north with him. Bolli got great renown from this
journey. Snorri made it no less his business now to treat Bolli with
every kindness than when he was with him before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVIII: The Death of Snorri, and the End, A.D.
1030](lax78)
