[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Icelandic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](lax74)  [Next](lax76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1434613038/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Laxdaela Saga*, tr. by Muriel Press, \[1899\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter LXXV: Thorkell and Thorstein and Halldor Olafson, A.D. 1026

That winter after Yule Thorkell got ready to go from home north to
Ramfirth to bring his timber from the north. He rode first up into the
Dales and then to Lea-shaws to Thorstein, his kinsman, where he gathered
together men and horses. He afterwards went north to Ramfirth and stayed
there awhile, taken up with the business of his journey, and gathered to
him horses from about the firth, for he did not want to make more than
one journey of it, if that could be managed. But this did not speed
swiftly, and Thorkell was busy at this work even into Lent. At last he
got under way with the work, and had the wood dragged from the north by
more than twenty horses, and had the timber stacked on Lea-Eyr, meaning
later on to bring it in a boat out to Holyfell. Thorstein owned a large
ferry-boat, and this boat Thorkell was minded to use for his homeward
voyage. Thorkell stayed at Lea- shaws through Lent, for there was dear
friendship between these kinsmen.

Thorstein said one day to Thorkell, they had better go to Herdholt, "for
I want to make a bid for some land from Halldor, he having but little
money since he paid the brothers the weregild for their father, and the
land being just what I want most."

Thorkell bade him do as he liked; so they left home a party of twenty
men together. They come to Herdholt, and Halldor gave them good welcome,
and was most free of talk with them. There were few men at home, for
Halldor had sent his men north to Steingrims-firth, as a whale had come
ashore there in which he owned a share. Beiner the Strong was at home,
the only man now left alive of those who had been there with Olaf, the
father of Halldor.

Halldor had said to Beiner at once when he saw Thorstein and Thorkell
riding up, "I can easily see what the errand of these kinsmen is -- they
are going to make me a bid for my land, and if that is the case they
will call me aside for a talk; I guess they will seat themselves each on
either side of me; so, then, if they should give me any trouble you must
not be slower to set on Thorstein than I on Thorkell. You have long been
true to us kinsfolk. I have also sent to the nearest homesteads for men,
and at just the same moment I should like these two things to happen:
the coming in of the men summoned, and the breaking up of our talk."

Now as the day wore on, Thorstein hinted to Halldor that they should all
go aside and have some talk together, "for we have an errand with you."

Halldor said it suited him well. Thorstein told his followers they need
not come with them, but Beiner went with them none the less, for he
thought things came to pass very much after what Halldor had guessed
they would. They went very far out into the field. Halldor had on a
pinned-up cloak with a long pin brooch, as was the fashion then. Halldor
sat down on the field, but on either side of him each of these kinsmen,
so near that they sat well-nigh on his cloak; but Beiner stood over them
with a big axe in his hand. Then said Thorstein, "My errand here is that
I wish to buy land from you, and I bring it before you now because my
kinsman Thorkell is with me; I should think that this would suit us both
well, for I hear that you are short of money, while your land is costly
to husband. I will give you in return an estate that will beseem you,
and into the bargain as much as we shall agree upon."

In the beginning Halldor took the matter as if it were not so very far
from his mind, and they exchanged words concerning the terms of the
purchase; and when they felt that he was not so far from coming to
terms, Thorkell joined eagerly in the talk, and tried to bring the
bargain to a point. Then Halldor began to draw back rather, but they
pressed him all the more; yet at last it came to this, that he was the
further from the bargain the closer they pressed him.

Then said Thorkell, "Do you not see, kinsman Thorstein, how this is
going? Halldor has delayed the matter for us all day long, and we have
sat here listening to his fooling and wiles. Now if you want to buy the
land we must come to closer quarters."

Thorstein then said he must know what he had to look forward to, and
bade Halldor now come out of the shadow as to whether he was willing to
come to the bargain.

Halldor answered, "I do not think I need keep you in the dark as to this
point, that you will have to go home tonight without any bargain
struck."

Then said Thorstein, "Nor do I think it needful to delay making known to
you what we have in our mind to do; for we, deeming that we shall get
the better of you by reason of the odds on our side, have bethought us
of two choices for you: one choice is, that you do this matter willingly
and take in return our friendship; but the other, clearly a worse one,
is, that you now stretch out your hand against your own will and sell me
the land of Herdholt."

But when Thorstein spoke in this outrageous manner, Halldor leapt up so
suddenly that the brooch was torn from his cloak, and said, "Something
else will happen before I utter that which is not my will."

"What is that?" said Thorstein.

"A poleaxe will stand on your head from one of the worst of men, and
thus cast down your insolence and unfairness."

Thorkell answered, "That is an evil prophecy, and I hope it will not be
fulfilled; and now I think there is ample cause why you, Halldor, should
give up your land and have nothing for it."

Then Halldor answered, "Sooner you will be embracing the sea- tangle in
Broadfirth than I sell my land against my own will."

Halldor went home after that, and the men he had sent for came crowding
up to the place. Thorstein was of the wrothest, and wanted forthwith to
make an onset on Halldor. Thorkell bade him not to do so, "for that is
the greatest enormity at such a season as this; but when this season
wears off, I shall not stand in the way of his and ours clashing
together."

Halldor said he was given to think he would not fail in being ready for
them. After that they rode away and talked much together of this their
journey; and Thorstein, speaking thereof, said that, truth to tell,
their journey was most wretched. "But why, kinsman Thorkell, were you so
afraid of falling on Halldor and putting him to some shame?"

Thorkell answered, "Did you not see Beiner, who stood over you with the
axe reared aloft? Why, it was an utter folly, for forthwith on seeing me
likely to do anything, he would have driven that axe into your head."

They rode now home to Lea-shaws; and Lent wears and Passion Week sets
in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVI: The Drowning of Thorkell, A.D. 1026](lax76)
