[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pgr00)  [Next](pgr02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0691015147/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
The First Two Chapters of *Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion*,
by Jane Ellen Harrison, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

THE object of the following pages is to draw attention to some neglected
aspects of Greek religion.

Greek religion, as set forth in popular handbooks and even in more
ambitious treatises, is an affair mainly of mythology, and moreover of
mythology as seen through the medium of literature. In England, so far
as I am aware, no serious attempt has been made to examine Greek ritual.
Yet the facts of ritual are more easy definitely to ascertain, more
permanent, and at least equally significant. What a people does in
relation to its gods must always be one clue, and perhaps the safest, to
what it thinks. The first preliminary to any scientific understanding of
Greek religion is a minute examination of its ritual.

This habit of viewing Greek religion exclusively through the medium of
Greek literature has brought with it an initial and fundamental error in
method--an error which in England, where scholarship is mainly literary,
is likely to die hard. For literature Homer is the beginning, though
every scholar is aware that he is nowise primitive; for theology, or--if
we prefer so to call it--mythology, Homer presents, not a
starting-point, but a culmination, a complete achievement, an almost
mechanical accomplishment, with scarcely a hint of *origines*, an
accomplishment moreover, which is essentially literary rather than
religious, sceptical and moribund already in its very perfection. The
Olympians of Homer are no more primitive than his hexameters. Beneath
this splendid surface lies a stratum of religious conceptions, ideas of
evil, of purification, of atonement, ignored or suppressed by Homer, but
reappearing in later poets and notably in Aeschylus. It is this
substratum of religious conceptions, at once more primitive and more
permanent, that I am concerned

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

to investigate. Had ritual received its due share of attention, it had
not remained so long neglected.

I would guard against misapprehension. Literature as a starting-point
for investigation, and especially the poems of Homer, I am compelled to
disallow; yet literature is really my goal. I have tried to understand
primitive rites, not from love of their archaism, nor yet wholly from a
single-minded devotion to science, but with the definite hope that I
might come to a better understanding of some forms of Greek poetry.
Religious convention compelled the tragic poets to draw their plots from
traditional mythology, from stories whose religious content and motive
were already in Homer's days obsolete. A knowledge of, a certain
sympathy with, the milieu of this primitive material is one step to the
realization of its final form in tragedy. It is then in the temple of
literature, if but as a hewer of wood and drawer of water, that I still
hope to serve.

As the evidence to be set before the reader is necessarily somewhat
complex in detail, and the arguments of the successive chapters closely
interdependent, it may be well at the outset to state, as simply as may
be, the conclusions at which I have arrived, and to summarize briefly
the steps of the discussion.

 

In Chapter I. it is established that the Greeks themselves in classical
times recognized two forms of ritual, Olympian and Chthonic. It is
further seen that the characteristic ritual of Homeric days was of the
kind known to them as Olympian. Sacrifice in Homer takes the form of an
offering to the god to induce his favour. Its formulary is *do ut des*.
Moreover the sacrificial banquet to which the god is bidden is shared by
the worshipper. In sharp contradistinction to this cheerful sacrificial
feast, when we examine the supposed festival of Zeus at Athens, the
Diasia, we find rites of quite other significance; the sacrifice is a
holocaust, it is *devoted*, made over entirely to the god, unshared by
the worshipper, and its associations are gloomy. The rites of the
Diasia, though ostensibly in honour of Zeus, are found really to be
addressed to an underworld snake on whose worship that of Zeus has been
superimposed.

In the three chapters that follow, on the festivals of the

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Anthesteria,
Thargelia, and Thesmophoria, held respectively in the spring, summer,
and autumn, the Olympian ritual superimposed is taken as known and only
alluded to in passing. The attention is focussed on the rites of the
underlying stratum.

In the Anthesteria, ostensibly sacred to Dionysos, the main ritual is
found to be that of the placation of ghosts. Ghosts, it is found, were
placated in order that they might be kept away; the formulary for these
rites is not, as with the Olympians, *do ut des*, but *do ut abeas*. The
object of these rites of Aversion, practised in the spring, is found to
be strictly practical; it is the promotion of fertility by the purgation
of evil influences.

The ritual of the Thargelia is even snore primitive and plain-spoken. In
this festival of the early summer, ostensibly dedicated to Apollo, the
first-fruits of the harvest are gathered in. The main gist of the
festival is purification, necessary as a preliminary to this
ingathering. Purification is effected by the ceremonial of the
pharmakos. Though the festival in classical days was 'sacred to' Apollo,
the pharmakos is nowise a 'human sacrifice' to a god, but a direct means
of physical and moral purgation, with a view to the promotion and
conservation of fertility.

Thus far it will be seen that the rites of the lower stratum are
characterized by a deep and constant sense of evil to be removed and of
the need of purification for its removal; that the means of purification
adopted are primitive and mainly magical nowise affects this religious
content.

This practical end of primitive ceremonies, the promotion of fertility
by magical rites, comes out still more strongly in the autumn sowing
festival of the Thesmophoria. Here the women attempt, by carrying
certain magical *sacra*, the direct impulsion of nature. In connection
with these *sacra* of the Thesmophoria the subject of 'mysteries' falls
to be examined. The gist of all primitive mysteries is found to be the
handling or tasting of certain sacra after elaborate purification. The
sacra are conceived of as having magical, i.e. divine, properties.
Contact with them is contact with a superhuman potency, which is taboo
to the unpurified. The gist of a mystery is often the removal of a
taboo. From the Olympian religion 'mysteries' appear to have been wholly
absent.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

In Chapter V. we pass from ritual to theology, from an examination of
rites performed to the examination of the beings to whom these rites
were addressed. These beings, it is found, are of the order of sprites,
ghosts, and bogeys, rather than of completely articulate gods, their
study that of demonology rather than theology. As their ritual has been
shown to be mainly that of the Aversion of evil, so they and their
shifting attributes are mainly of malevolent character. Man makes his
demons in the image of his own savage and irrational passions. Aeschylus
attempts, and the normal man fails, to convert his Erinyes into Semnai
Theai.

In Chapter VI. the advance is noted from demonology to theology, from
the sprite and ghost to the human and humane god. The god begins to
reflect not only human passions but humane relations. The primitive
association of women with agriculture is seen to issue in the figures of
the Mother and the Maid, and later of the Mother and the Daughter, later
still in the numerous female trinities that arose out of this duality.
In Chapter VII. the passage from ghost to god is clearly seen, and the
humane relation between descendant and ancestor begets a kindliness
which mollifies and humanizes the old religion of Aversion. The
culminating point of the natural development of an anthropomorphic
theology is here reached, and it is seen that the goddesses and the
'hero-gods' of the old order are, in their simple, non-mystic humanity,
very near to the Olympians.

 

At this point comes the great significant moment for Greece, the
intrusion of a new and missionary faith, the religion of an immigrant
god, Dionysos.

In Chapter VIII. the Thracian origin of Dionysos is established. In his
religion two elements are seen to coexist, the worship of an old god of
vegetation on which was grafted the worship of a spirit of intoxication.
The new impulse that he brought to Greece was the belief in
*enthusiasm*, the belief that a man through physical intoxication at
first, later through spiritual ecstasy, could pass from the human to the
divine.

This faith might have remained in its primitive savagery, and therefore
for Greece ineffective, but for another religious impulse, that known to
us under the name of Orpheus. To the

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

discussion of Orphism the last four chapters IX.-XII. are devoted.

In Chapter IX. I have attempted to show that the name Orpheus stands for
a real personality. I have hazarded the conjecture that Orpheus came
from Crete bringing with him, perhaps ultimately from Egypt, a religion
of spiritual asceticism which yet included the ecstasy of the religion
of Dionysos. Chapter X. is devoted to the examination of the Orphic and
Dionysiac mysteries. It has been shown that before the coming of the
Orphic and Dionysiac religion the mysteries consisted mainly in the
handling of certain sacra after elaborate purification. By handling
these sacra man came into contact with some divine potency. To this
rudimentary mysticism Orphism added the doctrine of the possibility of
complete union with the divine. This union was effected in the primitive
Cretan rite of the Omophagia by the physical eating of the god; union
with the divine was further symbolically effected by the rite of the
Sacred Marriage, and union by adoption by the rite of the Sacred Birth.
The mission of Orphism was to take these primitive rites, originally of
the crudest sympathetic magic, and inform them with a deep spiritual
mysticism. The rite of the Omophagia found no place at Eleusis, but the
other two sacramental rites of union, the Sacred Marriage and the Sacred
Birth, formed ultimately its central mysteries.

With the doctrine and ritual of union with the divine there came as a
necessary corollary the doctrine that man could attain the divine
attribute of immortality. Orphic eschatology is the subject of Chapter
XI. Its highest spiritual form, the belief that perfect purity issued in
divinity and hence in immortality, is found expressed in the Orphic
tablets. Its lower expression, the belief in a Hades of eternal
punishment as contrasted with the shadowy after-world of Homer, is seen
in the vases of Lower Italy and the eschatology denounced by Plato.

Finally in Chapter XII. it is shown how, as a concomitant to their
Eschatology, the Orphics, unlike Homer, developed a Cosmogony, and with
this Cosmogony was ultimately bound up a peculiar and philosophic
theology. In the fifth century B.C. the puppet-show of the Olympians was
well-nigh played out, but the two gods of the Orphics remained potent.
In ritual they worshipped Dionysos, but their theoretical theology
recognized

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eros as source of
all things. The Eros of the Orphics was a mystery-being, a *daimon*
rather than a *theos*, a potency wholly alien to the clear-cut
humanities of Olympus.

 

With the consideration of Orphism it has become, I hope, abundantly
clear why at the outset attention was focussed on the primitive rites of
Aversion and Purification rather than on the Service of the Olympians.
The ritual embodied in the formulary do ut des is barren of spiritual
content. The ritual embodied in do ut abeas contains at least the
recognition of one great mystery of life, the existence of evil. The
rites of the Olympians were left untouched by the Orphics; the rites of
purification and of sympathetic magic lent them just the symbolism they
needed. Moreover in theology the crude forms of demons were more pliant
material for mysticism than the clear-cut limitations and vivid
personality of the Olympians. Orphism was the last word of Greek
religion, and the ritual of Orphism was but the revival of ancient
practices with a new significance.

 

The reader will note that in the pages that follow, two authors,
Plutarch and Euripides, have been laid under special contribution.
Plutarch's gentle conservatism made him cling tenaciously to antique
faith. According to him, one function of religion was to explain and
justify established rites, and in the course of his attempted
justification he tells us many valuable ritual facts. Euripides, instant
in his attack on the Olympian gods, yet treats with respect the two
divinities of Orphism, Dionysos and Eros. I have suggested that, born as
he was at Phlya, the ancient home of Orphic mysteries, his attitude on
this matter may have been influenced by early associations. In any case,
a religion whose chief divinities were reverently handled by Euripides
cannot be dismissed as a decadent maleficent superstition.

 

I would ask that the chapters I have written be taken strictly as they
are meant, as Prolegomena. I am deeply conscious that in surveying so
wide a field I have left much of interest untouched, still more only
roughly sketched in. I wished to present my general theory in broad
outline for criticism before filling in details, and I hope in the
future to achieve a study of Orphism

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

that may have more claim to completeness. If here I have dwelt almost
exclusively on its strength and beauty, I am not unaware that it has,
like all mystical religions, a weak and ugly side.

 

If in these Prolegomena I have accomplished anything, this is very
largely due to the many friends who have helped me; the pleasant task
remains of acknowledging my obligations.

 

My grateful thanks are offered to the Syndics of the University Press
for undertaking the publication of this book; to the Syndics of the
University Library and the Fitzwilliam Museum for the courtesy they have
shown in allowing me free access to their libraries; to my own College,
which, by electing me to a Fellowship, has given me for three years the
means and leisure to devote myself to writing.

For the illustrations they have placed at my disposal I must record my
debt to the Trustees of the British Museum, to the Hellenic Society, the
German Archaeological Institute, and the École Française of Athens. The
sources of particular plates are acknowledged in the notes. The
troublesome task of drawing from photographs and transcribing
inscriptions has been most kindly undertaken for me by Mrs Hugh Stewart.

 

Passing to literary obligations, it will be evident that in the two
first chapters I owe much, as regards philology, to the late Mr R. A.
Neil. His friendship and his help were lost to me midway in my work, and
that loss has been irreparable.

It is a pleasure to me to remember gratefully that to Sir Richard Jebb I
owe my first impulse to the study of Orphism. The notes in his edition
of the *Characters* of Theophrastos first led me as a student into the
by-paths of Orphic literature, and since those days the problem of
Orphism, though often of necessity set aside, has never ceased to haunt
me.

To Professor Ridgeway I owe much more than can appear on the surface.
The material for the early portion of my book was collected many years
ago, but, baffled by the ethnological problems it suggested, I laid it
aside in despair. The appearance of Professor Ridgeway's article, 'What
people made the objects called Mycenaean?' threw to me an instant flood
of light on the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

problems of ritual and mythology that perplexed me, and I returned to my
work with fresh courage. Since then he has, with the utmost kindness,
allowed me to attend his professorial lectures and frequently to refer
to him my difficulties. I have thought it best finally to state my own
argument independently of his ethnological conclusions, first because
those conclusions are, at the time I write, only in part before the
public, but chiefly because I hoped that by stating my evidence
independently it might, in the comparatively narrow sphere in which I
work, offer some slight testimony to the truth of his illuminating
theories.

To all workers in the field of primitive religion Dr Frazer's writings
have become so part and parcel of their mental furniture that special
acknowledgement has become almost superfluous. But I cannot deny myself
the pleasure of acknowledging a deep and frequent debt, the more as from
time to time I have been allowed to ask for criticism on individual
points, and my request, as the notes will show, has always met with
generous response.

Mr F. M. Cornford of Trinity College has, with a kindness and patience
for which I can offer no adequate thanks, undertaken the revision of my
proof-sheets. To him I owe not only any degree of verbal accuracy
attained, but also, which is much more, countless valuable suggestions
made from time to time in the course of my work. Many other scholars
have allowed me to refer to them on matters outside my own competency.
Some of these debts are acknowledged in the notes, but I wish specially
to thank Dr A. S. Murray, Mr Cecil Smith and Mr A. H. Smith of the
British Museum for constant facilities afforded to me in my work there,
and Mr R. C. Bosanquet and Mr M. Tod for help in Athens; and, in
Cambridge, Dr Haddon, Dr Hans Gadow, Mr Francis Darwin, Mr H. G. Dakyns
and Mr A. B. Cook.

My debt to Dr A. W. Verrall is so great and constant that it is hard to
formulate. If in one part of my book more than another I am indebted to
him it is in the discussion of the Erinyes. Chapter V. indeed owes its
inception to Dr Verrall's notes in his edition of the *Choephoroi*, and
its final form to his unwearied criticism. Throughout the book there is
scarcely a literary difficulty that he has not allowed me to refer to
him, and his sure scholarship and luminous perception have dissipated
for me many a mental fog.

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

Mr Gilbert Murray has written for me the critical Appendix on the text
of the Orphic tablets, a matter beyond my competence. Many verse
translations, acknowledged in their place, are also by him, and
uniformly those from the *Bacchae* and *Hippolytus* of Euripides. It is
to Mr Murray's translation of the *Bacchae* that finally, as regards the
religion of Dionysos, I owe most. The beauty of that translation, which
he kindly allowed me to use before its publication, turned the arduous
task of investigation into a labour of delight, and throughout the later
chapters of the book, the whole of which he has read for me in proof, it
will be evident that, in many difficult places, his sensitive and wise
imagination has been my guide.

JANE ELLEN HARRISON.

<span class="small">NEWNHAM COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,  
         *September* 9, 1903.</span>

IN the second edition, errors to which the kindness of friends and
reviewers has drawn my attention have been corrected. The tedious task
of proof-revision has been again undertaken for me by Mr Cornford. For
the index of Classical Passages I have to thank Mr F. C. Green of
Trinity College. In the notes many new references have been added to
literature that has appeared since my first edition. I would mention
especially Dr Frazer's *Early History of the Kingship* and the
invaluable *Archiv für Religionswissenschaft*, the issue of which in new
form since 1904 marks a fresh departure in the study of religion. In my
second edition however new material has been indicated rather than
incorporated. Save for obvious corrections and added references the book
remains substantially unaltered--not, I would ask my friends to believe,
because in the lapse of four years my views remain the same, but because
on some matters, especially on magic, mimetic ritual and the mysteries,
I hope before long, in a volume of *Epilegomena*, to develope certain
suggestions and to remedy many shortcomings.

JANE ELLEN HARRISON.

<span class="small">NEWNHAM COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.  
        *December*, 1907.</span>

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

Save for the addition of a few references the third edition is
substantially the same as the second. In my *Epilegomena* now published
will be found the further development of my views.

JANE ELLEN HARRISON.

<span class="small">NEWNHAM COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.  
             *August* 8, 1921.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](pgr02)
