[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc20003)  [Next](cc20005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 33

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#001.md)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1**. Moreover, the word of the LORD came unto
Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the
prison, saying,

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1**. Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad Jeremiam
secundo, cum ipse adhuc captivus esset in atrio custodiae, dicendo,

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>**2**. Thus saith the LORD the maker thereof,
the LORD that formed it, to establish it; The LORD *is* his name;

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**2**. Sic dicit Jehova, faciens ipsam, Jehova
formans ipsam, ad stabiliendum ipsam; Jehova nomen ejus;

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>**3**. Call unto me, and I will answer thee,
and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>**3**. Clama ad me, et respondebo tibi, et
annunciabo tibi res magnificas et reconditas, quas non novisti:

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>**4**. For thus saith the LORD, the God of
Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of
the kings of Judah, which are thrown down by the mounts, and by the
sword;

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>**4**. Quia sic dicit Jehova, Deus Israel,
super domibus urbis hujus, super domibus regum Jehudah, quae dirutae
fuerunt catapultis (vel, balistis, vel, machinis aliis) et gladio, (alii
autem vertunt, ad catapultas, vel, balistas, vel, alias munitiones, et
ad gladium; dicemus postea de sensu: hoec omnia legenda sunt uno
contextu)

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>**5**. They come to fight with the Chaldeans,
but *it is* to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have slain
in mine anger and in my fury, and for all whose wickedness I have hid my
face from this city.

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>**5**. Venerunt ad praeliandum cum Chaldaeis,
et ad replendas ipsas (domos) cadaveribus hominum, quos percussi in ira
mea et indignatione mea, et quia abscondi faciam meam ab hac urbe
propter universam malitiam ipsorum;

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>**6**. Behold, I will bring it health and
cure, and I will cure them, and will reveal unto them the abundance of
peace and truth.

<span id="v.i-p13"></span>**6**. Ecce ego adduco illi restitutionem et
sanationem, et sanabo eos, et aperiam ipsis multitudinem pacis et
veritatis (alii vertunt, orationem)

<span id="v.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p15"></span><span id="v.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p16"></span>This prophecy refers to the same subject; nor
was it to be wondered at, that God spoke so much of the same thing, for
it was necessary to render the Jews inexcusable, as they always
pretended ignorance, except God made frequent repetitions. And this was
also the reason why Paul said, that by the mouth of two or three
witnesses everything should be established, when he said that he would
come the second and the third time to Corinth. (<span
id="v.i-p16.1"></span>[2Co 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001.md)<span
id="v.i-p16.1"></span>) He intimated that his coming would not be
useless, for except they repented they could not have escaped by
pretending ignorance, as hypocrites are wont to do. It was, then, God’s
purpose to confirm by many prophecies what he had once testified
respecting the restoration of the people; but he had an especial care
for the faithful, that they might not grow faint and succumb under those
many trials which remained for so long a time; for as some died in
exile, they might have forgotten the covenant of God, and thus the soul
might have perished with the body. And those who were to return to their
own country had need of no common support, so that they might continue
firm for seventy years, and rely with confidence on God’s mercy. We now,
then, understand why God repeated the doctrine as to the return of the
people.

<span id="v.i-p17"></span>It is said that the *word of Jehovah came to
Jeremiah* while he was yet in *prison* Then the Prophet was bidden to
consult the benefit of his enemies, and to promote their welfare,
however unworthy they were through their ingratitude; for though they
had not all demanded his death, yet the greater part of them had
clamorously condemned him, and he had been with difficulty delivered,
and was now lying in prison. It was a great cruelty that the people,
while he was faithfully discharging his prophetic office, should thus
furiously rage against him. He is, however, bidden still to proceed in
the duties of his office, to comfort them, to ease their grief, and to
afford them some alleviation in their evils and miseries.

<span id="v.i-p18"></span>There is also no doubt but that it was
profitable to Jeremiah himself; for it was a most iniquitous reward,
that he should, while serving God faithfully and conscientiously, be
cast ignominiously into prison, and be there kept a captive so long. It
was, then, some mitigation of his grief, that God appeared to him in
that very prison; it was an evidence that God esteemed him higher than
all the Jews. God did not then speak in the Temple, nor throughout the
whole city. The prison then was God’s sanctuary, and there he gave
responses to his Prophet, though he was wont to do this before from the
mercy-seat, from the ark of the covenant. We hence see how great was the
honor that God was pleased at that time to bestow in a manner on a
prison, when he had forsaken his own Temple.

<span id="v.i-p19"></span>Now follows the prophecy, the substance of
which is, that though the city was to be given up into the hand of the
king of Babylon, yet that calamity was not to be perpetual, for God at
length, after the completion of seventy years, would restore it. But why
this promise was given has been stated already: it was given that the
faithful might submit patiently to God, and suffer themselves with calm
minds to be chastised, and also recumb on the hope the promise gave
them, and thus feel assured, that as they were smitten by God’s hand,
their punishment would prove their medicine and an aid to their
salvation. Now, then, we perceive what this prophecy is, and also for
what purpose it was delivered.

<span id="v.i-p20"></span><span id="v.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p21"></span>But before God promised anything respecting
the return of the people, he strengthened the mind of the Prophet by a
preface, and also encouraged and animated the godly to entertain good
hope. The preface is, that God created and *formed Jerusalem* There was,
then, no doubt but he would at length rescue it from the hands of
enemies; nay, that he would raise it up even from hell itself. To prove
this, he says that he is *Jehovah* We hence see why the Prophet, before
he recited the promise, honored God with magnificent titles. But it is
doubtful whether the past or the present time is to be understood, when
it is said, *Jehovah the maker of it, Jehovah the former of it;* for
either would be suitable, — that is, that God at the beginning built
Jerusalem and was its founder, or that he had purposed again to create
and form it anew. If the past time be taken, then the meaning is, that
the city, which had been built by God, could not possibly perish,
because his will was that it should remain perpetually. And the same
sentiment often occurs in the Prophets, and also in the Psalms. For it
was God’s design to be regarded as the founder of Jerusalem, in order
that he might distinguish it from all other cities of the world. We know
that there is nothing under the sun perpetual, for the whole world is
subject to various changes; nay,

<span id="v.i-p22"></span>“the fashion of this world,” as Paul says,
“passeth away.”  
(<span id="v.i-p22.2"></span>[1Co
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="v.i-p22.2"></span>.md)

<span id="v.i-p23"></span>As, then, changes so various take place in all
cities, God, by a singular privilege, exempted Jerusalem from this
common lot; and hence the Prophet truly and wisely concludes, that the
ruin of the city would not be perpetual, because God had formed it. And
hence its future restitution is sufficiently proved.

<span id="v.i-p24"></span>But if any one prefers the present time, then
the meaning would be, that he who had resolved to create and form
Jerusalem is *Jehovah,* the God of hosts: no one then can hinder his
work. As this sense is not unsuitable, I do not reject it, though I
follow the former. We must, at the same time, bear in mind this
principle, — that restoration is promised to the Jews, because Jerusalem
had been, as it were, chosen by God, so that he took it under his care
and protection, so as to preserve it perpetually. Whether then we take
the words to be in the past or present time, that God is the creator and
former of Jerusalem, we see that the promise of deliverance is founded
on the mercy of God, even because he had cliosen Jerusalem for his own
habitation, according to what is in the Psalms,

<span id="v.i-p25"></span>“His foundations are on the holy mountains.”
(<span id="v.i-p25.1"></span>[Ps
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p25.1"></span>.md)

<span id="v.i-p26"></span>And there, also, the pronoun is used instead
of God’s name, as here instead of the city’s name, *Thus saith Jehovah,
who has created it, who has formed it, that he might establish it* Here
Jerusalem is not named; but the narrative is much more emphatical than
if it was expressed, as also in the place we have just quoted, the word
God is not given, nor the word Church, if I mistake not, in the 37th
chapter of Isaiah (<span id="v.i-p26.1"></span>[Isa
37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#000)<span id="v.i-p26.1"></span>.md). When
the Prophet says,

<span id="v.i-p27"></span>“His foundations are on the holy mountains,”

<span id="v.i-p28"></span>there is no doubt but that the word God is to
be understood, though not expressed. So here, when speaking of the city,
he says that Jehovah *formed it,* or will form it.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md)

<span id="v.i-p32"></span>He adds, *Jehovah is his name* Here he exalts
the power of God, that the Jews might not set up against him what
otherwise might have terrified them, and, as it were, reduced them to a
lifeless state, and caused them wholly to faint away. He, therefore,
sets before their eyes the power of God, as though he had said, that
there would be no obstacle which could delay God’s work, for he had
resolved to form and create anew his own city after its demolition; it
is, in a word, the same as though he had bidden the people to turn their
eyes and all their thoughts to God, to consider his immeasurable power,
and so to entertain hope, and thus to look down, as it were, from on
high on all the impediments which might have otherwise wholly weakened
their confidence.

<span id="v.i-p33"></span><span id="v.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p34"></span>He afterwards adds, *Cry to me, and I will
answer thee, and I will announce to thee things magnificent and
recondite, which thou hast not known* It was not so much for the sake of
the Prophet as of others that this was said. For the Prophet, no doubt,
had earnestly prayed, and his prison must have inflamed his ardor, so as
to intercede constantly with God. God then does not here reprove his
torpor or his sloth by saying, *Cry to me;* but as I have said, the word
is so directed to the Prophet, that God excites all the godly to pray.
There is indeed here an implied reproof, as though he had said that it
was their fault that God did not cheer their minds with a joyful and
happy message, for they had closed the door against themselves, so as to
prevent God from offering them that comfort which they yet *especially*
wished; but men, while they expect God to be propitious to them, do not
yet give entrance to his grace, because they bolt up, as it were, their
hearts with unbelief. We hence see why it was said, *Cry to me, and I
will answer thee*

<span id="v.i-p35"></span>But this passage ought especially to be
noticed; for we may hence conclude, that whenever we pine away in
sorrow, or are worn out by affliction, it is our own fault, because we
are tardy and slow to pray: for every one who cries acknowledges that
God is always nigh, as he promises in the Psalms, to those who truly
call on him. That we are then sometimes worn out with long grief, and no
comfort given to us, this happens, let us know, through our neglect and
sloth, because we cry not to God, who is ever ready to answer us, as he
here promises.

<span id="v.i-p36"></span>And he says, *I will declare to thee great
things, and of hidden things thou knowest not* So are the words
literally; but they cannot be thus suitably rendered: then we may read,
“and things hidden which thou knowest not,” or, “I will make thee
acquainted with hidden things which are unknown to thee.” It may,
however, be asked, why God called those things hidden, of which Jeremiah
had already prophesied? The answer is obvious, — that they had, as it
were, made void all the promises of God, and the holy man might, have
been even confounded, when he saw that God’s favor was thus rejected;
for it was reasonable to conclude, that as the people obstinately
rejected the hope of deliverance, it was all over with them, and that
their condition was, as it were, hopeless. We hence see that those
things are often hidden to us which God has again and again made known
to us; for either they do not immediately penetrate into our minds, or
the memory of them is extinguished, or faith is not so vigorous in us as
it ought to be, or we are disturbed and confounded by obstacles thrown
in our way.

<span id="v.i-p37"></span><span id="v.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p38"></span>He now expresses what these hidden things
were, *As to the houses, he says, (so it is literally) thus saith
Jehovah, the God of Israel, as to the houses of this city, and as to the
houses of the kings of Judah* The proposition; <span
id="v.i-p38.1"></span>על, upon, often means with regard to, concerning.
He names the *houses* of the kings, for the kings of Judah were not
satisfied, as it is well known, with one palace, but had many houses
without the city. *As to the houses,* he says, *which had been thrown
down* This is variously explained; the houses, say some, had been pulled
down for the warlike engines, that is, that these engines might be made
from the materials, and for the sword. The sense, however, would appear
more obvious were we to take this view, that the houses had been thrown
down by the warlike engines, and also by the sword, that is, by the
violence of the enemies. The word, <span id="v.i-p38.2"></span>סללת
*sallut,* as it has been already stated, is rendered by some
fortifications; but when the storming of cities is spoken of, it means
no doubt warlike machines, such as the engines to throw darts, or
battering-rams: but we know not in what form they were made by the Jews
and the Chaldeans.

<span id="v.i-p39"></span><span id="v.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p40"></span>There are two parts to this prophecy, — that
the Jews were about to perish through their own fault, — and that they
were to be restored through the favor and goodness of God alone. Here,
then, in the first place, the Prophet condemns the false confidence of
the people, who stoutly resisted the Chaldeans. *They came,* he says,
*to fight with the Chaldeans;* but what would be the issue of the
battle? even to *fill,* he says, *with the carcases of men their very
houses* When he says that the Jews were *come,* he speaks of what had
already, as it were, taken place. It is indeed a participle in the
present tense, *coming;* but the Prophet here sets before their eyes
what was to be, as though he had said, “The Jews will boldly rush forth,
and will think themselves equal, and even superior to the Chaldeans;
thus they will arm themselves with courage for the battle.” Then he says
this, in order to ridicule the audacity of the people. The sad issue of
the fight follows, the filling of their own houses with the carcases of
men. The copulative is redundant, or it must be taken as explanatory,
and rendered, even. *They shall come* then *to fight, evern that they
may fill their own houses with carcases,* and thus inflame the fury of
their enemies.  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) For it hence
happened that the Chaldeans shed more blood, and spared not the mass of
the people; because we know that when a city is won by force, more
cruelty is exercised, and the slaughters become much greater. Had the
Jews willingly surrendered, they would have received more humanity at
the hand of their conquerors; but the Chaldeans became implacable,
because their fury had been kindled by the pertinacity of the people
fighting against them. God, at the same time, shews that the Chaldeans
would not be victorious through their own valor, but because he himself
would *smite* or slay the Jews. Then he ascribes to his own vengeance
the calamity which might have seemed to proceed from the Chaldeans; for
Jeremiah could not have exhorted the people to repentance except he
shewed that it happened through a righteous judgment, that the Chaldeans
so cruelly raged against them. But we must defer the rest until
to-morrow.

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may so learn to
humble ourselves under thy mighty hand, whenever thou chastisest us,
that we may not faint in our miseries, but flee to thy mercy with more
confidence, and by acknowledging our sins, may become so displeased with
ourselves, that we may never lose the taste of thy mercy but gird
ourselves up so as to entertain good hope, and call upon thee, until we
shall at length find by success that our prayers are not in vain; and
may we ever thus find comfort in our evils, so that we may at length
enjoy that perfect felicity, which thou hast prepared for us in heaven,
through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-Third

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>I was compelled yesterday to stop at the
second clause of the fifth verse, where God declares that the Jews were
*slain* by him, while they were exerting all their strength to resist.
He then says that that slaughter happened to the city and to the people,
because they had sinned against him. But he says, first, I have *slain*
them, and then, *I have hid my face from this city,* and he also adds
the reason, on *accorent of all their wickedness* Then he declares that
he was the author of that slaughter, and he also shews that in just
judgment he punished the wickedness of the people. For as they had never
ceased for a long time to provoke his vengeance, he here shews that they
deserved that reward, even of having their city forcibly taken by the
Chaldeans, and also of being everywhere slain, and of having their
houses filled with dead bodies.

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span><span id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span>He afterwards says, *Behold, I will bring a
renewal and a healing, and I will heal them* This is the main point, as
they say, in the passage. He had been hitherto shewing, that the Jews
had deserved so heavy a punishment, because by their obstinacy they had
not ceased to provoke God against themselves. But he promises here to be
propitious to them after having moderately corrected them. For we have
said, that the design of this prophecy was to sustain the Jews, so that
they might not despond, but rely on the promise of favor, however bitter
exile might be. Then he says, *I will bring a renewal,* or restoration,
*and a healing*  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md)

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span>And it is added, *I will open to them
abundance of peace and of truth* Some render the last word, <span
id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>אמת, *amet,* prayer; for the verb <span
id="v.iii-p6.2"></span>אמן *amen,* means sometimes to pray and also to
multiply. There may then be a twofold meaning; the first, that God would
open to them an access to prayer; for things were so hopeless among the
people, that no one dared to utter a word. Even Jeremiah himself was
forbidden to pray, (<span id="v.iii-p6.3"></span>[Jer
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#014)<span id="v.iii-p6.3"></span>.md)
because God had resolved to destroy those miserable men respecting whom
there was no hope of repentance. Some therefore understand that an
access to prayer is here promised, so that the faithful and the servants
of God might pray for the prosperity of the city. But this explanation
seems to me to be too far-fetched. I take, therefore, a simpler
interpretation, — that God would give them abundance of peace, or rather
the prolonging or continuance of peace. By peace is meant, as it is well
known, a happy state. Then to Jerusalem, reduced to extreme miseries,
God promises joyful things, so that she should afterwards live
prosperously; and he adds the word *truth,* which is to be taken here
for stability,  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) as, indeed,
everywhere in Scripture, as though he had said, that the prosperous
state of the city would notbe for a month, or a short time, but
continual and even perpetual, as he declares in the next verse.

<span id="v.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#007.md)<span id="v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>**7**. And I will cause the captivity of Judah
and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as at the
first.

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>**7**. Et reducam captivitatem Jehudah, et
captivitatem Israel, et aedificabo cos sicuti a principio.

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span><span id="v.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>By the word *building,* God means that they
would return to their own country for this end — that they might remain
secure in it. And this promise was very needful, since the Jews were on
every side surrounded by enemies; for all their neighbors had united
together against them, and were most hostile, so that they never ceased
to create new troubles. For this reason mention is made of *building,*
as though the Prophet had said, that the prosperity of the city would be
lasting, for it would be so founded, that it would not fall or totter at
any kind of assault.

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span>But he promises deliverance, not only to the
tribe of Judah, but also to the whole kingdom of Israel. Though very few
returned, yet God offered the benefit which he had promised to all in
common: and then, as it has been often said, this promise is to be
extended to the coming of Christ. For God confined not his favor to
those few years in which liberty was granted to the Jews, when they
returned from their exile in Babylon; but included the eternal salvation
which remained for them, of whiclx the prelude was their return. Let us
now proceed, —

<span id="v.v"></span>

<span id="v.v-p1"></span><span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#008.md)<span id="v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p2"></span>**8**. And I will cleanse them from all their
iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon all
their iniquities, whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have
transgressed against me.

<span id="v.v-p3"></span>**8**. Et purgabo eos ab omni iniquitate eorum,
qua peccarunt mihi (hoc est, in me) et ignoscam omnibus iniquitatibus
eorum quibus peccarunt in me, et quibus scelerate egerunt contra me.

<span id="v.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.v-p5"></span><span id="v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.v-p6"></span>He says first, that he would *cleanse themfrom
all iniquity,* and then, that he would be propitious to *all their
iniquities* He no doubt repeats the same thing; but the words are not
superfluous, for it was necessary seriously to remind the Jews of their
many vices, of which indeed they were conscious, and yet they did not
repent. As then they perversely followed their own wills, it was needful
for the Prophet to goad them sharply, so that they might know that they
were exposed to eternal destruction, if God’s mercy, and that by no
means common, came not to their aid. Here, then, he represents the
greatness of their sins, that he might on the other hand extol the mercy
of God.

<span id="v.v-p7"></span>By the word *cleanse,* one might understand
regeneration, and this may seem probable to those who are not well
acquainted with the language of Scripture; but <span
id="v.v-p7.1"></span>טהר, *theer,* means properly to expiate. This then
does not refer to regeneration, but to forgiveness, hence I have said,
that the Prophet mentions two things here in the same sense, — that God
would *cleanse them from iniquity,* — and that he would *pardon all
their iniquities* We see now the reason why the Prophet used so many
words in testifying that God would be so merciful to them as to forgive
their sins, even because they, though loaded with many vices, yet
extenuated their heinousness, as hypocrites always do. The favor of God,
then, would never have been appreciated by the Jews had not the atrocity
of their guilt been clearly made known to them. And this also was the
reason why he said, *I will pardon all their iniquities* He had said
before, *I will cleanse them from all iniquity;* then he added, *I will
pardon all their iniquities* For by this change in the number the
Prophet shews the mass and variety of their sins, as though he had said,
that the heaps of evils were so multiplied, that there was need of no
common mercy in God to receive them into favor.

<span id="v.v-p8"></span>He says further, *By which they have sinned
against me, and by which they have acted wickedly against me* These
words confirm what I have already said, that the Jews were severely
reproved by the Prophet, in order that they might first consider and
reflect on what they deserved; and secondly, that they might extol the
favor of God according to its value.

<span id="v.v-p9"></span>We must at the same time observe, that the Jews
had their attention directed to the first and chief ground of
confidence, so that they might have some hope of a restoration; for the
origin of all God’s blessings, or the fountain from which all good
things flow, is the favor of God in being reconciled to us. He may,
indeed, supply us bountifully with whatever we may wish, while yet he
himself is alienated from us, as we see to be the case with the ungodly,
who often abound in all good things; and hence they glory and boast as
though they had God as it were, in a manner, bound to them. But whatever
God grants and bestows on the ungodly, cannot, properly speaking, be
deemed as an evidence of his favor and grace; but he thus renders them
more unexcusable, while he treats them so indulgently. There is then no
saving good, but what flows from the paternal love of God.

<span id="v.v-p10"></span>We must now see how God becomes propitious to
us. He becomes so, when he imputes not our sins to us. For except pardon
goes before, he must necessarily be adverse to us; for as long as he
looks on us as we are, he finds in us nothing but what deserves
vengeance. We are therefore always accursed before God until he buries
our sins. Hence I have said, that the first fountain of all the good
things that are to be hoped for, is here briefly made known to the Jews,
even the gratuitous favor of God in reconciling them to himself. Let us
then learn to direct all our thoughts to God’s mercy whenever we seek
what seems necessary to us. For if we catch as it were at God’s
blessings, and do not consider whence they proceed, we shall be caught
by a bait: as the fish through their voracity strangle themselves, (for
they snatch at the hook as though it were food) so also the ungodly, who
with avidity seize on God’s blessings, and care not that he should be
propitious to them; they swallow them as it were to their own ruin. That
all things then may tuae to our salvation, let us learn to make always a
beginning with the paternal love of God, and let us know that the cause
of that love is his immeasurable goodness, through which it comes that
he reconciles us freely to himself by not imputing to us our sins.

<span id="v.v-p11"></span>We may also gather another doctrine from this
passage, — that if the grievousness of our sins terrifies us, yet all
diffidence ought to be overcome, because God does not promise his mercy
only to those sinners who have slightly fallen, either through ignorance
or error, but even to such as have heaped sins on sins. There is
therefore no reason why the greatness of our sins should overwhelm us;
but we may ever venture to flee to the hope of pardon, since we see that
it is offered indiscriminately to all, even to those who had been
extremely wicked before God, and had not only sinned, but had also
become in a manner apostates, so that they ceased not in all ways to
provoke God’s vengeance. It follows, —

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#009.md)<span id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span>**9**. And it shall be to me a name of joy, a
praise and an honour before all the nations of the earth, which shall
hear all the good that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble
for all the goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>**9**. Et erit mihi in nomen, laetitiam *(alii
in constructione vertunt,* in nomen laetitiae) in laudem et in decorem
*(vel,* gloriam) apud omnes gentes terrae, quae audient omnem
beneficentiam, quam ego exercuero erga ipsos (quam ego facio ipsis, *ad
verbum)* et pavebunt et contremiscent super omni beneficentia, et super
onmi pace, quam ego facio illi *(mutat humerum; dixerat,* <span
id="v.vi-p3.1"></span>אותם *nunc dicit,* <span id="v.vi-p3.2"></span>עשה
לה*, et refertur hoc pronomen ad urbem ipsam)*

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span><span id="v.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span>Here God testifies that his favor would be
such as to deserve praise in all the world, or, which is the same thing,
that his bounty would be worthy of being remembered. Hence he says, that
it would be to him for *a name among all nations;* but as he designed to
extol the greatness of his glory, he adds, *a praise and an honor,* or a
glory; and it is emphatically added, *among all nations* And this
passage shews to us that the Prophet did not speak only of the people’s
return, and that this prophecy ought not to be confined to the state of
the *city,* such as it was before the coming of Christ; for though the
favor of God was known among the Chaldeans and some other nations, it
was not yet known through the whole world, for he says, *among all the
nations of the earth;* and God no doubt included all parts of the world.
We hence then conclude that the favor of which the Prophet speaks refers
to the kingdom of Christ, for God did not then attain a name to himself
among all nations, but, as it is well known, only in some portions of
the east. When, therefore, he says that the favor he would shew to his
people, would be to him *a name,* he promises no doubt that deliverance
which was at length brought by Christ.

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span>And in the same sense must be taken what
follows, *Because they shall hear,* etc.; for the relative <span
id="v.vi-p7.1"></span>אשר *asher,* is here a causative, as the Prophet
expresses here the way and manner in which glory and honor would come to
God on account of the deliverance of his people, even because the
nations would hear of this; and this has been done by the preaching of
the Gospel, because then only was God’s goodness towards the Jews
everywhere made known, when the knowledge of the Law and of prophetic
truth came to aliens who had previously heard nothing of the true
doctrine of religion. We now then understand the design of the holy
Spirit.

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span>Further, by these words God exhorts all to
gratitude; for whenever the fountain of God’s blessings is pointed out
to us, we ought not to be indifferent, but to be stimulated to give
thanks to him. When therefore God declares that the redemption of his
people would be *a name* to him *among all nations,* he thus shews to
the godly that they ought not to be torpid, but to proclaim his
goodness. And at the same time it serves for a confirmation, when God
intimates that he would be the Redeemer of his people, in order that he
might acquire to himself a name, for there is to be understood a
contrast, that in this kindness, he would not regard what the Jews
deserved, but would seek for a cause in himself, as it is expressed more
fully elsewhere,

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>“Not on your account will I do this, O house
of Israel,” (<span id="v.vi-p9.1"></span>[Eze
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022)<span id="v.vi-p9.1"></span>.md)

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>and the faithful sing in their turn,

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>“Not on our account, O Lord, but on account
of thy name.”  
(<span id="v.vi-p11.2"></span>[Ps
79:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#009.md)<span id="v.vi-p11.2"></span>;
<span id="v.vi-p11.3"></span>[Ps
115:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#001)<span id="v.vi-p11.3"></span>.md)

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span>We then see that God brings forward his own
name, that the Jews might continue to entertain hope, however guilty
they may have been, and own themselves worthy of eternal destruction.

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span>If we read, “It shall be to me for a name of
joy,” the sense would be, “for a name in which I delight.” If we read
the words apart, “For a name and joy,” the sense would be still the
same; nor ought it to be deemed unreasonable that God testifies that it
would be to him for joy. For though he is not moved and influenced as we
are, yet this mode of speaking is elsewhere adopted, as in <span
id="v.vi-p13.1"></span>[Ps 104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031.md)<span
id="v.vi-p13.1"></span>,

<span id="v.vi-p14"></span>“The Lord shall rejoice in his works.”

<span id="v.vi-p15"></span>God then is said to take delight in doing
good, because he is in his nature inclined to goodness and mercy.

<span id="v.vi-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, *they, shall fear and
tremble for all the goodness,* etc. The word <span
id="v.vi-p16.1"></span>כל *cal,* “all,” denotes greatness, and is to be
taken emphatically. The words, however, may at first sight appear
singular, “they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness,” etc.; for
it seems not reasonable that men should fear, when they acknowledge
God’s goodness, for this, on the contrary, is a reason for joy and
confidence. This clause is sometimes applied to the ungodly, for they
have no taste for God’s favor so as to be cheered by it, but on the
contrary they fret and gnash their teeth when God appears kind to his
people; for they are vexed, when they see that they are excluded from
the enjoyment of those blessings, which are laid up, as it is said
elsewhere, for them who fear God. But I have not the least doubt but the
Prophet means the conversion of the Gentiles when he says, *they shall
fear* and *tremble* for all *the goodness,* etc.; as though he had said,
that not only the name of God would be known among the nations, so that
they would proclaim that he had been merciful to his people, but that it
would at the same time be the effect and influence of his grace, that
the nations would become obedient to God. Moreover, it is a usual thing
to designate the worship and fear of God by the words fear, dread, and
trembling. For though the faithful do not dread the presence of God, but
cheerfully present themselves to him whenever he invites them, and in
full confidence call on him, there is yet no reason why they should not
tremble when they think of his majesty. For these two things are
connected together, even the fear and trembling which humble us before
God, and the confidence which raises us up so as to dare familiarly to
approach him. Here then is pointed out the conversion of the Gentiles;
as though the Prophet had said, that the favor of deliverance to the
Church would not only avail for this end, to make the Gentiles to
proclaim God’s goodness, but would also have the effect of bringing them
under his authority, that they might reverence and fear him as the only
true God. He again adds the word *peace,* but in the same sense as
before: he mentions goodness, the cause of prosperity, and then he adds
peace or prosperity as its effect. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#010.md)<span id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>**10**. Thus saith the LORD; Again there
shall be heard in this place, which ye say *shall be* desolate without
man and without beast, *even* in the cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man, and without inhabitant,
and without beast,

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>**10**. Sic dicit Jehova, Adhuc audietur in
loco hoc, de quo vos dicitis, Exterminatus est (vel, traditus exitio) ab
homine (hoc est, ut non supersit homo) neque supersit jumentum in
urbibus Jehudah et in compitis Jerusalem, quae in solitudinem redacta
sunt, ut non sit homo et non sit habitator, et non sit animal (vel,
jumentum)

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span>**11**. The voice of joy, and the voice of
gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the
voice of them that shall say, Praise the LORD of hosts: for the LORD
*is* good; for his mercy *endureth* for ever: *and* of them that shall
bring the sacrifice of praise into the house of the LORD. For I will
cause to return the captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the
LORD.

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span>**11**. Vox laetitiae et vox gaudii, vox
sponsi et vox sponsae, vox dicentium, celebrate Jehovam exercituum, quia
bonus Jehova, quia in seculum misericordia (vel, clementia) ejus,
afferentium laudem (hoc est, testimonium gratiarum actionis, pro
sacrificio hic capitur) in domum Jehovae, quia reducam captivitatem
terrae sicut ab initio, dicit Jehova.

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span><span id="v.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span>These two verses are connected together, and
have been improperly divided, for the sentence is not complete. In the
first place we have, *Yet shall be heard,* but what? *the voice of joy,
etc.,* as we find in the following verse. Jeremiah confirms at large
what he had taught respecting the return of the people, because there
was need of many and strong supports, that, the faithful might *proceed*
in their course with *confidence* It was indeed difficult to muster
courage under so great a calamity; and had they for a short season
breathing time, yet new trials constantly arising might have cast them
down and laid them prostrate. There is no wonder then that the Prophet
here speaks diffusely of that favor which was deemed incredible; and
then the memory of it might not have always remained fixed in the hearts
of the faithful, had not a repeated confirmation been given.

<span id="v.vii-p9"></span>He again introduces God as the speaker, that
the promise might have more effect. *Again,* he says, *shall be heard in
this place* — *even in the cities of Judah and in the streets of
Jerusalem* — *the voice of joy,* etc. He repeats what we noticed
yesterday, that the Jews put every obstacle they could in the way of
their restoration. The narrowness of our hearts, we know does in a
manner exclude an entrance as to God’s favor; for being filled, nay,
swollen with unbelief, we suffer not God’s grace to enter into us. So
the Jews, by desponding and imagining that their calamity was incurable,
and that no remedy was to be expected, rejected as far as they could the
promised favor of deliverance This, then, is what the Prophet again
upbraids them with, even that they said that the whole country and all
the cities were destroyed, so that neither man nor beast remained. This
was, indeed, the fact at that time, and the Jews had spoken correctly;
but as it was said yesterday, the ungodly never feel the scourges of God
without rushing headlong into despair. Then what is condenmed is this,
that the Jews thought that they were to perish without any hope of
deliverance. Hence the Prophet here reproves their unbelief, and at the
same time exhorts them to entertain hope. But he testifies that God’s
grace would surpass all their wickedness.

<span id="v.vii-p10"></span><span id="v.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p11"></span>*Heard* then *shall be the voice of joy, and
the voice of gladness; the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the
bride;* that is, marriages shall again be celebrated. And this way of
speaking often occurs in the Prophets when they refer to the joyful
condition of the city and of the people; for in seasons of mourning no
one thinks of marrying a wife, so that marriage-feasts then cease as
well as all festivals. Then the Prophet briefly shews that God would put
an end to the calamities of the people, and give them reasons for
rejoicing after he had for a time punished their sins.

<span id="v.vii-p12"></span>But he shews also of what kind their joy
would be, *The voice of them who shall say, Praise ye Jehovah of hosts*
Here he distinguishes between the faithful and the ungodly, for joy is
common to both, when prosperity happens to them; for God’s children may
rejoice when the Lord shews himself to them as a bountiful Father. But
the profane exult through intemperate joy, and at the same time they
make no mention of God, for they live only on present things; but the
faithful raise up their thoughts to God, and never rejoice without
thanksgiving. Thus they consecrate and sanctify their joy, when the
ungodly, by polluting God’s blessing, do also contaminate their joy. We
ought then to take special notice of this difference which the Prophet
here intimates, between godly and profane joy; for the children of this
world do indeed exult, but as we have said, immoderately in their joy;
and they are unthankful to God, and never duly reflect on his goodness;
nay, they designedly turn away their eyes and their thoughts from God;
but the faithful have always a regard to God whenever it succeeds well
with them, for they know that everything flows to them from God’s
goodness only.

<span id="v.vii-p13"></span>Hence he says, Heard shall be the voice of
them who shall say, *Praise ye Jehovah, for he is good, etc.* The
Prophet here alludes to the customary practice of singing, which is
spoken of in sacred history. For we know that when the Temple was
dedicated, the praises of God were celebrated, and the Levites always
sang, *For his mercy is for ever* They first exhorted others to praise
God, and to every sentence this repetition was added, “For his mercy is
for ever.” What then had formerly been in common use the Prophet refers
to: *Heard* then *shall be* that usual song, *Praise ye Jehovah, for his
mercy is for ever*

<span id="v.vii-p14"></span>He then adds, *Of them who shall bring
praise to the house of Jehovah; for I will restore the captivity of the
land* He mentions sacrifices, for the service, according to the Law,
required, that these should be added as evidences of gratitude. God
indeed had no need of vetires, nor did he delight in external displays;
but these exercises of religion were necessary for a rude people, and
still learning the elements of truth. The Prophet then speaks here with
reference to a particular time, when he connects sacrifices with praises
and thanksgiving, he yet shews for what end God required sacrifices to
be then offered to him, lest the Jews should think that God was pacified
when a calf had been slain. He then shews that all this had been
prescribed to them, and enjoined for this end — that they might shew
themselves thankful.

<span id="v.vii-p15"></span>This metonymical mode of speaking ought then
to be carefully observed; for hence we conclude, that sacrifices of
themselves were of no moment, but were only acceptable and of good odor
to God on this account — because they were evidences of gratitude.

<span id="v.vii-p16"></span>He then adds, *To the house of Jehovah* Now,
this also ought in the last place to be noticed, — that it is not
sufficient for one to be thankful to God, but that public thanksgiving
is also required, so that we may mutually stimulate one another. And we
also know that confession ought not to be separated from faith; as faith
has its seat in the heart, so also outward confession proceeds from it;
and therefore it cannot be but that the interior feeling must break out
from the soul, and the tongue be connected with the heart. It hence
follows, that all those are guilty of falsehood who say that they have
faith within, but are at the same time mute, and, as far as they can,
unworthily bury the benefits of God. And as I have said, this zeal is
required of all the godly, in order that they may stimulate one another
to praise God; for it was for this purpose and for this reason, that
express mention is made of the Temple; that is, that the faithful might
understand, that God is to be worshipped, not only privately and within
closed doors, but that also a public profession ought to be made, so
that they may together with common consent celebrate and acknowledge his
benefits and blessings.

<span id="v.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease not to
separate ourselves often from thee, we may at least know that
reconciliation is prepared for us, provided we seek it by a true and
sincere faith in thine only-begotten Son, and so return to thee as
really to loathe ourselves on account of our sins, and that relying on
thine infinite mercy we may never doubt but that thou wilt be reconciled
to us, until having at length finished our present course of life, and
being cleansed from all the pollutions of the flesh, we shall be clothed
with that celestial glory, which thy Son by his death and resurrection
has obtained for us. — Amen.

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-Fourth

<span id="v.x"></span>

<span id="v.x-p1"></span><span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#012.md)<span id="v.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p2"></span>**12**. Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Again in
this place, which is desolate without man and without beast, and in all
the cities thereof, shall be an babitation of shepherds causing *their*
flocks to lie down.

<span id="v.x-p3"></span>**12**. Sic dicit Jehova exercituum, Adhuc erit
in loco hoc destructo, ut non sit homo et jumentum, et in omnibus
urbibus ejus, habitaculum pastorum accubare facientium oves:

<span id="v.x-p4"></span>**13**. In the cities of the mountains, in the
cities of the vale, and in the cities of the south, and in the land of
Benjamin, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah,
shall the flocks pass again under the hands of him that telleth *them,*
saith the LORD.

<span id="v.x-p5"></span>**13**. In urbibus montis *(hoc est,* montanis)
et in urbibus planicei (campestribus) et in urbibus Austri *(id est,*
quae vergunt ad meridiem) et in terra Benjamin, et per circuitus
Jerusalem, et in urbibus Jehudae, adhuc transibunt oves per manus
numerantis, dicit Jehova.

<span id="v.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.x-p7"></span><span id="v.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p8"></span>Jeremiah still pursues the same subject; but he
speaks here of the settled happiness of the people, as though he had
said, that there was no reason for the Israelites to fear, that God
would not open for them a way of return to their own country, and
preserve and protect them after their return. But in setting forth their
quiet and peaceable condition, he speaks of shepherds; for we know that
it is a sure sign of peace, when flocks and herds are led into the
fields in security. For enemies always gape after prey, and the
experience of wars proves this; for whenever incursions are made by
enemies, they send spies that they may know whether there are any
shepherds or keepers of cattle; and then they know that there is a prey
for them. As then shepherds, when an invasion from enemies is dreaded,
dare not go forth, and as there is then no liberty, the Prophet, in
order to intimate that the Jews would be in a tranquil state, says,
*There shall again be in this place the habitation of sheepherds, who
will make their sheep,* or *their flock*, *to lie down*

<span id="v.x-p9"></span>We now perceive the design of the Prophet; for
one not sufficiently acquainted with Scripture might raise a question,
Is this promise to be confined to shepherds and herdsmen? But, as I have
already intimated, the answer is obvious, — The promise is general, but
expressed in this way, — that God would be the guardian of his people,
so that shepherds would drive here and there their flocks, and herdsmen
their cattle, in perfect safety, and without any fear of danger.

<span id="v.x-p10"></span><span id="v.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.x-p11"></span>And in the next verse Jeremiah confirms the
same thing, where he mentions, as before, the cities of the mountains,
and the cities of the plains, and then the cities of the south, and adds
also the *land of Benjamin,* which was a different part of the country,
and he mentions generally the *circuits of Jerusalem and the cities of
Judah* What then? *The flocks,* he says, *shall pass under the hands of
a numberer* Here, again, is set forth a greater security, because
shepherds would not, as it were, by stealth lead forth their sheep, and
afterwards gather them in a hurry, as it is usually done, when there is
any fear of danger. *The sheep,* he says, *shall pass under the hands of
a numberer* This could not be the case but in time of perfect peace and
quietness; for where there is fear, the shepherds can hardly dare send
forth their flocks, and then they dare not number them, but shut them
in; and they are also often compelled to drive their flocks into forests
and desert places, in order to conceal them. When, therefore, Jeremiah
mentions the numbering of them, he intimates that the whole country
would be in a state of peace, as in other words, and without a figure,
he presently will tell us. But the Prophet in this way exalted the
benefits of God, and at the same time strengthened the minds of the
weak, for as it has been said, this favor could have hardly been tasted
by the Jews while in a state so despairing. The Prophet then made use of
a homely and ordinary style when he spoke of flocks and herds. It now
follows —

<span id="v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#014.md)<span id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p2"></span>**14**. Behold, the days come, saith the LORD,
that I will perform that good thing which I have promised unto the house
of Israel and to the house of Judah.

<span id="v.xi-p3"></span>**14**. Ecce dies veniunt, dicit Jehova, et
excitabo *(vel,* stabilium) sermonum meum benum, quem loquutus sum
*(vel,* pronuntiavi) ad domum Israel et ad domum Jehudah.

<span id="v.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xi-p5"></span><span id="v.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p6"></span>Jeremiah now shews why God had promised that
there would be a quiet *habitation for shepherds,* so that no one would
by force take away their flocks. For God declares, that his promise
would not be void, as its effects would shortly be evident, even when
his mercy was known by the ten tribes and by the kingdom of Judah. Hence
he says, *The days shall come;* for it behoved the faithful to look
farther than to their present condition. As they were then exposed to
slaughter, though the unbelieving still entertained vain hopes, yet the
children of God saw thousand deaths; so that it could not be but that
terror almost drove them to despair; and in their exile they saw that
they were far removed from their own country, without any hope of a
return. That the Prophet then might still support these, he bids them to
extend their thoughts to a future time; and he had prefixed, as we have
before seen, seventy years. It is the same then as though he had said,
that the favor of which he predicts could not be laid hold on, except
the faithful held their minds in suspense, and patiently waited until
the time of the promised deliverance came.

<span id="v.xi-p7"></span>*Coming* then *are the days, and I will
rouse,* or as some render it, “and I will establish;” and both meanings
may suit; for <span id="v.xi-p7.1"></span>קום *kum,* means to rise, but
here in an active or transitive sense it means to make to rise. However,
its meaning sometimes is to establish, and sometimes to rouse,  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) so as to make that to appear which was
before hidden. And this mode of speaking is fitly adopted as to the
promises of God; for they seem for a time to he dormant without any
effect, or seem to disappear or vanish away. Hence the stability of the
promises then appears, and is seen when God raises them up, they being
before hidden and concealed from the faithful. The meaning of the
Prophet is, that God would at length render evident the power of his
word, by fulfilling it.

<span id="v.xi-p9"></span>But from this manner of speaking, a useful
doctrine may be deduced: for we are thus reminded that the promises of
God are not always so manifest, that their effect or accomplishment is
evident to us, but on the contrary they may appear to be dead and void.
When it is so, let us learn to exercise faith and patience, so that our
souls may not tremble, though God’s promises may not every moment
manifest their power by being actually fulfilled. In short, the true
application of prophetic truth is, that we never lay hold on, and really
embrace the promises of God, except we look forward to the *days that
are coming,* that is, except we patiently wait for the time prefixed by
God: and further, except our faith leans on the promises, when they seem
to he dormant, it is not firm, and has no roots or foundations; for as
the root which nourishes the tree is not seen, but lies hid in the
earth, and as the foundation of a house is not visible to our eyes, so
ought our faith to be in like manner founded, and to drive deep roots
into God’s promises, so that its firmness may not be in the air, nor
have a visible surface, but a hidden foundation. This then is the import
and the proper application of this doctrine.

<span id="v.xi-p10"></span>But God calls it his *good word,* because he
had promised to be the deliverer of his people. The word of God, when it
denounces all kinds of death, and contains nothing but terrors, is
always good, if goodness be taken for what is just and right; and hence
God, by Ezekiel, reproves the Jews, because his word was bitter to them,
and says,

<span id="v.xi-p11"></span>“Are the ways of the Lord crooked and thorny?
Ye are awry,” he says, “and not my word.” (<span
id="v.xi-p11.1"></span>[Eze 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#025.md)<span
id="v.xi-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="v.xi-p12"></span>But here the goodness of the word is to be
taken for the deliverance of the people; for when God shakes the
despisers of his Law with terror, his word is called evil on account of
its effect. At the same time, as I have already said, whether God offers
to us his favor and mercy, or denounces vengeance on the unbelieving,
his word is ever good and right, though it may not be pleasant. This
then relates to the apprehensions of men when he says, *I will rouse,*
or establish, *my good word*

<span id="v.xi-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *which I have spoken;’*by
which clause he confirms the doctrine of Jeremiah, for he shews that he
was its author, and that Jeremiah brought nothing from himself, but
faithfully testified of his mercy and of the liberation of the people
according to the commission he had received. We are at the same time
reminded, that we are not presumptuously to hope for anything, except
God has spoken. Let us then learn to embrace his promises, so that none
of us may look for this or that, but know that then only he will be
propitious to us, when we lean on his word. He afterwards speaks of the
kingdom of Israel, and of the kingdom of Judah, to intimate that he
would be merciful to the whole people, though the ten tribes had been
for a long time separated from the tribe of Judah, and from the half
tribe of Benjamin, as it has been stated elsewhere. It follows —

<span id="v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015.md)<span id="v.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span>**15**. In those days, and at that time, will
I cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall
execute judgment and righteousness in the land.

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span>**15**. Diebus illis et termpore illo
germinare faciam Davidi germen justitiae; et faciet judicium et
justitiam in terra.

<span id="v.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xii-p5"></span><span id="v.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet shews what Paul afterwards
has spoken of, that all the promises of God are in Christ yea and amen,
(<span id="v.xii-p6.1"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="v.xii-p6.1"></span>.md)
that is, that they do not stand nor can be valid as to us, except Christ
interposes to sanction or confirm them. Then the efficacy of God’s
promises depends on Christ alone. And hence the Prophets, when speaking
of the grace of God, come at length to Christ, for without him all the
promises would vanish away. Let us also know that the Jews had been so
trained as ever to flee to God’s covenant; for on the general covenant
depended all particular promises. As, for instance, Jeremiah has
hitherto been often prophesying of God’s mercy to the people, after
having punished them for their sins; now this promise was special. How
then could the Jews and the Israelites believe that they should return
to their own country? This special promise could have been of no moment,
except as it was an appendix of the covenant, even because God had
adopted them as his people. As then the Jews knew that they had been
chosen as a peculiar people, and that God was their Father, hence their
faith in all the promises. Now, again, we must bear in mind, that the
covenant was founded on Christ alone; for God had not only promised to
Abraham that he would be a Father to his seed, but had also added an
earnest or a pledge that a Redeemer would come.

<span id="v.xii-p7"></span>We now then perceive the reason why the
Prophets, when they sought to strengthen the faithful in the hope of
salvation, set forth Christ, because the promises had no certainty
without the general covenant. And further, as the general covenant could
not stand, nor have any validity, except in Christ, this is the point to
which Jeremiah now turns his attention, as we have also seen in other
places, especially in the twenty-third chapter, from which he repeats
this prophecy. God then had promised that his people would be restored;
he had also promised that he would be so propitious to them as to
preserve them in safety as his people: he now adds —

<span id="v.xii-p8"></span>*In those days, and at that time, I will
raise up,* I will cause to germinate; the verb in the twenty-third
chapter is <span id="v.xii-p8.1"></span>הקמתי, *ekamti,* I will cause to
rise; but here, “I will cause to germinate;” and there we read, “a
righteous branch,” but here, “a branch of righteousness,” which means
the same thing. But why does the Prophet now speak of the seed of David?
It is not an abrupt sentence; and the reason is, because the minds of
the faithful would have alwass vacillated, had not Christ been brought
forward, on whom the eternal and unchangeable covenant of God was
founded. But they could not have had any taste of God’s grace, had they
not known that they had been gratuitously chosen by him. Adoption then
was the foundation of the covenant; and then Christ was the earnest and
pledge of the covenant, as well as of gratuitous adoption. Hence it was,
that the Prophet, wishing to seal and confirm his prophecy, bids the
faithful to look to Christ.

<span id="v.xii-p9"></span>He says, *In those days, and at that time;*
for, as it is said in the proverb, “Even quickness is delay when we have
ardent wishes,” so now a long delay might have produced weariness iu the
Israelites. That they might not, then, be carried away by too much
haste, he mentions *those days* and *that time* So that if God deferred
the time, that they might check themselves, he says, *I will make to
grow for David a righteous branch*

<span id="v.xii-p10"></span>This passage ought, no doubt, to be
understood of Christ. We know that it was a common thing with the Jews,
that whenever the Prophets promised to them the seed of David, to direct
their attention to Christ. This was then a mode of teaching familiarly
known to the Jews. The Prophets, indeed, sometimes mentioned David
himself, and not his son,

<span id="v.xii-p11"></span>“I will raise up David,” etc. (<span
id="v.xii-p11.1"></span>[Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023)<span id="v.xii-p11.1"></span>.md)

<span id="v.xii-p12"></span>Now David was dead, and his body was reduced
to dust and ashes; but under the person of David, the Prophets exhibited
Christ. Then as to this passage, the Jews must shew their effrontery in
a most ridiculous manner, if they make evasions and attempt to apply it
otherwise than to Christ. This being the ease, were any one to ask now
the Jews, how this prophecy has been fulfilled, it would be necessary
for them to acknowledge Christ, or to deny faith in God, and also in
Jeremiah. It is, indeed, certain that Jeremiah celebrates here the grace
of deliverance especially on this account, because a Redeemer was
shortly to come. For the return of the Jews to their own land, what was
it? We know that they, even immediately at their restoration, were in a
miserable state, though their condition then was much better than
afterwards; for in after times they were cruelly treated by Antiochus
and other kings of Syria: they were ever exposed to the heathens around
them, so that they were harassed and plundered by them at pleasure. Then
during the whole of that time which preceded the coming of Christ, God
did not fulfill what he had promised by Jeremiah and his other servants.
What is now their condition? Dispersed through the whole world; and they
have been so for more than fifteen hundred years, since Christ arose
from the dead; and we see that they pine away under their calamities, so
their curse seems dreadful to all. God had, indeed, spoken by Moses, and
then repeated it by his Prophets,

<span id="v.xii-p13"></span>“Ye shall be for a hissing and for a curse
to all nations.”  
(<span id="v.xii-p13.2"></span>[De
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037.md)<span id="v.xii-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="v.xii-p13.3"></span>[Jer
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#018)<span id="v.xii-p13.3"></span>.md)

<span id="v.xii-p14"></span>But that punishment was to be for a time.
There is, therefore, no reason for what the Jews allege. It hence
appears that they are wholly destitute of all credit, and only
perversely pretend, I know not what, that there may be some show, though
wholly hypocritical, in what they assert. But with regard to us, we see
that the promise respecting the coming of the Messiah has not been made
in vain; and we also know, that it happened, through the wonderful
purpose of God, that the Jews did not enjoy full and real happiness,
such as had been promised at the coming of Christ, lest they should
think that what all God’s servants had promised was then accomplished:
for we know how disposed men are to be satisfied with earthly things.
The Jews might then have thought that their happiness was completed, had
not God exercised them with many troubles, in order that they might ever
look forward to the manifestation of Christ.

<span id="v.xii-p15"></span>He calls it *the Branch of righteousness,*
by way of contrast, because the children of David had become
degenerated; and God had almost deemed them accursed, for the greatest
part of the kings were destitute of God’s grace. There was, then, but
one Branch of righteousness, even Christ. We further know how wide and
extensive is Christ’s righteousness, for he communicates it to us. But
we ought to begin with that righteousness which I have mentioned, that
is, what is in opposition to the many changes which happened to the
posterity of David, for things often were in a very low state. Though
*unto David,* <span id="v.xii-p15.1"></span>לדוד *Ladavid,* is often
taken as meaning, “I will raise up the branch of David,” yet God seems
here to refer to the promise which he had made to David, as God is said
in many passages to have sworn to his servant David. (<span
id="v.xii-p15.2"></span>[Ps. 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003.md),
[Ps. 132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011.md)<span
id="v.xii-p15.2"></span>)

<span id="v.xii-p16"></span>It follows, *And he shall execute judgement
and justice in the land* By these words a right government is denoted;
for when the two words are joined tegether, justice refers to the
defense of the innocent, and judgment to the punishment of iniquity; for
except the wicked are restrained by the fear of the law, they would
violate all order. Judgment, indeed, when by itself, means the right
administration of the law; but as I have already said, justice and
judgment include the protection of the good, and also the restraint of
the wicked, who become not obedient willingly or of their own accord. In
a word, the promise is, that the king here spoken of would be upright
and just, so as to be in every way perfect, and exhibit the model of the
best of kings.

<span id="v.xii-p17"></span>But we must always observe the contrast
between the other descendants of David and Christ. For the Jews had seen
the saddest spectacles in the posterity of David: many of them were
apostates, and perverted the worship of God; others raged against the
Prophets and all good men, and were also full of avarice and rapacity,
and given to all kinds of lusts. Since, then, their kings had debased
themselves with so many crimes, there is here promised a king who would
so discharge his office as to be owned as the true minister of God.

<span id="v.xii-p18"></span>It is, at the same time, necessary to bear
in mind the character of Christ’s kingdom. It is, we know, spiritual;
but it is set forth under the image or form of an earthly and civil
government; for whenever the Prophets speak of Christ’s kingdom, they
set before us an earthly form, because spiritual truth, without any
metaphor, could not have been sufficiently understood by a rude people
in their childhood. There is no wonder, then, that the Prophets, wishing
to accommodate their words to the capacity of the Jews, should so speak
of Christ’s kingdom as to portray it before them as an earthly and civil
government. But it is necessary for us to consider what sort of kingdom
it is. As, then, it is spiritual, the justice and judgment of which the
Prophet speaks, do not belong only to civil and external order, but
rather to that rectitude by which it comes that men are reformed
according to God’s image, which is in righteousness and truth. Christ
then is said to reign over us in justice and judgment, not only because
he keeps us by laws within the range of our duty, and defends the good
and the innocent, and represses the audacity of the wicked; but because
he rules us by his Spirit. And of the Spirit we know what Christ himself
declares, “The Spirit shall convince the world of righteousness and
judgment,” etc. (<span id="v.xii-p18.1"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="v.xii-p18.1"></span>.md)
Hence we must come to spiritual jurisdiction, if we wish to understand
what that righteousness is which is here mentioned: of the same kind
also is the judgment that is added. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="v.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p1"></span><span id="v.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#016.md)<span id="v.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p2"></span>**16**. In those days shall Judah be saved,
and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this *is the name* wherewith she
shall be called, The LORD our righteousness.

<span id="v.xiii-p3"></span>**16**. Diebus illis servabitur Jehudah, et
Jerusalem habitabitur secure; et hoc nomen quo vocabitur ipsa, Jehova
justitia nostra.

<span id="v.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xiii-p5"></span><span id="v.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet extends the benefits of the
kingdom to all the Jews, and shews how much was to be expected fromthat
kingdom which he had promised; for in it would be found perfect
happiness and safety. Had not this been added, what we have heard of the
righteous king would have appeared cold and uninteresting; for it
sometimes happens, that however much the king may exercise justice and
judgment, yet the people continue still miserable. But the Prophet
testifies here that the people would be in every way blessed and happy,
when governed by the King promised to come. Hence he says, *In those
days Judah shall be saved* He promises salvation to the Jews, though
under that name are included also, as it is often the case, the ten
tribes. He adds *Jerusalem,* but in a similar sense, *Jerusalem shall
dwell safely,* that is, shall be in a peaceable state. This mode of
speaking is taken from Moses; for the Prophets, whenever they spoke of
God’s blessings, are wont to borrow their doctrine from that fountain.
He then says, that the people would be saved, and then that they would
be in peace and quietness.

<span id="v.xiii-p7"></span>It may now be proper to repeat what I have
already touched upon, — that the salvation mentioned here belongs to the
kingdom of Christ. Had he been speaking of some earthly or temporal
government, the salvation must also have been temporal. But as the
spiritual and celestial kingdom of Christ is the object of the promise,
the salvation mentioned must reach to the very heavens. Hence its limits
are far wider than the whole world. In short, the salvation of which
Jeremiah now prophesies, is not to be confined to the boundaries of a
fading life, nor is it to be sought in this world, where it has no
standing; but if we wish to know what it is, we must learn to raise our
thoughts upwards, and above the world and everything that exists here.
It is an eternal salvation. In the meantime, Christ gives us some
foretaste of this salvation in this life, according to what is said,

<span id="v.xiii-p8"></span>“godliness has the promises of the present
as well  
as of the future life.” (<span id="v.xiii-p8.2"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="v.xiii-p8.2"></span>.md)

<span id="v.xiii-p9"></span>But as this promise ought to be applied to
the kingdom of Christ, there is no doubt but it is perpetual, and ought
to raise up our thoughts to heaven itself.

<span id="v.xiii-p10"></span>To salvation is added *safety;* for were
the faithful ever to fear and tremble, where would be their salvation?
And we know that the happiness brought to us by Christ cannot be
otherwise received, except through peace, according to what Scripture so
often teaches us:

<span id="v.xiii-p11"></span>“Having been justified,” says Paul, “we
have peace with God.”  
(<span id="v.xiii-p11.2"></span>[Ro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span id="v.xiii-p11.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.xiii-p12"></span>And then when he speaks in the fourteenth
chapter of the same Epistle of the kingdom of God, he says that it
consists in joy and peace; and in another place he says,

<span id="v.xiii-p13"></span>“May the peace of God, which surpasses all
conception, obtain the victory in your hearts.” (<span
id="v.xiii-p13.1"></span>[Php 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007.md)<span
id="v.xiii-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="v.xiii-p14"></span>Hence these things are connected together,
salvation and peace, not that we enjoy this joyful and peaceful state in
the world; for they greatly deceive themselves who dream of such a quiet
state here, as we have to engage in a perpetual warfare, until God at
length gathers us to the fruition of a blessed rest. We must, therefore,
contend and fight in this world. Thus the faithful shall ever be exposed
to many troubles; and hence Christ reminds his disciples, “In me ye have
peace; but in theworld” — what? Sorrows and troubles. (<span
id="v.xiii-p14.1"></span>[Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="v.xiii-p14.1"></span>.md)

<span id="v.xiii-p15"></span>We now, then, see why the Prophet joined
safety or security to salvation, even because we cannot otherwise know
that we shall be saved, except we be fully persuaded that God so cares
for our salvation as to protect us by his power, and that his aid will
be always ready whenever needed.

<span id="v.xiii-p16"></span>He in the last place adds, *And this is the
name by which they shall call her, Jehovah our righteousness* In chapter
23 (<span id="v.xiii-p16.1"></span>[Jeremiah
23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#000)<span id="v.xiii-p16.1"></span>.md)
this name is given to Christ, and to him alone it properly belongs; but
it is here transferred to the Church, for whatever belongs to the head,
is made common to all the members. For we indeed know that Christ has
nothing as his own, for as he is made righteousness, it belongs to us,
according to what Paul says,

<span id="v.xiii-p17"></span>“He is made to us righteousness, and
redemption, and sanctification, and wisdom.”  
(<span id="v.xiii-p17.2"></span>[1Co
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span id="v.xiii-p17.2"></span>.md)

<span id="v.xiii-p18"></span>As, then, the Father conferred
righteousness on his own Son for our sake, it is no wonder that what is
in his power is transferred to us. What, then, we found in the
twenty-third chapter was rightly declared, for it belongs peculiarly to
Christ, that he is God our righteousness. But as we partake of this
righteousness, when he admits us into a participation of all the
blessings by which he is adorned and enriched by the Father, it hence
follows, that this also belongs to the whole Church, even that God is
its righteousness.  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) Hence it is
wisely said by the Prophet, that this would be the name of the whole
Church, which could not be, except it had put on Christ, so that God
might reign there in righteousness, for the righteousness of Christ
extends to all the faithful; and Christ also dwells in them, so that
they are not only the temples of Christ, but, as it were, a part of him;
and even the Church itself is by Paul called Christ,

<span id="v.xiii-p20"></span>“As there are,” he says, “many members in
the human body,  
so is Christ.” (<span id="v.xiii-p20.2"></span>[1Co
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span id="v.xiii-p20.2"></span>.md)

<span id="v.xiii-p21"></span>This cannot be applied to Christ
personally, but he thus calls the Church by a metonymy, on account of
that participation which I have mentioned.

<span id="v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.xiv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
been pleased to perform to the Jews what thou didst promise, by sending
the Savior, and hast also designed, by pulling down the middle wall of
partition, to make us partakers of the same invaluable blessing, — O
grant, that we may embrace him with true faith, and constantly abide in
him, and so know thee as our Father, that, being renewed by the Spirit
of thy Son, we may wholly devote ourselves to thee, and consecrate
ourselves to thy service, until at length that which is begun in us be
completed, and we be filled with that glory to which thy Son, our Lord,
daily invites us. — Amen.

<span id="v.xiv-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.xv"></span>

<span id="v.xv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-Fifth

<span id="v.xvi"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p1"></span><span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#017.md)<span id="v.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p2"></span>**17**. For thus saith the LORD; David shall
never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel;

<span id="v.xvi-p3"></span>**17**. Quia sic dicit Jehova, non exeidetur
Davidi vir qui sedeat super solium domus Israel;

<span id="v.xvi-p4"></span>**18**. Neither shall the priests the Levites
want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and to kindle meat
offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.

<span id="v.xvi-p5"></span>**18**. Et sacerdotibus Levitis non excidetur
vir coram facie mea, qui aecendat holocaustum, adoleat oblationem et
faciat sacrificium cunctis diebus.

<span id="v.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xvi-p7"></span><span id="v.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p8"></span>The Prophet had spoken of the restoration of
the Church; he now confirms the same truth, for he promises that the
kingdom and the priesthood would be perpetual. The safety of the people,
as it is well known, was secured by these two things; for without a king
they were like an imperfect or a maimed body, and without a priesthood
there was nothing but ruin; for the priest was, as it were, the mediator
between God and the people, and the king represented God. We now, then,
perceive the object of the Prophet, why he speaks expressly here of the
kingdom and the priesthood, for the people could not otherwise have any
ground to stand on. He therefore declares that the condition of the
people would be safe, because there would always be some of the
posterity of David, who would succeed to govern them, and there would
always be some of the posterity of Levi, to offer sacrifices.

<span id="v.xvi-p9"></span>But this passage ought to be carefully
noticed, for we hence gather, that though all other things were given to
us according to our wishes, we should yet be ever miserable, except we
had Christ as our head, to perform the office of a king and of a priest.
This, then, is the only true happiness of the Church, even to be in
subjection to Christ, so that he may exercise towards us the two offices
described here. Hence also we gather, that these are the two marks of a
true Church, by which she is to be distinguished from all conventicles,
who falsely profess the name of God, and boast themselves to be
Churches. For where the kingdom and priesthood of Christ are found,
there, no doubt, is the Church; but where Christ is not owned as a king
and a priest, nothing is there but confusion, as under the Papacy; for
though they pretend the name of Christ, yet, as they do not submit to
his government and laws, nor are satisfied with his priesthood, but have
devised for themselves numberless patrons and advocates, it is quite
evident that, notwithstanding the great splendor of the Papacy, it is
nothing but an abomination before God. Let us, then, learn to begin with
the kingdom and the priesthood, when we speak of the state and
government of the Church.

<span id="v.xvi-p10"></span>Now we know that in David was promised a
spiritual kingdom, for what was David but a type of Christ? As God then
gave in David a living image of his only-begotten Son, we ought ever to
pass from the temporal kingdom to the eternal, from the visible to the
spiritual, from the earthly to the celestial. The same thing ought to be
said of the priesthood; for no mortal can reconcile God to men, and make
an atonement for sins; and further, the blood of bulls and of goats
could not pacify the wrath of God, nor incense, nor the sprinkling
of,water, nor any of the things which belonged to the ceremonial laws;
they could not, give the hope of salvation, so as to quiet trembling
consciences. It then follows, that that priesthood was shadowy, and that
the Levites represented Christ until he came.

<span id="v.xvi-p11"></span>But the Prophet here speaks according to the
*circumstances* of his own time, when he says, *Cut off shall not be
from David a man,* who may *sit on the throne of the house of Israel;*
and then, *cut off shall not be from the priests, the Levites, a man*
who may *kindle burnt-offerings burn an oblation,* etc.  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) Why does he not speak in general of the
whole people? Why does he not promise that the twelve tribes would be
saved? for this would be, a matter of greater moment. But as we have
said, we ought to understand this principle, that every kind of blessing
is included here, so that men are always in a miserable state unless
they are ruled by Christ and have him as their priest.

<span id="v.xvi-p16"></span>But it may be asked here, how does this
prophecy agree with facts? for from the time Jeremiah promised such a
state of things, there has been no successor to David. It is true,
indeed, that Zerubbabel was a leader among the people, but he was
without a royal title or dignity. There was no throne, no crown, no
scepter, from the time in which the people returned from their
Babylonian exile; and yet God testified by the mouth of Jeremiah that
there would be those from the posterity of David, who would govern the
people in continual succession. He does not stay that they would be
chiefs or leaders, but he adorns them with a royal title. Some one, he
says, will ever remain to occupy the throne. I have said already that
there has been no throne. But we must bear in mind what Ezekiel says,
that an interruption as to the kingdom is not contrary to this prophecy,
as to the perpetuity of the kingdom, or continued succession, (<span
id="v.xvi-p16.1"></span>[Eze
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)<span id="v.xvi-p16.1"></span>.md)
for he prophesied that the crown would be cast down, until the
legitimate successor of David came. It was therefore necessary that the
diadem should fall and be cast on the ground, or be transverted, as the
Prophet says, until Christ was manifested. As, then, this had been
declared, now when our Prophet speaks of kings succeeding David, we must
so understand what he says as that that should remain true which has
been said of the cast down diadem. God, then, did cast down the diadem
until the legitimate successor came. Ezekiel does not only say, “Cast ye
it down transverted,” but he repeats the words three times, intimating
thereby that the interruption would be long. There was, therefore, no
cause of stumbling, when there was no kind of government, nor dignity,
nor power; for it was necessary to look forward to the king, to whom the
diadem, or the royal crown, was to be restored.

<span id="v.xvi-p17"></span>We now then see how it was that there have
been always those of David’s posterity who occupied the throne; though
this was hidden, yet it may be gathered from other prophetic
testimonies. For Amos, when he speaks of Christ’s coming, makes this
announcement,

<span id="v.xvi-p18"></span>“There shall come at that time one who will
repair the ruins of the tabernacle of David.” (<span
id="v.xvi-p18.1"></span>[Am 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011.md)<span
id="v.xvi-p18.1"></span>)

<span id="v.xvi-p19"></span>It was therefore necessary that the kingdom
should be, as it were, demolished when Christ appeared. We further know
what Isaiah says,

<span id="v.xvi-p20"></span>“Come forth shall a shoot from the root of
Jesse.”  
(<span id="v.xvi-p20.2"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="v.xvi-p20.2"></span>.md)

<span id="v.xvi-p21"></span>He does not there name David, but a private
person, who was content with a humble, retired, and rustic life; for a
husbandman and a shepherd, as it is well known, was Jesse the father of
David. In short, whenever the Prophets declare that the kingdom of David
would be perpetual, they do not promise that there would be a succession
without interruption; but this ought to be referred to that perpetuity
which was at length manifested in Christ alone. We have said elsewhere,
how the time of return ought to be connected with the coming of Christ.
For it is not necessary nor expedient to introduce an anagogical sense,
as interpreters are wont to do, by representing the return of the people
as symbolical of what was higher, even of the deliverance which was
effected by Christ; for it ought to be considered as one and the same
favor of God, that is, that he brought back his people from exile, that
they might at length enjoy quiet and solid happiness when the kingdom of
David should again be established.

<span id="v.xvi-p22"></span><span id="v.xvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p23"></span>As to the priesthood, the same difficulty
might be raised, for we know that the priesthood became corrupted; nay,
that for the most part the priests not only became degenerate, but
altogether sacrilegious. Hence the sacerdotal name itself became nothing
else but a base and wicked profanation of all sacred things. But it was
God’s purpose in this manner to shew that another priest was to be
expected, and that men were not to look on figures and types, but were
to raise their thoughts higher, even to him who was to be the only true
Mediator to reconcile God to men.

<span id="v.xvi-p24"></span>By saying, *who may kindle a burnt-offering,
etc*., he specifies certain things, or some parts of the priest’s
office, because the Prophets accommodated their discourses to men of
their own age and time, and described the kingdom and priesthood of
Christ under those external symbols, which were then in use. It is hence
proper to take the ceremonies of the Law as denoting the reality, or
what they signified. For Christ offered no calves, nor any incense, but
fulfilled all these things which were then set forth to the people under
symbols. And he speaks of *burning,* or perfuming the *oblation,* <span
id="v.xvi-p24.1"></span>מנחה*, meneche,* for though the oblation
remained entire, there was yet a perfuming made by frankincense, and a
small portion of the flour was burnt. It is then a mode of speaking,
when a part is stated for the whole. It now follows —

<span id="v.xvii"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p1"></span><span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#019.md)<span id="v.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p2"></span>**19**. And the word of the LORD came unto
Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="v.xvii-p3"></span>**19**. Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad Jeremiam,
dicendo,

<span id="v.xvii-p4"></span>**20**. Thus saith the LORD; If ye can break
my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, and that there
should not be day and night in their season;

<span id="v.xvii-p5"></span>**20**. Sic dicit Jehova, Si irritum
feceritis foedus meum diei et foedus meum noctis, ut non sint dies et
nox suis temporibus;

<span id="v.xvii-p6"></span>**21** *Then* may also my covenant be broken
with David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his
throne; and with the Levites the priests, my ministers.

<span id="v.xvii-p7"></span>**21**. Etiam foedus meum abolebitur (hoc
est, irritum fiet) cum Davide servo meo, ut non sit ei filius, qui
regnet supra solium ejus et cum Levitis sacerdotibus ministris meis.

<span id="v.xvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.xvii-p9"></span><span id="v.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p10"></span>He confirms the same thing, but by
introducing a similitude; for he shews that God’s covenant with the
people of Israel would not be less firm than the settled order of
nature. Unceasing are the progresses of the sun, moon, and stars;
continual is the succession of day and night. This settled state of
things is so fixed, that in so great and so multiplied a variety there
is no change. We have now rain, then fair weather, and we have various
changes in the seasons; but the sun still continues its daily course,
the moon is new every month, and the revolving of day and night, which
God has appointed, never ceases; and this unbroken order declares, as it
is said in <span id="v.xvii-p10.1"></span>[Psalm
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#000.md)<span id="v.xvii-p10.1"></span>, the
wonderful wisdom of God. The Prophet then sets before us here the order
of nature, and says, that God’s covenant with his Church shall be no
less fixed and unchangeable than what it is with mankind, with regard to
the government of the world.

<span id="v.xvii-p11"></span><span id="v.xvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p12"></span>We now perceive the purpose of the Prophet
in saying, *If void ye can make my covenant respecting the day and the
night, then abolished shall be my covenant with David and the Levites*
Now he indirectly touches on the wickedness of the people; for the Jews
did, as far as they could, overthrow, by their murmurs and complaints,
the covenant of God; for in their adversities they instantly entertained
the thought and also expressed it, that God had forgotten his covenant.
This want of faith then is intimated by the Prophet, as though he had
said, “Why are these complaints? It is the same thing as though ye
sought to pull down the sun and the moon from the heavens, and to
subvert the difference between day and night, and to upset the whole
order of nature; for I am the same God, who has settled the succession
of day and night, and has promised that the Church shall continue for
ever: ye can, therefore, no more abolish my covenant with David than the
general law of nature.” We now then understand the Prophet’s object: for
this was not said without conveying reproof; because they were very
wicked and ungrateful to God, when they doubted his truth and constancy,
respecting the promise as to the perpetual condition of the Church. He
in short intimates that they were carried away, as it were, by a blind
madness, when they thus hesitated to believe God’s covenant, as though
they attempted to subvert the whole world, so that there should be no
longer any difference between light and darkness.

<span id="v.xvii-p13"></span><span id="v.xvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvii-p14"></span>Hence he says, *There shall be abolished my
covenant with David my servant, that he should not be my son,* etc. He
repeats what he had said, even that it could not be but that the
posterity of David should obtain the kingdom, which we know has been
fulfilled in Christ. *The throne* of David he now calls what he had
named before as the throne of the house of Israel; but he means the same
thing. It is called the throne of the house of Israel, because the king
and the people are relatively connected, and also because the posterity
of David ruled for the public good, not for their own sake.

<span id="v.xvii-p15"></span>He adds, *and with the Levites, the
priests, my ministers* He had called David his *servant,* he now calls
the Levites his *ministers.* The word <span id="v.xvii-p15.1"></span>שרת
*sheret,* is commonly known, and is used often by Moses, when speaking
of the Levitical priesthood. Its meaning is to serve. He adds —

<span id="v.xviii"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p1"></span><span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#022.md)<span id="v.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p2"></span>**22**. As the host of heaven cannot be
numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured: so will I multiply the
seed of David my servant, and the Levites that minister unto me.

<span id="v.xviii-p3"></span>**22**. Sicut non numeratur exercitus
coelorum, et non mensuratur *(in futureo tempore ponuntur hoec verba,
sed ira resolvi debent, sicutli non potest numerari exercitus coelorum,
et non petest modum habere;* <span id="v.xviii-p3.1"></span>מדד
*significat metiri; mensurare non est Latinum verbum, qualiquam cogimur
uti;* sicut *ergo* non mensuratur) arena maris; sic multiplicabo semen
Davidis servi mei, et Levitarum ministrorum meorum *(non dicit sicuti
proximo versu, uno verbo,* <span id="v.xviii-p3.2"></span>משרתי*, sed
dicit* <span id="v.xviii-p3.3"></span>משרתי אותי*, hoc est,* qui
ministrant mihi, *sed idem est sensus)*

<span id="v.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.xviii-p5"></span><span id="v.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xviii-p6"></span>There is an omission at the beginning; the
particle of comparison is left out, for <span
id="v.xviii-p6.1"></span>אשר *asher,* cannot be taken for <span
id="v.xviii-p6.2"></span>כאשר *caasher: As the hosts of the heavens
cannot be numbered,* nor *the sand of the sea,* so God promises that he
would *multiply the seed of David,* and also the *Levites.* This
promise, as given to Abraham, referred to the whole body of the people;
for when Abraham was bidden to go out, and to look on the heavens, God
made this promise to him, “Number the stars, if thou canst, and the
sands of the sea, so shall thy seed be.” We hence see that this blessing
was extended to the whole seed of Abraham, and especially to the twelve
tribes. And now it is confined to the family of David, and to the
Levitical tribe.

<span id="v.xviii-p7"></span>But what we have already touched upon ought
to be borne in mind, — that the safety of the people was grounded on the
kingdom and the priesthood. As then kings ruled not for themselves, nor
had the sacerdotal dignity been given to the Levites for their own
private advantage, but for the sake of the people, so now the Prophet,
stating a part for the whole, intimates that the whole people would be
secure and safe, when the royal and sacerdotal dignity flourished. There
is not, then, anything diminished from God’s promise, as though the
other tribes were not to multiply; but what Jeremiah testifies
respecting the family of David and the Levitical tribe, is to be
extended, without any difference, to the whole Church. It is yet not
without reason that an especial mention is made of David and Levi; for,
as it has been said, the Church must have been in a miserable state,
without a head, and without a Mediator. There is, however, no doubt but
that Jeremiah alluded to that passage which we have already quoted,
(<span id="v.xviii-p7.1"></span>[Ge
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005.md)<span id="v.xviii-p7.1"></span>;
<span id="v.xviii-p7.2"></span>[Ro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span id="v.xviii-p7.2"></span>.md)
and thus he reproved the want of faith in the people; for they could not
have doubted the restoration of the Church without impugning the truth
of God, as though he had given only vain words to Abraham, when he said,

<span id="v.xviii-p8"></span>“Number the stars of heaven if thou canst,
and the sands of the sea, so shall thy seed be.”

<span id="v.xviii-p9"></span>He therefore shews that God would be true
and faithful in that promise, so as to multiply his Church like the
stars of heaven, and the sands of the sea. It follows —

<span id="v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p1"></span><span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#023.md)<span id="v.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p2"></span>**23**. Moreover, the word of the LORD came
to Jeremiah, saying,

<span id="v.xix-p3"></span>**23**. Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad Jeremiam,
dicendo,

<span id="v.xix-p4"></span>**24**. Considerest thou not what this people
have spoken, saying, The two families which the LORD hath chosen, he
hath even cast them off? thus they have despised my people, that they
should be no more a nation before them.

<span id="v.xix-p5"></span>**24**. An non vidisti quomodo populus hic
loquantur? Duas familias quas elegit Jehova in ipsis, reprobavit eas
(sed abundat particula <span id="v.xix-p5.1"></span>בהם deinde copula
etiam supervacua est, nisi vertatur in adverbium temporis, nunc; nunc
ergo objecit eas) et populum meum spreverunt, ut non sit amplius gens in
conspectu ipsorum (hoc est, ipsorum judicio)

<span id="v.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xix-p7"></span><span id="v.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xix-p8"></span>He now assigns a reason why he had so largely
spoken of the deliverance of the people and of their perpetual
preservation, even because the blessing promised by God was regarded as
uncertain by the unbelieving. Farther, God not only reminds his Prophet
why he bade him to repeat so often the same thing, but speaks also for
the sake of the people, in order that they might know that this
repetition was not in vain, as it was necessary to contend against their
perverse wickedness; for they had so filled their minds and hearts with
despair, that they rejected all God’s promises, and gave no place to
faith or hope.

<span id="v.xix-p9"></span>There are some who explain this passage of
the Chaldeans, who regarded the people with great contempt. But this
explanation is cold and unmeaning. I have no doubt but that God here
expostulates with the Israelites, because they relinquished the hope of
a deliverance; for Jeremiah would not have spoken thus of the Chaldeans,
*Hast thou not seen this people?* He expostulates with Jeremiah, because
he had not moved from the city. He then shews, according to what I have
already observed, that there was a necessity why he should so often
confirm what had been said so plainly before of the return of the
people, *Hast thou not seen,* he says, *how this people speak? saying,
Jehovah now rejects the two families whom he had chosen,* even the
kingdom of Israel and the kingdom of Judah.

<span id="v.xix-p10"></span>It was indeed an unhappy event, that the
people had been divided into two parts; for they ought to have been one
nation. But though it had happened through the defection of the ten
tribes that the body of the people had been torn asunder, yet the
Prophet, according to the usual way of speaking, says, that the *two
families* had been *chosen* The election of God was indeed different,
even that the seed of Abraham might be one: for as there is but one
head, so there ought to be but one body. But God had not wholly cast
away the ten tribes, though they had wickedly and impiously revolted
from the family of David. He then says, according to the language which
prevailed, that the *two families* had been *rejected,* that is, the
kingdom of Israel and the kingdom of Judah. Now the people said, that
both were rejected, which was true, but not in the sense they intended;
for as it has been before said, they thought that there was no hope
remaining, as though the covenant of God had been wholly abolished,
while yet the rejection was only for a time.

<span id="v.xix-p11"></span>We hence see what God reproved in the common
language of the people, even because they entertained no hope of mercy
and pardon; for being struck with amazement, they had cast aside every
thought of God’s promises, when they saw that they were to go into
exile. For as before they had hardened themselves against threatenings,
so now despair immediately laid hold on their minds, so that they could
not conceive any idea of God’s goodness and mercy. He adds, that *the
people were contemptible in their eyes, so as not to be a nation any
more* Thus in the third place he teaches what we have before observed.

<span id="v.xx"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p1"></span><span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
33:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#025.md)<span id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p2"></span>**25**. Thus saith the LORD; If my covenant
*be* not with day and night, *and if* I have not appointed the
ordinantes of heaven and earth;

<span id="v.xx-p3"></span>**25**. Sic dicit Jehova, Si non foedus meum
diei et noctis, leges coelorum et terrae non posuero *(repetendum est*
<span id="v.xx-p3.1"></span>אם *si,* si non posuero leges, *vel,
statuta,* coelorum et terrae:)

<span id="v.xx-p4"></span>**26**. Then will I cast away the seed of
Jacob, and David my servant, *so* that I will not take *any* of his seed
*to be* rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: for I will
cause their captivity to return, and have mercy on them.

<span id="v.xx-p5"></span>**26**. Etiam semen Jacob et Davidis servi mei
reprobabo, ut non assumam ex semine ejus qui dominetur super semine
Abrahae, Isaac et Jacob; quia reducam captivitatem eorum, et miserabor
eorum.

<span id="v.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.xx-p7"></span><span id="v.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p8"></span>Here God opposes the constancy of his
faithfulness to their perverse murmurings, of which he had complained;
and he again adduces the similitude previously brought forward: *“lf,*
then, I *have not fixed my covenant,* or if there is no covenant *as to
the day and the night,* — *if there are no laws as to heaven and earth,
then I shall now cast away the seed of Jacob and the seed of David:* but
if my constancy is ever conspicuous as to the laws of nature, how is it
that ye ascribe not to me my due honor? For I am the same God, who
created the heaven and the earth, who fixed all the laws of nature which
remain unchangeable, and who also have made a covenant with my Church.
If my faithfulness as to the laws of nature changes not, wily should it
change as to that sacred covenant which I have made with my chosen
people?”

<span id="v.xx-p9"></span>We now see the reason why God so often
confirmed a thing in itself sufficiently clear, even because the contest
with the obstinate hopelessness of the people was difficult. For they
thought that they were rejected without any hope of deliverance, when
God punished them only for a time for their wickedness, as they deemed
their exile to be without a return.

<span id="v.xx-p10"></span><span id="v.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p11"></span>He mentions the *seed of Jacob* first,
because it had been said to Abraham, *For thy seed,* and the same
promise was repeated to Jacob. (<span id="v.xx-p11.1"></span>[Ge
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004.md)<span id="v.xx-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="v.xx-p11.2"></span>[Ge
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014)<span id="v.xx-p11.2"></span>.md) He
afterwards adds the *seed of David,* because an especial promise was
afterwards given to David, (<span id="v.xx-p11.3"></span>[2 Sam.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013)<span id="v.xx-p11.3"></span>:.md)
*Then also the seed of David,* he says, *will I reject, that I should
not take of his seed to rule over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob:* he now fitly joins together what might have seemed unconnected;
for he says, that there would be always some of David’s posterity to
rule over all the tribes. God, therefore, thus preserved his Church when
he set a king over his Church; or a kingdom, as we have said, is
inseparable from the safety of the people.

<span id="v.xx-p12"></span>He lastly adds, *For I will restore their
captivity* This obviated the diffidence of the people: for an objection
was ready at hand, “What can this mean? for the ten tribes have been
already led away into distant regions, and are scattered; a part also of
the kingdom of Judah has been cut off; and what remains is not far from
entire ruin.” Hence God calls their attention to the hope of
deliverance, as though he had said, that they were acting foolishly,
because they were thus hasty, for their expectation ought to have
remained in suspense until the time prescribed, that is, till the end of
the seventy years, according to what we have before seen, when the
Prophet spoke against impostors who boasted of a quick return. He
therefore tells them that they ought patiently to bear their exile,
until the full time of their deliverance came. And he points out the
fountain or cause of their deliverance when he says, *I will have mercy
on them,* as though he had said, that the very salvation whieh he
promised to the people depended on his gratuitous mercy.

<span id="v.xxi"></span>

<span id="v.xxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="v.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou settest
before us daily, both in the heavens and on the earth, an illustrious
example, not only of thy power and wisdom, but also of thy goodness and
faithfulness, — O grant, that we may learn to raise up our thoughts
still higher, even to that hope which is laid up for us in heaven, and
that we may so suffer ourselves to be agitated by the various changes of
this world, that yet our hope may remain fixed in thee, and that
whatever may happen, we may be fully persuaded that thou wilt be in such
a way our Father, that we shall at length enjoy that blessed rest, which
has been obtained for us by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. —
Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc20004.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="v.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p29"></span> The *Sept.* give the present time, “who
makes,” etc.; the *Vulg.* the future, “who will make,” etc.; and the
*Syr.* and the *Targ.* in the past, “who made,” etc. The verse may be
thus rendered, —

<span id="v.i-p30"></span>Thus saith Jehovah, — Made it hath Jehovah,
Having formed it in order to establish it; Jehovah *is* his name.

<span id="v.i-p31"></span>That the city is meant cannot be disputed, as
the word itself is introduced in the 4th verse (<span
id="v.i-p31.1"></span>[Jer 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.i-p31.1"></span>), and at the end of the 5th verse. In the *Sept.*
it is land, “who makes the land,” and in the *Syr.,* “who made thee:”
both which are no doubt wrong. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc20004.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="v.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p41"></span> These two verses have been improperly
separated, so that <span id="v.i-p41.1"></span>באים, “coming,” stands by
itself without connection with anything; it ought to be *in* *regimine*
with “sword.” The versions vary, but none give any tolerable meaning.
The verses may be thus rendered, —

<span id="v.i-p42"></span>**4.** For thus saith Jehovah, the God of
Israel, Concerning the houses of this city, And concerning the houses of
the kings of Judah, — Which are thrown down by the engines,

<span id="v.i-p43"></span>**5.** And by the sword of those who come To
make war, even the Chaldeans, And to fill them \[*i.e.,* houses\] with
the carcases of the men, Whom I have smitten in mine anger, And in my
wrath, and for all whose wickedness I have hidden my face from this
city, —

<span id="v.i-p44"></span>**6.** Behold, I will bring, etc. etc.

<span id="v.i-p45"></span>The present and past time in the 4th and 5th
verses, is used for the future, which is often the case in prophecies. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc20004.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="v.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span> The word rendered *“renewal,”* means
lengthening, that is, of man’s life; hence it is taken in the sense of
recovery, — “I will bring to it a recovery and a healing.” See <span
id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>[Jer 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022.md)<span
id="v.iii-p5.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc20004.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="v.iii-p6.4"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span> The best word for it here, as given by the
*Syr.,* is *security;* “And I will unfold to them abundance of peace and
security.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc20004.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="v.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p8"></span> So is the *Vulg.,* “<span
id="v.xi-p8.1"></span>suscitabo,” “I will awake,” or rouse; and also the
*Sept.* and the *Targ.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc20004.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="v.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p19"></span> See Preface to the third volume. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc20004.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="v.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.xvi-p12"></span> It is better to adopt the secondary meaning
of the verb, rendered “cut off,” as it is done by the *Syr.* and the
*Targ.,* which is that of failing or wanting, —

<span id="v.xvi-p13"></span>**17.** For thus saith Jehovah, — Not
wanting to David shall be a man, Sitting on the throne of the house of
Israel;

<span id="v.xvi-p14"></span>**18.** And to the priests, the Levites, Not
wanting shall there be a man before me, Burning a burnt-offering, And
perfuming an oblation, And making a sacrifice all the days.

<span id="v.xvi-p15"></span>— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](cc20005.md)
