[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20016)  [Next](cc20018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 46

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1**. The word of the LORD which came to
Jeremiah the prophet against the Gentiles;

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Qui fuit sermo Jehovae (*ita ad
verbum*) ad Jeremiam Prophetam super cunctas Gentes:

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Against Egypt, against the army of
Pharaohnecho king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in
Carchemish, which Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah.

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Quantum ad Aegyptum, contra
exercitum Pharaonis Necho, regis Aegypti qui erat super flumen Euphratem
in Charchamis, quem percussit Nabuchadnezer, rex Babylonis, anno quarto
Jehoiakim, filii Josiae, regis Jehudah.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span><span id="xviii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>Jeremiah begins here to prophesy against
foreign nations, and continues to do so to the last chapter but one, not
that he then for the first time began to announce these oracles, but as
I have already said, a volume was at length formed, including his
prophecies, the order of time being not everywhere observed; for we see
in the 25th chapter that he threatened heathen nations with the
punishments they had deserved before Jehoiakim was made king. But as I
have said, the prophecies respecting heathen nations have been
separated, though as to time Jeremiah had predicted what afterwards
happened.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span><span id="xviii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>He then says that he had prophesied of the
destruction of *the Egyptian army* which King Nebuchadnezzar overthrew
*in the fourth year of Jehoiakim* Jeremiah had then foretold before this
time what was to be. It might have been that before Pharaoh-necho
prepared his army, Jeremiah predicted what would take place; but it is
probable that this prophecy was announced at the time when Pharaoh-necho
went forth against the Chaldeans, for he was fighting then for the
Assyrians. As they were not equal to the Chaldeans they made a treaty
with the Egyptians. They then had come for a subsidy to drive away the
Babylonians, and thus to defend the Assyrians against their forces. But
at first the expedition met with success; yet at last what had been
predicted by the Prophet was fulfilled.

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>It is not known whether or not the design
was to alleviate the sorrow of the people by this prophecy; and yet I am
disposed to receive what the greater part of interpreters have held,
that as at that time the people were in the greatest trouble, this
prophecy was given in order that the faithful might know that God had
not ceased to care for his people. But we must especially attend to the
truth of history, for when Pharaoh-necho was induced, as it has been
said, by the Assyrians, to lead his army to the Euphrates, the pious
king Josiah met him, and he was then a confederate with the Babylonians,
because there had been a friendly intercourse between the Chaldeans and
the Jews since the reign of Hezekiah. As then Josiah wished to render
service to a king who was his friend, he opposed the army of Pharaoh;
but he was conquered and slain. Now the expedition of Pharaoh was
fortunate and successful for a time, but when he began to boast of
victory he was suddenly cast down; for King Nebuchadnezzar not only
checked his audacity, but having routed his army, compelled him to
return into Egypt, and occupied the whole country from the Euphrates to
Palusium. That country had not yet been exposed to those continual
changes which afterwards happened, that is, when those robbers who had
succeeded Alexander the Great boasted that they were the kings of kings,
and when every one strove to draw all things to himself. For hence it
happened that now Egyptian kings, and then Asiatic kings, often shook
that land as far as they could. This had not yet happened when Jeremiah
prophesied, nor had Alexander been yet born, but it yet appears that
these regions were even then subject to changes, so that there was
nothing fixed or permanent connected with them. We must then bear in
mind that the events of wars were dubious, so that, one while, the
Egyptians forcibly seized a portion of Asia, and at another time the
Assyrians diminished their power, and again the Chaldeans. Pharaoh-necho
was then so repulsed that he never dared again to come forth, as sacred
history testifies in <span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>[2Ki
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>Let us now come to the Prophecy of
Jeremiah. He says that he *prophesied against the army of Pharaoh-necho,
when it was at Euphrates,* that is when he fought there and thought that
he would be a conqueror, as he had far and wide desolated a hostile
land, and brought under his authority many cities. When therefore he had
met with great successes, Jeremiah was then bidden to prophesy against
his army, so that the Jews might know that the death of pious Josiah
would not go unpunished, because God had purposed to destroy that great
army by which Josiah had been killed, and so to break down and lay
prostrate the power of Egypt, that King Pharaoh would hereafter remain
as shut up in prison as it afterwards happened. The rest to-morrow.

<span id="xviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xviii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
been pleased to call us to the spiritual warfare, we may never be
wearied; and that, as our weakness is so great that we are unequal to
our conflicts, grant, that being supported by the power of thy Spirit,
we may persevere in the course of thy holy calling, and never be broken
down by anything that may happen to us, but learn so to break through
all dangers as to commit our life into thy hands, and be in the meantime
prepared to live or to die, until thou gatherest us into that blessed
rest which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xviii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xviii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-Fifth

<span id="xviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003)<span id="xviii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p2"></span>**3**. Order ye the buckler and shield,
and draw near to battle.

<span id="xviii.iv-p3"></span>**3**. Preparate scutum et clypeum et
accedite ad praelium.

<span id="xviii.iv-p4"></span>**4**. Harness the horses; and get up, ye
horsemen, and stand forth with *your* helmets; furbish the spears, *and*
put on the brigandines.

<span id="xviii.iv-p5"></span>**4**. Ligate equos et ascendite equi-tes,
et state (statute vos) in galeis vestris, abstergite lanceas, induite
loricas.

<span id="xviii.iv-p6"></span>**5**. Wherefore have I seen them dismayed
*and* turned away back? and their mighty ones are beaten down, and are
fled apace, and look not back: *for* fear *was* round about, saith the
LORD.

<span id="xviii.iv-p7"></span>**5**. Quare vidi ipsos fractos, aver-sos
retrorsum? et fortes eorum per-cutientur (percussi sunt) et fuga
fugerunt, et non respexerunt; terror undique, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xviii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="xviii.iv-p9"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p10"></span>Jeremiah uses now a form of speaking very
common in the Prophets though remote from common use. For the Prophets,
when they denounce God’s judgments and punishments on the ungodly, do
not speak in a simple language, as though they were giving a narrative,
but they employed figurative expressions, as though they wished to
introduce men into the very scene itself. And that their doctrine might
more effectually penetrate into the hearts of men, they bring forward
various persons; they at one time introduce God as speaking, and at
another they pronounce this or that according to the sentiments of
others; and again, they declare the commands of God.

<span id="xviii.iv-p11"></span>Jeremiah begins here by summoning the
Egyptians, as though he were the herald of Pharaoh, and thus borrows the
name of another person. He says, *Prepare* The verb <span
id="xviii.iv-p11.1"></span>ערך*, orec,* properly means to set in order,
but here it signifies to prepare; *Prepare,* then, *the buckler and the
shield* The word <span id="xviii.iv-p11.2"></span>צנה, *tsane,* was a
shield of a larger form, and <span id="xviii.iv-p11.3"></span>מגן,
*megen,* seems to have been a buckler carried by horsemen of light
armor. *And come near to battle*: He then adds, *Bind* or he *the
horses* The manner of fighting is not the same now as it was formerly;
they fought in chariots, as heathen authors abundantly shew. He
therefore says, he *the horses,* that is, join them together that they
may draw the chariots. *Go up, ye horsemen, stand in your helmets, clean
your lances, and put on your coats of mail.* The meaning is, that
Egyptians would come well prepared with all kinds of arms that they
might be formidable to their enemies. And hence the vengeance appeared
more clearly, because they had been well furnished, so that they might
seem to have gained the victory before they engaged with their enemies.
This is the reason why the Prophet enumerates their complete armor,
having omitted no material part; he mentions *the lances, the helmets,
the coats of mail, the chariots, the horses,* and *the shield,* so that
victory, according to the judgment of men, was already theirs. This is
the first thing.

<span id="xviii.iv-p12"></span>But we must observe the design of the
Holy Spirit; it was his purpose to remove the veil from the eyes of the
faithful, which for the most part prevents us to see as clearly as we
ought the power of God; for when we fix our attention on warlike
preparations, we do not think that anything is left for God to do; for
they who are well prepared seem to be beyond the hazard of losing the
day. That the Jews then might know that it would be nothing for God to
punish the Egyptians, he records this preparation. And there is a kind
of concession when he says, They shall indeed be furnished with a
helmet, a coat of mail, a shield, a sword, and a lance; but all this
would avail nothing as to the issue. Then from this prophetic word let
us learn, that God makes no account of all those things which men
prepare when they wish to *effect* anything. For smoke is everything
that dazzles our eyes; so forces and arms have no importance before God;
for by a single blast he can dissipate all such clouds. And this truth
is very useful; for we look on external things, and when anything
specious presents itself to us, we are immediately taken up with it, and
rob God of all power; for we transfer his glory to these masks which
appear before us. We now then understand why the Prophet speaks here of
bucklers, and shields, and lances, and chariots, and helmets, and coats
of mail.

<span id="xviii.iv-p13"></span><span id="xviii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.iv-p14"></span>For it immediately follows, *Why,* or
how, *have I seen them broken?* Here the Prophet, on the other hand,
disregards all the things which he before enumerated in such high terms,
for he spoke, as it were, according to the common judgment of men. And,
as I have said, he undertook the person of a herald, as though Pharaoh
himself had commanded the Egyptians immediately to take up arms. This
then was apparently very formidable. But the Prophet now speaks as
though standing on an eminence, and says, How or what is this? for <span
id="xviii.iv-p14.1"></span>מדוע, m*eduo,* is a particle of wonder, How!
He then passes over from the common opinion of the flesh to the
prophetic Spirit, as though he had said, “Were any one to judge of the
Egyptians by their external splen-dour, he would say that they would be
victorious over their enemies; but were any one to ascend higher and to
form a judgment, not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit, he would see that all this is frail and evanescent.”

<span id="xviii.iv-p15"></span>But the question, *How?* is to be taken
as emphatical; for it could have been hardly believed that an army so
well equipped could have become a prey to the Babylonians, and that it
was hastening to its own ruin. As then this seemed incredible to any one
attending to the subject, the Prophet asks, How have I seen them? He
however says that he *saw* them, even because God had set him, as we
have said, as it were on a watch-tower. This, however, may be applied to
the body as well as to the mind. *I saw them turned backward:,* when yet
they were rushing forward, as he says afterwards, like a flood. *Their
valiant* men, he says, *have been smitten, and by flight they have
fled.* He means, in short, that there would not be so much courage in
the Egyptians as to withstand the onset of their enemies, because they
would be broken down by the hidden power of God. He also adds, that
their flight would be accompanied with so much dread, that they would
not dare to look behind, so that their danger would increase their
haste.

<span id="xviii.iv-p16"></span>He at length adds in God’s name, *Terror
on every side, says Jehovah* Here he changes the person the third time,
for he declares as from God’s mouth that there would be *terror on every
side;* and thus it is an answer to the question, How, or why? even
because God, he says, executes his judgment on them. Whenever,
therefore, we see that nothing is wanting to our enemies for victory
even over the Church of God, let what the Prophet says here be
remembered by us, that there is no reason why we should despond, though
we may be filled with wonder and amazement; for God will so work as to
break down, without the hand of man, those who shake the whole world
with terror. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="xviii.v"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p1"></span><span id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#006)<span id="xviii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p2"></span>**6**. Let not the swift flee away, nor the
mighty man escape; they shall stumble, and fall toward the north by the
river Euphrates.

<span id="xviii.v-p3"></span>**6**. Ne effugiat volex, et ne servetur
fortis; in Aquilone (in Septentrione) super ripam fluvii Euphratis
impingent (*vel,* impegerunt, *est proeteriti temporis,*) et ceciderunt
(<span id="xviii.v-p3.1"></span>כשל *significat etiam corruere, ideo
vertunt alii,* corruerunt, *sed videtur esse species gradationis.*)

<span id="xviii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.v-p5"></span><span id="xviii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p6"></span>He then says first that they would gain
power, but he speaks presently of their fall, unless it be thought that
the same thing is repeated: and the beginning of the verse may be read
affirmatively, “The swift shall not flee,” etc. But as the particle
<span id="xviii.v-p6.1"></span>אל, *al,* is often used in a prohibitory
sense, the verse may be evidently explained as spoken by God, and thus
it may be read in connection with the previous verse, *Let not the swift
flee, nor the brave escape* For God here declares authoritatively, that
celerity and courage would be of no avail to the Egyptians, because the
swiftest would be taken by their enemies, and the bravest would fall.
 <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132)

<span id="xviii.v-p10"></span>He says, *In the land of the north,* on
the bank of *the river* We know that Babylon and Assyria and Chaldea and
those countries, were northward with respect to Judea. Whenever then the
Prophets speak of the Babylonians, they call them Northlanders; but
Egypt was to the south, as it is clear from many parts of Scripture. But
as the Prophet here speaks of the Egyptians, he rightly makes Chaldea to
be northward. Then he says, *On the bank of the river Euphrates they
shall stumble,* or fall. The meaning is, that the event of war is in the
power of God, so that he would tear in pieces and lay prostrate or
scatter the Egyptians, however well equipped they might be, and trust in
their own strength.

<span id="xviii.v-p11"></span>We must also observe, that whatever
subsidies men pro-cum for themselves in order to protect their safety,
they are nothing when God is opposed to them. The Prophet indeed
mentions only two things; but he means that though men may excel in many
things and possess many endowments, they must yet perish, when that is
God’s will: flight cannot save the swift, nor strength the valiant. It
follows —

<span id="xviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007)<span id="xviii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p2"></span>**7**. Who *is* this *that* cometh up as a
flood, whose waters are moved as the rivers?

<span id="xviii.vi-p3"></span>**7**. Quis iste tanquam lacus ascendet
(*vel,* ascendit, *ad verbum*) tanquam fluvii sese agitant (*aut,*
moventur) aquae ejus?

<span id="xviii.vi-p4"></span>**8**. Egypt riseth up like a flood, and
*his* waters are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up,
*and* will cover the earth; I will destroy the city and the inhabitants
thereof.

<span id="xviii.vi-p5"></span>**8**. Aegyptus tanquam lacus ascendit
(ascendet, *ad verbum, sed significat continuum actum,*) et tanquam
fluvii sese movent aquae: dixit enim, Ascendam et operiam terram; perdam
urbem et qui habitant in ea.

<span id="xviii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xviii.vi-p7"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p8"></span>The Prophet again meets those doubts which
might have possessed the minds of the godly, so as to prevent them to
receive this prophecy in faith and with due reverence: for we have said,
that when our thoughts are occupied with external things, the power of
God is disregarded. When, therefore, we speak of some impregnable
kingdom, it does not come into our minds, that all strongholds are of no
account with God. It was therefore necessary highly to extol the power
of God, when the Prophets spoke of his judgments: otherwise the flesh,
as we have stated, would have said, “They who are well fortified must be
free from evils, and as it were beyond the reach of weapons, and hence
there is nothing for them to fear.” And it is with this false
imagination that the proud deceive themselves, for they set up their
forces, their auxiliaries, and all the things which they deem, according
to the judgment of the flesh, as sufficient to protect their safety.
Titus it happens, that they heedlessly disregard all threatenings, even
because they think that the subsidies which they have are so many
fortresses against all attacks.

<span id="xviii.vi-p9"></span>It is for this purpose that the Prophet
now says, *Who is this that as a lake rises,* or *swells*, *as rivers
are moved,* or, *whose waters are agitated*? But he speaks according to
the common judgment of men, for the very sight could not but fill men
with fear; and so the Jews could never have thought that possible which
the Prophet here asserts. He then, as it were, introduces them all as
anxiously inquiring according to their own judgment, *Who is this?* as
though Pharaoh was not a mortal, but something above human. For the
drift of the question is this, that Pharaoh was as it were exempted from
the common condition of men, because his power increased like a river
rising or swelling; and *its waters,* he says, *make a noise*

<span id="xviii.vi-p10"></span><span id="xviii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p11"></span>Then he adds, *Egypt* is like *rivers*
and like a *lake*: it made a noise with its forces, as though a river
were rolling along its waters. But all this would be nothing, as he
afterwards tells us he adds, he *hath said, I will ascend, I will cover
the land, I will destroy the city, etc*. He puts city in the singular
instead of the plural number;  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) I
*will destroy cities,* he says, *and all who dwell in them.* He in short
sets forth Pharaoh here as one who triumphed before he fought, because
he could cover the land with the multitude of his footmen and horsemen.
It now follows, —

<span id="xviii.vii"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009)<span id="xviii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p2"></span>**9**. Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye
chariots; and let the mighty men come forth; the Ethiopians and the
Libyans, that handle the shield; and the Lydians, that handle *and* bend
the bow.

<span id="xviii.vii-p3"></span>**9**. Ascendite equi (*quidam vertunt,*
insanite, *sed dura esset metaphora, ideo simpliciter accipio,*) jactate
vos currus (*ponit in singulari numero, cum tamen verbum sit pluralis
numeri,*) egredientur fortes, nempe Aethiopes et Lybes, qui tenent
clypeum, et Lydi, qui tenent et tendunt arcum.

<span id="xviii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.vii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vii-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject, and
enumerates whatever might discredit his prophecy. For when the faithful
saw that the Egyptians went on that expedition not only with immense
forces, but had also, as foreign aids, the Ethiopians and the Libyans,
and even transmarine soldiers from Lydia, — when they saw hired soldiers
from all parts joined to the Egyptians, it was hardly credible that such
an army could be put to flight. Then the Prophet says here, that though
Pharaoh hired the Ethiopians, the Libyans, and the Lydians, yet with all
these forces he would perish.

<span id="xviii.vii-p7"></span>He again speaks in the name of Pharaoh,
*Ascend, ye* horses; *toss, ye chariots, and let the valiant come forth*
This coming forth may refer to the lands whence they came. He mentions
first the Ethiopians, who were near the Egyptians, though separated from
them. Then he adds the people of Libya, who were Africans, or who were
in the middle between Egypt and Africa. Then he says, that they *laid
hold on the shield.* He points out their principal armor, not that they
were without a helmet and sword and other arms, but they mainly trusted
in their shields. As we know that the Macedonians wore the *pelta,* and
were remarkable for that piece of armor, so the Prophet says that the
Ethiopians and Libyans were furnished with bucklers or shields. He
mentions also the Lydians, who were from another part, even from the
opposite shore of the sea; for we know that the Lydians were in Asia
Minor, while the Egyptians were in the middle between Africa and Judea.
The Mediterranean Sea was therefore between them. It hence appears, that
auxiliaries from a distance, and with great expense, were procured by
Pharaoh when he undertook this war. And it is also probable that other
nations were hired; but the Prophet mentions only the Ethiopians,
Libyans, and Lydians: and he says, that those named last *laid hold on
the bow,* because they were the best archers. It now follows, —

<span id="xviii.viii"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010)<span
id="xviii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p2"></span>**10.** For this *is* the day of the
Lord GOD of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his
adversaries: and the sword shall devour, and it shall be satiate and
made drunk with their blood: for the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice
in the north country by the river Euphrates.

<span id="xviii.viii-p3"></span>**10.** Verum (*copula enim hic
adversative exponi debet,* atqui) dies ille Domino Jehovae exercituum,
dies ultionis ad ulciscendum de adversariis suis; et vorabit gladius et
saturabitur et inebriabitur sanguine ipsorum; quia victima Domino
Jehovae exercituum in terra aquilonis ad fluvium Euphratem.

<span id="xviii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet having described the
terrible forces of Pharaoh, in which he so trusted, that he dared to
boast of a certain victory, now says that the event would be very
different: *But this day, he says, will be the day of Jehovah’s
vengeance;* as though he had said, that Pharaoh would look only on his
chariots and horsemen, his hired soldiers, their arms and warlike
preparations, and that he would not at the same time look to God, who is
not without reason called the God of hosts. Though the Scripture in many
places ascribes this title to God, yet here it has a special
application. For the Prophet derides the folly of Pharaoh, because he
thought the issue of the war was in his own hand, as though the
over-ruling of all things was not in God’s hand. He then says, that
victory depended on God only; and farther, he announces what was to be:
*This day,* he says, *will be the day of God’s vengeance.*

<span id="xviii.viii-p7"></span>By these words he intimates that God was
incensed with the Egyptians, and the cause we referred to yesterday,
even because Pharaoh-necho had in passing through slain the pious King
Josiah. He then deserved that God should lay prostrate his arrogance,
and also chastise his cruelty and check his tyranny. But when he calls
the Egyptians God’s *adversaries,* this was said for the consolation of
the chosen people, to shew that God would undertake their cause. For
whence was it that he was an enemy to the Egyptians? even because he
would not suffer the pious king to be killed with impunity. We now then
understand what these words mean, that *this day* would be *a day of
vengeance* to the God *of hosts;* as though he had said, that God would
preside over and regulate that war, so that all the forces of Pharaoh
would avail him nothing.

<span id="xviii.viii-p8"></span>he afterwards expresses more clearly,
for confirmation, what he had said: *The sword,* he says, *shall devour,
and shall be satiated and made drunk with their blood* But at the end of
the verse he says, that this would be the righteous judgment of God. For
God so extols his own power, that he yet would have himself acknowledged
to be just whenever he inflicts punishment on the ungodly; for as his
severity often appears extreme, hence the Prophets, when they speak of
acts of vengeance which God executes, at the same time adds some
testimony as to his judgment being righteous, as in this place, when it
is said, that the God of hosts had *a sacrifice*

<span id="xviii.viii-p9"></span>By *sacrifice* the Prophet means, that
the slaughter would be free from every stain; for it is the same thing
as though he had said, “God will be glorified in that slaughter, when
all the Egyptians shall be destroyed.” For why do we offer sacrifices to
God except that his glory may be proclaimed, that he is just as well as
merciful, and almighty, and the fountain of all wisdom and uprightness?
We hence see the purpose for which the word sacrifice is used, even that
none should dare to blame that slaughter, as though God were too rigid
and exceeded the limits of justice in shedding that blood. He then says
that all the slaughters would be as so many sacrifices, in which God’s
justice as well as his power would shine forth, he again points out the
place, the land of the north, nigh Euphrates, in order that more credit
and certainty might be given to the prophecy. It now follows, —

<span id="xviii.ix"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xviii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011)<span id="xviii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p2"></span>**11**. Go up into Gilead, and take balm,
O virgin, the daughter of Egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines;
*for* thou shalt not be cured.

<span id="xviii.ix-p3"></span>**11.** Ascende in Guilead, et sume
resinam virgo filia Aegypti; frustra multiplicas medicamina; sanitas
nulla tibi.

<span id="xviii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.ix-p5"></span><span id="xviii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet adds here nothing new, but
confirms by another metaphor what he had said before. He then says, that
the slaughter would be like a fatal plague, as though God would take
away from the Egyptians every hope. We indeed know that the kingdom of
Egypt did not then perish; for the nation itself remained. But the
kingdom was so depressed, that, as it was stated yesterday, they kept
themselves as shut up within their own borders, and did not afterwards
bring out their forces. And yet it is well known how great was the pride
and audacity of that nation; but they saw that they were wholly broken
down and weakened. Hence the Prophet says, not without reason, that that
would be an incurable wound, by which God would so smite Egypt, that it
would no more recover its ancient strength; for after that time the
kingdom of Egypt never flourished; and after a few years, as we shall
see in another prophecy, it was brought under the power of Babylon.

<span id="xviii.ix-p7"></span>he now turns his discourse to Egypt: he
says, *O virgin, the daughter of Egypt, a* mode of speaking common in
the Prophets. They call Babylon, The daughter of Babylon; they call
Judea, The daughter of Judah. But this may be applied to the people or
to the kingdom. And he calls Egypt *virgin* on account of its
*delicacies,* as though he had said, that the Egyptians were tender and
delicate, because they had during a long peace gathered strength and all
kinds of wealth. As then they were so inebriated with their pleasures,
Egypt by way of mockery is called a virgin.

<span id="xviii.ix-p8"></span>*Ascend,* he says, *into Gilead, and take
rosin,* or, as some render it, “balm.” Jerome, in another place,
rendered it “honey,” but without reason; and it is probable that the
word means rosin rather than balm. It may be also concluded from other
places that the best rosin was found on Mount Gilead, as we have also
stated in the eighth chapter of this book (<span
id="xviii.ix-p8.1"></span>[Jer
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022)<span id="xviii.ix-p8.1"></span>).
The rosin was a juice flowing from trees, especially from the terebinth;
and hence the best rosin is the terebinthine, which we call
*terebenthine.* There is at the same time a rosin from firs and other
trees. But as I have already said, Mount Gilead was fruitful in rosin,
and is celebrated not only for the abundance of its rosin but also for
its excellency; and its medicinal qualities are found better and more
efficacious in some places than in others.

<span id="xviii.ix-p9"></span>According, then, to the common mode of
speaking, he says*, O daughter of Egypt, ascend into Gilead, and take to
thee rosin;* but it will be, he says, *in vain;* that is, *“Wert* thou
earnestly to seek a remedy for thy evils, thou couldst never find it;
for thy stroke is incurable.” Not that the kingdom of Egypt perished or
was wholly overthrown, but that its strength would be lost, so that the
Chaldean king would take possession of all that part of Asia which the
Egyptians had occupied, even as far as Pelusium, to the very borders of
the Nile. He at length adds, —

<span id="xviii.x"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p1"></span><span id="xviii.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#012)<span id="xviii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p2"></span>**12.** The nations have heard of thy
shame, and thy cry hath filled the land: for the mighty man hath
stumbled against the mighty, *and* they are fallen both together.

<span id="xviii.x-p3"></span>**12.** Audierunt gentes opprobrium tuum,
et clamore tuo repleta est terra; quia fortis contra fortem impegit, et
simul ceciderunt ambo.

<span id="xviii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.x-p5"></span><span id="xviii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.x-p6"></span>He concludes this prophecy by saying that
the report of this slaughter would be everywhere known among all
nations. Had the Egyptians sustained only a small loss, the thing might
have been unknown, as when a small engagement takes place the report
does not spread far and wide; but when by one battle a nation is so
conquered that a remarkable change follows, the event then is proclaimed
everywhere. The Prophet then intimates by these words, that the stroke
of Egypt would not be common, as also he said before, because the report
would fly through all nations.

<span id="xviii.x-p7"></span>*Heard* then *have all nations of thy
reproach,* even that the Egyptians had, to their great disgrace, been
conquered by the Chaldeans, and that they had not only been put to
flight, but that the greatest part of them had been slain, so that the
kingdom of Egypt had been nearly lost; that at least they had been
reduced to such straits, that they lost their chief eries and a very
wide country, even throughout Asia to the river Euphrates.

<span id="xviii.x-p8"></span>He says that *the land was filled with
their cry*: by voice or cry he means lamentations. Then he adds,
*Because the valiant hath stumbled against the valiant* This may be thus
explained, “The valiant hath contended with the valiant;” but. that the
Chaldean proved stronger than the Egyptian: but I prefer to apply this
to the Egyptians; and this may be inferred from the end of the verse,
where he says, that *both fell.* So the Prophet means that the
multitude, in which the Egyptians gloried, would be a hindrance to them,
as usually is the case, when the army is too crowded, for the larger and
the more numerous the army is, the greater is the disorder and
confusion. When an army is small, they can by degrees recede, or stand
still, until they take flight in safety: but in a great multitude there
is also great trepidation, and hence a great disorder and confusion.
This then is what the Prophet points out, when he says, *The valiant
stumbled against the valiant, and they both fell together;* that is,
that while they were fighting, they would clash with one another, and
produce such disorder, as to occasion the fall of both.

<span id="xviii.xi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xviii.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we see
that the most opulent kingdoms have not escaped thy hand, we may learn
to recumb only on thine aid, and to submit ourselves to thee, with due
hu-milky, so that we may be protected by thy hand, and that this only
true confidence may sustain us in all perils, that thou hast undertaken
the care of our salvation; and that we may, in the meantime, fight under
thy banner with sincerity and uprightness of life, until we shall at
length enjoy the fruit of our victory, in the celestial kingdom, through
Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xviii.xi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-Sixth

<span id="xviii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#013)<span
id="xviii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p2"></span>**13** The word that the LORD spake to
Jeremiah the prophet, how Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come
*and* smite the land of Egypt.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p3"></span>**13.** Sermo quem locutus est Jehova ad
Jeremiam Prophetam ad veniendum (*vel,* de veniendo,) de adventu
Nabuchadnezer regis Babylonis ad percutiendam terram Aegypti.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiii-p6"></span>The former prophecy was respecting the
slaughter of the Egyptian army, when Pharaoh came to assist the
Assyrians, with whom he was then confederate. But this prophecy extends
farther; for Jeremiah declares that the Egyptians themselves would have
their turn; for we know even from other Prophets, that punishment had
been denounced on them, (and Ezekiel pursues this subject through many
chapters,) because they had, by their allurements, deceived the people
of God. And God punished them not only for the evils by which they had
themselves provoked his wrath, but because they had corrupted the Jews
and confirmed them more and more in their obstinacy.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p7"></span>We now then perceive the design of the
Prophet: the meaning is, that God, after having executed his judgment on
the Israelites and the Jews, would become also the judge of the
Egyptians and of other nations. We must further observe, that this
prophecy was announced before the city was taken. At the time, then,
that the Egyptians were secure, and that the Jews, relying on their aid,
thought themselves safe from the violence of Nebuchadnezzar, it was then
that this prophecy was delivered. But we see again, that the order of
time is not observed as to these prophecies; for he had spoken of the
slaughter of the army, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim. And it is
probable, though the time is not pointed out here, that the destruction
of Egypt had then been predicted; for before Jeremiah began to discharge
his prophetic office, Isaiah had spoken against Egypt. Ezekiel, also,
when an exile in Chaldea, at the same time confirmed the prophecies of
Jeremiah, and said many more things against Egypt. We must however
remark, that Jeremiah had not once only prophesied of the ruin of Egypt;
for after he was forcibly led there, he confirmed, as we have before
seen, what he had said previously.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p8"></span>Jeremiah then had predicted what we read
here many years before the taking of the city. But as the Jews
disregarded what he had said before, he again confirmed it, when he was
in Egypt, though it was not without great danger to his life, for he
spared neither the king nor the nation.

<span id="xviii.xiii-p9"></span>He then says, that *the word* came to
him *respecting the coming of Nebuchadnezzar to smite the land of Egypt*
Hitherto he has spoken of the punishment which God inflicted on the
Egyptians, beyond their own kingdom, on the bank of the Euphrates; but,
now he records the punishment of Egypt itself, when Nebuchadnezzar not
only went to meet the Egyptians, to drive them from his own borders, but
when he made an irruption into their kingdom, and plundered many cities,
and so afflicted the whole kingdom, that the Egyptian king afterwards
reigned only, as it were, by his permission. It follows, —

<span id="xviii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)<span id="xviii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p2"></span>**14.** Declare ye in Egypt, and publish
in Migdol, and publish in Noph and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and
prepare thee; for the sword shall devour round about thee.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p3"></span>**14.** Annuntiate in Aegypto, et
promulgate in Migdol, promulgate in Noph et in Taphnees, dicite, Sta, et
para te; quia voravit (*vel,* consumpsit) gladius circuitus tuos.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xiv-p6"></span>He pursues the same mode of speaking as
we observed yesterday; and the reason was explained, even because, as
men are very inattentive to God’s judgments, the message of Jeremiah
would have been *ineffectual,* had he spoken plainly, and in an ordinary
way. It was therefore necessary to adopt an elevated style, and to
speak, as he does, in a manner striking and forcible. Public speakers
affect fine speaking, but only to catch applause, or to fill men with
empty fear or joy: but the Prophets had in view another thing, even to
teach, to exhort, to reprove, to threaten, in a way calculated to be
effectual.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p7"></span>He says, *Declare ye in Egypt,* as though
he pronounced a sentence from a tribunal, being endowed with divine
authority. He then bids this message to be brought to the Egyptians. He
afterwards mentions some cities, *Migdol, Noph,* and *Tahpanhes.* Some
think Noph to be Alexandria; but it was probably Memphis, and this
appears evident from other parts of Scripture. But they are mistaken who
think that the same was Migdol, for the Prophet here refers to them as
different places. Of Tahpanhes we have spoken elsewhere. Now these were
celebrated cities and known to the Jews, as they were not far from them.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p8"></span>We know that Memphis was a renowned city;
but this was much more known to the Israelites, for it was not far from
their passage from Egypt, as we may learn from the second book of Moses
and other parts of Scripture. Then we have seen that the *Jews* dwelt in
Tahpanhes when they became fugitives from their own land, and were
*received* there as guests.

<span id="xviii.xiv-p9"></span>It is then the same as though the Prophet
had said, that God was now armed against the Egyptians; but as he was
not a teacher set over them, he speaks of them as of foreign nations,
*Declare,* he says, in Egypt*,* that is, let the Egyptians know this.
*Say, Stand, and prepare thyself, for the sword has devoured thy
borders,* and everything around thee. By these words the Prophet
intimates, that though the Egyptians, being warned in due time, should
exercise vigilance, yet their care would be useless, for they could not
prevent God from executing what he had determined, he speaks, however,
of what was incredible, for the Egyptians thought themselves far from
every danger: hence the Prophet says, that how much so ever they might
prepare themselves, yet it would all be in vain. He then derides their
security, because they thought themselves beyond the reach of danger. It
follows —

<span id="xviii.xv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xviii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#015)<span id="xviii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p2"></span>**15.** Why are thy valiant *men* swept
away? they stood not, because the LORD did drive them.

<span id="xviii.xv-p3"></span>**15.** Quomodo dispersus est fortis tuns
(*ad verbum,* fortes tui, *est mutatio* numeri,) non stabit (*vel,* non
stetit,) quia Jehova impulit eum (*iterum mutatur munerus, designat enim
fortes tuos.*)

<span id="xviii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xv-p6"></span>By these words the Prophet expresses more
clearly what I have just referred to, that the Egyptians would not be
able to resist, though they might have gathered auxiliaries on every
side, because God would carry on war against them. In astonishment he
asks, “How has it happened, or, how is it, that thy *valiant men have
been thus scattered?”* The verb, indeed, means to sweep, but here it
means to scatter. He immediately answers, *Because God has driven them,
they could not stand* The reason for such a question we explained
yesterday, even because the unbelieving regarded as a fable whatever
they heard from the Prophets; and as long as things went on
prosperously, they slept, in a manner, over their good fortune, and
became inebriated with it, so that they feared nothing, and did not
think themselves exposed to any adversities. As then ungodly men proudly
disregarded God, the Prophets, appealing to common sense, asked them,
*How comes this?* For Jeremiah spoke of things as yet hidden, and which
had not fallen under the observation of men. We hence see why this
wonder was expressed, *How have thy valiant fallen?* Then he says,
*Because Jehovah has driven them, they could not stand*

<span id="xviii.xv-p7"></span>Here, again, we must bear in mind, what we
briefly referred to yesterday, that ungodly men deceive themselves by a
false confidence, when they set up in opposition to God’s power their
earthly helps and subsidies, and think that they are well secured when
they possess many forces and strongholds, and when they can procure
auxiliaries for themselves from every quarter. Let us know that nothing
is more fatal than to confide in earthly helps, when God declares that
he is our adversary. Hence the Prophet says, that they did not stand,
*because Jehovah drove them;* as though he had said, that Egyptians
would have to do not only with the king of Babylon, but with God
himself, whom they had provoked. It follows, —

<span id="xviii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#016)<span id="xviii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p2"></span>**16.** He made many to fall, yea, one
fell upon another: and they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own
people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p3"></span>**16.** Multiplicavit, impingent, etiam
cecidit quisque in socium suum; et dixerunt, surge et revertamur ad
populum nostrum, et ad terram nativitatis nostrae a facie gladii
populantis.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvi-p6"></span>Brevity of expression renders this
sentence obscure or ambiguous. The verb <span
id="xviii.xvi-p6.1"></span>הרבה*, erebe,* is put without a nominative
case; but it is to be applied to God. God, then, has *multiplied.* And
then there is a change of number, for the singular is to be taken as a
plural when he says, *he falls,* <span id="xviii.xvi-p6.2"></span>כושל*,
cushil*: the meaning is, that many would stumble, because God would
drive them, as it was said in the last verse. Hence comes what
immediately follows, *Even fall shall every one on his friend,* that is,
before the enemy smote them; by crowding together they would of
themselves dash one against another, so that *each* would fall by the
pushing of his associate.

<span id="xviii.xvi-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *And they shall say,
Rise* Here he speaks not of natives. Some think that the reference is to
foreigners, who had come into Egypt on account of the fruitfulness of
the land; for a dwelling in Egypt, which we know was very fertile and
full of all abundance, was especially advantageous to them. As, then,
Egypt had in it many strangers and sojourners, some interpreters think
that the Prophet here speaks of them, as though he had said, “They who
came into Egypt, to live well there through the affluence of all good
things, shall find nothing better for them than to flee away:” *They
shall t*hen *say, Rise;* that is, every one will exhort one another, and
say, *Let us go into the land of our nativity,* that is, “Let us be
satisfied with our own native soil; for the very richness of Egypt will
prove fatal to us if we remain in it.” But I rather think that the
Prophet refers to the hired soldiers. We saw yesterday that when Pharaoh
carried on war on the banks of Euphrates, he had with him Ethiopians,
and Lydians, and many from Libya, and we shall see again presently that
there were hired soldiers in Egypt when Nebuchadnezzar conquered it. It
was then very suitable for the Prophet to mention these foreign soldiers
whom Pharaoh had hired; for at the beginning of the verse he said,
*Every one shall stumble on his neighbor,* and then it follows, *And
they shall say, Let us return to our own people and to the land of our
nativity* When he says, *Every one shall stumble on his neighbor,* he
means, no doubt, those valiant men, called to defend Egypt; of the same
also he speaks when he says, *Rise, let us return to the land of our
nativity.*

<span id="xviii.xvi-p8"></span>He says, *From the face of the
devastating sword.* The word <span id="xviii.xvi-p8.1"></span>היונה,
*eiune,* is derived by some from <span id="xviii.xvi-p8.2"></span>יין,
*iin,* wine; and they give this explanation, “from the inebriated
sword.” *Jerome* renders the word “Dove,” but without reason. He then
calls the sword wasting or destroying, which had already been inebriated
with much blood, and which had done many slaughters. By the sword, he
means that of the soldiers of Nebuchadnezzar. Some render the words,
“saddening sword,” but this rendering appears to me unmeaning. They then
say, “As we have been already broken down, and see our enemies
committing slaughters with impunity, and kill all who meet them, nothing
is better for us than to return to our own land.” It follows, —

<span id="xviii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017)<span
id="xviii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvii-p2"></span>**17.** They did cry there, Pharaoh king
of Egypt *is but* a noise; he hath passed the time appointed.

<span id="xviii.xvii-p3"></span>**17**. Clamarunt illic, Pharao rex
Aegypti perturbationis, praeteriit tempus statutum (*vel,* condictum.)

<span id="xviii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xvii-p6"></span>This verse ought to be joined with the
preceding, for he refers to the cries of the soldiers who had been
deceived by their own hopes: they at length *cried, Pharaoh is to us a
king of confusion.* The Prophet predicts what was to be; but he speaks,
according to what was usually done, in the past time; for the Prophets
announce unknown things as before their eyes, in order to gain credit to
their prophecies. He then says, that there would be a cry among the
soldiers, *Pharaoh the king of Egypt is a king of confusion;* for the
word <span id="xviii.xvii-p6.1"></span>שאון, *shaun,* is to be read in
the genitive case; as though the Prophet had said that the soldiers
would really find that Pharaoh would not turn out according to his
boasting. The name of Egypt first filled him and the whole nation with
arrogance; and further, it was dreaded by the neighbouring nations.
When, therefore, they *came* to Pharaoh, they thought that they were
coming to some sort of a god. The Prophet derided that foolish
confidence unreasonably entertained, and says, *“They* shall cry there,
O Pharaoh, magnificent king, thou art now a king of tumult,” or
confusion.

<span id="xviii.xvii-p7"></span>What follows is not well explained, as I
think, by interpreters; for they all, with one consent, think that
Pharaoh is derided, because he delayed time, after having before said
that he would go against Nebuchadnezzar; as earthly kings, when they
think themselves sufficiently prepared, do not wait until the enemy is
at hand, or finds them at home, but go to meet him at a distance. Others
think that the time for war had been proclaimed, as it was usual
formerly for both sides to proclaim a certain day on which they were to
*come* to a conflict. But from the last verse we may gather that the
Prophet meant another thing, he then derides, if I am not mistaken, the
folly of Pharaoh for another reason, even because he thought that those
threatenings were vain and empty, which had been dispersed by the Jews;
for the Egyptians were not ignorant of what had been predicted by the
Prophets. Isaiah had long before cried out against the Jews, because
they made treaties with the Egyptians, and fled there for aid. There is
no doubt but the courtiers, in order to gain favor, said to them,
“Behold, our Prophets hinder us as much as they can, and we must take
care lest they turn aside the people: while then there is time, let us
make the treaty, which will be useful to you as well as to us.” As,
then, the destruction of Egypt had been predicted many years before, and
as the Egyptians remained in safety after Judea was overthrown and laid
waste, it is probable that they became more hardened, thinking that the
time had elapsed. And this view, as I have said, is confirmed by the
context. For it follows, —

<span id="xviii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#018)<span
id="xviii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xviii-p2"></span>**18.** *As* I live, saith the King,
whose name *is* The LORD of hosts, Surely as Tabor *is* among the
mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, *so* shall he come.

<span id="xviii.xviii-p3"></span>**18.** Vivo ego, dicit rex (cui nomen
est rex) Jehova exercituum, quoniam sicut Thabor in montibus, et sicut
Carmelus in mari, veniet.

<span id="xviii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xviii-p6"></span>Why did the Prophet say this, except
that the Egyptians thought they had escaped, because the time had been
delayed? As, then, the length of time had deceived them, thinking, as
they did, that God had told what was false, or that he had forgotten
what he had predicted by his Prophets, he says, *I live, saith Jehovah,*
that is, by my life; for God here swears by his life, that what he now
declares would come. This seems to be the true meaning. Igor did the
Prophet speak thus only for the sake of the Egyptians, but also for the
sake of the Jews; for we know that it was usual and common with them
proudly to assert that what the Prophets had spoken from God’s mouth was
all vain: hence that proverbial saying,

<span id="xviii.xviii-p7"></span>“To-morrow we shall die, let us eat and
drink.”  
(<span id="xviii.xviii-p7.2"></span>[Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span
id="xviii.xviii-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="xviii.xviii-p8"></span>They also called the prophecies
burdens, by way of reproach and contempt. As the ungodly promised
themselves impunity through God’s forbearance, it was necessary to
testify to them what we here read, even that whatever God had threatened
would come to pass, though he delayed it for a time. For he suspends his
punishment, but his vengeance at length breaks out, when the unbelieving
think that all things will turn out prosperously; yea, when they say,

<span id="xviii.xviii-p9"></span>“Peace and security, then sudden
destruction overtakes them.”  
(<span id="xviii.xviii-p9.2"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span
id="xviii.xviii-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="xviii.xviii-p10"></span>By the word <span
id="xviii.xviii-p10.1"></span>מועד, *muod,* then, the Prophets mean a
fixed time, not that they had pointed out a certain day, but that they
had spoken of the destruction of *Egypt,* as though God had already gone
forth as the judge.

<span id="xviii.xviii-p11"></span>As, then, they said that the time had
passed by, God here swears by his life; and hence he says, *whose name
is King, Jehovah of hosts* God here sets forth his own greatness in
opposition to the power of Pharaoh and of all other kings; for
prosperity commonly brings pride with it, and those who excel in dignity
and power become self-willed and insolent. Hence to repress this haughty
insolence, he says, that the name of King, the God of hosts, belongs not
properly to any but to himself alone.

<span id="xviii.xviii-p12"></span>*It shall come,* he says, *as Tabor is
in the mountains, and Carmel in the sea* Their exposition is not
suitable who say, “As wild beasts fleeing from hunters, pass over from
neighboring mountains to Mount Tabor, and as trees cut on Carmel are
carried to the sea.” This is an extremely forced explanation, and cannot
be adapted to the present passage. For what is the design of the
Prophet? even to shew that what he had just declared would be immutable,
and so fixed that it could not be reversed, that though the whole world
attempted to frustrate what God had decreed, yet nothing could be done.
Then he says, *As Tabor is in the mountains,* that is, As Mount Tabor is
surrounded by other mountains, and has there its deep roots, so that it
cannot be torn up; and *as Carmel is in the sea* Now this Carmel was not
understood by the Jews to have been that mount where Nabal dwelt, but a
mountain not far from Ptolemais, and it was girded and washed by the
sea: hence he says, *As Carmel is a mountain in the sea.* Tabor as well
as Carmel remain fixed, and cannot be transferred to another place; so
he says, shall this prophecy come to pass; it is valid and shall be
accomplished; as though he had said, “This immutable decree cannot be
refixed, as Carmel cannot be moved, nor Tabor, so as to be transplanted
elsewhere.” It now follows, —

<span id="xviii.xix"></span>

<span id="xviii.xix-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#019)<span id="xviii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xix-p2"></span>**19.** O thou daughter dwelling in
Egypt, furnish thyself to go into captivity: for Noph shall be waste and
desolate without an inhabitant.

<span id="xviii.xix-p3"></span>**19.** Vasa migrationis fac (*vel,*
para) tibi habitatrix Aegypti; quia Noph (*id est,* Memphis,) in
solitudinem erit, et vastabitur, ut non sit habitator.

<span id="xviii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xix-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xix-p6"></span>The Prophet exults over the Egyptians, in
order that he might more and more confirm his doctrine; for we have
said, and experience teaches the same, that the unbelieving are but
little moved when God summons them to his tribunal, and gives evidence
of his vengeance; for they remain stupid, except their torpor is by
force shaken from them. This is the reason why the Prophet sharply
assails the wicked, even that they might awake from their drowsiness.

<span id="xviii.xix-p7"></span>Hence he says, *Take to thee the
furniture of transmigration,* that is, prepare for thyself garments and
other things for the purpose of removing. The Egyptians, having a
fruitful land, remained quietly in their own country, and led, as it
were, a sedentary life. Now the Prophet intimates that they were to move
elsewhere; and he bids them to prepare for a long journey, or a long
peregrination: *Make to thee,* then, *furniture for transmigration; for
Memphis shall be reduced to solitude, and laid waste without an
inhabitant*

<span id="xviii.xix-p8"></span>He mentions Memphis again, which, as we
have said, was a very celebrated city and a royal residence. He says
that it would be laid waste, and yet we know that the Pyramids there
were reckoned among the wonders of the world. The city was populous, and
had many advantages. The Prophet dooms it to desolation. If, then, such
solitude awaited the most celebrated city, what was to become of the
smaller towns? what was to become of the villages? We now, then, see
what was the purpose of the Prophet, even to shew, that when
Nebuchadnezzar made an irruption into Egypt, all things would be under
his power, so that he would, at his pleasure, seize on, plunder, and lay
waste the whole land. It now follows, —

<span id="xviii.xx"></span>

<span id="xviii.xx-p1"></span><span id="xviii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020)<span id="xviii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xx-p2"></span>**20.** Egypt *is like* a very fair
heifer, *but* destruction cometh; it cometh out of the north.

<span id="xviii.xx-p3"></span>**20.** Vitula formosa Aegyptus, afflictio
ab aquilone venit, venit.

<span id="xviii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xx-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xx-p6"></span>Jeremiah intimates here, that though Egypt
indulged in pleasures, it could not yet escape the vengeance of God. We
reminded you yesterday why the Prophets mentioned the wealth, the
riches, and the power of the ungodly, even because they are blinded by
all the good things in which they abound; for they fear nothing, nor
feel any anxiety, but through a false notion they exempt themselves from
every evil. As, then, the unbelieving are thus presumptuous and proud,
the Prophets, on the other hand, warn them and say, that however they
may exult in their own strength and defenses, *they* would yet, when it
pleased God to make them prey, become the most miserable of all.

<span id="xviii.xx-p7"></span>The Prophet, then, in short, takes away
the false conceit of the Jews, as well as of the Egyptians; as though he
had said, “The Egyptians trust in their prosperity, even as though they
were like a heifer frisking in the fields; but *calamity,” he* says,.”
is coming, is coming from the north.” He repeats the same word, in order
to remove every doubt: *coming,* then, *is distress, it is coming from
the north,* that is, from the Babylonians, who were situated northward
to Judea, as we stated yesterday.

<span id="xviii.xxi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021)<span id="xviii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxi-p2"></span>**21.** Also her hired men *are* in the
midst of her like fatted bullocks; for they also are turned back, *and*
are fled away together: they did not stand, because the day of their
calamity was come upon them, *and* the time of their visitation.

<span id="xviii.xxi-p3"></span>**21.** Etiam mercenarii ejus in medio
ejus tanquam vituli saginati, quia etiam ipsi vertent terga, fugient
simul, non steterunt, quia dies calamitatis (*vel,* miseriae) venit
super eos, tempus visitationis ipsorum.

<span id="xviii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet represents the
mercenaries of Egypt, as we have already said, as being foreign
soldiers, who had been hired here and there, and from far countries,
such as Lydia was. It may yet have been, that there were not many at
that time who had come from beyond the sea to the Egyptians; but they
had the Ethiopians, for Ezekiel says that many came from Cush, that is,
Ethiopia; and then they had some from Libya and the neighboring
countries. Then Jeremiah includes them under one name, and says that
they were *mercenaries.* Now, they who hire themselves seem to be more
warlike than others; for they who defend their own country do this from
necessity; but those who of themselves seek war, and depart from their
own borders for the purpose of engaging in war, seem to be men fit for
any bold undertaking.

<span id="xviii.xxi-p7"></span>But the Prophet says, *also,* <span
id="xviii.xxi-p7.1"></span>גם*, gam, also mercenaries;* that is, not
only the Egyptians were accustomed to a delicate and indulgent life, but
also the Ethiopians and others who had been hired, *They are also in the
midst of it as fatted bullocks,* that is, they fill themselves with the
abundance of Egypt; and hence it was that they became a prey to their
enemies; for we know that nothing is more injurious to soldiers than to
live delicately and luxuriously. Of all ancient generals, the most
celebrated is Hannibal; but how did it happen, that having an invincible
army, by which he had terrified all Italy, he afterwards fell? because
Campania, with its luxuries, enervated him, for he lived there not like
a soldier, but had tables richly furnished for himself and for his army.
Hence it was, that they were no more what they had been. So also the
Prophet says, “Egypt will ruin its hired soldiers; for she will satiate
them with luxuries.” What did at length happen to them? he compares them
to bullocks of the stall, <span id="xviii.xxi-p7.2"></span>מרבק,
*merebec;* some read bullocks of the pasture, but not correctly; for
<span id="xviii.xxi-p7.3"></span>רבק, *rebec,* is properly to fatten. He
then calls them the bullocks of the stall, which are fed that they may
become fat and be soon slaughtered. He therefore says, *They also shall
turn their backs;* and then he says, *They shall not stand, because the
time of calamity is come* I cannot finish this subject now.

<span id="xviii.xxii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xviii.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that when thou
indulgest us, we may not abuse thy patience, nor become wanton in
prosperity, but learn so to subdue ourselves of our own accord, that we
may obey thee through the whole course of our life, and mortify our
flesh, lest we be elated by pride and false confidence, but so live in
thy fear as to reverence thee when we regard thee as the righteous Judge
of the world, and recumb at the same time on thee, when we acknowledge
thee as our Father, as thou hast been pleased to adopt us in thine
only-begotten Son our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xviii.xxii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-Seventh

<span id="xviii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#022)<span
id="xviii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p2"></span>**22.** The voice thereof shall go like
a serpent; for they shall march with an army, and come against her with
axes, as hewers of wood.

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p3"></span>**22.** Vox ejus tanquam serpentis
incedet, quia in potentia incedent; et cum securibus venient contra eam,
sicuti caesores lignorum.

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p6"></span>To study elegance was not so much the
object of the Prophet, as to confirm what he had taught. The figures,
then, which he now uses, were not intended as ornaments of speech, but
rather for the purpose of giving force and power to what he had said;
for, as it has been said, prophecies had no credit with stupid men,
unless stimulants were added to them.

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p7"></span>He says now, that the *voice of Egypt
would go forth like that of a serpent:* some read, *“as* though it were
a serpent;” but I prefer to render it in the genitive case, and it is
more suitable; for the Prophet means that the complaints of Egypt would
not be obstreperous; as serpents, in creeping, send forth their hisses,
so he intimates that the Egyptians, being overthrown, would be so broken
down, as not to dare to utter open complaints, as those who freely cry
out, but such as would remain alive would be so smitten with fear as
only to mutter, as it has been said of serpents, who hiss as they creep.
We now understand the real meaning of the Prophet: he says that the
Egyptians would be so east down as not to dare openly to complain of
their miseries, for they would only mutter, not otherwise than serpents
who, on the ground, indistinctly hiss: *its voice,* then, *shall
advance,* or go forth, *like that of a serpent;* and thus he points out
their uneasiness, for they would seek hiding-places, and flee here and
there, and never dare to remain in the same place. It is, indeed, a
proof of the most miserable trepidation, when he who succumbs under his
evils finds no place to set his foot on, but is forced, like serpents,
to wander here and there. *Jerome’s* rendering is, “as that of brass,”
as though it was written, <span id="xviii.xxiv-p7.1"></span>נחשת,
*nuchashet;* but I have already shewn what the Prophet meant.

<span id="xviii.xxiv-p8"></span>*He adds, For they shall come with an
army, or* with power. The word <span id="xviii.xxiv-p8.1"></span>חיל,
*chil,* means both. He now speaks of the Chaldeans. He said that the
Egyptians would tremble, and be so broken down, as not to dare to utter
their groans openly. Now follows the reason, because the Chaldeans would
come *with power,* or with an army; they would come not only as soldiers
to fight, but also as *hewers of wood* with their *axes* He intimates
that the issue of the war would by no means be doubtful, but that the
Chaldeans would come into Egypt as hired men come to cut down trees.
Soldiers are, indeed, armed with swords and lances; for they have to do
with enemies, nor can they overcome without danger, at least they cannot
conquer without striving; but the Prophet says that the Chaldeans would
be so filled with *confidence,* that they would not regard the Egyptians
as enemies, for they would come, as it were, to cut down trees which
offer no resistance: *They shall come,* then, *as hewers of wood* There
is here an implied contrast between swords, lances, and axes, as there
is between soldiers and hewers of wood. It follows, —

<span id="xviii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxv-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023)<span id="xviii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxv-p2"></span>**23.** They shall cut down her forest,
saith the LORD, though it cannot be searched; because they are more than
the grasshoppers, and *are* innumerable.

<span id="xviii.xxv-p3"></span>**23.** Exciderunt sylvam ejus, dicit
Jehova, quia non investigabitur, quia multiplicati sunt prae locusta
(phsquam locustrae) et non illis numerus.

<span id="xviii.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxv-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxv-p6"></span>He goes on here with the same subject. He
indeed uses the past tense, but we know that this was commonly done by
the Prophets. He compares the people of Egypt to a forest, as he had
said that individual men would be like trees: *They have* then *cut
down,* that is, *they* shall cut down *its forest, saith Jehovah* For
the sake of confirmation he ascribes the words to God; as though he had
said, that he predicted nothing but what God had determined to do. His
object then was to remove every doubt; because the Jews might on the one
hand have refused to believe this prophecy on considering the power of
Egypt; and the Egyptians on the other might have disregarded these
threatenings, confiding in their own strength. Hence the Prophet
introduces God as the speaker, as though he had said, “This decree
cannot be revoked, because God hath spoken.”

<span id="xviii.xxv-p7"></span>And he says, that they had *multiplied
more than locusts, so there could be no number* I have omitted one
previous sentence, *It shall not be searched.* As the particle <span
id="xviii.xxv-p7.1"></span>כי, k*i,* is read twice, some think that both
clauses refer to the Chal-deans. Others read, “It shall not be
numbered;” but the verb <span id="xviii.xxv-p7.2"></span>חקר, *chekor,*
properly means to inquire, to investigate; and the sentence may be thus
suitably rendered, *“That* the forest may not be investigated.” Yet
another meaning has been more approved, that the Chaldeans shall not be
numbered. If this view be received, there is a Change of number, for it
immediately follows, “They shall multiply,” <span
id="xviii.xxv-p7.3"></span>רבו, *rebu*; and then, *there shall not be a
number to them,* <span id="xviii.xxv-p7.4"></span>להם*, laem.* But what
I stated in the first place, as it appears to me, does not ill suit the
passage, that is, that there would be no investigation of the forest of
Egypt, that is, of the people; for when a forest is cut down, it appears
a naked plain, nor can the place of any tree be pointed out. As to the
general meaning, there is not much difference. The Prophet, in short,
means, that the slaughter, of which he prophecies, would be so great,
that Egypt would be reduced to a waste, because the Chaldeans would come
with a numerous army: and he sets up this number in opposition to the
Egyptian forces, that they might know that their enemies would be far
superior to them. It follows —

<span id="xviii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#024)<span
id="xviii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p2"></span>**24.** The daughter of Egypt shall be
confounded; she shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the
north.

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p3"></span>**24.** Pudefacta est filia Aegypti,
tradita in manum populi Aquilonis.

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvi-p6"></span>He says that *Egypt* would be *ashamed,*
because it would be brought into the greatest disgrace, for their
enemies would treat them reproachfully. By the *people of the north* he
means the Chaldeans, as in many other places; for Babylon was northward
of Egypt. he intimates, in short, that the Chaldeans would be proud
conquerors, so that they would in a reproachful manner oppress the
Egyptians, after having conquered them. It is no wonder that the same
thing is often repeated by the Prophet, because the thing was incredible
at that time, as we have before said. As then it was difficult to make
the Jews believe, that the Chaldeans would become victorious over that
nation and land, Jeremiah confirms at large the same thing, for he
resolutely struggled with the obstinate unbelief of the people. Let us
proceed, —

<span id="xviii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#025)<span
id="xviii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p2"></span>**25.** The LORD of hosts, the God of
Israel, saith, Behold, I will punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh,
and Egypt, with their gods, and their kings; even Pharaoh, and *all*
them that trust in him:

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p3"></span>**25.** Dicit Jehova exercituum, Deus
Israel, Ecce ego visito super multitudinem quae ab Alexandria, et super
Pharaonem, et super Aegyptum, et super deos ejus, et super reges ejus,
et super Pharaonem, et super eos, qui confidunt in ipso.

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p6"></span>The Prophet speaks again in God’s name,
and sets God’s glory in opposition to the perverseness of his own
nation; for, as it has been said, he effected but little when he
threatened the Egyptians. For the Jews, believing that land to be
impregnable, were secure; because they thought that the Egyptians would
come to their aid, and so they believed that they were fortified against
any hostile power. As then the Jews were inebriated with this false
confidence, the Prophet was constrained, not only with many words to
enlarge on this subject, but also to introduce God as the judge.

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p7"></span>He then does not speak here in his own
words, but says, *Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, hath spoken,
Behold I,* etc. It was a form of speaking much more forcible than if the
Prophet had repeated in his own name what God had committed to him; and
yet the Jews were not moved: but still this mode of speaking was
calculated to break down their obduracy. he then says, *Behold, I will
visit the multitude,* etc. The word <span
id="xviii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>אמון, *amun,* is to be taken here for <span
id="xviii.xxvii-p7.2"></span>המון, *emun;* <span
id="xviii.xxvii-p7.3"></span>א*, aleph,* is put for <span
id="xviii.xxvii-p7.4"></span>ה*, he;* though some render it *“king,”*
but improperly: *I will visit the multitude which is from Alexandria* We
know that this was a celebrated city of Egypt, though it had not yet
this name; for Alexander was not born, who called it by his own name;
but it had its old name <span id="xviii.xxvii-p7.5"></span>נא, *na*, and
it was so called by the Hebrews. In after time it was called Alexandria,
its name having been changed.

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p8"></span>But there is here a statement of a part
for the whole, for the Prophet included the whole of Egypt; what is
general is comprehended under what is particular; for God spared not the
other cities of Egypt; and it appears from the context that the prophecy
extended to all parts of that land, not one angle, even the least, being
excepted. But as Alexandria might have remained safe, while the other
cities were destroyed, it is here especially mentioned, as though he had
said, that nothing would be safe in Egypt. *Behold,* he says, *I will
visit the multitude,* etc. It was a very populous city, as we gather
from heathen writers; and hence it was that it was full of pride, for
they thought it sufficiently safe when they had as it were a
proportionate army. But the Prophet derides this vain glory, and says
that the vast number of people in Alexandria would avail nothing to
prevent the Chaldeans to take possession of it.

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p9"></span>*I will visit,* he says, the whole
people, and then *Pharaoh and Egypt* We now clearly see that the city
named was the chief city, and that its multitude was expressly
mentioned, that the Egyptians might know, that they could not escape
destruction, because they had war with God, and not with men; for as
long as they looked on the Chaldeans alone, they remained secure. But
the Prophet awakens them from their lethargy, and says, that they were
not to look on what the Chaldeans of themselves could do, for they would
carry on war under the banner of God, and under his guidance would,
without any difficulty, penetrate through the whole of Egypt. Hence he
says, I will visit *Pharaoh and Egypt*

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p10"></span>He adds, *and her gods.* We know that
that land was very much given to superstitions, that the Egyptians had
imbibed gross and shameful errors, though otherwise remarkable for their
wisdom and knowledge. But God had smitten them with madness, so that
they were become almost like brute beasts. Besides, as they thought that
they had perfect safety in their idols, the Prophet shakes off this
confidence, and declares that God would not only be the judge of men but
also of the idols. For we know that men strengthen themselves against
God’s threatenings either by superstition or by confidence in their own
strength: as long as they depend on the world, they gather from all
quarters some grounds of hope; and hence it is, that they think that
they will be safe though in opposition to God’s will. The Prophet beats
down this folly when he says, *Behold, I will visit the multitude of
Alexandria,* and adds, *I will visit the gods* of Egypt. As the
unbelieving, when they find earthly aids not sufficient for them, flee
to God, but not in the right way, for they become vain in their foolish
thoughts; hence is the reason why the Prophet threatens the idols of
Egypt.

<span id="xviii.xxvii-p11"></span>He adds, *her kings.* There was indeed
but one king in Egypt, why then does he mention kings? This may be
explained of successors; but I prefer taking *“kings”* here as meaning
the satraps and princes, for we know that the kingdom was very opulent,
that it had many equal to kings. I therefore think that the Prophet
adorned the princes and satraps of Egypt with this high title; and he
confirms this opinion by what immediately follows, even — *Pharaoh and
those who trust in him* He repeats the name of Pharaoh, and when he says
that he would visit those who trust in him, I doubt not but that the
Prophet points out those whom he had before designated *“kings.”* We now
then perceive the real meaning, that though Pharaoh had many defenses,
being strengthened by a great multitude of men, and had also mighty
satraps, yet all this would prove fading and evanescent, when he would
have to carry on war with God: and God declares here that he would be
the general of the whole war guiding and directing the Chaldeans. It now
follows, —

<span id="xviii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026)<span
id="xviii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxviii-p2"></span>**26.** And I will deliver them into
the hand of those that seek their lives, and into the hand of
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants: and
afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith the LORD.

<span id="xviii.xxviii-p3"></span>**26.** Et dabo illos in manum
quaerentium animam ipsorum, et in manum Nabuchadnezer regis Babylonis,
et in manum servorum ejus, et postea habitabitur sicut diebus antiquis,
dicit Jehova.

<span id="xviii.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxviii-p6"></span>Jeremiah pursues the same subject, and
continues to speak in God’s name, that he might more powerfully impress
minds otherwise tardy; *I will give them,* he says, *into the hand* of
enemies, and those deadly enemies; for we have said elsewhere that to
“seek life” is not to spare it. Expressed here then is the cruelty of
the Chaldean army, as though he had said that they would be deadly
enemies to the Egyptians. And he explains himself more fully, and says,
*Into the hand of the king of Babylon, and into the hand of his
servants,* so that not only Nebuchadnezzar was to be victorious over
Egypt, but also his servants, which was still more degrading.

<span id="xviii.xxviii-p7"></span>A promise is at length added, not to
shew favor to that heathen nation, but that God might shew that he would
be so far merciful towards the Egyptians as not wholly to destroy them.
*It shall be inhabited,* he says, *as in ancient days.* Ezekiel says
that the kingdom would be small and humble or abject. (<span
id="xviii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>[Ezek.
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#015)<span
id="xviii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>.) But our Prophet seems to promise to
Egypt the same prosperity as it had before its overthrow. We have
already said that restoration was promised to the Egyptians, not because
God was pacified towards them, but because his purpose was that his
mercy should be made evident in the judgments he executed even on
foreign nations; and further, it served to confirm prophecy, when to
Egypt, after having been destroyed, was granted that restoration of
which Jeremiah had prophesied. The truth, then, of what the Prophet had
said became more evident through the two changes, than if he had only
said, *“God* shall destroy Egypt.” We now, then, perceive why the
Prophet spoke of the future condition of Egypt. It follows, —

<span id="xviii.xxix"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxix-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027)<span
id="xviii.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxix-p2"></span>**27.** But fear not thou, O my servant
Jacob, and be not dismayed, O Israel: for, behold, I will save thee from
afar off, and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall
return, and be in rest and at ease, and none shall make *him* afraid.

<span id="xviii.xxix-p3"></span>**27.** Et tu ne timeas, serve mi Jacob,
et ne expavescas (*vel,* frangaris animo, <span
id="xviii.xxix-p3.1"></span>חתת *significat conteri et frangi, sed magis
refertur ad animum metaphorice,* ne *ergo* frangaris animo,) Israel;
quia ecce ego servo te a longinquo, et semen tuum e terra captivitatis
ipsorum; et revertetur Jacob et quiescet et securus erit, et nemo
exterrebit (nemo qui exterreat, *ad verbum.*)

<span id="xviii.xxix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxix-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxix-p6"></span>The Prophet now directs his discourse to
the Israelites; for we have already said that he was not appointed a
teacher to heathen nations. Whatever, then, he spoke of heathen nations
had a reference to the benefit of his people; and for this purpose, as
we have said, the Prophets extended their prophecies respecting God’s
judgments to all nations; for otherwise the Israelites would have been
disheartened, as though their condition was worse than that of others:
“What can this mean? God has chosen us as his peculiar people; in the
meantime we alone are miserable: God pours forth on us his whole rigor,
and yet he spares the unbelieving. It would have been better for us to
have been rejected wholly by him, for the covenant which he has made
with us only renders us more miserable than others.” Thus the miserable
Israelites might have rushed headlong into despair, had nothing been
done in time to relieve them. And then the Prophets, or rather the
Spirit of God who spoke by them, regarded another thing; for if nothing
had been predicted they would have passed by, with closed eyes, those
judgments which God executed on all their neighbors, for all that
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel had predicted was fulfilled. Had they been
silent respecting the ruin of Egypt, of the Philistines and the
Moabites, the people, owing to their torpor, would not have considered
God’s judgments, but would have thought them to have all happened by
chance. The Prophets then represented as in a mirror the power of God,
that the Israelites might know that it extended to the whole world and
to every nation.

<span id="xviii.xxix-p7"></span>This is the reason why Jeremiah now
turns his discourse to the chosen people, and says, *Fear not, my
servant Jacob* He still speaks in God’s name. Now God calls Jacob his
servant, not on the ground of obedience, but because he had chosen him.
Then by this word God sets forth the favor of adoption, and not the
obedience of the people, for we know how refractory and disobedient they
were; we know that they were continually shaking off the yoke, that they
insulted as it were God himself; very far were they from quietly
submitting to his authority as it became servants. Here, then, the
obedience of the Israelites is not commended, but that election is set
forth by which God had set them apart from other nations. How then was
Jacob God’s servant? not because he deserved that honor by his own
merits, but because God had been pleased gratuitously to choose him for
himself. So also David says,

<span id="xviii.xxix-p8"></span>“I am thy servant, the son of thy
handmaid,”  
(<span id="xviii.xxix-p8.2"></span>[Ps
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016)<span
id="xviii.xxix-p8.2"></span>)

<span id="xviii.xxix-p9"></span>He means that he was as it were a
hereditary servant, who had been already dedicated to God before he was
conceived in his mother’s womb. But as this mode of speaking often
occurs, I pass it by with only a few words.

<span id="xviii.xxix-p10"></span>*Fear not, O Jacob,* he says, *and be
not broken in mind, O Israel* There are indeed two names used, but God
thus addresses his people often; and why? *because I wall save thee* We
now then see why God called Jacob his servant, even because the
salvation of the elect people depended on this peculiar privilege, that
God had chosen them for himself; *I will save thee,* he says, *from far*
The ten tribes, as it is well known, had already been driven far, and a
part of Judah had been led into exile. Distance took away the hope of a
return. Hence God here declares that a long distance would be no
hindrance to him to restore his people when it seemed good to him;
*Behold, I will save thee* He then obviates this objection; “What! why
then does God thus suffer us to be driven to foreign lands? why have we
not staid in our own land?” God, he says, will not be less able to save
thee in the remotest places, than if thou hadst remained in thy native
country, and in thine own habitation. And he adds, *and thy seed, from
the land of their captivity*

<span id="xviii.xxix-p11"></span>We hence learn, that though the Prophet
spoke of the temporal restoration of the people, he yet had a regard to
higher and greater things, even that the captives should recumb on God’s
mercy, and believe that he would be propitious to them even when dead.
This passage then shews that the hope of God’s children is not confined
to this life, but extends farther, in order that they may know that God
will be propitious to them after death, and that they may sustain
themselves with the assurance of his favor, for otherwise this promise
that God would restore their children after their death would have been
absurd. “But why is he implacable to us? why does he not restore us
sooner?” The Jews might have raised this objection; but the Prophet
reminds them, that though they were not to be restored immediately to
their country, yet the covenant of God would remain valid, and its
stability would appear after seventy years.

<span id="xviii.xxix-p12"></span>We now perceive why the Prophet said,
*Jacob shall return and rest, and shall be secure* I wonder that some
have rendered the last words, “and shall be happy,” for <span
id="xviii.xxix-p12.1"></span>שאנן, *shanun,* means to be secure, or to
rest; and then the Prophet explains himself, *nor will there be any to
terrify* We indeed know that it is the main part of happiness when no
fear disturbs us, when our minds are in a composed and quiet state.
Further, by these words he intimates the continuance of God’s favor, as
though he had said that his favor would not only be evident in restoring
the people from exile, but in restoring the miserable in such a way as
to grant them full and continued happiness. It follows, —

<span id="xviii.xxx"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxx-p1"></span><span
id="xviii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028)<span id="xviii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxx-p2"></span>**28.** Fear thou not, O Jacob my
servant, saith the LORD: for I *am* with thee; for I will make a full
end of all the nations whither I have driven thee: but I will not make a
full end of thee, but correct thee in measure; yet will I not leave thee
wholly unpunished.

<span id="xviii.xxx-p3"></span>**28.** Tu ne timeas, serve mi Jacob,
dicit Jehova, quia ego tecum, quia faciam consumptionem in cunctis
gentibus ad quas te expulero illuc (*est supervacuum* <span
id="xviii.xxx-p3.1"></span>שמה;) et tecum non faciam consumptionem; et
castigabo te in judicio, et excidendo non excidam te (*alii vertunt,*
non faciam te innocentem, *sed male, ut postea dicemus.*)

<span id="xviii.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xviii.xxx-p5"></span><span id="xviii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxx-p6"></span>He repeats the same thing, and no wonder,
for under circumstances so hopeless it was not easy to raise up and
sustain the minds of the people, so that they might patiently wait for
the time of their redemption. He had to raise them to light as it were
from the lowest depths, for captivity was little short of death,
according to what Ezekiel says, (<span id="xviii.xxx-p6.1"></span>[Eze
37](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#000)<span id="xviii.xxx-p6.1"></span>)
who shews that the common saying among them was,

<span id="xviii.xxx-p7"></span>“Can God raise the dead from their
graves?”

<span id="xviii.xxx-p8"></span>Whenever the Prophets promised that God
would become their Redeemer, they said, “Oh, will God raise us up again?
It is all a fable.” For this reason God commanded dead and dry bones to
rise and to assume their own skin and flesh, at least this was shewn to
the Prophet in a vision.

<span id="xviii.xxx-p9"></span>We now then understand why the Prophet
repeated twice what was in itself sufficiently clear, *Fear not, my
servant Jacob,* even because they could not apprehend God’s mercy,
except they looked off from their great difficulties, and further,
because it was not enough for them once to embrace this promise, without
recumbing on it constantly. Hence the Prophet, in order to encourage
them firmly to hope, and at the same time to render them persevering,
and to confirm them, says twice, *Fear not, my servant Jacob* He then
adds, *I am with thee* And this promise, as it has been said, depends on
gratuitous adoption, because God had chosen that people for himself,
that they might be a priestly kingdom.

<span id="xviii.xxx-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *For I will make a
consummation among all the nations,* etc. By this comparison he softens
and alleviates all sorrow: for however bitter the condition of the
people might be, yet when they considered that fled would deal milder
with them than with other mortals, it was a cause of ample consolation.
The Prophet, then, seeing that the Jews, while their minds were
embittered, could not accept God’s favor, shews here, that however
severely God might chastise them, he yet would be more merciful to them
than to other nations: how so? *because,* he says, *I will make a
consummation among other nations,* that is, they shall be destroyed
without any remedy; as though he had said, that the wound he would
inflict on other nations would be deadly, but that he would not make a
consummation as to his chosen people.

<span id="xviii.xxx-p11"></span>This seems not to agree with what he had
said before, that Egypt should be again inhabited as in days of old. How
can the restoration of Egypt be consistent with the words of the Prophet
here? To this I answer, that when God mitigates his rigor towards the
unbelieving, he is not yet propitious to them, nor is the indulgence
shewn to them a proof of his paternal favor, as I have before observed.
Though then there were Egyptians who remained alive after the ruin of
their kingdom, yet God made a consummation in Egypt, for there his
vengeance continued after that, time. Now, when we come to the chosen
people, God says in many places, *I will not make a consummation* There
seems to be here again some contrariety, when any one attends only to
the words; for God is said to have made a consummation as to his elect
people: but this was the case, when he destroyed the whole body of the
people; and that consummation was external; there ever remained at the
same time some hidden root.

<span id="xviii.xxx-p12"></span>In short, when God says, that he makes a
consummation as to heathen nations, it ought to be understood, that God
curses them from the root. As when a tree stands, when its root is dead;
so also heathen nations, as it were, stand, but in the meantime they are
consumed, for God has doomed them to eternal ruin. But consummation is
said to be as to God’s children, when nothing appears on the surface,
but perhaps a dry trunk; yet a living root remains, which will again
grow up, and from it branches will arise. We hence see how God makes a
consummation as to all the unbelieving, and yet does not make a
consummation as to his chosen people.

<span id="xviii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxxi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xviii.xxxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
testified that thou wilt be a Father to us, and hast given us a pledge
of thy adoption, thine only-begotten Son, — O grant, that we, trusting
in thy promise, may never doubt, even when thou severely chastisest us,
but that thou wilt at length be merciful to us, and that we may thus
never cease to flee to thy mercy, and thus submit to thee, and suffer
ourselves to be corrected; and may, in the meantime, this hope sustain
us, and alleviate all our sorrows, that in all our miseries we shall yet
ever glorify thy name, through the same, thy Son our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xviii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="xviii.xxxii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-Eighth

<span id="xviii.xxxii-p2"></span>WE explained yesterday what is meant by
not making a consummation. The meaning is, that sometimes God’s
vengeance is such towards his Church, that it seems to be consumed,
while yet some hidden hope remains, for God raises his own as it were
from death. We said, that in this sense is to be understood what
Jeremiah now promises to the chosen people: for God makes a distinction
between the Israelites and strangers; for on account of the covenant he
had made with them, he would spare them, so that some hope remained,
though the Church itself seemed for a time to be lost.

<span id="xviii.xxxii-p3"></span>And he explains himself in other words,
*I will chastise thee,* he says, *in judgment;* for to chastise in
judgment is to exercise moderation, so that rigor may not issue in
destruction. In the tenth chapter, Jeremiah says the same, “Chastise me,
O Jehovah, but in judgment, and not in thine anger.” The Prophet, then,
in the person of the faithful submitted himself to the scourges of God,
because it was useful for them to be corrected, for had the Lord spared
them, they would have abused his *indulgence,* and have become thus
putrid in their vices. Hence the Prophet offered himself to be chastised
by God, but *deprecated* his anger, which he set in opposition to
judgment. The word judgment, in Hebrew, is taken in various senses; but
in that passage, as I explained there, it means due measure, or
moderation. When God punishes the unbelieving, he cannot be charged with
extreme severity, for he is ever just and regards a due measure. But, as
I have already said, judgment means not only rectitude, but also the
paternal love of God, when he moderates punishment, so as to render it
medicinal and salutary to his elect. Hence he promises to punish his
Church moderately, not only because he is just, but also because he
mercifully spares his own, and regards what they can bear, and what is
useful for them.

<span id="xviii.xxxii-p4"></span>Now this passage ought to be especially
noticed, from which we may derive great consolation; for we are here
taught that punishments inflicted on us are temporary, and that God
prescribes limits to them, such as he knows to be best for us: for
whence comes despair which overwhelms the unbelieving, except that being
sunk in the deep, they know not that God will be merciful to them, but
apprehend nothing but his wrath? Hence then it comes that they have no
comfort in their evils and sorrows. Whenever, then, excessive anxiety
lays hold on us, or our evils drive us into despair, let us learn to
flee to this consolation, even that the punishments by which we are
chastised are only for a time.

<span id="xviii.xxxii-p5"></span>He afterwards adds, *And cutting off I
will not cut thee off* There are some who give another rendering, “I
will not make thee innocent:“ and in this sense the verb <span
id="xviii.xxxii-p5.1"></span>נקה, *nuke,* is sometimes to be taken; but
it is not suitable to the context here, unless the copulative be
rendered as an adversative, “Though I shall not make thee innocent, I
shall yet chastise thee with paternal moderation.” As this, however,
seems forced, I doubt not but that the Prophet means, that chastisement
would be moderated, because God would not wholly cut off his chosen
people, according to the exposition I gave on the thirtieth chapter of
this book; and thus the Prophet confirms what I have already said, that
God spares his children, because he purifies them by afflictions, as
gold is melted and purified by fire, so that punishment does not issue
in their destruction. Now follows the forty-seventh chapter:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc20017.htm#fr_132) <span
id="xviii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.v-p7"></span> It is more consistent with the passage to
render the verbs in the future tense, —

<span id="xviii.v-p8"></span>Not flee shall the swift,  
Nor escape shall the strong;  
In the north, by the side of the river Euphrates,  
Have they stumbled and fallen.

<span id="xviii.v-p9"></span>— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc20017.htm#fr_133) <span
id="xviii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.vi-p12"></span> The *city* here is put in opposition to
the *land,* — And it (Egypt) said, I will ascend, I will cover the land;
I will destroy (every) city, and the dwellers in it.

<span id="xviii.vi-p13"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 47](cc20018)
