[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc20001)  [Next](cc20003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 31

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. At the same time, saith the LORD, will
I be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>**1**. In tempore illo, dicit Jehova, ero in
Deum cunctis cognationibus Israel; et ipsi mihi in populum.

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Thus saith the LORD, The people *which
were* left of the sword found grace in the wilderness; *even* Israel,
when I went to cause him to rest.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Sic dicit Jehova, Invenit gratiam in
deserto populus qui evaserant a gladio, proficiscendo donec quietem
daret ipsi Israeli *(vel* profectus est Israel, donec se ad quietem
conferret)

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span><span id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>I omit here any remarks on the first verse;
for it was explained in connection, with the 22d verse of the last
chapter (<span id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>[Jer
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)<span id="iii.i-p8.1"></span>.md).
The verb <span id="iii.i-p8.2"></span>הלוך *eluk,* in the second verse,
is in the infinitive mood, but it is to be taken as a preterite, and in
this interpreters agree. But some apply it to God, that he is a leader
to his people, until he brings them to rest; and as the verb, <span
id="iii.i-p8.3"></span>להרגיעו, *laeregiou,* to rest him, so to speak,
is in *Hiphil,* it seems that this ought to be ascribed to God. But we
may take the words more simply, “until he betakes himself to rest;”
added afterwards is the word “Israel;” and thus we may render the
pronoun “himself,” and not “him,” — *until* then he *betook himself to
rest*  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md)

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span>Let us now come to the truth which the
Prophet handles: he reminds the people, no doubt, of the ancient
benefits of God, in order that the miserable exiles might entertain
hope, and not doubt but that God would be their deliverer, though they
were drowned, as it were, in Chaldea, and overwhelmed with a deluge of
evils. This is the reason why he mentions the *desert,* and why Jeremiah
also adds, that they who were then preserved *had escaped from the
sword* For the people, though they dwelt in a pleasant and fertile
country, were in a manner in a desert, when compared with their own
country. As then the Israelites had been driven far away into foreign
lands, all the regions where they then inhabited are compared to a
desert. A similar mode of speaking is adopted by Isaiah when he says,

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span>“A voice crying in the desert, Prepare ye
the way of Jehovah, make straight paths in the wilderness.” (<span
id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>[Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>What did he understand then by desert? even
the most fertile regions, Chaldea, Assyria, and other neighboring
countries. But with regard to the people, he thus calls these countries,
because their exile was always sorrowful and miserable. So then in this
place the Prophet, in order to animate the exiles with hope, says, that
though they had been sent away to unknown regions, yet distance, or
anything else which might seem opposed to their liberation, could not
prevent God to restore them; for he formerly liberated their fathers
when they were in Egypt.; Now as the Jews might again object and say,
that they were few in number, and also that they were ever exposed to
the sword, as they dwelt among conquerors the most cruel, he says, that
their fathers were not preserved otherwise than by a miracle; they had
been snatched, as it were, from the midst of death.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span>We now perceive the design of the Prophet;
and we may include in a few words the substance of what he says, — That
there was no reason to fear, that God would not, in due time, deliver
his people; for it was well known, that when he became formerly the
liberator of his people, his power was rendered illustrious in various
ways, nay, that it was inconceivably great, since for forty years he
nourished his people in the desert, and also that their coming out was
as though the dead arose from their graves, for the Egyptians might have
easily killed the whole people; so that they were taken as it were from
death, when they were led into the land which had been promised to
Abraham. There was therefore no doubt but that God would again, in a
wonderful way, deliver them, and manifest the same power in liberating
them as was formerly exhibited towards their fathers.

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>A profitable doctrine may hence be gathered:
Whenever despair presents itself to our eyes, or whenever our miseries
tempt us to despair, let the benefits of God come to our minds, not only
those which we ourselves have experienced, but also those which he has
in all ages conferred on his Church, according to what David also says,
who had this one consolation in his grief, when pressed down with
extreme evils and almost overwhelmed with despair,

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>“I remember the days of old.” (<span
id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>[Ps 143:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.i-p19.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>So that he not only called to mind the
benefits of God which he himself had experienced, but also what he had
heard of from his fathers, and what he had read of in the books of
Moses. In the same manner the Prophet here reminds us of God’s benefits,
when we seem to be forsaken by him; for this one thought is capable of
alleviating and comforting us. This is the import of the whole. It now
follows —

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. The LORD hath appeared of old unto
me, *saying,* Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore
with lovingkindness have I drawn thee.

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span>**3**. Ab antiquo Jehova apparuit mihi;
atqui dilectione perpetua dilexi re; ideo protraham *(vel,* protraxi,
*vel,* extendi) ad to clementiam.

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>The last part is commonly rendered, “I have
therefore drawn thee in mercy;” but the sense is frigid and unsuitable.
I therefore doubt not but that he, on the contrary, means, that the
mercy of God would not be evanescent, but would follow the people from
year to year in all ages. At the beginning of the verse the Prophet
introduces the Jews as making a clamor, as the unbelieving are wont to
do, who, while they reject the favor of God, yet wish to appear to do so
with some reason. Then, in the first place, is narrated the blasphemy of
the people. These impious and diabolical words were no doubt everywhere
heard at that time, “He! God has appeared to us, but it was a long while
ago:” as profane men say at this day, when we bring forward examples of
God’s favor from the Law or from the Prophets, or from the Gospel, *He!*
*c’est du temps jadis.* Thus, they facetiously deride whatever God has
at any time testified in his word, as though it were obsolete, because
it is ancient. It is the same when we announce any terrors according to
ancient examples, “He! it happened formerly, but a long time ago.” They
then always return to that impious common saying, *Le temps jadis.* And
the same thing Jeremiah meant to express here, *At a remote time Jehovah
appeared to us;* that is, “Thou indeed speakest in high terms of the
redemption by which the fathers were liberated, but what is that to us?
why dost not thou rather shew us plainly what God intends to do? and why
dost thou not bring forward some ground for present joy? why dost thou
not really prove that God is propitious to us? but thou speakest of the
ancient deliverance, while that narrative is now as it were obsolete.”

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span>We hence see, that men have been always from
the beginning ungrateful to God; for as far as they could, they buried
the kind acts of God; nor by this only was their impiety discovered, but
because they treated with scorn all ancient histories, which have yet
been preserved for us, in order that our salvation might be promoted.

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span>“Whatsoever is written,” says Paul, “has
been written for our instruction, that through the patience and the
consolation of the Scripture we might have hope.” (<span
id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ro 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>He there shews that we are to learn patience
from the examples contained in the Scripture, and that we have there a
ground for strong consolation, so that we may cherish hope until God
delivers us from all miseries. But what say the profane?” He, thou
tellest us what has been written, but this is remote from us, and
through length of time has vanished away: what is antiquity to us?” But
though the Jews used this sacrilegious language, let us yet learn to
embrace whatever is set before us in Scripture, while God invites us to
hope for mercy, and at the same time exhorts us to patience; nor let
this blasphemy ever fall from our mouths; nay, let not this thought ever
creep into our hearts, “God appeared a long while ago.” Let us then
abominate the ingratitude of those who would have God to be always
present, and yet pay no regard to his ancient benefits.

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span>Hence the Prophet answers, *But,* etc.: the
copulative <span id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>ו is here an adversative, as
though he had said, Nay, or Yea, for it may also be taken for <span
id="iii.ii-p10.2"></span>גם, *gam,* “Yea, I have loved thee with
perpetual love.” Then God answers the ungodly, and shews, that he having
become once the liberator of his people, did not undertake this office
through a momentary impulse, but because he had so promised to Abraham,
and had adopted the people. Since then God’s covenant was perpetual, he
thus refutes here the impious calumny, that God acted bountifully only
for a moment towards his people, and had regard only once for their
miseries, so as to help them. *Yea,* he says, *I have loved thee with
perpetual love* God then here shews, that the redemption, by which he
had exhibited a remarkable proof of his mercy, was founded on the
gratuitous adoption which was not for one year, but perpetual in its
duration. We thus see that he reproves the detestable blasphemy of the
people, and intimates that adoption was the cause of their redemption.

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span>And this passage ought to be carefully
noticed: for these false imaginations come immediately to our minds,
when we read or hear how God had in various ways and degrees been
merciful towards his people, “He! that happened formerly, but we know
not whether God’s purpose remains the same; he, indeed, conferred this
favor on his ancient people, but we know not whether the same can or
will be extended to us.” Thus the devil, by his craft, suggests to us
these false imaginations, which impede the flow of God’s favor, that it
may not come to us. So the grace of God is stopped in its course, when
we thus separate ourselves from the fathers, and from all his servants
towards whom he has been so merciful. It is, therefore, a doctrine
especially useful, when the Prophet shews, that whatever blessings God
has at any time conferred on his ancient people, they ought to be
ascribed to his gratuitous covenant, and that that covenant is eternal:
and hence there is no doubt but that God is at this day prepared to
secure the salvation of all the godly; for he remains ever the same, and
never changes; and he would also have his fidelity and constancy to
shine forth in the covenant which he has made with his Church. Since,
then, the covenant of God is inviolable and cannot fail, even were
heaven and earth brought into confusion, we ought to feel assured that
God will ever be a deliverer to us: how so? because his covenant remains
the same; and, therefore, his power to deliver us will remain the same.
This is the use we ought to make of this clause.

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>A confirmation afterwards follows,
*Therefore have I prolonged towards thee my mercy* I have already said,
that this clause is otherwise rendered and explained. But nothing can be
more diluted when we read thus, “I have drawn thee in mercy.” What has
this to do with the perpetuity or the continued course and progress of
love? But the other meaning is very suitable, that God would prolong his
mercy to Israel. There is understood only one letter, but this does not
interfere with the sense; and such forms of speech are elsewhere often
found, he then says, that as he had embraced Israel with perpetual love,
he had, therefore, drawn out or extended his mercy; for from the time he
delivered his people from the tyranny of Pharaoh, and fed them forty
years in the desert, he had bestowed on them many benefits. For with
what victories favored he them? and then how often had he pitied them?
God then ceased not from continuing his mercy to them from the time he
had stretched forth his hand to them. And according to this view it is
very appropriately said, that he had prolonged his mercy; for not only
for one day or one year did he shew himself propitious to the
Israelites, but he had exhibited himself the same for four hundred, five
hundred, six hundred years. And thus also is best confuted that impiety
and blasphemy of the people, that God had formerly appeared to them;
“Nay,” he says, “except thou suppressest most wickedly my benefits, thou
must perceive that the benefits I conferred on thy fathers have been
long extended to thee, and have been perpetual and manifold.”  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md)

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span>We now perceive the real meaning of the
Prophet. Were any to prefer turning the preterite to the future, I would
not object, “Therefore will I prolong (or extend) towards thee my
mercy.” This sense would be suitable. But when the words are taken as
they are, we see why the Prophet adds, that God’s mercy had been
prolonged, that is, that he might condemn the ingratitude of the Jews,
because they did not rightly consider the benefits which had been
bestowed on them for so many ages. It follows —

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**4**. Again I will build thee, and thou
shalt be built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy
tabrets, and shalt go forth in the dances of them that make merry.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span>**4**. Adhuc aedificabo to, et
aedificaberis, puella Israel: adhuc ornaberis tympanis tuis, et exibis
in choros ludentium.

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span>Jeremiah, in this verse, proceeds with the
same subject, — that though there would be the long time of seventy
years, yet God would become the liberator of his Church. Length of time
might have extinguished the faith of the people, as it is too commonly
the case: for when nothing appears to us but the naked word, and when
God repeats the same promises from day to day, we think it of no moment;
and then when some evil has been prevailing, we think that all ways have
been already closed up, so that God cannot bring a remedy; we thus
measure his power by our own standard: and as he comes late to help us,
because he suffers men to be long afflicted with disease or other evils,
so we imagine that God will never come, when he suspends and delays his
favor longer than we wish.

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>Hence the Prophet says here, *I will yet
build thee, and built shalt thou be, virgin of Israel;* and then, *thou
shalt yet be adorned with thy tabrets* Joy is here set in opposition to
the grief with which the people were to be oppressed in exile, and in
part had been already oppressed, for many had been driven into exile.
But Jeremiah expresses their joy and gladness by a figurative mode of
speaking, by *tabrets* and *dances of those who play* For when the
Prophets announce the vengeance of God, they are wont to say, “cease
shall all joy among you; ye shall not play any more with the harp or
with musical instruments.” So also in this place Jeremiah says, that
they would return to the tabrets and dances, when God restored them to
their own country. We ought not at the same time to turn this testimony
of the Prophet to excuse profane lasciviousness, by which profane men
pervert the benefits of God, for they preserve no moderation in their
joy, but abandon themselves, and thus become wanton against God. And it
is the tendency of all dances and sounds of tabrets, to besot profane
men. The Prophet then did not intend to allow this sort of
licentiousness to the people: for we must ever bear in mind what he said
yesterday, that the voice of praise would go forth with joy. By
*tabrets* and *dances,* he then means holy joy, connected with praises
to God, and with the sacrifice of thanksgiving.  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) It afterwards follows —

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**5**. Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the
mountains of Samaria: the planters shall plant, and shall eat *them as*
common things.

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span>**5**. Adhuc plantabis rites in montibus
Samariae: plantabunt plantatores *(hoc est,* plantabunt vinitores) et
profanabunt *(id est,* conferent ad usum communem)

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span>The verb <span id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>חלל,
*chelal,* means to profane, but it means also to apply to common use.
The expression is taken from the Law; for it was not lawful to eat of
the fruit of the vine until after the fourth year; for its
uncircumcision as it were remained in the vine, so that its fruit was
unclean. Then its first-fruits were offered to God; afterwards every one
enjoyed his vintage. (<span id="iii.iv-p6.2"></span>[Le
19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.iv-p6.2"></span>) But at the same time Jeremiah had respect to
the curses which we read of elsewhere,

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span>“Thou shalt plant a vineyard, and others
shall eat its fruit.” (<span id="iii.iv-p7.1"></span>[De
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030)<span id="iii.iv-p7.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>What did he then mean by these words? even
that the country would, for a time, be so deserted, that there would be
no vines on the richest and the most fertile mountains. The mountains of
Samaria were rich in vines; and when vines on these were cut down, there
was a dreadful desolation. When, therefore, the Prophet says, *they
shall yet plant a vineyard,* he intimates that the land would be
desolate for a time; so also when he says, I *will yet build thee,* he
reminds the Jews, that they were to bear with resignation the judgment
of God, while they could see nothing but desolation through the whole
land.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span>This, then, is what the word *yet*
intimates: but when he promised that there would be vines again on the
mountains of Samaria, he adds, that they who planted them would enjoy
the fruit. Here, then, is an additional blessing: it would have availed
them nothing to plant or set vines, except this blessing of God was
added; for it is a very grievous thing to be deprived of a possession
which we have cultivated, and on which we have spent much labor. He then
who has diligently planted vines, and he who has cultivated his land, if
driven into exile, feels deeply wounded in his mind, when he sees that
his vines and his land are in the possession of strangers. Hence the
Prophet here intimates that God’s favor would be certain, because he
would not only give leisure to the Jews, when they returned, to plant
vines, but would also cause them to enjoy the fruit in peace and
quietness. They shall then *profane,*  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) that is, apply to their own use, in the
fifth year, the fruit produced by the vines, as though he had said,
“They shall dwell, without disturbance, in their own inheritance, when
once they shall have returned to it.”

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast once
testified that thou art to us a Father through thine only-begotten Son,
we may not only taste of that promise, but be also wholly satisfied with
it, and remain in it constantly, until having gone through all evils, we
may at length attain to the full manifestation of it, when thou
gatherest us into that blessed rest, which is the fruit of thy eternal
adoption, through the same Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Eighteenth

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**6**. For there shall be a day, *that* the
watchmen upon the mount Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to
Zion unto the LORD our God.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span>**6**. Quia erit dies, quo clamabunt *(sed
subaudiendum est relativum)* custodes in monte Ephraim, Surgite et
ascendamus Sion ad Jehovam Deum nostrum.

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet here amplifies the kindness of
God, because he would not only restore the tribe of Judah, but also the
ten tribes, who had previously been led into exile. He then promises
here a full and complete restoration of the Church. The Prophets do not
always speak in the same manner of the liberation of the people;
sometimes they confine what they say to the tribe of Judah, as though
the rest were in a hopeless state, but often they extend their
prophecies to the whole body of the people. So in this place Jeremiah
includes, together with the tribe of Judah, the ten tribes, and the half
tribe of Benjamin, for some of the tribe of Benjamin had remained and
had never revolted from the family of David. But they usually call the
kingdom of Israel the ten tribes, and denote the kingdom of Judah by the
name of that one tribe: thus the tribe of Benjamin, divided into two
parts, is not mentioned.

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span>The meaning, then, of the Prophet is, that
when God redeemed his people, not only Judah would return, but also the
Israelites, of whom there was hardly a hope, because they had been in
exile for a long time; and as they had rejected the pure and legitimate
worship of God, they might have been thought to have been excluded from
the Church, for by their own perfidy they had shut out themselves, so
that they were unworthy of so honorable a distinction. So the Prophet
here declares that God’s favor would surpass the wickedness and
perverseness of the people of Israel.

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span>Hence he says that *the day* would *come*
in which *watch-men* would *cry on the mountain of Ephraim,* etc. By
Ephraim, as it is well known, are often to be understood the ten tribes,
and that on account of Jeroboam, who first reigned over them. But we
ought ever to remember, that under one tribe, in this case, are included
all the ten tribes. When, therefore, the Prophet speaks of watchmen on
Mount Ephraim, he means all the watchmen, placed on their watchtowers,
through the whole kingdom of Israel. But the contrast ought to be
noticed, for Jeroboam had closed up every passage by which the
Israelites might ascend to Jerusalem; for he feared lest they should
there hear of God’s covenant which he had made with David and his
posterity. He was in at ease with himself, because he had obtained the
kingdom by sinister means. God had, indeed, by his Prophet commanded him
to be anointed a king; but it does not hence follow, that as to himself
he had obtained the kingdom justly. It is true that God intended to
punish Rehoboam and also the people; but he who had been the author of
the revolt was perfidious in seeking to establish a kingdom for his
posterity; he forbade any one to ascend to Jerusalem, and therefore he
built altars in Dan and Bethel. (<span id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>[1Ki
12:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.vii-p8.1"></span>) On this account the Prophet Hosea complains
that they besieged the ways like thieves, and that many who ascended to
Jerusalem to offer sacrifices to God were slain; and some were plundered
and sent home. (<span id="iii.vii-p8.2"></span>[Ho
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009)<span id="iii.vii-p8.2"></span>.md)
The contrast then is worthy of being noticed, when the Prophet says,

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span>“Yet cry shall watchmen on Mount Ephraim,
Arise, let us ascend to Zion to our God.”

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span>For though in appearance they forsook only
the posterity of David, they yet at the same time renounced the true and
pure worship of God; and the religion which they followed under Jeroboam
was spurious; for they ought to have offered sacrifices to God only in
one place, for it is often found in the Law,

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span>“Thou shalt come to the place which the
Lord thy God shall choose.” (<span id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>[De
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#026)<span id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span>But they having despised the place which
God had appointed for himself, built altars elsewhere. Then their
worship was nothing but superstition; and though they multiplied
sacrifices, they did nothing but provoke God’s wrath; for it is not
lawful for us to devise anything beyond what is prescribed in the Law.

<span id="iii.vii-p13"></span>The Prophet therefore says, *Cry shall
watchmen, Arise, let us ascend into Zion;* that is, there will not be
such a division among the people as there was formerly. For a few only
worshipped God in the Temple which had beell built by his command, and
the rest gave themselves up to numberless superstitions; but now they
shall again unite in one body. In short, Jeremiah here teaches us, that
all the children of Abraham would return to a fraternal agreement, and
that there would be a bond between them, a unity of faith, for they
would together unite in offering sacrifices, and no one would invent a
god for himself.  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md)

<span id="iii.vii-p21"></span>Now this passage is especially useful; for
we may hence learn what is the right state of the Church; it is when all
agree in one faith. But we must, at the same time, see what is the
foundation of this faith. The Papists indeed boast of this union, but
yet they pass by what ought to hold the first place, that is, that all
must have regard to the only true God, according to what they are taught
by his word. Hence the Prophet here mentions Mount Sion, which had been
chosen by God, that he might shew that no unity pleases God, unless men
obey his word from the least to the greatest, and not follow their own
imaginations, but embrace what he teaches and prescribes in his Law.
This is the import of this passage. The Israelites shall then call him
*their God,* from whom they had before wickedly departed. It follows —

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p2"></span>**7**. For thus saith the LORD; Sing with
gladness for Jacob, and shout among the chief of the nations: publish
ye, praise ye, and say, O LORD, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.

<span id="iii.viii-p3"></span>**7**. Quid sic dicit Jehova, Exultate
propter Jacob in laetitia *(vel* cum Jacob, *nam* <span
id="iii.viii-p3.1"></span>ל potest utroque modo accipi) et jubilate in
capite gentium; promulgate, laudate, et dicite, Serva Jehova populum
suum, reliquias Israel.

<span id="iii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms the contents of the
verse we have explained; and it was necessary to make this addition,
because what he had said was almost incredible. He therefore enlarged
upon it. *Thus saith Jehovah;* this preface he made, as I have often
reminded you, that his doctrine might have more weight. Jeremiah,
indeed, adduced nothing but what he had learnt from God, and by the
revelation of his Spirit; but it was needful sometimes expressly to
testify this on account of his hearers.

<span id="iii.viii-p7"></span>He now bids them to *exult with joy, and
to shout for joy* It must be observed that this prophecy was announced,
when the utter destruction of the people, of the city, and temple, was
not far distant; but it was the Prophet’s object to comfort, so to
speak, the dead in their graves, so that they might patiently wait for
their promised deliverance, and that they might feel assured that it was
not more difficult for God to raise the dead than to heal the sick.
Therefore the prophecy had its use when the Jews were driven into exile
and miserably scattered, so as to have no hope of deliverance. But that
his doctrine might more effectually enter into their hearts, he exhorts
them to rejoice, to shout for joy, and to sing; and not only them, but
also strangers. For though it will presently appear that their joy was
not in common with the unbelieving, the Prophet yet seems to address his
words on purpose to aliens, that the Jews themselves might become
ashamed for not embracing the promise offered to them. For what doth the
Prophet say? “Ye alien nations, shout for joy, for Jacob.” What should
Jacob himself do in the meantime? We now then see the design of the
Prophet’s vehemence in bidding all to rejoice for the redemption of the
people, even that this prophecy might not only bring some comfort to the
miserable exiles, but that they might also know, that whilst in the
midst of death, they would live before God, provided they did not
despair.

<span id="iii.viii-p8"></span>In short, he not only intended to mitigate
their sorrow, but also to fill them with spiritual joy, that they might
not cease to entertain hope and to take courage, and not only patiently,
but cheerfully to bear their calamities, because God promised to be
propitious to them. This is the reason why he bids them to *exult with
joy, and to shout for joy*

<span id="iii.viii-p9"></span>He adds, *among the chief of the nations*
This may be understood as though the Prophet had said, that the nations
would be so contemptible, that the children of God would not be disposed
to insult them; but I understand the words in a simpler way, — that the
Prophet bids them to exult *at the head of nations,* as though he had
said, “openly, so that your joy may be observed by all.” For though the
Jews entertained the hope of a return, yet they hardly dared to give any
sign of their confidence, because they might have thus exasperated the
minds of their enemies. They were, therefore, under the necessity of
being wholly silent, and, as it were, without life. Now the Prophet sets
this manifest joy in opposition to that fear which constrained the Jews
to be almost wholly mute, so that they dared not by gesture nor by
words, to make known what they had learned from the holy servants of
God. In short, the Prophet intimates that the liberation of the Jews
would be so glorious, that they would dread no danger in proclaiming
openly the kindness of God. This seems to be denoted by *the head of the
nations*

<span id="iii.viii-p10"></span>He then adds, *Proclaim ye, praise and
say, Save,* etc. This refers properly to the faithful; for we know that
God is not really invoked by the unbelieving. Faith alone opens a door
of access to us, and there cannot be any right praying except what
proceeds from faith. The Prophet then addresses here the children of
God, when he says, “Proclaim ye, praise and say,” etc. And though all
the ungodly were by evident experience convinced of the wonderful power
of God, yet there was not among them any herald of God’s grace. It is
then enjoined on the faithful, as their own proper office, to celebrate
the favor of God. And to this is added thanksgiving, as though the
Prophet had said that God’s grace cannot be rightly proclaimed unless
his goodness be acknowledged, and the sacrifice of praise be offered to
him. We hence learn that we are to be so animated by his promises to
trust in God as not to grow torpid. For many cheer themselves up when
they hear some joyful news, but this joy produces in them security. Thus
it comes that faith is choked, and does not produce its proper fruits;
for the chief work of faith is prayer to God. Now, they who are secure
because they think of no danger, do not flee to God, and thus omit that
work of religion in which they ought mainly to exercise themselves.
Hence the Prophet reminds the faithful here that they are so to praise
God as not to neglect prayer.

<span id="iii.viii-p11"></span>The meaning is, that when God promises
that he will be propitious to us, he gives us a sufficient reason for
joy. We ought then to be satisfied with the naked word of God, when he
declares that he will be a Father to us, and when he promises that our
salvation will be the object of his care. But yet, as I have already
said, joy ought not to render us secure, so as to make faith idle, but
it ought rather to stimulate us to prayer. True and spiritual joy we
then have, derived from God’s word, when we are diligent in prayer; and
coldness and security are no tokens of faith, but of insensibility; and
the promises of God produce no real effects in us, as it must needs be,
unless our minds are kindled into a desire for prayer, yea, into a
fervor in prayer. This then is the reason why the Prophet, after having
bidden the faithful to praise and exalt the favor of God, adds this
prayer — “Say ye, Save thou, Jehovah, thy people.” It then behoved them
so to rejoice as to feel solicitous for the restoration of the Church.
And it behoves us, also, at this time, whenever God shines on us with
the testimony of his favor, so to rejoice as not to omit that primary
exercise of faith, even prayer.

<span id="iii.viii-p12"></span>He further adds, *the remnant of Israel,*
because it was necessary that what Isaiah had predicted should be
fulfilled,

<span id="iii.viii-p13"></span>“Though thy people were as sand of the
sea, a remnant only shall be delivered.”  
(<span id="iii.viii-p13.2"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.viii-p13.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.viii-p14"></span>Though, then, the Prophet has been
speaking generally of all the posterity of Abraham, and included the ten
tribes, yet here he qualifies that statement by mentioning *the remnant*
or residue *of Israel,* and this in order that the faithful might not
despond on seeing hardly one in ten or in fifty returning from exile;
for we know that in comparison of their great number, a few only
returned from exile. He has then mentioned here “the remnant of Israel,”
that the faithful at a future time might not be shaken in their hope,
though God did not immediately restore the whole Church; and it was also
necessary to deprive the hypocrites of that vain confidence with which
they were filled; for they were wont to seize on everything which God
promised by his servants. Hence Jeremiah excluded them, that they might
know that this promise did not belong to them, according to what Paul,
while handling this subject, shews to us at large. (<span
id="iii.viii-p14.1"></span>[Ro
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.viii-p14.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.viii-p14.2"></span>[Rom.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007)<span id="iii.viii-p14.2"></span>.md)
And he is a correct interpreter of this passage and of similar ones,
when he says that God was never so bound to the people of Israel, but
that he could freely do what he pleased, so that a remnant only should
he saved. And he calls them the “remnant of grace,” because they are in
no other way saved than through the free and gratuitous goodness of God.

<span id="iii.viii-p15"></span>And this doctrine may also be justly
applied to our time. For we are by no means to expect that God will so
restore his Church in the world, that all shall be renewed by his
Spirit, and unite in true religion; but he gathers his Church on all
sides, and yet in such a way, that his gratuitous mercy ever appears,
because there shall be remnants only. It follows, —

<span id="iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p2"></span>**8**. Behold, I will bring them from the
north country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, *and* with
them the blind and the lame, the woman with child and her that
travaileth with child together: a great company shall return thither.

<span id="iii.ix-p3"></span>**8**. Ecce reducens ipsos e terra
Aquilonis: et congregabo eos ex lateribus terrae; in ipsis erunt caecus
et claudus, praegnans et puerpera simul, coetus magnus revertentur huc.

<span id="iii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix-p6"></span>The Prophet again confirms the same truth,
but with amplification. For this oracle is not only prefaced as having
proceeded from God, but that the address might be more forcible, he
introduces God himself as the speaker, *Behold me restoring them from,
the land of the north;* for Babylon, as it is well known, was northward
from Judea. And whenever the Prophets speak of the deliverance of the
people, they ever name the north; as, also, when they threaten the
people, they say that an army or a calamity was to come from the north.
They had before been delivered from the south, for such was the
situation of Egypt. The Prophet now intimates that God was furnished
with power to liberate them again from the land of the north.

<span id="iii.ix-p7"></span>Then he says, *and I will collect them from
the sides of the earth:* by *sides,* he means the extremities or the
corners, so to speak, of the earth; as though he had said, that their
dispersion would not prevent God from collecting his people.

<span id="iii.ix-p8"></span>Nearly the same promise was announced by
Moses, though in other words, —

<span id="iii.ix-p9"></span>“Though thou wert dispersed through the four
quarters of the world, I will yet from thence collect thee.”  
(<span id="iii.ix-p9.2"></span>[De
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix-p9.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.ix-p10"></span>God there means that distance of places
would be no obstacle to him, but that as soon as the fit time arrived,
he would again collect his Church from its dispersion. We hence see what
the Prophet understands by the *sides* of the earth. And he intended to
obviate a doubt which might have depressed the minds of the people on
seeing the body torn and deformed: “Eh! how can it be, that we can again
come together?” In order then to remove this doubt, the Prophet says
that God would come to collect his people again, not only from one
corner, but also from the extreme regions of the earth.

<span id="iii.ix-p11"></span>He then adopts another mode of speaking, in
order to shew that no impediment would be so strong as to exceed God’s
power, when his purpose was to deliver his people: *The blind,* he says,
*and the lame, the pregnant, and the one in travail, shall come* The
blind cannot move a step without stumbling or falling; then the blind
are by no means fit to undertake a journey, for there is no way which
they can see as open for them; and the lame, when there is a way for
them, cannot make any progress. But God promises that such would be
their deliverance, that both the lame and the blind would participate of
it. He then mentions the *pregnant and women in childbed* The pregnant,
owing to the burden she carries, cannot undertake a long journey, and
she that is recently confined, can hardly dare to leave her bed, being
so debilitated by parturition; but God promises that the pregnant and
the lately confined shall return with the rest; as though he had said,
that there was no fear but that God would restore his Church, because
his power was superior to all the impediments of the world, so that he
could confirm the feeble, guide the blind, sustain the lame, and
strengthen the pregnant and those lying in childbed.

<span id="iii.ix-p12"></span>Now, though the Prophet addressed this
discourse to the ancient people, it yet contains a doctrine perpetually
useful. We hence gather, that they act preposterously who estimate God’s
favor according to present appearances. But this is a mistake almost
inbred in us by nature, and engrosses all our thoughts and feelings.
Hence arises want of confidence in God, and hence it also happens, that
all God’s promises become frigid to us, or at least lose their just
value. For when God promises anything, we look around us and inquire how
it can be fulfilled; and if our minds cannot comprehend the way and
manner, we reject what has proceeded from the mouth of God. Let us then
attend to this prophetic doctrine; and when God seems to promise what
surpasses our faith, nay, what appears to us by no means possible, let
this doctrine come to our minds, and let it serve as a corrective to
check our false thoughts, lest we, having our minds preoccupied by a
false and preposterous opinion, should do wrong to the power of God. If,
then, the deliverance which God promises seems incredible, as to our
perceptions, let us remember that it is in his power to make the blind
to see, the lame to walk, the pregnant and those lying in childbed, to
undertake a journey; for he can by his power surmount all obstacles, so
that we shall find our faith victorious, provided we learn to rely on
God’s promises, and firmly rest on them. We now understand what use we
ought to make of this prophecy. It follows afterwards —

<span id="iii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p2"></span>**9**. They shall come with weeping, and with
supplications will I lead them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers
of waters in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a
father to Israel, and Ephraim *is* my first-born.

<span id="iii.x-p3"></span>**9**. Cum fletu venient, et in precationibus
*(vel,* miserationibus) addiscam cos; deducam ad fluvios aquarum, in
viam rectam, ubi non impingent (non impingent in ea, *ad verbum, sed*
<span id="iii.x-p3.1"></span>בה *debet resolvi in relativum)* quoniam
ero Israeli in Patrem, et Ephraim primogenitus meus ipse.

<span id="iii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p6"></span>The Prophet still pursues the same subject;
but he adds, that though they went with weeping into exile, yet that
would be no impediment, that God should not restore them again to their
own country: for I take the beginning of this verse, *in weeping shall
they come,* in an adversative sense. Some explain weeping as the effect
of joy; for joy as well as grief sometimes brings tears. Some then think
the meaning of the Prophet to be, that so great would be the joy on
their return, that tears would flow from their eyes. But I, on the
contrary, think, that the Prophet means what was afterwards repeated in
one of the Psalms,

<span id="iii.x-p7"></span>“Going forth they went forth and wept; but
coming they shall come with exultation, carrying their sheaves.” (<span
id="iii.x-p7.1"></span>[Ps 126:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.x-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.x-p8"></span>For the Prophet compares the exile of the
people to sowing; for except the seed cast on the earth dies, it remains
dry and barren, and does not germinate: the death then of the seed is
the cause of production. So also it was necessary for the people to be
by exile thus cast on the ground, that their calamity might be a kind of
death to them. But he says that the Jews when cast forth as a seed, that
is, when driven into exile to be put to death by the chastening rod of
God, “had come with weeping;” but that afterwards they returned with joy
as in harvest, that is, when liberty to return was granted them. So also
the Prophet here speaks, as I think, in an adversative sense, of the
Jews; the particle *though* is to be understood.

<span id="iii.x-p9"></span>It afterwards follows, *With prayers,* or
mercies, *will I lead them* The word <span
id="iii.x-p9.1"></span>תחנונים*, techenunim,* which is found mostly in
the plural number, means prayers; and I know not whether this sense is
suitable here. In Zechariah, the word being connected with grace, it
cannot be otherwise explained than of mercy, (<span
id="iii.x-p9.2"></span>[Zec 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.x-p9.2"></span>) and I am inclined to adopt this meaning here,
even that the weeping of the people would be no hinderance, that God
should not at last shew mercy to them, and turn their weeping and tears
into laughter and joy. But if any one prefers to render the word,
prayers, the sense would not be improper; that is, that when they began
suppliantly to confess their sins, and to flee to God’s mercy, there
would then come the time of joy. But weeping then must be applied to
blind grief, for the Jews were not as yet subdued so as to submit to
God, to be humbled and to repent. Hence weeping is to be taken in a bad
sense, even for grief, mixed with perverseness, when they murmured
against God; and the Prophet must have taken prayers as tokens of
repentance, that is, when the Jews, having been truly convinced of their
sins by many and continual evils, would begin to flee to God’s mercy.
But he seems rather to set God’s mercies in opposition to the sorrow in
which the Jews were involved when God hid his favor from them.  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md)

<span id="iii.x-p13"></span>He adds, *I will lead them to fountains of
waters,* according to what is said in the book of Psalms, that they
would find fountains and wells on their journey. (<span
id="iii.x-p13.1"></span>[Ps 84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.x-p13.1"></span>) For the Jews had to travel through deserts and
sterile sands; so they thought that they lived in another world while
they were in Chaldea: they remembered how vast was the solitude through
which they had passed. Hence then was their despair, so that they
refused every comfort when the Prophets exhorted them to entertain good
hope. God therefore promises to be their leader on their journey, so
that they should not want water in the lonely and barren desert. And we
see that the Prophet, by the various figures he uses, means one and the
same thing, even that whatever obstacles may meet us, to prevent us from
tasting of God’s goodness, and to embrace the promises of salvation,
they will all vanish away, if we bear in mind the infinite power of God.
*I will* then *lead them by fountains of water*

<span id="iii.x-p14"></span>Then he says, *through a straight way, in
which they shall not stumble,* according to what is said in <span
id="iii.x-p14.1"></span>[Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.x-p14.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.x-p15"></span>“A voice crying in the wilderness, Prepare
ye the way of Jehovah, make straight the paths of our God; let every
valley be raised and mountain be made low, so that rough places may
become plain, and the crooked (or tortuous) become straight ways.”

<span id="iii.x-p16"></span>We thus see how these prophecies harmonize,
and ought to be regarded as teaching the same thing, — that God
surmounts all obstacles when it is his purpose to save his Church; for
how much soever all the elements may unite against the salvation of the
godly, God can by one breath dissipate them all, and cast down the
loftiest mountains that may be in his way, and give rivers in deserts
and dry lands; and thus he can constrain to obey him whatever may seem
opposed to the salvation of his Church.

<span id="iii.x-p17"></span>He afterwards adds, *for I shall be a Father
to Israel, Ephraim my first-born he,* or shall be; for <span
id="iii.x-p17.1"></span>הוא, *eua,* as it is well known, is taken in the
place of a verb. Here Jeremiah points out the cause, and as it were the
fountain of the deliverance of which he has been hitherto speaking, even
because God would become reconciled to his people. He intimates also the
cause of the exile and of all the evils that had been and would be,
because they had provoked God by their sins. God had indeed adopted them
as his people in the person of Abraham; but the Prophet intimates an
interruption when he says, *I will be,* though the covenant of God had
never been annulled. He was then ever the Father of the Church, but the
benefit of adoption did not appear; as to outward appearance the people
seemed as rejected, as it has been said in other places: and on this
subject Hosea also speaks in these words,

<span id="iii.x-p18"></span>“I will say to her who obtained not mercy,
Thou shalt obtain mercy; I will say to the not beloved, Thou art a
beloved people.” (<span id="iii.x-p18.1"></span>[Ho
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span id="iii.x-p18.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.x-p19"></span>For nothing could have been said of the Jews
when expelled from their inheritance, but that they were wholly
alienated from God. He was therefore no Father to them at that time,
that is, he did not appear to be so, although he did prove himself to be
a Father really and effectually. He then began to be a Father when the
people returned into their own country, because God’s favor then shone
forth, which for a time had been as it were extinct.  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)

<span id="iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast so
often been pleased to receive into favor thine ancient people, though
extremely provoked by their perverse wickedness, — O grant, that mercy
may also at this day be shewn to us, and that though we wholly deserve
to perish eternally, thou mayest yet stretch forth thine hand to us and
grant to us a testimony of thy favor, so that we may be able with a
cheerful mind to call on thee as our Father, and ever to entertain hope
of thy mercy, until we shall be gathered into that kingdom, where we
shall perfectly render to thee the sacrifice of praise, and rejoice in
the fruition of that eternal life, which has been procured for us by the
blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Nineteenth

<span id="iii.xii-p2"></span>We explained yesterday how God began to be
a Father to Israel when he restored him from exile. Adoption, with
regard to God, remained indeed the same, as it has been stated; but as
to the judgment of men, it was abolished. He then began anew so to
collect his people, that they might really know him as their Father.

<span id="iii.xii-p3"></span>He afterwards adds, that *Ephraim would be
his first-born* Ephraim is no doubt taken here for the whole people; nor
does the Prophet here make any distinction between the two kingdoms, but
includes even the tribe of Judah in the name Ephraim, as it is done in
many other places. But yet it is proper to observe, that Ephraim is
sometimes taken for all the posterity of Abraham, sometimes for the
kingdom of Israel, and sometimes for that tribe itself. When the kingdom
of Judah is distinguished from the kingdom of Israel, then Ephraim
includes only the ten tribes; but in this place the Prophet did not
intend to mark the difference between the tribe of Judah and the ten
tribes, because it would have in this case been very strange to call
Ephraim the first-born; for we know that Ephraim had been rejected from
a regard to David, as it is said in the Psalms,

<span id="iii.xii-p4"></span>“And God refused the tribe of Joseph, and
rejected the tabernacles of Ephraim; he chose the tribe of Judah whom he
loved.”  
(<span id="iii.xii-p4.2"></span>[Ps.
78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067.md),
[68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068)<span id="iii.xii-p4.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xii-p5"></span>There a comparison is made between the
kingdom of Judah which God had erected, having added a promise, and the
kingdom of Jeroboam, which was, as it were, spurious; for the revolt
from the family of David had torn the body of the Church, so that it
became as it were mutilated. For this reason it is said that Ephraim was
rejected, that is, because God regarded David alone and his posterity
with paternal favor; and of his whole family it was said,

<span id="iii.xii-p6"></span>“He shall call me, ‘My Father;’ and I will
say to him  
‘Thou art my Son.’” (<span id="iii.xii-p6.2"></span>[Ps
89:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026)<span id="iii.xii-p6.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xii-p7"></span>In this place then, the Prophet speaks
generally of the people, as though he had said that it was only a
temporary division when the ten tribes had formed for themselves a
kingdom of their own, but that they would become one people, so that
Ephraim would differ in nothing any more from Judah. To the same purpose
is what is said by Hosea,

<span id="iii.xii-p8"></span>“When Israel was a child I loved him,  
and from Egypt have I called my Son.” (<span
id="iii.xii-p8.2"></span>[Ho 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.xii-p8.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.xii-p9"></span>There the Prophet calls the people Israel;
he does not, however, denote the ten tribes only, but he placed in the
first rank David and his posterity. Indeed, the Prophets, when
prophesying of the restoration of the Church, direct their eyes to the
first unity which God had fixed among the people, for it was then only
the true state of things, when the twelve tribes preserved a fraternal
union. We now then perceive why the Prophet says that Ephraim was God’s
*first-born.*

<span id="iii.xii-p10"></span>But it may be asked here, “With respect to
whom is he thus called? for it follows that there were other sons of
God, if Ephraim was the first-born among them.” But this conclusion is
not well-founded; for Mary is said to have brought forth her first-born
son, who was yet her only son, (<span id="iii.xii-p10.1"></span>[Mt
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025)<span id="iii.xii-p10.1"></span>.md)
and Christ is called elsewhere the first-begotten with: reference to all
the faithful,

<span id="iii.xii-p11"></span>“that he might be the first-born among
many brethren.” (<span id="iii.xii-p11.1"></span>[Ro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span id="iii.xii-p11.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xii-p12"></span>But Mary had brought forth her only son.
Hence the word, “first-born,” does not prove that others follow, the
second and the third in their order; but we may say that Ephraim was
called the first-born of God with reference to the Gentiles, who at
length became partakers of free adoption: for we also are the children
of Abraham, because we have been planted by faith among the elect
people; yet this solution seems to me more refined than solid. I then
give this simple interpretation, that Ephraim was called the first-born
because he was preferred to all the Gentiles; God was pleased to choose
them as his people. This then was the peculiar privilege of the seed of
Abraham; for though the human race was one and the same, yet it pleased
God to choose and adopt Abraham and his posterity. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p2"></span>**10**. Hear the word of the LORD, O ye
nations, and declare *it* in the isles afar off, and say, He that
scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd *doth* his
flock.

<span id="iii.xiii-p3"></span>**10**. Audite sermonem Jehovae, gentes,
et annuntiate in insulis e longinquo, et dicite, Qui dispersit Israel
congregabit eum, et custodiet tanquam pastor gregem suum.

<span id="iii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet dwells at large on the
redemption which was in the opinion of all incredible, especially as so
many years had already elapsed; for it was the full extent of human life
when the people had been buried, as it were, in their graves for seventy
years. Then the length of time alone was sufficient to cut off every
hope. No wonder then that our Prophet sets forth in a lofty strain the
return of the people.

<span id="iii.xiii-p7"></span>Hence he exclaims, *Hear, ye nations, the
word of Jehovah* And then, as by God’s command, he sends forth heralds
here and there to proclaim the favor granted: *Go ye,* he says, *and
announce it in remote islands* Now, by these words he intimates that the
liberation of the people would be a remarkable demonstration of God’s
power, which was to be made known through all nations. Had not this been
said, the hope of the people must have failed through its own weakness,
and been reduced, as it were, to nothing. But when they heard.
Jeremiah’s prophecy respecting this extraordinary favor of God, it was
no common consolation to them; that is, that God would become such a
deliverer to them that he would exercise his power in such a way as to
become evident even to remote nations, yea, the report of which would
penetrate into the farthest regions. By *islands* the Prophets mean
countries beyond the sea; thus by the Jews, Italy, Spain, Greece,
France, were called Islands. Then the Prophet here by remote islands,
means all the regions of the world distant from Judea, and especially
those beyond the sea.

<span id="iii.xiii-p8"></span>He afterwards says, *he who has dispersed
Israel will gather him* This sentence confirms the hope of liberation;
for God could easily redeem his people, since their exile was a
punishment inflicted by his own hand. Had the Chaldeans obtained the
victory over them by their own prowess, they might have cast away all
hope as to their deliverance. God then exhorts the people here to
entertain hope, because he could heal those wounds which he himself had
inflicted; as though he had said, “I am he who drove you into exile, am
I not able to bring you back? Had you been led away by the power of your
enemies, you might be now without any hope of deliverance; but as
nothing happened but through my righteous judgment, mercy can bring a
remedy for all your evils.” Then God shews that their liberation could
be easily effected, since the Chaldeans gained nothing by their own
power, but as far as he permitted them when chastising his people. He
then reasons from contraries, that since he had dispersed, he could also
gather them. For had the Israelites been dispersed at the will and
pleasure of men, their deliverance might have seemed to be beyond the
power of God; but as he had chastised them, he could, as I have just
said, heal the wounds inflicted by his own hand.

<span id="iii.xiii-p9"></span>A useful doctrine may be hence deduced:
the Prophet invites the people to repentance by reminding them that God
had dispersed them; for had not the miserable people known this and been
fully persuaded of it, they would not have fled to God’s mercy, nor have
regarded him, nor entertained hope of deliverance. It was, therefore,
necessary that repentance should in due order precede, that the people
might embrace the deliverance offered to them. This is the reason why
the Prophet says, that it was God who had *dispersed* Israel. He indeed
reasons, as I have said, from contraries; but the sentence, no doubt,
contains the exhortation which I have now stated, that the people might
know that they suffered a just punishment; for it was not by chance, nor
by the will of men, but by God’s righteous judgment, that they had been
driven into exile.

<span id="iii.xiii-p10"></span>It follows, *and he will guard them as a
shepherd his flock* The Prophet here shews that God’s favor would not be
momentary, but that their liberation would be the beginning of a
deliverance continued to the end; and to know this is most necessary;
for what would it avail us to be once delivered by God? Were it so, our
salvation would soon fail. But when we hear that we are delivered by God
from the tyranny of our enemies for this end, that he may continue
towards us his favor, that he may become our perpetual guardian and
shepherd, this is a solid ground of confidence. This then is the reason
why the Prophet, after having spoken of the deliverance of his people,
at the same time adds, that God would be their *shepherd,* that he would
perpetually guard and preserve his people. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#011.md)<span id="iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p2"></span>**11**. For the LORD hath redeemed Jacob,
and ransomed him from the hand of *him that was* stronger than he.

<span id="iii.xiv-p3"></span>**11**. Quia redimet Jehova Jacob et
redimet e manu *(est quidem aliud verbum, sed idem significat,* <span
id="iii.xiv-p3.1"></span>פדה נאל *redemit e manu)* potentis *(vel,*
robusti) prae ipso.

<span id="iii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject. He had
said before that it would not be a difficult or an arduous work for God
to deliver his people; he now says, *Jehovah will redeem his people, and
will redeem them from the hand of one more powerful than themselves*
Jeremiah again obviates the doubt which might have dejected the minds of
the godly; for this thought ever recurred to them, “How can God redeem
us? he might indeed have cheeked the Chaldeans, but now they rule over
the whole East; this monarchy is like a gulf in which the whole world is
swallowed up: since then God has thus exalted the Chaldean power, we are
wholly without hope.” They might then have despaired when they compared
this evil with all the remedies that might occur to them. But the
Prophet here confirms what he had just stated, that God would be more
powerful than the Chaldeans and all other enemies; as though he had
said,

<span id="iii.xiv-p7"></span>“Though your enemies are strong, and ye are
like sheep in the jaws of wolves, yet nothing can hinder God from
redeeming you.”  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md)

<span id="iii.xiv-p11"></span>To the same purpose is what God says often
by his Prophets,

<span id="iii.xiv-p12"></span>“Ye have been sold for nothing, and
redeemed shall  
ye be without price,” (<span id="iii.xiv-p12.2"></span>[Isa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#003)<span id="iii.xiv-p12.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xiv-p13"></span>as though he had said, “I am not bound to
pay anything to the Chaldeans, for I did not sell you to them as by a
contract, but I sold you on account of your sins; as to them, they have
given me no price: let nothing, therefore, terrify you as though they
could oppose your deliverance against my will.” How so? “Because they
have no right to detain you; therefore, if ye only accept my favor, the
strength of your enemies, which appears so formidable, shall not hinder
your redemption.” This is the reason why he says that the Chaldeans were
stronger or more powerful than the Israelites.

<span id="iii.xiv-p14"></span>This truth is also of no little use to us
at this day; for when we consider how great is the strength of our
enemies, despair must overwhelm our minds; but this promise comes to our
aid — God testifies that he will in such a way be the Deliverer of his
people, that the power of men shall not prevent nor delay his work. It
follows, —

<span id="iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012.md)<span id="iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p2"></span>**12**. Therefore they shall come and sing
in the height of Zion, and shall flow together to the goodness of the
LORD, for wheat, and for wine, and for oil, and for the young of the
flock and of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered garden; and
they shall not sorrow any more at all.

<span id="iii.xv-p3"></span>**12**. Et venient et laudabunt in excelso
Zion, et confluent ad beneficentiam Jehovae, ad triticum et ad vinum et
ad oleum, et ad gregem pecudum (ad verbum, filios ovium) et armenti
(vel, pecoris; distinguit oves et arietes a bobus et vaccis) et erit
anima eorum quasi hortus irriguus, et non adjicient ad dolendum (vel,
lugendum) amplius.

<span id="iii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p6"></span>He says that they would come to *sing
praises on the height of Zion;* by which words Jeremiah promises the
restoration of the Temple, for otherwise the return of the Jews to their
own country would have been of no great importance; nay, it would have
been better for them to have remained in Chaldea, if they only regarded
quietness, wealth, and pleasures; for we know how great was the
fertility and pleasantness of Chaldea. Then as to the benefits of an
earthly and fading life, dwelling there would have been more
advantageous to the Jews; but their return to their own country was to
be looked for chiefly that they might be separated from heathens, and
might rightly worship God, and so dwell in the promised inheritance, as
to be strangers in the world, having respect to their celestial rest.

<span id="iii.xv-p7"></span>What then has been hitherto said of the
people’s return would have been unimportant, had not this promise been
added respecting the restoration of God’s worship. At the same time he
exhorts the Israelites to gratitude by shewing to them the end for which
they were to be made free, even that they might sing praises on the
height of Zion. We, indeed, know that the Temple was built on the top of
that hill. But the Prophet mentions the height or high place, because
gratitude was freely expressed when the Jews returned to their own
country; for while they lived in exile they were like persons mute. It
is hence said in the Psalms,

<span id="iii.xv-p8"></span>“How shall we sing a song to God in a
foreign land?”  
(<span id="iii.xv-p8.2"></span>[Ps
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004)<span id="iii.xv-p8.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xv-p9"></span>And they might have been still fearful after
their return, had not a full liberty been granted them. This then is the
benefit which the Prophet refers to when he says, that they would
celebrate this favor *on the high place of Sion,* not in an obscure
corner, but so that their voice might be heard far and wide.

<span id="iii.xv-p10"></span>He adds, *and they shall flow together to
the goodness of Jehovah, to the wheat, vine, and oil*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) This mode of speaking, common among the
Prophets, ought to be specially noticed. They describe the kingdom of
Christ in a way suitable to the comprehension of a rude people, and
hence they set before them external images; for when Christ’s kingdom is
the subject, mention is made of gold, of silver, of every kind of
wealth, and also of great splendor and of great power, for we know that
what is beyond and above the world cannot be immediately comprehended by
the human mind. We are here inclosed, as it were, in prisons — I speak
not of our bodies; but while we sojourn on earth, we cannot raise our
minds upwards so as to penetrate as far as the celestial glory of God.
As, then, the kingdom of Christ is spiritual and celestial, it cannot be
comprehended by buman minds, except he raises up our thoughts, as he
does, by degrees. This, then, is the reason why the Prophets have set
forth the kingdom of Christ by comparing it to earthly kingdoms. We also
know that there was a peculiarity in the Old Testament, when God covered
with shadows what was afterwards clearly revealed in the Gospel; in
Christ the heavens are opened to us. Hence this form of stating the
truth would now be not only superfluous to us, but even injurious, as it
would draw us back from the enjoyment of heavenly things. For we ought
to distinguish between our state and that of the ancient people. Paul
reminds us that they were children under a schoolmaster, being under the
Law; but that we are grown up, and that, therefore, the bondage under
which the Fathers lived, has come to an end through the coming of
Christ. (<span id="iii.xv-p15.1"></span>[Ga
3:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.xv-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.xv-p16"></span>Though David was endued with a singular
gift of the Spirit, yet he confined himself within his own limits; for
he knew that God intended so to rule at that time his Church, as that
the manner of teaching should be suitable to children. But now, after we
have grown up in Christ, the figures and external images have ceased;
for though godliness has promises respecting the present as well as the
future life, as Paul testifies, (<span id="iii.xv-p16.1"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="iii.xv-p16.1"></span>.md) we
ought yet to rise above that doctrine which is elementary. Hence when
the Prophets promise wine, and oil, and wheat to the faithful, their
object is to raise up their minds by degrees and gradually to higher
things, according to the condition and comprehension of childhood.

<span id="iii.xv-p17"></span>And this ought to be carefully noticed; for
many profane men, when they read such sentences, think that the people
were addicted only to present gratifications, and that all the Jews were
slaves to their appetites, and were fed by God like swine or oxen. But
such an opinion is to be altogether abhorred; for they who entertain it
not only wrong the Fathers most grievously, whose hope was the same as
ours, as thy ever looked forward to an eternal inheritance, being
strangers, as the Apostle tells us, in this world, (<span
id="iii.xv-p17.1"></span>[Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)<span id="iii.xv-p17.1"></span>.md)
but they also disunite the body of the Church, and extinguish the grace
of God, which was granted formerly through many ages, though it was only
at the coming of Christ that God commenced to proclaim to men his
eternal salvation. But we must bear in mind that the holy Fathers were
not so brutish in their minds, that they confined their thoughts to this
world; for they knew that they had been adopted by God, that they might
at last enjoy a celestial life; and hence they called themselves
sojourners. Jacob, who had long dwelt in the land of Canaan, says that
his whole life had been a continual pilgrimage. (<span
id="iii.xv-p17.2"></span>[Ge 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.xv-p17.2"></span>) And the Apostle wisely notices this, when he
says that they were acknowledged by God as his children, because they
were strangers in this world. (<span id="iii.xv-p17.3"></span>[Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)<span id="iii.xv-p17.3"></span>.md)
Then the holy fathers had the same hope as we now receive from the
Gospel, as they had also the same Christ. But the difference is, that
God then set forth his grace under visible figures, and it was,
therefore, more obscure, but that now, figures and types had ceased, and
Christ has come forth and appeared to us more clearly. I have therefore
said, that this doctrine ought to be wisely applied to our use, lest we
seek to be fed and crammed when God invites us to the participation of
his grace. But we ought to know, that of all men, we are the most
miserable, if our hope is confined to this world; and yet, at that time
this way of teaching was very necessary, for the return of the people,
as it has been stated, required it.

<span id="iii.xv-p18"></span>Now, then, let us know that by saying,
*they shall flow together to the goodness of Jehovah, to wine, oil, and
wheat,* something better and more excellent than food and sufficiency is
promised, and that what is spiritual is conveyed under these figures,
that the people might, by degrees, ascend to the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, which was as yet involved in shadows and obscurity.

<span id="iii.xv-p19"></span>He afterwards adds, *their soul shall be as
a watered garden* He intimates that their abundance would be perpetual.
When a fruitful year happens, fruits then, indeed, abound, and the
quantity of wine and wheat is more than the demand; but after a fertile
year sterility follows, which absorbs the previous abundance; and so it
often happens, because men through their ingratitude, as it were, drive
away God’s blessing, so that it does not flow to them in a continuous
course; but God promises here that the souls of the people would be as
watered gardens, because they were not to be satisfied only for a short
time, but were at no time to be exposed to want, or famine, or to any
deficiency.

<span id="iii.xv-p20"></span>He says further, *they shall again mourn no
more* He confirms the same thing by using various forms of expression;
but what he substantially means is, that when God’s people were made
free, God’s blessing would be continued to them, so that the faithful
would not be subject to the common miseries of men.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) For we know what our condition is in this
world, for every hour, nay, almost every moment, our joy is turned into
sorrow, and our laughter into tears. But God promises here that he would
be so propitious to his Church, that it would have a perpetual cause for
rejoicing. Now, how this comes to pass we do not easily comprehend; for
though God in Christ has plainly unfolded to us the treasures of
celestial life, yet we always creep on the earth. Hence it comes that we
do not attain what is contained in these sentences which speak of the
true and real happiness of the godly. However, we ought, in the main, to
regard our joy as perpetual; for whatever evils may happen to us, yet
God shines on us by his grace, and thus all things turn out for our
good, and are aids to our salvation, as Paul tells us in <span
id="iii.xv-p21.2"></span>[Ro 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)<span
id="iii.xv-p21.2"></span>. And thus we cease not to glory in distresses
and afflictions, as he also teaches us in the fifth chapter; and we dare
to triumph over cold and heat, over nakedness and all other evils, and
even over death itself.

<span id="iii.xv-p22"></span>But we must bear in mind that Christ’s
kingdom only begins in us here, and in the rest of the world; it is,
then, no wonder that we taste so little of the benefits which the
Prophets extol in such high terms. When, therefore, a temptation of this
kind creeps in, when God treats us more sharply then we desire, “What
does this mean? Wert thou one of God’s children, would he not deal with
thee indulgently as he has promised? Where is that abundance of wheat,
wine, and oil, for thou art often in want? Thou always livest in penury,
nor does there appear to be anything better for thee to-morrow, as thou
art now robbed and art come to a barren country,” — now when such a
temptation as this creeps in, such as may draw thee to despair, let this
doctrine come to thy mind, “Is the kingdom of God made perfect in thee?”
Now if not one of us has hardly entered into God’s kingdom, there is no
wonder that we are not partakers of all the good things which God has
promised to his people; for if Christ’s kingdom is weak and feeble in
us, it is nothing but right that we should live, as it were, in that
penury which tempts us to distrust God; the same is the way with the
whole world. There is, then, no reason to wonder that God does not
fulfill what he has promised under Christ’s kingdom, when men are not
capable of receiving so great a kindness; for it is written,

<span id="iii.xv-p23"></span>“Open thy mouth and I will fill it.” (<span
id="iii.xv-p23.1"></span>[Ps
81:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span id="iii.xv-p23.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xv-p24"></span>But we are straitened in ourselves; hence
it is, that hardly the smallest drops of God’s bounty come to us. It
afterwards follows, —

<span id="iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p2"></span>**13**. Then shall the virgin rejoice in
the dance, both young men and old together: for I will turn their
mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from
their sorrow.

<span id="iii.xvi-p3"></span>**13**. Tunc laetabitur virgo *(aut*
puella) in choro et adolescentes *(vel,* electi; *sed signi,ficat
proprie adolescentes)* et senes pariter; et convertam luctum eorum in
gaudium, et consolabor eos et exhilarabo a suo dolore.

<span id="iii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p6"></span>This is a confirmation of the former verse;
for he says that joy would be in common to young women and young men,
and also to the old. He had spoken of the perpetuity of joy; but he now
extends this joy to both sexes, women and men, and to all ages. Of the
*dance* we have spoken elsewhere, — that wantonness in which the world
indulges in its hilarity, was not permitted; as to profane men, there is
no moderation in their joy. The Prophets followed the common mode of
speaking; and, indeed, the Israelites had their dances while celebrating
the praises of God; but it was a chaste and modest joy, yea, and a
sacred joy, for it was a mode of worshipping God. Yet the Prophet speaks
according to the common practices of the people, as in many other
places, when he says that young women and young men would *rejoice in
the dance*

<span id="iii.xvi-p7"></span>He then adds, I *will turn their mourning
to joy, I will console them and exhilarate them from their grief*  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) Here the Prophet averts the thoughts of
the Israelites from the evils they then had, lest their grief should so
darken their minds as to prevent them to taste of God’s goodness
promised them. That the feeling, then, of present evils might not hinder
them to come to God and receive his favor, he speaks of their grief and
mourning, and intimates that the change would be easily made by God’s
hand, when it pleased him to deliver his people and restore them to
their former state, so that their complete happiness would take place
under the reign of Christ.

<span id="iii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xvii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are still
in our state of pilgrimage, and as thou makest us partakers of thy
goodness, according as thou knowest to be necessary for us, — O grant,
that we, being ever reminded by thy benefits, may aspire to higher
things, and may, through all the temptations with which we must contend,
advance towards the goal set before us, looking for that perfect
felicity in heaven, of which a few sparks only now shine before our
eyes, and thus carry on a warfare under the banner of thy Son, so as not
to doubt but that a triumph is prepared for us in that blessed life
which has been obtained by his blood. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xvii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xviii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twentieth

<span id="iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p1"></span><span id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#014.md)<span id="iii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p2"></span>**14**. And I will satiate the soul of the
priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness,
saith the LORD.

<span id="iii.xix-p3"></span>**14**. Et satiabo animam sacerdotum
pinguedine, et populus meus beneficentia mea salvabitur, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xix-p6"></span>This verse is connected with the former;
for what the Prophet had said generally of the whole people, he now
distinctly declares respecting the priests, for they were, as it were,
the heart of the people; and by this order God gave a lively
representation of his favor. This is the reason why the Scripture, in
setting forth God’s blessing to his chosen people, speaks especially of
the priests, as it appears from many places. Then the Prophet intimates
that God would be bountiful indiscriminately to all the Israelites, but
that his peculiar favor would be conspicuous towards the priests, for
the condition of the people would not be complete without the
priesthood, for the priesthood was, as it were, the soul. They would
have lived like the heathens, had not God prescribed how he was to be
called upon and worshipped. And having mentioned the priests, he does
not confine himself to them, but the favor of God is extended to the
whole people. It is not then only of the priests that the Prophet
speaks, but he declares that the people would be made blessed through
God’s bounty, and yet that his peculiar kindness would be manifested
towards the Levitical priests, according to what we read in the Psalms:
a special blessing is promised to the priests, accompanied with felicity
to the godly; and David, when felicitating himself on having so many of
God’s blessings, by which he was distinguished, does indeed mention the
provisions of his table and abundance of all other things, yet he
immediately adds,

<span id="iii.xix-p7"></span>“I will dwell in the house of the Lord.”
(<span id="iii.xix-p7.1"></span>[Ps
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006)<span id="iii.xix-p7.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xix-p8"></span>By this conclusion, he intimates, that he
esteemed as nothing what profane men desire, except he enjoyed as the
first thing the worship of God; for this is the main part of our
happiness. For wherefore do we live, except we learn, while we partake
of blessings from God’s hand, that he is our Father, and that we are
stimulated by his bounty to worship him, and except we surrender
ourselves wholly to his word?

<span id="iii.xix-p9"></span>We now, then, perceive the Prophet’s object
in saying, that the priests would be satiated *with fatness*

<span id="iii.xix-p10"></span>As the word <span
id="iii.xix-p10.1"></span>דשן, *deshin,* fatness, denotes abundance of
all things; so *satiate* intimates the great extent of God’s bounty.
Some render it “inebriate,” but improperly; and it would be
inappropriate to say, “I will inebriate with fatness.” But <span
id="iii.xix-p10.2"></span>רוה *rue,* means to irrigate and also to
satiate: hence the Prophet said, in what we considered yesterday, that
the soul of the faithful would be like a watered garden; it is there
<span id="iii.xix-p10.3"></span>רוה*, rue.* So also now God means, that
he would be so bountiful towards his people, that nothing would be
wanting to the full affluence of all good things. And he again says the
same thing with regard to the whole people, *My people shall be
satisfied with my goodness, saith Jehovah* We hence see that nothing is
promised to the priests, except in connection with the whole Church. It
follows —

<span id="iii.xix-p11"></span> 

<span id="iii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p1"></span><span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015.md)<span id="iii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p2"></span>**15**. Thus saith the LORD; A voice was
heard in Ramah, lamentation, *and* bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her
children refused to be comforted for her children, because they *were*
not.

<span id="iii.xx-p3"></span>**15**. Sic dicit Jehova, Vox in excelso
audita est, lamentatio, fietus amaritudinum, Rachel plorans super filiis
suis noluit (renuit, vel, non admisit) ad consolandum (hoc est, non
admisit consolationum super filiis suis) quia non ipsi, (hoc est, quia
non sunt)

<span id="iii.xx-p4"></span>**16**. Thus saith the LORD; Refrain thy
voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears: for thy work shall be
rewarded, saith the LORD; and they shall come again from the land of the
enemy.

<span id="iii.xx-p5"></span>**16**. Sic dicit Jehova, Prohibe vocem tuam
a fletu et oculos tuos a lachrymis, quia erit merces operi tuo, dicit
Jehova, et revertentur e terra hostis.

<span id="iii.xx-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xx-p7"></span><span id="iii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p8"></span>Here, in the first place, the Prophet
describes the desolation of the land, when deprived of all its
inhabitants; and, in the second place, he adds a comfort, — that God
would restore the captives from exile, that the land might again be
inhabited. But there is here what they call a personification, that is,
an imaginary person introduced: for the Prophet raises up Rachel from
the grave, and represents her as lamenting. She had been long dead, and
her body had been reduced to ashes; but the discourse has more force
when lamentation is ascribed to a dead woman than if the Prophet had
said, that the land would present a sad and a mournful appearance,
because it would be waste and desolate; for rhetoricians mention
personification among the highest excellencies, and Cicero, when
treating of the highest ornament of an oration, says, that nothing
touches an audience so much as when the dead are raised up from below.
The Prophet, then, though not taught in the school of rhetoricians, thus
adorned his discourse through the impulse ot God’s Spirit, that he might
more effectually penetrate into the hearts of the people.

<span id="iii.xx-p9"></span>And this personification introduces a scene,
for it brings before us the Jews and the other Israelites; nor does it
only represent to them the calamity that was at hand, and what had
already in part happened, but it also sets before their eyes the
vengeance of God which had taken place in the destruction of the kingdom
of Israel, when first four tribes were driven into exile, and afterwards
the whole kingdom was destroyed, and it also sets forth what the Jews
little thought of and did not fear, even the extreme calamity and ruin
of the kingdom of Judah, and of the holy city.

<span id="iii.xx-p10"></span>Hence he says, *Thus saith Jehovah, A voice
on the height is heard, even lamentation, the weeping of bitterness,* he
introduces God as the speaker; for the Jews, though they had seen the
dreadful scattering of their brethren, were yet remaining secure; and
hence another Prophet complains, that no one laid to heart the calamity
of Joseph. (<span id="iii.xx-p10.1"></span>[Am
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006)<span id="iii.xx-p10.1"></span>.md)
They saw that the whole land was almost consumed by God’s vengeance, as
though a fire had raged everywhere; and yet they followed their own
gratifications, as Isaiah also accuses them. (<span
id="iii.xx-p10.2"></span>[Isa 22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.xx-p10.2"></span>) This is the reason why God is made to speak
here: he had to do with men altogether torpid and heedless. That the
Prophet then might awaken them from their torpor, he introduces God as
making the announcement, *A voice* then *is heard,* — whose voice? of
*Rachel.*

<span id="iii.xx-p11"></span>Interpreters think that Rachel is
mentioned, because she was buried in Bethlehem: but as to Joseph, that
is, his posterity, this region had come by lot, it seems to me probable
that the Prophet here refers not to the grave of Rachel, but to her
offspring; for that part which they who descended from her son Benjamin
had obtained, was laid waste; hence he introduces Rachel as the mother
of that part of the country; and it is well known that under the tribe
of Ephraim is included the other ten tribes: but the reference to her
burial is without meaning. *Rachel,* then, *weeping for her children,
refused consolation, because they were not;*  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) that is, she could not receive
consolation, for a reason was wanting, as her posterity were destroyed,
and were become extinct in the land.

<span id="iii.xx-p13"></span>This passage is quoted by Matthew, (<span
id="iii.xx-p13.1"></span>[Mt 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.xx-p13.1"></span>) where he gives an account of the infants
under two years old, who had been slain by the command of Herod: then he
says, that this prophecy was fulfilled, even that Rachel again wept for
her children. But the explanation of this is attended with no
difficulty; for Matthew meant no other thing than that the same thing
happened at the coming of Christ as had taken place before, when the
whole country was reduced to desolation; for it was the Evangelist’s
object to remove an offense arising from novelty, as we know that men’s
minds feel a dread when anything new, unexpected, and never heard of
before happens. Hence, the Evangelists often direct their attention to
this point, so that what happened in the time of Christ might not
terrify or disturb the minds of men as a thing new and unexpected,
inasmuch as the fathers formerly had experienced the same. To no purpose
then do interpreters torture themselves by explaining this passage
allegorically; for Matthew did not intend to lessen the authority of
ancient history, for he knew in what sense this had been formerly said;
but his only object was to remind the Jews that there was no cause for
them to be greatly astonished at that slaughter, for that region had
formerly been laid waste and bereaved of all its inhabitants, as though
a mother, having had a large family, were to lose all her children.
 <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md)

<span id="iii.xx-p15"></span>We now then see how Matthew accommodated to
his own purpose this passage. He retains the proper name, “Ramah,” and
there was a place so called; but the appellative is preferable here, “A
voice is heard on the height,” as we had yesterday, “on the height of
Zion.” Then a high place is what Jeremiah has mentioned here, because
lamentation was to be heard through all parts of the country, for a
voice sent forth from a high place sounds afar off.  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) Now, also, we perceive the meaning of
this sentence, — that the country possessed by the sons of Benjamin had
been reduced to desolation, so that the mother, as one bereaved of her
children, pined away in her lamentation, as nothing could afford her
comfort, because her whole offspring had been cut off.

<span id="iii.xx-p17"></span>Now follows a promise which moderates the
grievousness of the calamity. And the two verses ought to be read as
opposite the one to the other, “Though Rachel, weeping for her children,
has no ground for consolation for a time, yet God will console her.” And
thus the Prophet, in the former verse, exhorts the Jews to repentance,
but in the latter to hope: for it was necessary that the Jews should be
forewarned of their dreadful calamity, that they might acknowledge God’s
judgment; and it was also necessary for them to have their minds
inspired with hope. Now, then, the Prophet bids them to be comforted;
for Rachel, having long bewailed her children without any consolation,
would at length obtain God’s mercy. God then would console Rachel after
her long lamentation.

<span id="iii.xx-p18"></span><span id="iii.xx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p19"></span>*Refrain,* he says, *thy voice from
weeping* The word is <span id="iii.xx-p19.1"></span>בכה *beke:* as he
had mentioned this word before in the second place, “lamentation, the
weeping of bitterness,” so he now repeats the same here, “Refrain thy
voice from weeping,” that is, cease to complain and to bewail the death
of thy children, *and thine eyes from tears* The meaning is, that the
lamentation of Rachel would not be perpetual. We have said that a dead
woman is introduced, but that this is done for the sake of solemnity and
effect, so that the Jews, having the matter set as it were before their
eyes, might be more touched and moved. But if we wish to understand the
meaning of the Prophet without a figure it is this, — that the
lamentation would not be perpetual, because the exiles would return, and
that the land that had fallen to the lot of the children of Benjamin and
of Joseph would again be inhabited.

<span id="iii.xx-p20"></span>And he says, *for reward shall be to thy
work* He means that the sorrow of Rachel would at length happily come to
an end, so as to produce some benefit. While the faithful, according to
Isaiah, were complaining that they were oppressed with grief without
hope, they said, “We have been in travail, and brought forth wind:” by
these words they meant that they had experienced the heaviest troubles;
and then they added, “without fruit,” as though a woman were in travail
and suffered the greatest pain and anguish, and brought forth no living,
but a dead child, which is sometimes the case. Now a woman who gives
birth to a living child rejoices, as Christ says, because a man is born,
(<span id="iii.xx-p20.1"></span>[Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021)<span id="iii.xx-p20.1"></span>.md)
but when a woman after long pains brings forth a dead lump or something
monstrous, it is an increase of sorrow. So the Prophet says, that the
labor of Rachel, that is, of her country, would not be without fruit:
*there shall* then *be a reward to thy work* The Scripture uses the same
way of speaking in <span id="iii.xx-p20.2"></span>[2Ch
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#007.md)<span id="iii.xx-p20.2"></span>,
where the Prophet Azariah speaks to the King Asa,

<span id="iii.xx-p21"></span>“Act manfully, and let not your hands be
weakened, for there shall be a reward to your work.”

<span id="iii.xx-p22"></span>Then by work is to be understood trouble or
sorrow, and by reward a joyful and prosperous issue. The meaning is,
that though the whole country mourned miserably for a time, being
deserted and bereaved of its inhabitants, yet the issue would be joyful,
for the Lord would restore the exiles, so that the land would be like a
mother having a numerous family, and delighting in her children, or in
her offspring.

<span id="iii.xx-p23"></span>Now, were any one to apply this to
satisfactions, he would be doing what is very absurd, as the Papists do,
who say that by the punishment which we suffer we are redeemed from
eternal death, and that then the vengeance of God is pacified, and
satisfaction is made to his justice. But when the Prophet declares that
there would be reward to the work, he does not commend the fruits of the
punishment by which God chastised his people, as though they were, as
they say, satisfactions; but he simply reminds them that their troubles
and sorrows would not be useless, for a happier issue than the Jews
hoped for would take place. But it is God’s gratuitous gift that there
is a reward to our work, that is, when the miseries and calamities which
he inflicts on us are made aids to our salvation. For doubtless whatever
evils we suffer, they are tokens of God’s wrath; poverty, cold, famine,
sterility, disease, and all other evils, are so many curses inflicted by
God. When, therefore, there is a reward to our troubles and sorrows,
that is, when they produce some benefit or fruit, it is as though God
turned darkness into light; for naturally, as I have said, all these
punishments are curses. But God promises that he will bless us, so that
all these punishments shall turn out for our good and salvation, as Paul
tells us in <span id="iii.xx-p23.1"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.xx-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.xx-p24"></span>Then he adds, *they shall return from the
land of the enemy* By these words he refers to the restoration of the
people, so that Rachel would again see her posterity inheriting the
promised land. But there is no reason refinedly to dispute here, whether
Rachel rejoiced at the return of her offspring, or whether that calamity
was lamented by her; for the Prophet’s object was not to shew whether or
not the dead are conscious of our affairs; but he speaks figuratively in
order to render what he said more striking and forcible. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017.md)<span id="iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p2"></span>**17**. And there is hope in thine end,
saith the LORD, that thy children shall come again to their own border.

<span id="iii.xxi-p3"></span>**17**. Et erit spes novissimo tuo, dicit
Jehova; et redibunt filii ad terminum suum *(hoc est,* in regionum suam)

<span id="iii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p6"></span>He indeed explains in a few words, but with
sufficient plainness, what he had said. We must always bear in mind the
order which I have pointed out, — that he first placed before the Jews
their calamity, that they might humble themselves before God; and then
he gave them the hope of return, that they might feel assured that God
would be propitious to them. He now includes both in these few words,
*there shall be hope in thine end;* for they embrace the two clauses, —
that the whole country would lament for a time, and then that their
tears would be turned to laughter and their sorrow to joy: for had the
happiness of the people flowed in one unbroken stream, the word, “end,”
would not have been suitable; for it refers to what terminates. There is
then to be understood a contrast between the end and the beginning. In
short, Jeremiah teaches here, that the grievous time, during which God
would afflict his people, was to be borne patiently. But after having
bidden them to continue in a state of suspense, he sets before them a
happy issue.

<span id="iii.xxi-p7"></span>Now this passage contains a useful
doctrine, — that we are not to measure God’s favor by present
appearances, but learn to keep our minds and thoughts in suspense, while
the Lord seems to be angry with us, and only disheartening terrors meet
us, so that we may cherish in our hearts the hope which the Prophet
exhorts us to entertain, and distinguish between our present state and
the end. And on this account it is that the Apostle, in his Epistle to
the Hebrews, while exhorting the faithful to patience, says that the rod
is always at the time grievous to children, but that correction appears
useful, when the end is regarded. (<span id="iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>[Heb
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxi-p7.1"></span>.md)
So when we perceive that God is displeased with us, we cannot but feel a
dread, and we desire at the same time to escape from his chastening
hand; but, as I have just said, we ought to direct our thoughts to the
end or the issue, according to what we are taught here: *there shall*
then *be hope in thine end*  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md)

<span id="iii.xxi-p9"></span>But a question may be here moved, Was there
no hope for the intermediate time, while God was punishing the Jews? the
answer is obvious, — the Prophet takes hope here for hope accomplished.
If any one calls it actual hope or hope effected, I do not object. But
he doubtless intimates that all the calamities which the Jews would have
to endure would at last end in their deliverance, and would be for their
good. We thus see that hope here, as we have said, is to be taken for
hope accomplished. And the Prophet explains himself, *they shall return
to their own border* Here by stating a part for the whole he mentions
*border* for the whole country, as though he had said, “Ye are now far
off from your country, but you shall again return to that land which has
been marked out by certain limits, even by Euphrates, Egypt, the sea and
Arabia;” for these were the four borders. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md)<span id="iii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p2"></span>**18**. I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself *thus;* Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised,
as a bullock unaccustomed *to the yoke:* turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; for thou *art* the LORD my God.

<span id="iii.xxii-p3"></span>**18**. Audiendo audivi Ephraim
transmigrantem, *(vel,* cum transmigravit, *vel,* lamentantem, *ut alii
vertunt; dicemus postea de voce)* Castigasti me, et castigatus sum
tanquam vitulus non edotus; converte me et convertar, quia tu Jehova
Deus meus.

<span id="iii.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p6"></span>The Prophet here speaks more distinctly of
a blessed issue, and shews that the punishment by which God had already
chastised the people, and by which he was prepared to chastise the tribe
of Judah, was wholly necessary, which he would give them as a medicine.
For as long as we have set before us the wrath of God, we necessarily,
as it has been already said, try to avoid it, because we wish well to
ourselves, and endeavor to remove to a distance, as much as we can,
whatever is adverse to us: hence the punishment which God inflicts is
never pleasant to us, our sorrow in evils and adversities is never
mitigated, nor do we quietly submit to God, unless we direct our minds
to the fruit which distresses and chastisements bring forth. We now then
perceive the object of the Prophet: the Jews always murmured and said,
“Why does not God spare and forgive us? why does he not deal more gently
with us?” The Prophet therefore shews, that God had a regard to the
wellbeing of his people in chastising them; for had he indulged them in
their sins, their pride and perverseness would have increased.

<span id="iii.xxii-p7"></span>The intention then of these words is this,
and it is for this end the Prophet speaks, — that the Jews might know
that all their punishment, which would have been otherwise bitter and
grievous, was a sort of medicine, by which their spiritual diseases were
to be healed.

<span id="iii.xxii-p8"></span>He therefore says, *Hearing I have heard
Ephraim, after having transmigrated,* etc. The participle <span
id="iii.xxii-p8.1"></span>מתנודד, *metnudad,* is in *Hithpael,* and
comes from <span id="iii.xxii-p8.2"></span>נוד*, nud,* or from <span
id="iii.xxii-p8.3"></span>נדד *nedad.* Some render it*,
“transmigrating,”* and others, “lamenting.” But <span
id="iii.xxii-p8.4"></span>נוד, *nud,* means to move, to wander, to
migrate from one place to another; it means also to complain, to tell of
adversities, though it is often applied to those whose object is to
solace the miserable and the mournful. If any one prefers the rendering,
“I have heard Ephraim lamenting,” I do not object, for there is a
sufficient probability in its favor. But it may also be derived from
<span id="iii.xxii-p8.5"></span>נוד*, nud,* as well as from <span
id="iii.xxii-p8.6"></span>נדד *nedad;* the most suitable sense would
then be, “after having moved into exile,” or literally, “after having
transmigrated,” that is, after God had driven Ephraim, even the ten
tribes, into exile.  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md)

<span id="iii.xxii-p10"></span>After Ephraim then had thus
transmigrated, or had been driven into exile, he then began to say,
*Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastened, for I was an untamed
bullock: Turn thou me and I shall be turned; for thou, Jehovah, art my
God.*  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) The Prophet, no doubt, as I
said before, meant here to check the murmurs which prevailed among the
Jews, who said, that God was too rigid and severe, he shews not only
that they were worthy of the very grievous punishment they were
suffering, but also that it was a testimony of God’s favor, that he thus
intended to cleanse them from their sins; for they would have a hundred
times grown putrid in their wickedness, had not God thus reduced them to
a sound mind. He at the same time sets forth Ephraim as an example, that
the Jews might resignedly follow their brethren, and not discontentedly
bear their exile, seeing that it had already been profitable to their
brethren. When therefore they perceived that their punishment was useful
to the Israelites, and brought forth good fruit, they ought to have
submitted themselves willingly to God, and not to have murmured against
him for punishing them for their sins, but to have borne their exile as
a paternal correction.

<span id="iii.xxii-p12"></span>Then he says, “I have heard Ephraim,” —
at what time? This circumstance ought to be especially noticed, it was
after he had *transmigrated.* When they were quiet in the land, they
were, as it follows, like untameable steers. The Prophets also use this
mode of speaking, when they describe the Israelites before their
dispersion; they call them fat and well fed oxen: affluence produced
luxury, and luxury pride. Thus, then, they kicked, as it were, against
God, according to what is said by Moses,

<span id="iii.xxii-p13"></span>“My people having grown fat kicked.”  
(<span id="iii.xxii-p13.2"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.xxii-p13.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.xxii-p14"></span>As they were such, it was necessary that
they should be tamed. And to this refers the time that is mentioned:
when Ephraim was forcibly driven from his own country, then he began to
acknowledge his evils and to be touched with a penitent feeling; “Thou
hast chastised me,” he says, “and I was instructed.” The verb <span
id="iii.xxii-p14.1"></span>יסר, *iser,* means to instruct as well as to
chastise, and is applied to princes, counsellors, fathers, and
magistrates. The word chastise is more restricted in Latin. But <span
id="iii.xxii-p14.2"></span>יסר *iser,* properly means to teach, and yet
often it means to chastise, for that is one way of teaching or
instructing. He then says that he was chastised, though in a different
sense: in the first clause, when he says, “Thou hast chastised me,” he
refers to the punishment by which God had humbled his people; and in the
second clause he says, “I was instructed,” that is, “I begin now at
length to become wise;” for it is the wisdom even of fools, not to
become hardened under their calamities; for they who become hardened are
altogether in a hopeless state. It is the chief part of wisdom to
acknowledge what is right, and willingly to follow it; but, except we be
willing to regard our own good, God will then chastise us.  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md)

<span id="iii.xxii-p18"></span>When our diseases are healable, we turn
to God; but the perversely wicked bite and champ the bridle, and contend
with God’s judgment: But the Prophet here refers to the faithful alone;
for punishment has not the same effect on all indiscriminately. God,
indeed, calls all men by punishment to repentance, so that even the
reprobate are without excuse when they harden their hearts, and profit
not under the rod. But punishment is peculiarly useful to the faithful;
for God not only scourges them, but also, by his Spirit, bends their
minds to docility, so that they willingly suffer themselves to be
corrected by him. Hence I said that this clause properly refers to the
faithful, when the Prophet says that Ephraim was *instructed,* after
having been warned by punishment, to turn himself to God.

<span id="iii.xxii-p19"></span>He compares himself to an untameable
steer; for steers are wanton before they are habituated to the yoke.
Such also is the wantonness of men before God subdues them by various
kinds of punishment, and not only subdues them, but renders them also
tractable and submissive. Next week I shall lecture instead of Beza.

<span id="iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xxiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are
always carried away by our own vanities, and as the licentiousness and
insolence of our flesh are such that we never follow thee and submit to
thy will, — O grant, that we may profit more and more under thy
scourges, and never perversely harden ourselves, but learn to know that
even when thou appearest rigid, thou hast a regard for our salvation, so
that we, turning to thee, may strive during the rest of our life to
glorify thy name through thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxiv-p1"></span>Lecture One hundred and Twenty-First

<span id="iii.xxiv-p2"></span>In the last lecture, the Prophet told us
that Ephraim, until he had been chastised by God’s hand, was like an
untamed bullock, and that, therefore, exile was useful to him. He now
adds, *Turn me, and I shall be turned*

<span id="iii.xxiv-p3"></span>This second clause seems not to be in
accordance with the former; for the Israelites had before confessed that
they had turned, and now they pray God to turn them. Why is this said?
For it seems useless to ask for what we have already obtained. But the
solution is obvious. It may first be answered, that men never so repent
but that they have need of the continual aid of God; for we must be
renewed from day to day, and by degrees renounce the lusts of our flesh;
nor is it in one day that we put off the old man. And when the Prophet
in the Psalms speaks of the deliverance of the people, he says that it
was a miracle, that the people had been restored beyond all hope;

<span id="iii.xxiv-p4"></span>“We were,” he says, “like those who
dream;”

<span id="iii.xxiv-p5"></span>he afterwards adds,

<span id="iii.xxiv-p6"></span>“Turn our captivity, O Lord,” (<span
id="iii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>[Ps. 116:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#004)<span id="iii.xxiv-p6.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xxiv-p7"></span>and this he said because God had restored
but a small number. The same also happens as to spiritual turning, both
with regard to the whole body and to individual members. We turn, as I
have already said, by little and little to God, and by various steps;
for repentance has its progress. There is, therefore, nothing improper
when we say that the Prophet, in the name of the ten tribes, asks God to
go on with his work. But as this explanation is rather strained, I
prefer a simpler view of the words, “Turn me, and I shall be turned.”
They mean the same thing as though the Prophet had said, “O Lord, this
is thy work.” He does not then simply refer to a future time, but speaks
of God’s favor, as though he had said, that men do not turn by their own
impulse, but that God, by the hidden power of his Spirit, turns them.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p8"></span>The Israelites had before confessed that
they had been profitably chastised by God’s hand, because punishment had
instructed them; but now he adds that this was the singular kindness of
God. But, as we before observed, punishment is what the elect and the
reprobate have in common; but the end and fruit of punishment is far
different; for the reprobate become more and more hardened, the very
reverse of being submissive to God; but the elect are subdued, for God
not only smites them with his rods, but also tames them within, subdues
their pride, and, in a word, bends their hearts to obedience by his
Spirit.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p9"></span>We now then understand the purpose of the
Prophet: for in the name of the people, he first confesses that
punishment, inflicted by God, had been useful, and secondly, he adds,
that it was not through the power of men that they willingly returned to
a right mind, but that God had bent their hearts by his Spirit, so that
they did not become hardened by punishment, nor obstinately resisted, as
the case most commonly is. We hence, then, conclude that repentance is
the work of the Holy Spirit. God, indeed, invites us, and even urges us
by external means to repent; for what is the design of punishment, but
to lead us to repentance? But we must still remember that were God only
to chastise us, it would have no other effect than to render us
inexcusable, for our perverseness could never in this way be corrected.
It is, then, necessary to add the second favor, that is, that God should
subdue us within, and restore us to obedience. This the Prophet
testifieswhen he says, “Turn me, and I shall be turned,” as though he
had said, that men indeed turn when God reminds them of their sins, but
that they do this not by their own power, for it is the peculiar work of
God.

<span id="iii.xxiv-p10"></span>He therefore adds, *For thou, Jehovah,
art my God* By this clause he intimates that God favors only his elect
with this privilege; as though he had said, that it does not happen to
all indiscriminately that they repent and submit to God when he punishes
them for their sins, but that it is a benefit peculiar to his chosen
people. We ought then especially to notice the reason by which the
Prophet confirms the previous sentence, for we hence learn the manifest
difference there is between the elect and the reprobate; for some rebel
and kick against the goads, and obstinately rush headlong into ruin, but
others calmly and quietly submit to God: the reason is, because some are
reprobate and the others are the elect. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p2"></span>**19**. Surely after that I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon *my* thigh: I
was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my
youth.

<span id="iii.xxv-p3"></span>**19**. Quia postquam convertisti me,
poenituit me, et postquam cognitus sum mihi (vel, ostensum fuit mihi,
vel, agnovi meipsum) percussi femur meum; pudefactus sum, atque etiam
confusus, quia tuli opprobrium adolescentiae meae.

<span id="iii.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p6"></span>Jeremiah now proceeds with what he had
before briefly touched upon, even to shew that the punishment inflicted
on the Israelites had not been without its fruit. And this is a doctrine
which ought especially to be known, for we always shun whatever is hard
to the flesh; so that if it were according to our own will, the
chastisements of God would never be well received by us. It is,
therefore, necessary to regard the end, as the Apostle reminds us.
(<span id="iii.xxv-p6.1"></span>[Heb
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#011)<span id="iii.xxv-p6.1"></span>.md)
Now when we see that God has a regard for our own salvation while
handling us somewhat roughly, our sorrow is mitigated and lessened,
especially when experience proves that punishment is good for us; we
then felicitate ourselves, and give thanks to God that he has not
suffered us wholly to perish in our sins. This is the reason why the
Prophet enlarges on this doctrine.

<span id="iii.xxv-p7"></span>He therefore says, *After thou hast turned
me, I repented* He confirms what he has already said, that it is the
peculiar work of God when a sinner repents, and that it cannot be
ascribed to human powers, as though men could of themselves turn to the
right way. But how was this done? *After thou hast turned me* He thus
repeats in other words what he had said, but for the purpose of
confirming his previous declaration. The meaning is, that we are never
touched by a serious feeling, so as to be displeased with our sins,
until God himself turns us.

<span id="iii.xxv-p8"></span>We hence learn how blind the Papists are,
who, speaking of repentance, hold that man, through his own free-will,
returns to God; and on this point is our greatest contest with them at
this day. But the Prophet briefly determines the whole question; for, as
he had said before, that men cannot turn except God turns them, he now
adds, that he had found this to be really the fact, that people had
never become conscious of their sins though God had grievously punished
them until they were turned, not by their own free-will, but by the
hidden working and influence of the ttoly Spirit; *after thou hast
turned me, I repented* The meaning is, that men never entertain a real
hatred towards sin, unless God illuminates their minds and changes their
hearts; for what is the turning or conversion of which the Prophet
speaks? It is the renewal of the mind and heart. For let its definition
be fetched, as they say, from what is contrary to it; what is turning
away? It is the alienation of the mind and heart from God. It then
follows that when we turn we are converted, we are renewed in knowledge,
and then in heart, or in our affections; both of which the Prophet
ascribes to the grace of God, for he says that the people repented not
of their sins until they were turned or converted, that is, until they
were renewed both in mind and heart. Some give this version, “After I
received consolation;” but their mistake is easily confuted by the
context; for it immediately follows, *I was ashamed and also
confounded.* There is no doubt then but that here is set forth the
displeasure at sin that is felt when the sinner is terrified by God’s
judgment so as to renounce his vices.

<span id="iii.xxv-p9"></span>*After I was made known to myself,* or,
after it was shewn to me, or, simply, after I knew it, etc. For we may
take the meaning to be, After it was given to Ephraim to know himself,
or, after he knew himself. Some give this version, “After I was known;”
and so the meaning would be the same with those words of Paul,

<span id="iii.xxv-p10"></span>“After ye have known God, or rather are
known by him.”  
(<span id="iii.xxv-p10.2"></span>[Ga
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#009)<span id="iii.xxv-p10.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xxv-p11"></span>But I fear that this exposition is too
refined. I therefore would rather follow those who give this rendering,
After I became known to myself, or, after the thing was made known to
me. The Prophet, no doubt, commends here the grace of God, because the
veil had been taken away from the eyes of the people, or because they
had been cured of their blindness; as though they had said, that they
had long been blind, because they took delight in their vices, and their
whole soul was in a torpid state; for we know that those who are
forsaken by God are wholly insensible, and are as it were like the
beasts. Then the people of Israel confess that they were, for a time,
thus stupid, and that their minds were blinded: they therefore
acknowledge here the grace of God, that he had at length opened their
eyes. For they do not speak here, as we have said, of their virtue or
power, but acknowledge that it proceeded wholly from God’s gratuitous
favor that they repented.

<span id="iii.xxv-p12"></span>As then, under the word, turning or
conversion, is included the renewal of the whole soul, so now it is
expressly said, that they were endued with a right mind, because God had
taken away the veil by which their eyes were covered, and had conferred
on them new light. The meaning is, that they were not touched by the
true fear of God before they were endued with a right mind; but at the
same time he testifies that it had been obtained through the peculiar
favor of God. We hence see that the Prophet, in the name of the ten
tribes, acknowledges that nothing depended on the free-will of man, but
that a sound mind and a right feeling of the heart is the work of the
Holy Spirit.  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md)

<span id="iii.xxv-p17"></span>The *smiting of the thigh* means sorrow or
grief, which arises from the fear of God: for as long as we disregard
God’s judgment, Satan must necessarily fascinate us with his
allurements; but when God manifestly shews that he is our judge, and
when our own baseness comes to view, then we begin to *smite the thigh*
And he adds, what means the same thing, *I was ashamed and even
confounded* I wonder why many interpreters have omitted the particle
<span id="iii.xxv-p17.1"></span>גמ *gam,* even: they invert the order,
and render thus, “I was confounded and ashamed.” But the particle shews
that the Prophet enhances the greatness of the sorrow and shame when he
says, *I was ashamed and even confounded*

<span id="iii.xxv-p18"></span>He then adds, *Because I have borne the
reproach of my youth* He here repeats what he had said before, even that
punishment, sent from above, had done good to the Israelites. For except
they had been thus made ashamed, they would have always taken delight in
their vices; for we see that the wicked flatter and deceive themselves
as long as God spares and shews forbearance towards them. Hence the
Prophet, in the name of the people, says, that punishment had been
profitable to him. But we must bear in mind what we have said, that this
fruit altogether proceeds from the grace of God: for the reprobate,
however dreadful the examples of vengeance which God may exhibit, still
remain unbending, nor do they bear their own reproach, that is, confess
that they have sinned. To bear reproach, then, is peculiar to the elect
of God, who have been regenerated by his Spirit; for they understand the
cause of their evils. When we see two diseased persons, one of whom is
insane, and so is insensible as to his disease, and the other feels his
sorrow, and is affected by it: in this case we see some difference. But
we see another difference in others who are diseased; we may therefore
suppose a third case, for it often happens, that he who is affected with
sorrow, does not yet examine into its cause. He then who is healable is
one who understands whence has arisen his disease, and so is ready to
obey, and willing to adopt the necessary remedies. There are also many
who rush headlong to their own ruin; some, indeed, feel their punishment
to be bitter, but consider not the cause of it, that is, that they have
provoked God’s wrath: but they who are prepared to seek the restoration
of health, well know how they have contracted their disease. Hence the
Prophet here says, that they bore *their reproach,* for they not only
felt their sorrow, but also considered its fountain, that is, that they
had, by their sins, provoked the wrath of God.

<span id="iii.xxv-p19"></span>By *youth* he metaphorically points out
the time when the Israelites indulged in excesses; for we know how much
ardor belongs to that age. In the aged there is more moderation; but the
young intemperately indulge themselves. It is therefore a metaphorical
expression, by which the Prophet intimates, that the Israelites had, for
a time, been wanton against God, their petulance being not subdued, for,
as he had said, they had been like untamed bullocks. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p2"></span>**20** *ls* Ephraim my dear son? *is he* a
pleasant child? for since I spake against him, I do earnestly remember
him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have
mercy upon him, saith the LORD.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p3"></span>**20**. An filius pretiosus mihi Ephraim?
an filius oblectationum? tamen ex quo tempore loquutus sum de eo,
recordando recordabor filius (<span id="iii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>אזכרנו,
*vel,* quia a termpore loquutus sum cum eo, reeordando recordabor
illius; *dicemus postea de sensu)* propterea sonuerunt viscera mea illi
*(id est,* super ipsum) miserando miserabor illius, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p6"></span>God here complains of the Israelites,
because he had produced so little an effect on them by his great
goodness: for the adoption with which he had favored them was an immense
benefit;but by their ingratitude they had in a manner annihilated that
favor. God then here asks, what sort of people the Israelites had been.
But a question makes a thing stronger; for he who asks a question shews
that he speaks not of a thing uncertain, but the knowledge of which is
so conspicuous that it cannot be denied. It is then the same as though
he had said, that Ephraim was unworthy of any honor or esteem, and that
he was no object of delight. We now then perceive what God means in the
beginning of the verse, even that the people were unworthy of any mercy,
because they had abolished, as far as they could, the favor of adoption:
for by the word *son,* he refers to that special favor, the covenant
which he had made with the seed of Abraham.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p7"></span>In the first place, he calls him a son,
<span id="iii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>בן, *ben,* and then a child, <span
id="iii.xxvi-p7.2"></span>ילד, *ilad,* which refers to his birth: but by
these two names, God here intimates that they were to him a peculiar
people, as he everywhere calls those his sons who were the descendants
of Abraham; for circumcision was to them a symbol and pledge of the
covenant; and so the time is a circumstance that ought to be noticed,
because God does not shew here what the Israelites were before he had
chosen them to be his people. But as I have already said, he charges
them with ingratitude, since the time they had been adopted by him as
his children. He then calls them sons, or children, by way of
concession, and with regard to their adoption, as Jerusalem was called
the holy city, because it was God’s habitation. There is then a
concession as to the name given to them. But he afterwards adds, that
this *son* was not *precious,* that is, worthy of any honor, and that he
was not an object of *delight;* as though he had said, that he was of a
perverse and wicked disposition, so that he could not take any delight
in him, as by another simile he complains in <span
id="iii.xxvi-p7.3"></span>[Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p7.3"></span>,
as we have seen, that the Jews were become bitter to him,

<span id="iii.xxvi-p8"></span>“My vine have I planted thee;  
why then art thou turned to me into bitterness?”

<span id="iii.xxvi-p9"></span>So also now he says, that the Israelites
were indeed his sons, but that they were evil-disposed sons, disobedient
sons, sons who only vexed their father, who wounded his feelings, who
filled him with sorrow.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p10"></span>He then adds, *For from the time I spake
in him,* so it is literally. It is commonly agreed that these words are
to be read with those which follow. “For from what time I spake;” and
thus the relative <span id="iii.xxvi-p10.1"></span>אשר, *asher,* is to
be understood; but literally it is, “For from the time I spake in him,”
<span id="iii.xxvi-p10.2"></span>בו, *bu,* or, as some render it,
“concerning him;” but it may suitably be rendered “with him.” Then they
read, in connection with this, *Remembering I will yet remember him*

<span id="iii.xxvi-p11"></span>This passage, on account of its brevity,
is obscure, and therefore ambiguous; but the common opinion is this, —
that though Ephraim was not a child of delight, yet God would be
merciful towards him; and thus they take <span
id="iii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>כי *ki,* in an adversative sense,
“notwithstanding,” or yet: “Is Ephraim a precious son? Is he a child of
delight? yet remembering I will still remember him;” as though he had
said, that he would not be prevented by the people’s wickedness, for he
would still pity him according to his infinite goodness, or that his
goodness would surpass their wickedness. This sense is plausible; yet it
may be doubted whether this be the meaning. Some read the words, “From
the time I spake concerning him,” that is, while I now speak of him: but
I know not whether this explanation can stand. I am therefore inclined
to the opinion of those who refer this to threatenings, even that from
the time God had spoken against Israel, he was yet ready to be
reconciled to them, according to what is said by the Prophet Habakkuk,

<span id="iii.xxvi-p12"></span>“In wrath wilt thou remember mercy.”
(<span id="iii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>[Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span id="iii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xxvi-p13"></span>But this ought to be rather understood of
the covenant, as though God had said, “From the time I spake with him, I
will remember him;” that is, that he might shew the reason why he dealt
so mercifully with the people. For as their wickedness and corruption
were so great, a doubt might arise, “Can God still patiently endure
them?” Here then our attention is called back to the fountain of
gratuitous mercy, even that God would forgive his people, because he had
once chosen them.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p14"></span>But still when I narrowly weigh
everything, I think the meaning of the Prophet to be different. I
therefore separate the two clauses, “From the time I spake with him,”
and, “Remembering I will yet remember him;” for the sentence is harsh,
when we say, “From the time I spake with him,” and then add, “I will yet
remember him.” But the exposition, the most suitable in my opinion, is
this, “From the time I spake with him,” (for <span
id="iii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>ב means with) that is, I desisted not
continually to exhort him to repentance, and yet I effected nothing;
notwithstanding I will still remember him; that is, “Though I have found
this people very perverse, and though they have long given many proofs
of their obstinacy, for I have spoken to them for a long time,
nevertheless I will still remember them.” For the people deserved
eternal ruin who had been so often warned; but God declares that he
would still be propitious to them, though he had spoken to them for a
time, that is, a long time; for he had not ceased for a long space of
time to exhort that people by his Prophets, but with no success. So then
I read the words, “From the time I spake with him,” separately from what
follows, and connect them with the former clauses, “Is he a precious
son? Is he a child of delight?” For he complains that they had been
rebellious and untameable, not only from the time he had only once
addressed them and sought to do them good, but for several ages. He
therefore declares that the people themselves had no hope, because they
had been intractable for a long time. He yet adds, though it was so,
*Remembering I will still remember him*  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md)

<span id="iii.xxvi-p20"></span>And he enhances the benefit of this
reconciliation, and says, *Therefore sounded have my bowels for him,*
 <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) *pitying I will pity him* Here God
ascribes to himself human feelings; for the bowels are moved and make a
noise under immoderate grief; and we sigh and groan deeply, when we are
pressed down by great sorrow. So also when God expresses the feelings of
a tender father, he says that his bowels made a noise, because he wished
to receive his people again into favor. This, indeed, does not properly
belong to God; but as he could not otherwise express the greatness of
his love towards us, he thus speaks in condescension to our capacities.
It follows —

<span id="iii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021.md)<span id="iii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p2"></span>**21**. Set thee up waymarks, make thee
high heaps: set thine heart toward the highway, *even* the way *which*
thou wentest: turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy
cities.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p3"></span>**21**. Statue tibi titulos, pone tibi
acervos, adjice *(vel,* applica) cor tuum ad semitam, ad viam per quam
ambulasti; revertere virgo Israel, revertere ad urbes tuas istas.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p6"></span>He describes what mercy would do, even
that God would at length restore the captives and bring them back from
exile to their own country. There was however mention made previously of
his favor, that we may know that the people were restored for no other
reason but because God had mercy on them. The Prophet then having
pointed out the fountain of redemption, passes on now to the external
effect, by which God proved that he was reconciled to his people. Hence
he says, *set up for thee titles*

<span id="iii.xxvii-p7"></span>We must first understand why the Prophet
speaks thus. When the Jews were led away into Chaldea, they thought that
a return was closed up against them. Having then given up every concern
for their country, they dwelt among foreign nations, as though they were
dead to the land of Canaan. They knew that they had forfeited that land;
but they did not understand what had been so often said to them by the
Prophets, that their punishment was to be temporary. As they had before
disregarded all threatenings, so when God began to fulminate against
them, despair overwhelmed their minds, so that they did not wish to hear
anything about a return. As then they thought that they were never to
return to their own country, they had forgotten the way. As when one
moves to another place where he intends to dwell all his life, he only
seeks to know the way thither, but does not observe the accommodations
on the road, in order to use them again, nor does he take notice which
way he goes, whether he turns here to the right and there to the left;
it is enough for him to reach the place to which he is going; so also it
was with the Jews; they had made up their minds to remain in perpetual
exile, they were not therefore solicitous about the road, so as to
remember their journey. Therefore the Prophet says now, *Set up for thee
titles,* or inscriptions; for those who travel anywhere, if they mean to
return, know that such an inn was commodious, and also that there was so
much distance between this town or city and that village, and in like
manner, that the road was straight or turned more to one side than
another. When therefore they think of a return, they attend to such
things as these.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p8"></span>It is for this purpose that the Prophet
says, *Set up for thee titles,* that is, that thou mayest assist thy
memory, as travelers are wont to do, who intend to return by the same
way. *Set up* then *for thee titles, and raise up for thee heaps,* or
stones, which we call in our language *monioyes;* as though he had said,
“Thou indeed hast hitherto thought that the way has been closed up
against thee, so that thou art to return no more: but God will stretch
forth his hand and restore thee to thy former state.” We hence see that
the similitude is taken from the common practice of men, but employed
for this end, that the Jews might not despair of their restoration as
they had previously don.  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md)

<span id="iii.xxvii-p14"></span>He then says, *Apply thy heart* — he now
explains himself — *apply thy heart to the footpath, to the way through
which thou hast passed* We thus see that the Prophet becomes the
interpreter of his own words, even that the people would return along
the same road, though they expected no such thing. And he again confirms
the same declaration in other words, *Return, thou* *daughter of Israel,
return to thine own cities;* as though he had said, *“Though* the land
has beea deserted for a time, and reduced to solitude, yet the cities
remain, which shall again receive their inhabitants; and through the
wonderful favor of God the land still waits for its people.” Though it
cast them out for a time, yet the exile was not to be perpetual, for the
cities which remained were still by right the property of the people,
not because they were worthy of them, but because God had prefixed, as
it has elsewhere appeared, a set time for their exile and punishment.

<span id="iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as pertinacity
is inbred in us, so that we always struggle against thee, and are never
tractable until we are renewed by thy Spirit, — O grant, that thy
chastisements by which thou wouldest restore us to a sound mind, may not
prove ruinous to us, but so influence us by thy Spirit within, that we,
being really humbled, may acknowledge thee as our Judge and Father — our
Judge, in order that we may be displeased with ourselves, and being
touched by thy judgment, we may condemn ourselves, — and our Father, in
order that we may, notwithstanding, flee to that mercy which is daily
offered to us in the Gospel, through Christ Jesus our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xxviii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.xxix-p1"></span>LECTURE ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY-SECOND

<span id="iii.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p2"></span>**22**. How long wilt thou go about, O thou
backsliding daughter? for the LORD hath created a new thing in the
earth, A woman shall compass a man.

<span id="iii.xxx-p3"></span>**22**. Quousque vagaberis *(aut,* cir
cuibis) filia rebellis (immorigera)? quia creavit Jehova rem novam in
terra, Foemina circundabit virum.

<span id="iii.xxx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxx-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p6"></span>As the Prophet had promised a return to the
people, he now reproves especially the Israelites, who looked here and
there, and never could acquiesce in the word of God alone: for it is a
common thing with almost all the unbelieving, that they torment
themselves, and, as it were, designedly contrive for themselves many
inquietudes. Since then the Israelites were looking forward to what
might happen, and could not entertain any hope as to their return,
except when some appearance of hope was presented to them, the Prophet
now on this account reproves them.

<span id="iii.xxx-p7"></span>He first calls the *people disobedient* or
rebellions, for they had often been terrified by threatenings, and God
had also offered them the hope of pardon. As they had been perverse
whenever God spared them, and as they had also rejected all his
promises, the Prophet does not without reason call them disobedient or
rebellious. And by circuits or wanderings, he means those vain
speculations with which the unbelieving are wont to weary themselves;
for the word means properly to go around. We may indeed take it in the
sense of wandering, and it is the same thing: but as I have said, the
Prophet most fitly gives the name of circuits to those crooked and
tortuous speculations in which the unbelieving indulged. And there seems
to be understood a contrast between the straight way set before theIn by
God, and those circuitous courses in which miserable men entangle
themselves, when they do not follow God, but are led astray by their own
vain devices. Isaiah also makes use of the same similitude, for he says,
that the people were carried away by their own inventions, so that they
fruitlessly wearied themselves, because they did not proceed in the
straight way. (<span id="iii.xxx-p7.1"></span>[Isa
57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010)<span id="iii.xxx-p7.1"></span>.md)
 <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md)

<span id="iii.xxx-p11"></span>We may hence deduce a useful doctrine, —
that we are always within the boundary of safety, when we obey God and
walk in the way set before us in his word; but that as soon as we turn
aside from the right way, we are only drawn here and there through
windings and strayings, so that our labor is at last useless and even
ruinous.

<span id="iii.xxx-p12"></span>We now then understand the meaning of the
Prophet: as the unbelief of the people was, as it were, a sealed door,
so that they did not receive God’s promises as to their liberation and
return, his purpose here was to correct this evil, and to reprove the
Israelites for wandering and being disobedient.

<span id="iii.xxx-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *For behold Jehovah
will create* — literally, has created; but the past tense is here to be
taken for the future; and it serves to shew the certainty of a thing
when he uses the past tense, as though he was speaking of a thing
already done: *Jehovah* then has *created a new thing* He intimates that
the Israelites acted foolishly in estimating the promise of deliverance
according to their own judgment of things, and the state of things as it
appeared to them; for he says that the favor promised them would be
wonderful, for this is what he means by a *new* thing, as though he had
said, “Ye indeed judge, according to your usual manner, of what God
promises to you, as to your return, but it will be a miracle; act not
then perversely, by regarding the favor of God as the common order of
nature, for God will surpass everything that is usual among men.”

<span id="iii.xxx-p14"></span>It ought also to be observed, that what
Jeremiah said of the redemption of the people is to be extended to the
eternal salvation of the Church; for God in a wonderful manner raises
the dead, defends and preserves his Church, and succors her in her
troubles. Whenever then the Scripture speaks of the state of the Church,
we ought to ascend above the world, and above our own conceptions, and
to realize the miracle which is hid from us.

<span id="iii.xxx-p15"></span>Now follows the miracle, *A woman shall
surround a ‘man* Christians, almost with one consent, explain this of
the virgin Mary; and the “new thing,” leads them to this opinion, and
probably, also, they were anxious to lay hold on whatever might seem to
refer to the mystery of our salvation. They, therefore, say that the
*new thing* of which the Prophet speaks is the virgin carrying the
infant Christ in her womb, and that he is called *man,* because he was
full of divine power, though he increased according to the flesh in
stature, wisdom, and strength. All this is deservedly laughed at by the
Jews; yet they themselves, as I think, do not rightly understand the
meaning of the Prophet. They apply it to the people of Israel, because
they were like a woman divorced from her husband. They then say, “A
woman shall embrace a man after having been alienated from him, and
prostituted herself to many adulterers.” The Jews seem to think that
they give the meaning of the Prophet; but I think otherwise, for there
is here a comparison made between a woman and a man, which they do not
consider. For the Prophet does not speak here simply of a man, but of a
strong man; for the word <span id="iii.xxx-p15.1"></span>גבר *geber,*
means a man who is brave or courageous. When, therefore, he compares a
woman to a man, I doubt not but the Prophet means that the Israelites,
who were like women, without strength, were destitute of any means of
help; but then he says, that they would be superior in strength to their
enemies, whose power filled the whole world with terror. We, indeed,
know what sort of monarchy Babylon was when the Jews were led into
exile. If then we consider what the Jews at that time were, we must say
that they were like weak women, while their enemies were strong and
warlike: *A woman* then *shall surround a man*  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md)

<span id="iii.xxx-p17"></span>The word <span
id="iii.xxx-p17.1"></span>סבב, *sebab,* means not to embrace, but
oftentimes to besiege; and it is taken in many places of Scripture in a
bad sense, “Enemies have surrounded me.” When, therefore, a siege is
mentioned, the Scripture uses this word. It is then the same as though
the Prophet had said, “Women shall bring men into such straits that they
shall hold them captive.”  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) But he
uses the singular number, as though he had said, “One woman shall be
superior to many men, or each Jew shall exceed in valor a Chaldean; so
the Jews shall gain the upper hand, though the strength of their enemies
be great and terrible.” This is what I regard as the meaning of the
Prophet; and justly does he set forth this as a wonderful thing, for it,
was a sort of revolution in the world when God thus raised up his
servants, so that they who had enslaved them should become far unequal
to them. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p2"></span>**23**. Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel; As yet they shall use this speech in the land of Judah
and in the cities thereof, when I shall bring again their captivity; The
LORD bless thee, O habitation of justice, *and* mountain of holiness.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p3"></span>**23**. Sic dicit Jehova exercituum, Deus
Israel, Adhuc dicent hoc verbum (hoc est, pronunciabunt hunc sermonum)
in terra Jehudah et urbibus ejus, ubi convertero captivitatem ipsorum,
Benedicet tibi Jellova, habitaculum justitiae, mons sanctitatis.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxi-p6"></span>He confirms in other words what he has
said before; nor is the repetition, as we have said elsewhere,
superfluous; for it was difficult to convince the Jews that what they
had already regarded as impossible could be effected; for by their
perverseness they had closed, as it were, the door against the word of
God. As then despair had thus laid hold on them, and fast bound their
minds, it was necessary to dwell at large on the subject, so that they
might at length embrace the promise of deliverance. This is the reason
why the Prophet employed many words on the same subject.

<span id="iii.xxxi-p7"></span>Now he makes this preface, that he had his
message from God; and he speaks in his name, so that the incredible
thing might be believed both by the Israelites and the Jews. *They shall
yet,* he says, *say in the land of Judah and in its cities, when I shall
restore their captivity,* etc. By these words the Prophet brings forward
the Israelites and the Jews, as it were, into the middle, that they
might see placed before their eyes what they deemed impossible. *When I
shall restore,* therefore, *their captivity,* they shall again say,
*Bless thee may God, O dwelling-place of justice, O mountain of
holiness*

<span id="iii.xxxi-p8"></span>It was not without reason that the Prophet
employed this mode of speaking; for Jerusalem, we know, was entirely
overthrown, and the Temple pulled down, and even burnt with fire. As
then this was a spectacle awful and dreadful to all, there is here
described a wonderful revolution, even that Sion would again be the
*moment of holiness,* and Jerusalem the *habitation of justice,* though
then a solitude and desolation. And this passage deserves a special
notice, so that we may know that God restores his Church as though he
drew it up even from hell itself. When, therefore, there is no form of a
Church appearing, let us allow that the power of God can raise it up.
Whence?, even, as it has been said, from hell. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxii-p2"></span>**24**. And there shall dwell in Judah
itself, and in all the cities thereof together, husbandmen, and they
*that* go forth with flocks.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p3"></span>**24**. Et sedebunt *(vel,* habitabunt)
in ea *(nempe terra)* Jehudah, et omnes urbes ejus *(id est,* incolae
ejus) simul agricolae, et proficiscentur cum grege.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxii-p6"></span>He proceeds with the same subject, but
sets forth the effect of that favor of which he had spoken, for *dwell,*
he says, shall the Jews again in the land; that is, they shall rest
there and have a quiet habitation. He adds *cities,* only to amplify the
favor of God as to the number and multiplicity of men; as though he had
said, that not a few would return, but a vast number of men, sufficient
to fill their cities. Now this was to exceed the hope of all; for when
they saw the cities deserted, and the land almost empty, who would have
thought that they would again be filled with people? But this the
Prophet confirms by saying, *Dwell there shall Judah and all his
cities;* and he adds, *husbandmen* He extends God’s favor to the country
and the villages, as though he had said, that the land would be filled
with inhabitants, not only as to the fortified towns, but as to the
fields.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p7"></span>It often happens that cities are
inhabited when there is any fear or danger from enemies; for they who
dwell in cities have walls for their defense, and mounds and other means
of safety. Had then the Prophet spoken only of cities, he would not have
sufficiently set forth the favor of God. Hence he adds *husbandmen,* as
though he had said, that dwelling in the land would be safe, though
there were no gates, no walls, no defences, for husbandmen would rest
secure in their cottages as though inclosed within walls. We now then
understand what the Prophet means.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p8"></span>Some read thus, “Husbandmen, and they who
go forth with the flock,” as though the Prophet made a distinction
between husbandmen and keepers of sheep; but this seems to me
unsuitable; for I doubt not but that he means that husbandmen with their
flocks and herds would be secure, having no fear of the inroads of
enemies, but living in the land under the care and protection of God,
without apprehending anything adverse or hostile to them. The meaning
is, that the restoration of the Church would be such, that its state
would not be worse than in former ages, and that it would be in a
peaceable and quiet condition, so that the inhabitants of the villages
and country places would not be less secure than those in cities.  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md)

<span id="iii.xxxii-p14"></span>Now, were any one to ask, when was this
fulfilled? We must bear in mind what has been said elsewhere, — that the
Prophets, when speaking of the restoration of the Church, included the
whole kingdom of Christ from the beginning to the end. And in this our
divines go astray, so that by confining these promises to some
particular time, they are compelled to fly to allegories; and thus they
wrest, and even pervert all the prophecies. But the Prophets, as it has
been said, include the whole progress of Christ’s kingdom when they
speak of the future redemption of the people. The people began to do
well when they returned to their own country; but soon after distresses
came as Daniel had predicted. It was, therefore, necessary for them to
look for the coming of Christ. We now taste of these benefits of God as
long as we are in the world. We hence see that these prophecies are not
accomplished in one day, or in one year, no, not even in one age, but
ought to be understood as referring to the beginning and the end of
Christ’s kingdom. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025.md)<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p2"></span>**25**. For I have satiated the weary
soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p3"></span>**25**. Quia irrigabo *(vel,* inebriabo)
animam sitientem, et Omnem animam quae deficit implebo.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p6"></span>By this verse he removes every doubt,
lest any one should reject what he had promised as to the restoration of
the people, because the Jews and the Israelites were at the time as dead
men. He therefore says, *I will water the thirsty soul;* some render it
“the weary soul;” but <span id="iii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>נפש עיפה,
*n*u*pesh oiphe,* is often taken metaphorically for a thirsty soul. So
in <span id="iii.xxxiii-p6.2"></span>[Ps
143:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p6.2"></span>, it is said,

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p7"></span>“I am as a dry land;”

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p8"></span>weariness cannot be suitably applied to
land; and in <span id="iii.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>, we have these words,

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p9"></span>“As one dreaming he thinks that he eats;
afterwards, when awake, his soul is empty: and as one who thinks that he
drinks,”

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p10"></span>etc. The Prophet employs there the same
word, because there is hardly ever weariness without thirst; we contract
thirst by weariness. Then the soul is said to be <span
id="iii.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>עיפה, *oiphe,* by a metaphor, not weary,
but on the contrary thirsty; and the verb corresponds, which means to
inebriate, to irrigate, or to water, and often to satiate. *I will* then
*irrigate,* or water to satiety, *thy dry soul,* and *every soul which
faints,* etc., but as <span id="iii.xxxiii-p10.2"></span>דאב, *dab,*
means to be deficient, and sometimes to be wearied, here it denotes a
defect, for it follows, *I will fill* It is then to be taken for a
famished soul.  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md)

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p14"></span>The meaning is, that though the
Israelites should hunger and thirst, and be for a time without food and
drink, yet their want would not prevent God from affording them relief,
for he had the power and the will to satisfy the hungry, and to give
drink to the thirsty, or to those who were fainting on account of
thirst. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026.md)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p2"></span>**26**. Upon this I awaked, and beheld;
and my sleep was sweet unto me.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p3"></span>**26** Propterea expergefaetus sum et
vidi, et somnus meus dulcis fuit mihi, *(vel* utilis)

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet comes forth, and by his
own example encourages the faithful to be confident, even to recumb on
God’s promise, as though they really enjoyed already what was as yet hid
from them, nay, as it has been said, incredible. He then says, that he
*awoke* and *saw.* This metaphor ought to be applied to a feeling
contrary to that by which the Prophet had been, as it were, astonished.
For though the Jews were not yet led into exile, yet the ten tribes were
in that miserable bondage, — their kingdom had fallen and perished, and
final ruin was nigh the kingdom of Judah. While then the Prophet was
considering these dreadful vengeances of God, he was, as it were,
overwhelmed with sleep. He now says that he *awoke.* As in darkness men
lose the rigor of their minds, and sleep also prevails, so that they
cannot distinguish between black and white; so also the Prophet
confesses that he was for a time, as it were, lifeless; he then says,
that he awoke, that is, when God’s favor shone forth, not by its own
effect, but in this prophecy.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p7"></span>We then see that he knew as through a
mirror what was yet far distant; for the term of seventy years had not
as yet commenced: but faith, as it is well known, is the seeing of
things hid, and the substance of things absent; for except the word of
God obtains in our hearts this assurance, we betray our unbelief. The
Prophet gave a proof of his faith, for he fully acknowledged that all
that had been by God predicted, though far distant, would yet be
accomplished in due time. We now understand why he says, that he
*awoke.*

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p8"></span>And he adds, *And my sleep was pleasant
to me* After having said that he *saw* the work of God, which yet could
not be seen by the human eye, he now adds that his sleep had been
pleasant to him, while yet he had been sorrowful and full of fear; for
the best alleviator of all sorrow is hope.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p9"></span>But we have said that the sorrow by which
the mind of the Prophet had been for a time overwhelmed, is compared to
a sleep.  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) He now adds, —

<span id="iii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxv-p2"></span>**27**. Behold, the days come, saith the
LORD, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with
the seed of man, and with the seed of beast.

<span id="iii.xxxv-p3"></span>**27**. Ecce dies veniunt, dicit Jehova,
et seminabo domum Israel et domum Jehudah semine hominis et semine
animalis.

<span id="iii.xxxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxv-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxv-p6"></span>We see that the Prophet brings forward
nothing new, but only animates the Jews with confidence as to their
deliverance and their return. He yet employs another similitude, even
that God would again *sow* Judah in the land, that he might produce an
increase of men, and also of cattle, and of all kinds of animals. We
have said that the land was to be for a time dreary and forsaken. As God
then thus condemned as it were the land, that all might regard it as
given up to desolation and solitude, the Prophet says that God would
cause it to be inhabited again by both men and beasts.

<span id="iii.xxxv-p7"></span>But the similitude sets forth still more
fully the favor of God. There is to be understood a contrast between a
cultivated and a deserted land. It is as though one should say, “They
shall sow and reap on mountains, where corn has never been, where a
plough has never been seen.” Were any one then to promise a sowing and a
harvest in a desert land, it would be a new thing, and could hardly be
believed. Even so does the Prophet now say, *I will sow, etc.,* as
though he said, “The land indeed shall for a time be accursed, so that
it will not sustain either men or beasts; but it shall be sown again.”
*I will sow it,* he says, *with the seed both of, men and of animals:*
and thus he meets a question, which might have been asked, “How can it
be that the land will be again inhabited, since it is now deserted by
its inhabitants?” even because God *will sow* it. In this way then, the
Prophet answers the question. But at the same time he exalts the favor
of God, as though he had said, that there would be no other remedy for
the barrenness of the land, until God should cultivate it himself, and
scatter seed on it: which is the same as to say, that the restoration of
the land would not be the work of human industry or power, but of the
wonderful power of God.  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) It
follows, —

<span id="iii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028.md)<span id="iii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p2"></span>**28**. And it shall come to pass, *that*
like as I have watched over them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to
throw down, and to destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them,
to build, and to plant, saith the LORD.

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p3"></span>**28**. Et erit, sicuti vigilavi super
eos ad evellendum et conterendum, et ad confringendum et ad perdendum,
et ad affligendum, sic vigilabo super eos ad aedificandum et ad
plantandum, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p5"></span><span id="iii.xxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p6"></span>By these words the Prophet confirms what
he had said; for the Israelites and the Jews might have ever made this
objection, “Why should God promise to be the liberator of his people,
whom he had suffered to be oppressed with so great evils, for it would
have been easier to prevent them?” The Jews then might have raised this
clamor, “Thou givest us here the hope of a return, but why does God
suffer us to be driven into exile? why then does he not apply the remedy
in time; for now too late he declares that he will be a help to us after
our ruin.” As then the Jews thought that a restoration was promised to
them unseasonably, the Prophet says that it was God who chastised them
and punished them for their sins, and that he could also relieve them
whenever it pleased him. For had the Chaldeans, according to their own
pleasure, ruled over the Jews, and had obtained the victory over them,
who could have ever hoped that the miserable men, thus reduced, could
have been delivered by God’s hand? But now the Prophet shews that there
was no reason for the Jews to despair, as though it were difficult for
God to free them from the tyranny of their enemies; for nothing had
happened to them by chance, or through the power of their enemies, but
through the righteous judgment of God.

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p7"></span>We now then perceive the design of the
Holy Spirit in what the Prophet says, *As I have watched over them to
pluck up and to break down and to break in pieces and to destroy, and to
afflict; so will I watch, etc.*  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md)
God then sets himself forth as the judge who had punished them for their
sins, in order that he might convince them that he would also become
their Physician, as though he had said, “I who have inflicted the wound
can therefore heal it,” according to what is said elsewhere,

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p9"></span>“God is he who kills and brings to life,
who leads down to the grave and brings up.”*  
*(<span id="iii.xxxvi-p9.2"></span>[1Sa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.xxxvi-p9.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p10"></span>But he employs many words, for the great
mass of so many evils might have plunged the Jews into the abyss of
despair. Hence the Prophet anticipates them, and shews, that though they
had been reduced to extremities, yet so many and so severe calamities
could not prevent God from restoring them, when it seemed good to him.
He yet reminds them, that it was not without cause that they suffered
such grievous things; for God takes no delight in the miseries of his
people. The people then ought to have learnt that they had been guilty
of great sins from the fact, that they had been chastised with so much
rigor and severity. He now adds, *So will I watch over you to build and
to plant*

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p11"></span>As for the verb *destroy,* if we read
<span id="iii.xxxvi-p11.1"></span>הרם erem, it ought to be rendered,
*and to take away* The verb <span id="iii.xxxvi-p11.2"></span>רם *rem,*
as it is well known, means to elevate; but metaphorically, to take away.
But the received reading, as I have said, is <span
id="iii.xxxvi-p11.3"></span>הרס *eres.* He says, that he would *watch*
to *build* and to *plant* them, as he had watched to *destroy* them; as
though he had said, that they had already been taught by experience, how
great was the power of God’s hand to save as well as to destroy. They
had disregarded threatenings as long as God had spared them, and they
thought that they could sin with impunity; and we see how insolently
they rejected all the Prophets. But God had at length shewed by severe
proofs how his judgments oughf; to have been dreaded. He now then
inspires them with hope, for his watching would no less avail for their
preservation. It follows, —

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p2"></span>**29**. In those days they shall say no
more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children’s teeth are
set on edge.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p3"></span>**29**. In diebus illis non dicent
amplius, Patres comederunt omphacium *(uvam acerbam)* et dentes filiorum
obstupuerunt:

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p4"></span>**30**. But every one shall die for his
own iniquity: every man that eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be
set on edge.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p5"></span>**30**. Quin potius vir *(hoc est;*
quisque) in sun iniquitate morietur; omnis homo comedens *(hoc est,*
quisquis comederit) uvam acerbam obstupescent dentes ejus *(aut,* omnis
viri qui comederit, dentes obstupescent)

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p7"></span><span id="iii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p8"></span>Ezekiel shews that it was a complaint
commonly prevailing among the people, that they suffered for the sins of
their fathers, as Horace also says, a heathen and a despiser of God, “O
Roman, thou dost undeservedly suffer for the faults of thy fathers.”
 <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) Such, then, was the arrogance of
the Jews, as to strive with God, as though he punished them, while they
were innocent; and they expressed this by using a proverb, “If our
fathers have eaten sour grapes, what is the reason that our teeth are
set on edge?” We know that teeth are set on edge when unripe fruits are
eaten; but the word properly means sour grapes, which the Greeks call
*omphakes.* Then the Prophet says, that this proverb would be no longer
used, for after having been tamed by evils, they would at length know
that God had not dealt so severely with them without a just cause.

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p10"></span>We now perceive the meaning of the
Prophet. And he says, *In those days,* that is, after God had punished
the people, and also embraced them through his mercy; for both these
things were necessary, that is, that their perverseness and pride should
be subdued, and that they should cease to expostulate with God, and also
that the gratuitous favor of God should be manifested to them. At that
time then, he says, they shall not use this impious proverb, *The
fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the children’s teeth have been
blunted:*  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) *but on the contrary,*
he adds, *every one shall die in his own iniquity; and whosoever eateth
a sour grape, his teeth shall be blunted;* that is, at that time the
just judgment of God shall be exalted, so that there will be no place
for these insolent and blasphemous clamors; the mercy of God will also
be made manifest, for men, worthy of death, will be delivered, but not
otherwise than through the gratuitous goodness of God.

<span id="iii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxviii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xxxviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
warnest us daily by so many evidences of thy wrath, that we may in due
time repent, — O grant, that we may not be slow to consider thy work,
and also the doctrine which thou addest, but anticipate thy extreme
vengeance, and thus be made capable of receiving thy mercy, that as thou
freely offerest it to us, we may anxiously embrace it, and also so
retain it in our hearts by true faith, that thou mayest continue its
course towards us, until we shall at length reach that blessed rest,
which has been prepared for us in heaven by Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xxxviii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-Third

<span id="iii.xl"></span>

<span id="iii.xl-p1"></span><span id="iii.xl-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.xl-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xl-p2"></span>**31**. Behold, the days come, saith the
LORD, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah:

<span id="iii.xl-p3"></span>**31**. Ecce dies veniunt, dicit Jehova, et
percutiam cum domo Israel et cum domo Jehudah foedus novum:

<span id="iii.xl-p4"></span>**32**. Not according to the covenant that I
made with their fathers in the day *that* I took them by the hand to
bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant they brake,
although I was an husband unto them, saith the LORD:

<span id="iii.xl-p5"></span>**32**. Non secundum foedus quod percussi
cum patribus eorum die quo apprehendi manum eorum, ut educerem eos e
terra Egypti, quod irritum fecerunt foedus, *inquam,* et ego dominabor
illis, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iii.xl-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xl-p7"></span><span id="iii.xl-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xl-p8"></span>Jeremiah proceeds with the same subject, but
shews more clearly how much more abundant and richer the favor of God
would be towards his people than formerly, he then does not simply
promise the restoration of that dignity and greatness which they had
lost, but something better and more excellent. We hence see that this
passage necessarily refers to the kingdom of Christ, for without Christ
nothing could or ought to have been hoped for by the people, superior to
the Law; for the Law was a rule of the most perfect doctrine. If then
Christ be taken away, it is certain that we must abide in the Law.

<span id="iii.xl-p9"></span>We hence then conclude, that the Prophet
predicts of the kingdom of Christ; and this passage is also quoted by
the Apostles, as being remarkable and worthy of notice. (<span
id="iii.xl-p9.1"></span>[Ro 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#027.md)<span
id="iii.xl-p9.1"></span>; <span id="iii.xl-p9.2"></span>[Heb
8:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md)<span id="iii.xl-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.xl-p9.3"></span>[Heb
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#016)<span id="iii.xl-p9.3"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xl-p10"></span>But we must observe the order and manner of
teaching here pursued. The Prophet confirms what I have before said,
that what we have been considering was incredible to the Jews. Having
then already spoken of the benefits of God, which could have been hardly
recognised by the senses of men, in order to obviate the want of fifith,
he adds, that the Lord would manifest his mercy towards them in a new
and unusual manner. We hence see why the Prophet added this passage to
his former doctrine. For had he not spoken of a new covenant, those
miserable men, whom he sought to inspire with the hope of salvation,
would have ever vacillated; nay, as the greater part were already
overwhelmed with despair, he would have effected nothing. Here then he
sees before them a new covenant, as though he had said, that they ought
not to look farther or higher, nor to measure the benefit of God, of
which he had spoken, by the appearance of the state of things at that
time, for God would make a *new covenant.*

<span id="iii.xl-p11"></span>There is yet no doubt but that he commends
the favor of God, which was afterwards to be manifested in the fullness
of time. Besides, we must ever bear in mind, that from the time the
people returned to their own country, the faith of those who had
embraced the favor of deliverance was assailed by the most grievous
trials, for it would have been better for them to continue in perpetual
exile than to be cruelly harassed by all their neighbors, and to be
exposed to so many troubles. If, then, the people had been only restored
from their exile in Babylon, it was a matter of small moment; but it
behoved the godly to direct their minds to Christ. And hence we see that
the Prophets, who performed the office of teaching after the
restoration, dwelt on this point, — that they were to hope for something
better than what then appeared, and that they were not to despond,
because they saw that they did not enjoy rest, and were drawn into weary
and grievous contests rather than freed from tyranny. We indeed know
what Hagggai says of the future temple, and what Zechariah says, and
also Malachi. And the same was the object of our Prophet in speaking of
the new covenant, even that the faithful, after having enjoyed again
their own country, might not clamor against God, because he did not
bestow on them that happiness which he had promised. This was the second
reason why the Prophet spoke of the new covenant.

<span id="iii.xl-p12"></span>As before, he now repeats the words, that
*the days would come,* in which God would make a covenant with Israel as
well as with Judah. For the ten tribes, as it is well known, had been
driven into exile while the kingdom of Judah was still standing.
Besides, when they revolted from the family of David, they became as it
were another nation. God indeed did not cease to acknowledge them as his
people; but they had alienated themselves as far as they could from the
Church. God then promises that there would be again one body, for he
would gather them that they might unite together, and not be like two
houses.

<span id="iii.xl-p13"></span>Now, as to the *new* covenant, it is not so
called, because it is contrary to the first covenant; for God is never
inconsistent with himself, nor is he unlike himself, he then who once
made a covenant with his chosen people, had not changed his purpose, as
though he had forgotten his faithfulness. It then follows, that the
first covenant was inviolable; besides, he had already made his covenant
with Abraham, and the Law was a confirmation of that covenant. As then
the Law depended on that covenant which God made with his servant
Abraham, it follows that God could never have made a new, that is, a
contrary or a different covenant. For whence do we derive our hope of
salvation, except from that blessed seed promised to Abraham? Further,
why are we called the children of Abraham, except on account of the
common bond of faith? Why are the faithful said to be gathered into the
bosom of Abraham? Why does Christ say, that some will come from the east
and the west, and sit down in the kingdom of heaven with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob? (<span id="iii.xl-p13.1"></span>[Lu
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xl-p13.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.xl-p13.2"></span>[Mt
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span id="iii.xl-p13.2"></span>.md)
These things no doubt sufficiently shew that God has never made any
other covenant than that which he made formerly with Abraham, and at
length confirmed by the hand of Moses. This subject might be more fully
handled; but it is enough briefly to shew, that the covenant which God
made at first is perpetual.

<span id="iii.xl-p14"></span>Let us now see why he promises to the
people a *new* covenant. It being new, no doubt refers to what they call
the form; and the form, or manner, regards not words only, but first
Christ, then the grace of the Holy Spirit, and the whole external way of
teaching. But the substance remains the same. By substance I understand
the doctrine; for God in the Gospel brings forward nothing but what the
Law contains. We hence see that God has so spoken from the beginning,
that he has not changed, no not a syllable, with regard to the substance
of the doctrine. For he has included in the Law the rule of a perfect
life, and has also shewn what is the way of salvation, and by types and
figures led the people to Christ, so that the remission of sin is there
clearly made manifest, and whatever is necessary to be known.

<span id="iii.xl-p15"></span>As then God has added nothing to the Law as
to the substance of the doctrine, we must come, as I have already said,
to the form, as Christ was not as yet manifested: God made a new
covenant, when he accomplished through his Son whatever had been
shadowed forth under the Law. For the sacrifices could not of themselves
pacify God, as it is well known, and whatever the Law taught respecting
expiation was of itself useless and of no importance. The new covenant
then was made when Christ appeared with water and blood, and really
fulfilled what God had exhibited under types, so that the faithful might
have some taste of salvation. But the coming of Christ would not have
been sufficient, had not regeneration by the Holy Spirit been added. It
was, then, in some respects, a new thing, that God regenerated the
faithful by his Spirit, so that it became not only a doctrine as to the
letter, but also efficacious, which not only strikes the ear, but
penetrates into the heart, and really forms us for the service of God.
The outward mode of teaching was also new, as it is evident to all; for
when we compare the Law with the Gospel, we find that God speaks to us
now openly, as it were face to face, and not under a veil, as Paul
teaches us, when speaking of Moses, who put on a veil when he went forth
to address the people in God’s name. (<span
id="iii.xl-p15.1"></span>[2Co
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)<span id="iii.xl-p15.1"></span>.md)
It is not so, says Paul, under the Gospel, but the veil is removed, and
God in the face of Christ presents himself to be seen by us. This, then,
is the reason why the Prophet calls it a *new* covenant, as it will be
shown more at large: for I touch only on things which cannot be treated
apart, that the whole context of the Prophet may be better understood.
Let us then proceed now with the words.

<span id="iii.xl-p16"></span><span id="iii.xl-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xl-p17"></span>He says that the *covenant* which he will
make will not be such as he *had made with* their *fathers* Here he
clearly distinguishes the new covenant from the Law. The contrast ought
to be borne in mind; for no one of the Jews thought it possible that God
would add anything better to the Law. For though they regarded the Law
almost as nothing, yet we know that hypocrites pretended with great
ardor of zeal that they were so devoted to the Law, that they thought
that heaven and earth could sooner be blended together, than that any
change should be made in the Law; and at the same time they held most
tenaciously what God had only for a time instituted. It was therefore
necessary that the Law should be here contrasted with the new covenant,
that the Jews might know that the favor in reserve for them would be far
more excellent than what had been formerly manifested to the fathers.
This, then, is the reason why he says, not according to the *covenant,*
etc.

<span id="iii.xl-p18"></span>He afterwards adds, *which I made with
their fathers when I laid hold of their hand, etc.* Here he shows that
they could never have a firm hope of salvation, unless God made a new
covenant. Such was their pride, that they hardly would have received the
favor of God, had they not been convinced of this truth: for this would
have been always in their mouth, “Did not God shew himself a Father to
his people when he redeemed them? was it not a testimony of his paternal
favor? has he not elevated the condition of the Church, which he designs
to be perpetual?” They would have therefore rejected the favor of God,
had not the Prophet openly declared that the Law had been and would be
still useless to them, and that there was therefore a necessity for a
new covenant, otherwise they must have perished.

<span id="iii.xl-p19"></span>We now perceive the design of the Prophet;
and this ought to be carefully observed; for it would not be enough to
know what the Prophet says, except we also know why he says this or
that. The meaning then is, that it ought not to appear strange that God
makes a new covenant, because the first had been useless and was of no
avail. Then he confirms this, because God made the first covenant when
he stretched out his hand to his ancient people, and became their
liberator; and yet they *made void* that covenant. The circumstance as
to the time ought to be noticed, for the memory of a recent benefit
ought to be a most powerful motive to obedience. For how base an
ingratitude it was for those, who had been delivered by the wonderful
power of God, to reject his covenant at a time when they had been
anticipated by divine mercy? As then they had made void even at that
time the covenant of God, it may with certainty be concluded, that there
had been no time in which they had not manifested their impiety, and had
not been covenant-breakers.

<span id="iii.xl-p20"></span>He adds, *I however ruled over them,* or
was Lord over them. Though some confine the verb <span
id="iii.xl-p20.1"></span>בעלתי *bolti,* to the rule exercised by a
husband, and this would not be unsuitable, as God not only ruled then
over his people, but was also their husband, a similitude which is often
used; yet I know not whether this view can be satisfactorily sustained
we ought therefore to be satisfied with the general truth, that God had
the people under his own authority, as though he had said, that he only
used his own right in ruling over them and prescribing to them the way
in which they were to live. At the same time the word covenant, was more
honorable to the people. For when a king enjoins anything on his people,
it is called an edict; but God deals with his own people more kindly,
for he descends and appears in the midst of them, that he may bind
himself to his people, as he binds the people to himself. We hence see,
in short, why God says that he *ruled over* the people, even because he
had purchased them for himself, and yet he had not enjoyed his own right
on account of the untameable and perverse disposition of the people.
 <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md)

<span id="iii.xl-p23"></span>It ought at the same time to be observed,
that the fault is here cast on the people, that the Law was weak and not
sufficiently valid, as we see that Paul teaches us in <span
id="iii.xl-p23.1"></span>[Ro 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.xl-p23.1"></span>. For as soon as the weakness of the Law is
spoken of, the greater part lay hold of something they deem wrong in the
Law, and thus the Law is rendered contemptible: hence the Prophet says
here that *they* had made God’s *covenant void,* as though he had said,
that the fault was not to be sought in the Law that there was need of a
new covenant, for the Law was abundantly sufficient, but that the fault
was in the levity and the unfaithfulness of the people. We now then see
that nothing is detracted from the Law when it is said to be weak and
ineffectual; for it is an accidental fault derived from men who do not
observe nor keep their pledged faith. There are still more things to be
said; but I now, as I have said, touch but briefly on the words of the
Prophet. It then follows, —

<span id="iii.xli"></span>

<span id="iii.xli-p1"></span><span id="iii.xli-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033.md)<span id="iii.xli-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xli-p2"></span>**33**. But this *shall be* the covenant
that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the
LORD, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

<span id="iii.xli-p3"></span>**33**. Quia hoc foedus quod percutiam cum
domo Israel post dies illos, dicit Jehova, ponam legem meam in medio
ipsorum *(id est,* in visceribus) et in cordibus ipsorum scribam eam; et
ego ero illis in Deum, et ipsi erunt mihi in populum.

<span id="iii.xli-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xli-p5"></span><span id="iii.xli-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xli-p6"></span>He now shews a difference between the Law
and the Gospel, for the Gospel brings with it the grace of regeneration:
its doctrine, therefore, is not that of the letter, but penetrates into
the heart and reforms all the inward faculties, so that obedience is
rendered to the righteousness of God.

<span id="iii.xli-p7"></span>A question may however be here moved, Was
the grace of regeneration wanting to the Fathers under the Law? But this
is quite preposterous. What, then, is meant when God denies here that
the Law was written on the heart before the coming of Christ? To this I
answer, that the Fathers, who were formerly regenerated, obtained this
favor through Christ, so that we may say, that it was as it were
transferred to them from another source. The power then to penetrate
into the heart was not inherent in the Law, but it was a benefit
transferred to the Law from the Gospel. This is one thing. Then we know
that this grace of God was rare and little known under the Law; but that
under the Gospel the gifts of the Spirit have been more abundantly
poured forth, and that God has dealt more bountifully with his Church.
But still the main thing is, to consider what the Law of itself is, and
what is peculiar to the Gospel, especially when a comparison is made
between the Law and the Gospel. For when this comparison ceases, this
cannot be properly applied to the Law; but with regard to the Gospel it
is said, that the Law is that of the letter, as it is called elsewhere,
(<span id="iii.xli-p7.1"></span>[Ro
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006)<span id="iii.xli-p7.1"></span>.md)
and this also is the reason why Paul calls it the letter in <span
id="iii.xli-p7.2"></span>[2Co 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xli-p7.2"></span>,

<span id="iii.xli-p8"></span>“the letter killeth,”

<span id="iii.xli-p9"></span>etc. By “letter” he means not what Origen
foolishly explained, for he perverted that passage as he did almost the
whole Scripture: Paul does not mean there the simple and plain sense of
the Law; for he calls it the letter for another reason, because it only
sets before the eyes of men what is right, and sounds it also in their
ears. And the word *letter* refers to what is written, as though he had
said, The Law was written on stones, and was therefore a letter. But the
Gospel — what is it? It is spirit, that is, God not only addresses his
word to the ears of men and sets it before their eyes, but he also
inwardly teaches their hearts and minds. This is then the solution of
the question: the Prophet speaks of the Law in itself, as apart from the
Gospel, for the Law then is dead and destitute of the Spirit of
regeneration.

<span id="iii.xli-p10"></span>He afterwards says, *I will put my Law in
their inward parts* By these words he confirms what we have said, that
the newness, which he before mentioned, was not so as to the substance,
but as to the form only: for God does not say here, “I will give you
another Law,” but *I will write my Law,* that is, the same Law, which
had formerly been delivered to the Fathers. He then does not promise
anything different as to the essence of the doctrine, but he makes the
difference to be in the form only. But he states the same thing in two
ways, and says, that he would *put* his *law in their inward parts,* and
that he would *write it in their hearts*  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) We indeed know how difficult it is that
man should be so formed to obedience that his whole life may be in
unison with the Law of God, for all the lusts of the flesh are so many
enemies, as Paul says, who fight against God. (<span
id="iii.xli-p14.1"></span>[Ro 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007.md)<span
id="iii.xli-p14.1"></span>) As then all our affections and lusts thus
carry on war with God, it is in a manner a renovation of the world when
men suffer themselves to be ruled by God. And we know what Scripture
says, that we cannot be the disciples of Christ, except we renounce
ourselves and the world, and deny our own selves. (<span
id="iii.xli-p14.2"></span>[Mt
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md)<span id="iii.xli-p14.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.xli-p14.3"></span>[Luke
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#027)<span id="iii.xli-p14.3"></span>.md)
This is the reason why the Prophet was not satisfied with one statement,
but said, *I will put my Law in their inward parts, I will write it in
their hearts.*

<span id="iii.xli-p15"></span>We may further learn from this passage,
how foolish the Papists are in their conceit about free-will. They
indeed allow that without the help of God’s grace we are not capable of
fulfilling the Law, and thus they concede something to the aid of grace
and of the Spirit: but still they not only imagine a co-operation as to
free-will, but ascribe to it the main work. Now the Prophet here
testifies that it is the peculiar work of God to write his Law in our
hearts. Since God then declares that this favor is justly his, and
claims to himself the glory of it, how great must be the arrogance of
men to appropriate this to themselves? To *write* the Law *in the heart*
imports nothing less than so to form it, that the Law should rule there,
and that there should be no feeling of the heart, not conformable and
not consenting to its doctrine. It is hence then sufficiently clear,
that no one can be turned so as to obey the Law, until he be regenerated
by the Spirit of God; nay, that there is no inclination in man to act
rightly, except God prepares his heart by his grace; in a word, that the
doctrine of the letter is always dead, until God vivifies it by his
Spirit.

<span id="iii.xli-p16"></span>He adds, *And I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people* Here God comprehends generally the
substance of his covenant; for what is the design of the Law, except
that the people should call upon him, and that he should also exercise a
care over his people? For whenever God declares that he will be our God,
he offers to us his paternal layout, and declares that our salvation is
become the object of his care; he gives to us a free access to himself,
bids us to recumb on his grace, and, in short, this promise contains in
itself everything needful for our salvation. The case is now also at
this day the same under the Gospel; for as we are aliens from the
kingdom of heaven, he reconciles us by it to himself, and testifies that
he will be our God. On this depends what follows, *And they shall be my
people;* for the one cannot be separated from the other. By these words
then the Prophet briefly intimates, that the main object of God’s
covenant is, that he should become our Father, from whom we are to seek
and expect salvation, and that we should also become his people. Of
these things there is more to be said again; but I have explained the
reason why I now so quickly pass over things worthy of a longer
explanation. He adds, —

<span id="iii.xlii"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p1"></span><span id="iii.xlii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.xlii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlii-p2"></span>**34**. And they shall teach no more every
man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the LORD: for
they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of
them, saith the LORD: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more.

<span id="iii.xlii-p3"></span>**34**. Et non docebit amplius vir *(id
est,* quisque) proximum suum, et quisque fratrum suum, dicendo,
cognoscite Jehovam; quia omnes cognoscent me a parvo ipsorum, et *(sed
abundat copula)* ad magnum ipsorum, dicit Jehova; quia ignoscam pecattis
ipsorum, et iniquitatum ipsorum non recordabor amplius.

<span id="iii.xlii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xlii-p5"></span>But I cannot now proceed farther, for the
clock strikes.

<span id="iii.xliii"></span>

<span id="iii.xliii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xliii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
favored us with so singular a benefit as to make through thy Son a
covenant which has been ratified for our salvation, — O grant, that we
may become partakers of it, and know that thou so speakest with us, that
thou not only shewest by thy Word what is right, but speakest also to us
inwardly by thy Spirit, and thus renderest us teachable and obedient,
that there may be an evidence of our adoption, and a proof that thou
wilt govern and rule us, until we shall at length be really and fully
united to thee through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xliv"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-Fourth

<span id="iii.xliv-p2"></span><span id="iii.xliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p3"></span>*And no more shall every one teach his
neighbor, and every one his brother, saying, Know ye Jehovah; for all
shall know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, saith
Jehovah: for I will forgive their sins, and their iniquities will I
remember no more* Here is mentioned another difference between the old
and the new covenant, even that God, who had obscurely manifested
himself under the Law, would send forth a fuller light, so that the
knowledge of him would be commonly enjoyed. But he hyperbolically extols
this favor, when he says that no one would have need of a teacher or
instructor, as every one would have himself sufficient knowledge. We
therefore consider that the object of the Prophet is mainly to shew,
that so great would be the light of the Gospel, that it would be clearly
evident, that God under it deals more bountifully with his people,
because its truth shines forth as the sun at noon-day. The same thing
Isaiah promises, when he says that all would become the disciples of
God. (<span id="iii.xliv-p3.1"></span>[Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)<span id="iii.xliv-p3.1"></span>.md)
This was indeed the case also under the Law, though God gave then but a
small taste of heavenly doctrine: but at the coming of Christ he
unfolded the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, so that under the Gospel
there is the perfection of what had been begun; for we know that the
ancient people were like children, and hence God kept them in the
rudiments of knowledge: now, as we are grown up, he favors us with a
fuller doctrine, and he comes, as it were, nearer to us.

<span id="iii.xliv-p4"></span>Hence, he says, No *more shall every one
teach his neighbor, and a man his brother*  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) I have said that the Prophet here
amplifies the favor of God. But we find that some fanatics have
ignorantly and foolishly abused this passage, seeking to put down
teaching of every kind, as the Anabaptists in our day, who reject all
teaching; and flattering themselves in their ignorance, they proudly
boast that they are endued with the Spirit, and say, that dishonor is
done to Christ, if we are still disciples, because it is written as one
of the praises and encomiums given to the new covenant, that *no one
shall teach his neighbor any more* And hence it has also happened, that
they are inebriated with strange and horrible doctrines: for the devil,
when they become swollen with so much pride, can fascinate and delude
them as he pleases; and their own pride also so leads them astray, that
they invent dreams; and many unprincipled men have drawn aside this
passage to serve their own purposes. For when they boast themselves to
be prophets, and persuade the simple that they are so, they hold many
attached to themselves, and derive gain by this sort of boasting.

<span id="iii.xliv-p7"></span>But the Prophet here does not mean
inspiration, nor does he exclude the practice of teaching, as I have
already said; he only shews to us the superior brightness of the gospel
light, as God, under the Law, did not so perfectly teach his people as
he does us at this day. And hence is that saying of Christ,

<span id="iii.xliv-p8"></span>“Blessed are the eyes which see the things
which ye see, and the ears which hear the things which ye hear; for many
kings and prophets,” etc. (<span id="iii.xliv-p8.1"></span>[Lu
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023)<span id="iii.xliv-p8.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xliv-p9"></span>Christ, then, is the best interpreter of
this passage, even that God would cause the truth to shine forth more
fully under the Gospel; and hence Christ is called by Malachi

<span id="iii.xliv-p10"></span>“the Sun of Righteousness,” (<span
id="iii.xliv-p10.1"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="iii.xliv-p10.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xliv-p11"></span>for the Prophet there intimates that the
Fathers had indeed some light, but not such as we have. In short, we
ought to bear in mind the comparison, of which mention was made
yesterday, even that God held his people in suspense with the hope of a
better state.

<span id="iii.xliv-p12"></span>And that we may no farther seek an
explanation, let us carefully weigh the words; for it is not simply and
without exception said, “No one shall teach his neighbor,” but it it is
added, *“Saying,* *Know ye Jehovah.”* We hence see that the Prophet
promises knowledge, so that they might be no longer alphabetarians; for
these words, “Know ye Jehovah,” point out the first elements of faith,
or of celestial doctrine. And, doubtless, if we consider how great was
the ignorance of the ancient people, they were then only in the
elements. He who is at this day the least among the faithful, has so far
advanced, that he knows much more clearly what pertains chiefly to
salvation than those who were then the most learned. The meaning then
is, that all God’s chosen people would be so endued with the gift of
knowledge, that they would no longer continue in the first elements.

<span id="iii.xliv-p13"></span>Now, were any one pertinaciously to urge
this one clause, it would be right to set before him a passage in
Isaiah, for he certainly speaks of the kingdom of Christ, when he says,

<span id="iii.xliv-p14"></span>“Lay hold shall each on the hand of his
neighbor, and say, Come, let us ascend into the mountain of the Lord,
and he will teach us his ways,” etc. (<span
id="iii.xliv-p14.1"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="iii.xliv-p14.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xliv-p15"></span>Now, let us reconcile these two
prophecies. The design of both is to set forth the favor of God,
manifested by Christ at his coming. The one passage says, “No one will
teach his neighbor;” and the other, “Lay hold will each on the hand of
his neighbor, and say, Let us come and ascend into the mountain, that
Jehovah may teach us.” Now the way of reconciling them is this, — that
Jeremiah says, that the people would not be so ignorant under the new
covenant as to stand in need of the first principles of truth; but that
Isaiah says, that each would lay hold on the hand of his neighbor, that
they might mutually help one another, so as to attain the knowledge of
God’s law. The question is thus solved; and we, at the same time, see
how remarkable is the benefit with which God favors his people, as he
thus makes himself familiarly known to them.

<span id="iii.xliv-p16"></span>He says, *All shall know me, from the
least to the greatest* He does not mean that knowledge would be in all
in an equal measure. Experience indeed proves this to be false; and
further we know, that God has testified from the beginning, as Paul also
reminds us, (<span id="iii.xliv-p16.1"></span>[Rom.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="iii.xliv-p16.1"></span>.md)
that the measure of his gifts is according to his good pleasure. But the
Prophet means, that those who are the least or the lowest among God’s
people shall be endued with so much light of knowledge that they will be
almost like teachers. To the same purpose is the prophecy of Joel,

<span id="iii.xliv-p17"></span>“Prophesy shall your sons, your daughters
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.” (<span
id="iii.xliv-p17.1"></span>[Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="iii.xliv-p17.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xliv-p18"></span>He promises that there would be
everywhere prophets and teachers, because the grace of God would be at
that day more abundant; and these things ought ever to be understood
comparatively. Though, then, many are now ignorant among the children of
God, and among those who are really of the number of the faithful, yet
if we consider how great was the obscurity of the Law, those who are at
this day the least among the disciples, are not otherwise than prophets
and teachers. And for this reason Christ says,

<span id="iii.xliv-p19"></span>“He who is least in the kingdom of
heaven,  
is greater than John the Baptist,”

<span id="iii.xliv-p20"></span>who yet was superior to all the Prophets.
(<span id="iii.xliv-p20.1"></span>[Mt
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.xliv-p20.1"></span>) John the Baptist was, in his office,
exalted above all the Prophets, and he excelled them in knowledge; and
yet the least of those who professed the Gospel and bore testimony to
it, was greater, says Christ, than John the Baptist. And this is not to
be applied only to them individually, nor be confined to them, but
rather to the clear and plain doctrine which the Gospel conveys,
according to the passage we quoted yesterday, where Paul says that there
is now no veil intervening, but that we are allowed to see God, as it
were, face to face in the person of Christ. (<span
id="iii.xliv-p20.2"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="iii.xliv-p20.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xliv-p21"></span>It follows, *For I well forgive their
sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more* The Prophet, no
doubt, shews here the foundation of God’s kindness, even that he would
receive the people into favor by not imputing to them their sins. If we
then seek for the origin of the new covenant, it is the free remission
of sins, because God reconciles himself to his people. And we hence
conclude, that there is no other cause that we can imagine, why God
appeared in his only-begotten Son, and manifested so great a bounty: for
the Prophet here reduces to nothing all the glory of the flesh, and lays
prostrate all merits, when he says, that God would be so bountiful to
his people as to become propitious to them, freely to remit their sins,
and not to remember their iniquities. This passage, then, cannot
properly be taken as referring to the perpetual remission of sins,
though this he included in the general doctrine; but we must bear in
mind the design of the Prophet, which was to shew, that God from the
beginning, with regard to his Church, was moved by no other cause than a
desire to abolish sins.

<span id="iii.xliv-p22"></span>The Apostle, in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, gives rather a refined interpretation of this passage, for he
dwells on the word *more,* <span id="iii.xliv-p22.1"></span>עד*, od.* He
says, that under the New Testament God forgives iniquities, because
expiation has been made, so that there is no more need of sacrifices.
For he assumes the opposite idea, that God remembered iniquities until
he made the new covenant. If he remembered sins, he says, until he made
a new covenant, it is no wonder that he then required daily sacrifice to
propitiate him: but now under the New Testament he remembers them no
more. Then sacrifices cease, because there is now no need of
satisfaction when sins are forgiven. He hence concludes, that we have
been so expiated by the blood of Christ, and so reconciled to God, that
confidence as to our salvation ought to give us an entire rest. But we
ought to bear in mind what I have said, that the Prophet here expressly,
and in the first place, speaks of the beginning of the mercy and grace
which God promises; he therefore declares that God would be so kind and
so gracious as not to *remember iniquities*

<span id="iii.xliv-p23"></span>What, then, does the particle *more*
intimate? Even that God had for a time been angry with his people, and
visited their sins with judgment. For God is said to call our sins to
remembrance, he is said to be angry with us, he is said to be the
avenger of our iniquities, when he punishes us, when he gives evidences
of his severity and of his vengeance. Whenever then God severely handled
his people, he seemed to remember their iniquities; but when he made the
new covenant, all iniquities were then buried, and cast, as another
Prophet says, into the depths of the sea. (<span
id="iii.xliv-p23.1"></span>[Mic
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019)<span id="iii.xliv-p23.1"></span>.md)
Then the Apostle misapplied the testimony of the Prophet: by no means;
for he wisely accommodated it to the subject he was discussing: what God
promises, that he would not any more remember iniquities, after having
made the new covenant, was accomplished through the coming of Christ.
Then Christ alone has effected this — that our iniquities should no more
be remembered before God. Hence also we easily learn what the Apostle
intended to prove, even that sacrifices cease when sins are expiated.
These things indeed harmonize well together, and there is nothing forced
or too refined.

<span id="iii.xliv-p24"></span>Moreover, the Prophet does not here
discuss the whole question respecting the difference between the Old and
New Testament, but only takes this as granted, that the grace of God
would be more abundant than formerly, in order that the faithful,
supported by hope, might patiently endure their evils and most grievous
trials with which they had to contend, and not despond until Christ was
manifested, as we said yesterday. Here, then, he speaks of the grace of
regeneration, of the gift of knowledge, and at the same time promises
that God would be propitious to his people in a different and more
perfect way than he had been in former times. But the Apostle in that
Epistle seems to apply this to ceremonies, because these things are
connected together; that is, the abrogation of ceremonies and the
regeneration of the Spirit which is promised here. Then the Apostle does
not wrest the words of the Prophet; but as he commends the new covenant,
which was to be more excellent than the Law, he hence concludes, that it
is no wonder that ceremonies were not to continue but for a time. For he
assumes this principle, that a new covenant was to succeed the old: then
some change was necessarily to be. He assumes also that the new covenant
was opposed to the old, and that the old was subject to destruction. The
Jews could not endure any change in the types, for they would have them
to remain the same. But the Apostle says that it is nothing strange that
a thing should decay; for God, he says, does not certainly without
reason call that covenant old which he made by Moses; then it will not
always continue valid. (<span id="iii.xliv-p24.1"></span>[Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013)<span id="iii.xliv-p24.1"></span>.md)
Since it is so, it cannot be inconsistent with the truth and
faithfulness of God, that the ceremonies should cease as to their use,
while the Law itself remained unchanged. We now then see that the
Apostle faithfully interpreted the design of the Prophet by
accommodating his testimony to the abrogation of ceremonies.

<span id="iii.xliv-p25"></span>But as I have to explain only the words
of the Prophet, there is no need to speak further of the difference
between the Old and New Testament, that is, in what particulars they
differ; for the Old and New Testament differ also in other things. But
the Prophet, as I have said, thought it sufficient to touch on this
point, — that something better was to be hoped at the coming of Christ
than what the Fathers in all ages had found. And thus, as I have said,
he sought to alleviate the sorrow of the faithful, whom God exercised
with hard trials before Christ was manifested in the flesh.

<span id="iii.xliv-p26"></span>Moreover, the Law and the Gospel form a
contrast like Moses and Christ. Then the New Testament is more excellent
than the Law, as Christ excels Moses. But we must come to a passage in
John, that we may more fully understand why the Prophet says that the
grace of the new covenant would be different from that, of the old. John
says,

<span id="iii.xliv-p27"></span>“The Law was given by Moses, but grace  
and truth came by Jesus Christ.” (<span id="iii.xliv-p27.2"></span>[Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span id="iii.xliv-p27.2"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xliv-p28"></span>John seems there to leave nothing to the
Law but an evanescent shadow. For if Christ only brought truth to us,
then there was no truth in the Law, and there was no grace in the Law;
but this seems to east a reproach on the Law. Now this question was in
part answered yesterday. But as I wish to finish this passage, let it be
briefly observed, that whenever the Law is thus extenuated, it is only
that the benefit of Christ may be set forth, so that we may know how
invaluable is God’s mercy which appears in his only-begotten Son.

<span id="iii.xliv-p29"></span>Were now any one to object and say, “But
why had he previously published the Law? and why did he command it to be
reverently received, if it was without grace and truth?” To this I
answer, according to what I said yesterday, that the Law was not
destitute of those benefits which we at this day receive under the
Gospel, but that these benefits were then, as it were, adventitious, and
that they do not properly belong to the Law; for if the Law were
separated from the Gospel, it would be the same as if one was to
separate Moses from Christ. If Moses be regarded, not as opposed to
Christ, he was the herald and witness of God’s paternal kindness towards
his people; his doctrine also contained promises of a free salvation,
and opened to the faithful the door of access to God. But if Moses be
set in opposition to Christ, he becomes the minister of death, and his
doctrine leads to destruction; for the letter, as Paul in <span
id="iii.xliv-p29.1"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xliv-p29.1"></span>,
calls it, killeth, — how so? Because whosoever is attached to Moses
departs from Christ; and Christ alone possesses in himself the fullness
of all blessings. It then follows, that nothing remains in Moses when
considered in himself. But God promised salvation to his ancient people,
and also regenerated his chosen, and illuminated them by his Spirit.
This he did not do so freely and extensively as now. As then God’s grace
is at this day more abundant, it is justly extolled in high terms by all
the Prophets; and then, as I have already said, whatever God at that
time conferred, was, as it were, adventitious, for all these benefits
were dependant on Christ and the promulgation of the Gospel. Let us now
proceed, —

<span id="iii.xlv"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p1"></span><span id="iii.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035.md)<span
id="iii.xlv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p2"></span>**35**. Thus saith the LORD, which giveth
the sun for a light by day, *and* the ordinances of the moon and of the
stars for a light by night, which divideth the sea when the waves
thereof roar; the LORD of hosts *is* his name:

<span id="iii.xlv-p3"></span>**35**. Sic dicit Jehova, Qui ponit solera
*(vel,* posuit) in lucem diei, et leges *(vel,* statuta, decreta) lunae
et stellarum in lucem noctis; scindens mare, et resonant (tumultuautur)
fluctus ejus; Jehova exercituum nomen ejus:

<span id="iii.xlv-p4"></span>**36**. If those ordinances depart from
before me*,* saith the LORD, *then* the seed of Israel also shall cease
from being a nation before me for ever.

<span id="iii.xlv-p5"></span>**36**. Si remota fuerint decreta haec a
conspectu meo, dicit Jehova, etiam semen Israel cessabit *(vel,*
deficiet) ne sit gens coram facie mea cunctis diebus.

<span id="iii.xlv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.xlv-p7"></span><span id="iii.xlv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p8"></span>He confirms the promises which we have been
considering; for it was difficult to believe that the people would not
only recover what they had lost, but also be made much more happy; for
the Church was then wholly in a desponding state. It was not then an
easy matter to raise, as it were, from the lowest depths a miserable
people, and to comfort them so that they might overcome their dreadful
trial; for the disorder of the Church was such, that had it been raised
a hundred times from the dead, it might again be a hundred times crushed
into death, for there still remained for it most grievous evils in
future. This is then the reason why the Prophet dwells at large on
proving the same thing.

<span id="iii.xlv-p9"></span>He says in the person of God, “I am he who
created the sun, the moon, and the stars; the regular order of things in
creation still continues, for the sun performs its course, and so does
the moon.” He speaks, indeed, of their diurnal course, for we know that
the Prophets spoke popularly, and according to the common notions. Had
they philosophized, as astrologers do, and spoken of the monthly course
of the moon, and of the annual course of the sun, they could not have
been understood by the common people. They were, therefore, satisfied to
state things which even children could comprehend, even that the sun
made its circuit daily round the world, that the moon did the same, and
that the stars in their turns followed; so that the moon holds the first
place in the night among the stars, and that the sun rules during the
day. “I am the Lord,” he says, “who have fixed this order of things
which still remains:” *I cut* or divide *the sea,* he says, that is, I
stir it up with tempests, *and make a noise,* or roar, *do its waves.”*

<span id="iii.xlv-p10"></span>He mentions things which are contrary, but
not inconsistent, though different. For the course of the sun, moon, and
stars is regular and fixed, and so he calls their courses <span
id="iii.xlv-p10.1"></span>חקת *cheket,* and <span
id="iii.xlv-p10.2"></span>החקים *echekim,* that is, decrees, which are
not changeable.  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) Then in the
heavens we find an order so arranged and regulated, that nothing
deviates from its appointed course. But in storms and tempests God seems
as though he would shake the world and overturn what appears otherwise
immovable; for even the very rocks, as it were, tremble when the sea is
violently stirred up; and yet God calms the very sea, and thus puts an
end to storms and tempests, so that there ever appears to be a stability
and a perpetuity in nature. He then adds, *If removed shall these laws
be from my presence, the seed of Israel shall also fail;* that is, “As
certain as is the stability of the order of nature, seen in the course
of the sun and the moon, and in the turbulent sea, so certain will be
the deliverance of ray Church, nor can it ever be destroyed.” The
tempest on the sea seems to shake the world, and yet the world remains
fixed. The sun and moon, when they rise, might overwhelm the whole
earth; for we know that the sun is much larger than the earth. While so
large a body, and almost immeasurable, hangs over our heads, and rolls
on so swiftly, who ought not to be afraid? Yet the sun proceeds in its
course, and the earth remains firm, because it so pleases God. There is,
therefore, no reason to fear that the safety of the Church should ever
fail, for the laws or decrees of nature shall never cease; that is, God,
who has from the beginning governed the world, will not disregard the
welfare of his Church, for whose sake the world has been created.

<span id="iii.xlv-p15"></span>Nor, indeed, is it a matter of wonder,
that the safety of the Church is here shewn to be so secure, for it may
justly be preferred even to the fixed course of the sun and of the moon,
and to other institutions of nature. But God deemed it enough in this
place to use this comparison, according to what is said in the Psalms,
where the sun and the moon are called his faithful witnesses in heaven.
(<span id="iii.xlv-p15.1"></span>[Ps.
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036.md),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="iii.xlv-p15.1"></span>.md)
But there also the covenant is spoken of, which God was about to make
with his people through his only-begotten Son. He mentions the moon as
his witness in heaven; but as I have already said elsewhere, he raises
us far above the world and above all the elements, yea, above the sun
and the moon, when he treats of the certainty of our salvation; and,
doubtless, the condition of the Church does not depend on the state of
the world; for it is said in another place,

<span id="iii.xlv-p16"></span>“They shall grow old, but thou wilt remain
for ever.”  
(<span id="iii.xlv-p16.2"></span>[Ps
102:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026.md)<span
id="iii.xlv-p16.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.xlv-p17"></span>And the Prophet there compares the heavens
to garments, which wear out by use, and at length become useless; but
the condition of the Church, he says, is far different. He does not,
indeed, express these words; but after having said, “Thou, O God, art
the same from eternity,” he comes to the eternity of the Church, “Thy
children’s children shall endure.” We now see that the Church has the
preference over the whole world. But God had a regard in this place to
the weakness of his people, when he said that his grace to his people
would be as sure and certain as the institutions of nature. Some refer
the last clause in verse 35 (<span id="iii.xlv-p17.1"></span>[Jer
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035)<span id="iii.xlv-p17.1"></span>.md)
to the Red Sea; because God divided the Red Sea; but this is wholly
foreign to the meaning of the Prophet, nor does it require any
confutation; but I have pointed it out that no one may be led astray.

<span id="iii.xlvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvi-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="iii.xlvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we enjoy the
light of the sun by day, and of the moon by night, we may learn to raise
higher our eyes, and not be like the unbelieving, who have this benefit
in common with us, but look forward in hope of our eternal salvation,
nor doubt but that as thou settest before our eyes a proof of thy
immovable constancy in these created things, so also secure and certain
shall be our salvation, which is founded on thy most certain truth,
which renders sure all things, until at length we come into that blessed
kingdom, which has been obtained for us by the blood of thy
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="iii.xlvi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xlvii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-Fifth

<span id="iii.xlviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xlviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#037.md)<span
id="iii.xlviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlviii-p2"></span>**37**. Thus saith the LORD; If heaven
above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out
beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they
have done, saith the LORD.

<span id="iii.xlviii-p3"></span>**37**. Sic dicit Jehova, Si mensurentur
coeli sursum, et investigentur fundamenta terrae deorsum, etiam ego
rejiciam *(vel,* spernam) totum semen Israel, propter onmia quae
*fecerunt,* dicit Johova.

<span id="iii.xlviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.xlviii-p5"></span><span id="iii.xlviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlviii-p6"></span>He confirms the same thing by another
comparison, even that it would be impossible for God wholly to forget
his covenant, but that he would again gather his people. Exile might
indeed appear as a permanent death; and thus the truth of God might have
been brought to nothing; and the covenant could not have been made void
without giving the people a sort of right to complain, that they had
been deceived. For we know, that though a condition was added to the
covenant, yet it was not founded on the integrity of men; and hence it
is said, that God is not a liar, though all the Jews were perfidious.
(<span id="iii.xlviii-p6.1"></span>[Rom.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="iii.xlviii-p6.1"></span>.md)
Then the Prophet teaches us here, that though God had severely punished
the sins of the people, and had resolved to punish them in future, even
so as to destroy their city, there would yet be a place for mercy after
the people had been chastised.

<span id="iii.xlviii-p7"></span>He had said before that God’s covenant
with Abraham’s children could no more fail than the laws of nature: he
now says, that if any could measure the heaven, and investigate the
foundations of the earth, that is, penetrate into the very center of the
earth, then, he says, *I will reject the seed of Israel* But God brings
before us these strange and impossible things, that we may know that he
will at length be reconciled to his people after having justly punished
them. And this promise could not have afforded any consolation to
hypocrites, because God does not include the whole seed of Abraham, but
says, that he would not allow the whole seed of Abraham to perish, for
some remnant would continue, according to what is said by Isaiah,

<span id="iii.xlviii-p8"></span>“Though thy people were as the sand of
the sea,  
a remnant shall be saved.” (<span id="iii.xlviii-p8.2"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.xlviii-p8.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.xlviii-p9"></span>God then does not here affirm that he
would be merciful to all, but that there would be still some remaining,
so that the name of the people would continue immortal: in short, he
promises that the Church would be saved, but that the number would be
small.

<span id="iii.xlviii-p10"></span>We now perceive the design of the
Prophet: he doubtless had regard to the faithful, who might have been
overwhelmed with despair, on seeing themselves driven far away from
their own country, and having no hope of a return. Then he testifies
that God had such a care for the safety of the faithful, that he would
gather the scattered seed.

<span id="iii.xlviii-p11"></span>But we must bear in mind what we have
said, that this promise is to be confined to the elect alone, for they
were alone capable of receiving this favor. As to the unbelieving, who
were perverse in their wickedness, God might have wholly cut them off,
and yet save the remnants of grace.

<span id="iii.xlviii-p12"></span>Now there is no need here to enter into
a subtle discussion, whether the center of the earth can be found out.
The philosophers do indeed bring some probable reasons as to the extent
of the heavens, and the dimension of the earth is also conjectured by
them. But the Prophet’s purpose was to declare, according to the common
and popular mode of speaking, that God’s mercy would be perpetual and
immeasurable towards the children of Abraham, like the immensity of the
earth and the heavens, which exceeds the comprehension of the human
mind.

<span id="iii.xlviii-p13"></span>He adds, *On account of all the things
which they have done;* that is, though they have deserved to die
eternally a hundred times, I will yet have a regard to my covenant and
my mercy. The Prophet then designedly sets before us here the sins of
the people, that we may know that God’s mercy would be very great, as
that the whole mass of so many evils would not hinder God to forgive
them. This is the reason why he says, *on account of all* the things
which they have done. It now follows, —

<span id="iii.xlix"></span>

<span id="iii.xlix-p1"></span><span id="iii.xlix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038.md)<span
id="iii.xlix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlix-p2"></span>**38**. Behold, the days come, saith the
LORD, that the city shall be built to the LORD, from the tower of
Hananeel unto the gate of the corner.

<span id="iii.xlix-p3"></span>**38**. Ecce dies *(addunt alii* <span
id="iii.xlix-p3.1"></span>באים*, veniunt)* dicit Jehova, et edificabitur
urbs Jehovae e turri Chananeel usque ad portam anguli:

<span id="iii.xlix-p4"></span>**39**. And the measuring line shall yet
go forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to
Goath.

<span id="iii.xlix-p5"></span>**39**. Et exibit adhuc funiculus mensurae
coram ipso (vel, coram ipsa porta) et usque ad collem Gazeb, et
circumdabit Goathath,

<span id="iii.xlix-p6"></span>**40**. And the whole valley of the dead
bodies, and of the ashes, and all the fields unto the brook of Kidron,
unto the corner of the horse-gate toward the east, *shall be* holy unto
the LORD; it shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever.

<span id="iii.xlix-p7"></span>**40**. Et omnem vallem (alii legunt in
nominativeocasu, et omnis vailis) cadaverum et cineris, et omnes
regiones (vel, agri) ad torrentem Kedron usque ad angulum portae equorum
versus orientem, sanctitas Jehovae; non evelletur, et non destructur
amplius in perpetuum.

<span id="iii.xlix-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.xlix-p9"></span><span id="iii.xlix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlix-p10"></span>Here the Prophet speaks of the rebuilding
of the city. I doubt not but that his object was to shew them that the
largeness and splendor of the city after the return of the people would
not be less than it had been under David in its most flourishing
condition. We must, however, first speak of the words before we proceed
to the subject.

<span id="iii.xlix-p11"></span>*Behold, the days are coming, saith
Jehovah, and built shall be the city* It was not as yet destroyed; but
the Prophet intimated that its utter ruin was nigh at hand; he therefore
makes now their hope to depend on God’s mercy alone, as to the
deliverance of the people from exile: *Built* then *shall be the city to
Jehovah from the tower of Hananeel,* etc. This tower was, no doubt,
placed in the wall of the city. Almost the same prediction is found in
<span id="iii.xlix-p11.1"></span>[Zec
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.xlix-p11.1"></span>, though there is some diversity in the
words; but both the Prophets refer to the same thing. Zechariah’s object
was to animate the people under this circumstance, because the beauty,
greatness, and extent of the city did not at first correspond with what
it had formerly been. He then promises that its glory would at length be
the same as it had been; and he names there the *tower of Hananeel*
Jeremiah adds, *to the gate of the corner* The corner, <span
id="iii.xlix-p11.2"></span>הפנה *ephene,* is in the singular number; but
in Zechariah it is <span id="iii.xlix-p11.3"></span>הפנים *ephenim,* in
the plural; and it is thought that corners or corner is thus called
metaphorically, because a corner shews two faces while it stands out,
and thus two parts appear; but whether it be the gate of the corner or
of the corners, it makes but little difference.

<span id="iii.xlix-p12"></span><span id="iii.xlix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlix-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *Yet go forth shall
the line of measure before him* Some apply this to the gate, because
from the gate the line was to be extended to *the hill Gareb, and go
round to Goath* Of these names of places I cannot say much, for we do
not know the ancient situation of the city; and the Jews themselves,
when they make conjectures about these uncertain things, shew only their
own ignorance. However, the greater part of interpreters understand
this, — that the city was to be large, as though God promised that he
would extend it beyond the walls; and this they illicit from the verb
<span id="iii.xlix-p13.1"></span>יצא *itsa, go forth shall the line,* or
cord, *of measure* But when the Prophet says *yet,* he compares the
ancient greatness of the city with that which he perceives it to be
hereafter. Then Zechariah seems to promise that it would be such a city
as would contain the same measure; for he says,

<span id="iii.xlix-p14"></span>“Inhabited shall the city be under
itself,”

<span id="iii.xlix-p15"></span>or in its own place. (<span
id="iii.xlix-p15.1"></span>[Zec
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#006)<span id="iii.xlix-p15.1"></span>.md)
As then Zechariah promises that the city would occupy the same place as
formerly, I do not conclude anything else from the words of our Prophet,
especially as the particle *yet* intimates the same thing. When it is
said *before him,* I apply this to God and not to the gate; for mention
is previously made of God, *Built shall be the city to Jehovah;* and
then he adds, *before him* I have no doubt but that the Prophet here
bids the Israelites to raise up their eyes to God, that they might
expect from him what was incredible according to the comprehension of
men and of the flesh: then *before him,* that is, when God restores the
city, then *Go forth shall the line,* that is, he will extend the line
to *the hill Gareb, and surround Goath*

<span id="iii.xlix-p16"></span><span id="iii.xlix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xlix-p17"></span>He then adds, *And the whole valley* Some
read, “the whole valley shall be holiness to Jehovah:” and it may be
suitably taken, that all the places near to the city were to be holy to
God; but this verse may be connected with the preceding, as though he
said, extended shall be the line to the *whole valley of the carcases
and of the ashes* The word <span id="iii.xlix-p17.1"></span>דשן*,
dashin,* means ashes and fatness; but here it is to be taken for ashes;
and it is thought that the place was so called, where they were wont to
throw the ashes gathered from the altar, after the sacrifices were
burnt: as then there was there a great heap of ashes, the place had this
name given to it. Another place was also called the place of carcases,
because there a host of enemies had been slain by an angel, in the reign
of Hezekiah. As then a great and a memorable slaughter had taken place
there, it is thought that it received this name, in order that God’s
favor might remain known to posterity. If then this name became the
monument of God’s favor, Hezekiah, I have no doubt, was the cause of it.

<span id="iii.xlix-p18"></span>It is then added, *and all the regions to
the brook Kidron* It is probable enough that the places here named were
outside of the city, for we know that the brook Kidron was not within
the city. Then he adds, *to the corner of the gate of the horses* It is
thought that through this gate went forth the chariots of the king when
he wished to exercise his horses. It might have been the market-place
for horses. Conjectures only have place here; for no one knows of a
certainty whether the king had a place of exercise for his horses. But
this gate looked towards the east. He says that all the places would be
*holiness to Jehovah;* and then he promises them a quiet and a perpetual
condition, *It shall not be cut off nor destroyed any more for ever;*
for which it is said by Zechariah, “there shall be no more <span
id="iii.xlix-p18.1"></span>חרם *cherim,* destruction.”  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md)

<span id="iii.xlix-p24"></span>We now see the design of the Prophet:
after having spoken of the return of the people, he adds that the city
would again become splendid and large, as it had been; for the land
continued in a state of disorder until the restoration of the city, as
God had there chosen a habitation for himself. And as the Temple had
been built there, it behoved the Israelites, wherever they dwelt, ever
to direct their eyes to the Temple and the sanctuary of God, that they
might live under his protection. Except, then, the city had been built
again, the goodness of God could not have been really enjoyed; for a
sort of desolation would have otherwise ever presented itself to the
eyes of the people, as the city was as it were the banner under which
God protected them. This then is the reason why the Prophet expressly
announced this prophecy respecting the future restoration of the city.

<span id="iii.xlix-p25"></span>Now, when he says that the *city would be
built to Jehovah,* he intimates what was especially expected by the
Jews, that that city would again be holy; for if it only flourished in
wealth and power like other cities, it would have been but a small
comfort to the Israelites. But he points out here a difference between
Jerusalem and all heathen cities; for God was, as it were, the architect
of that city, as it is said in the Psalms,

<span id="iii.xlix-p26"></span>“He himself founded it,” (<span
id="iii.xlix-p26.1"></span>[Ps
87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005)<span id="iii.xlix-p26.1"></span>.md)

<span id="iii.xlix-p27"></span>and further,

<span id="iii.xlix-p28"></span>“His foundations are on the holy
mountains,”

<span id="iii.xlix-p29"></span>and this ought to be understood of
himself. (<span id="iii.xlix-p29.1"></span>[Ps
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)<span id="iii.xlix-p29.1"></span>.md)
The meaning is, that God would again care for that city, as the Temple
would become as it were his royal throne and earthly sanctuary. At the
same time when the Prophet affirms that the extent of the city would not
be less than it had been, we see that this prophecy must necessarily be
referred to the kingdom of Christ: for though Jerusalem before Christ’s
coming was eminent and surrounded by a triple wall, and though it was
celebrated through all the East, as even heathen writers say that it
excelled every other city, yet it was never accomplished, that the city
flourished as under David and Solomon.  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) We must then necessarily come to the
spiritual state of the city, and explain the promise as the grace which
came through Christ.

<span id="iii.xlix-p31"></span>But we must especially notice what is
said, that it would be *holiness to Jehovah,* and also that no ruin or
destruction would be dreaded any more. Had the condition of the elect
people been the same as that of other nations, the promise of
restoration would have been small and of no great moment; for it would
have been better for them to dwell in exile where they inhabited a
pleasant and fertile country. But the Prophet here commends a privilege
with which God had favored the children of Abraham above all other
nations, when he adopted them as his peculiar people. There is however
to be understood an implied contrast between the profanation which then
prevailed, and the sanctification which is here promised. The Jews had
so polluted the land that it differed nothing from other countries; and
God, as Ezekiel says, had thence migrated, (<span
id="iii.xlix-p31.1"></span>[Eze
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#006)<span id="iii.xlix-p31.1"></span>.md)
and we know that the Temple was called by the prophets the den of
robbers, (<span id="iii.xlix-p31.2"></span>[Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)<span id="iii.xlix-p31.2"></span>.md)
and that the city was also compared to Sodom and Gomorrah. (<span
id="iii.xlix-p31.3"></span>[Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span id="iii.xlix-p31.3"></span>.md)
Hence the Prophet here promises that the city, with its whole vicinity,
would be holy to God, because God would cleanse it from all the
defilements by which it had been polluted: and he also claims this as
his own work, for to sanctify is a work peculiar to himself.

<span id="iii.xlix-p32"></span>The promise of perpetual favor is added,
as it is also done by Zechariah; for it would not be sufficient to have
God’s mercy promised to us for a short time, except its perpetuity were
secured. The Prophet then promises now that the course of God’s benefits
would be permanent;. The city indeed was again destroyed by Titus, and
at length wholly demolished by Adrian; but this fact does not militate
against this promise; for as we have said, God gave some taste of his
favor in the external aspect of the city until Christ came; but after
Christ was manifested, the heavenly Jerusalem became the object to be
sought, for all the types and shadows then ceased. The perpetuity then
of which the Prophet speaks, is that which corresponds with the
character of Christ’s kingdom, and is therefore spiritual. Moreover,
this passage teaches us that the Church will be perpetual, and that
though God may permit it to be terribly shaken and tossed here and
there, there will yet be ever some seed remaining, as long as the sun
and the moon shall shine in the heavens, and the order of nature shall
continue; so that all the elements, everything we see with our eyes,
bear evidence to the perpetuity of the Church, even that it will ever
continue: for though Satan and all the world daily threaten its ruin,
yet the Lord will in a wonderful manner preserve it to the end, so that
it will never perish. This is the import of the passage. Another
prophecy follows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc20002.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iii.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span> The early versions and the *Targum* vary
much as to the meaning of this and the following verse. The nearest to
the Original, as a whole, is the *Vulg.;* the *Sept.* go wholly astray.
Of all the expositions which have been given, that of *Calvin* seems the
best, as it corresponds more with the Hebrew. I render the second verse
thus, —

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>Thus saith Jehovah, — Find favor in the
wilderness Did the people, the remnants of the sword, When proceeding to
his rest *was* Israel.

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>I take <span id="iii.i-p11.1"></span>הלוך as
a participle, the auxiliary verb being understood, as the case often is
in Hebrew. Preceded by a preposition, and followed by a pronoun, <span
id="iii.i-p11.2"></span>הרגיע is a verb in the infinitive mood, used as
a noun. Twelve MSS., says *Blayney,* have <span
id="iii.i-p11.3"></span>הלך a past tense in *Kal:* if so, then the
meaning would be more striking, though somewhat elliptical, —

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>Proceed (or advance) to his rest did Israel.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>As though he had said, “The people, who
escaped the sword of Pharaoh and the slaughters which happened to them,
found favor during their passage through the wilderness, and
notwithstanding all opposition, Israel advanced forward to his promised
rest.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc20002.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span> I find nothing satisfactory as to this
verse, except the explanation here given, and it is that of the
*Targum.* The first clause is the people’s cavilling answer to what is
declared in the foregoing verse. Jacob is the person introduced, as
representing the people. He says, it is indeed true, —

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span>“At a remote period Jehovah appeared to
me.”

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>Then the rejoinder to this is exactly
suitable, —

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>But with perpetual love have I loved
thee,  
Therefore have I prolonged to thee mercy.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span>Or, “extended to thee mercy,” (see <span
id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md)<span
id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>,) or, “continued to thee mercy,” or, according
to *Blayney,* “lengthened out mercy to thee.” Now there is a consistency
in the whole passage, according to this view, and also in what follows,
“I will again build thee,” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc20002.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span> See <span id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ex
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020.md)<span id="iii.iii-p8.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p8.2"></span>[Jud
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034.md)<span id="iii.iii-p8.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p8.3"></span>[1Sa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.iii-p8.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.iii-p8.4"></span>[Ps
68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025.md)<span id="iii.iii-p8.4"></span>.
“Tabrets” or timbrels were carried in one hand, and beaten by the
fingers of the other. It was a hoop with bits of brass, and over this
hoop parchment was distended; they were very like what are now called
tambourins. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc20002.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span> This verb seems not to have been rightly
understood by the authors of the early versions, nor by the writer of
the *Targum.* Their imperfect knowledge of Hebrew frequently appears. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc20002.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p14"></span> The verb for “cry” is either in the past
tense or in the imperative mood. As there are so many imperatives in
this passage, it seems that this is an imperative too. It appears that
the latter part of the last verse, this verse, and that which follows,
contain what would be addressed to the people after their return. In no
other way can the verbs be grammatically rendered. The whole address is
as follows, —

<span id="iii.vii-p15"></span>“Plant, O ye planters, and eat the fruit;

<span id="iii.vii-p16"></span>**6.** For come is the day: Call ye, O
watchmen, on mount Ephraim, ‘Arise, and let us go into Sion, to Jehovah
our God;’

<span id="iii.vii-p17"></span>**7.** For thus has Jehovah said, Shout
ye, ‘To Jacob *there is* joy,’ And cry it aloud amont the chief of the
nations; Publish, exultingly proclaim, and say, ‘Saved hath Jehovah thy
people, The remnant of Israel.’”

<span id="iii.vii-p18"></span>The passage is a sort of an episode. What
follows seems well connected with the former part of the 5th verse
(<span id="iii.vii-p18.1"></span>[Jer
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005)<span id="iii.vii-p18.1"></span>.md).

<span id="iii.vii-p19"></span>“Eat the fruit,” is the meaning, and not
the literal version, which can hardly be given: it is so rendered by
*Blayney.* “Call ye,” or, proclaim, or, give the invitation. The news
was to be made known “among the chief of the nations,” as it is evident
from the 10th verse (<span id="iii.vii-p19.1"></span>[Jer
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010.md)<span
id="iii.vii-p19.1"></span>). “Saved,” etc., so the Sept. and the
*Targum,* and more consistent with the context than “save;” but both
have “his,” *i.e.,* God’s, instead of “thy people,” *i.e.,* Jacob’s. The
verb <span id="iii.vii-p19.2"></span>הללו means not only to praise, but
also to boast, to exult, and here evidently to proclaim with exultation
or triumph. It is rendered here “sing ye,” by the *Vulg.* and *Syr.*

<span id="iii.vii-p20"></span>It is worthy of notice, that in this
episode the particulars, mentioned in the 4th verse (<span
id="iii.vii-p20.1"></span>[Jer
31:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004.md)<span
id="iii.vii-p20.1"></span>), and the beginning of the 5th, are referred
to in their reversed order. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc20002.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iii.x-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p10"></span> The *Targ.* and the Versions, excepting the
*Vulg.,* give a similar meaning to these two clauses. They give the
sense of “departing” to the first verb, while it commonly has the sense
of “coming.” It is also in the future tense, and therefore cannot refer
to the departing of the Israelites, who are meant here, for they had
already gone into exile. Their return is no doubt what is spoken of,
which would be attended with “weeping,” not for joy, but for their sins,
as it is distinctly expressed in verses 18 and 19 (<span
id="iii.x-p10.1"></span>[Jer
31:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md)<span
id="iii.x-p10.1"></span>); and also with entreaties or supplications.
And it is better with *Venema* to join the two words with “coming,” —

<span id="iii.x-p11"></span>With weeping shall they come and with
supplications;  
I will bring them, I will lead them,  
By streams of water, in a straight way;  
They shall not stumble in it.

<span id="iii.x-p12"></span>He promises two things, to “bring” and to
“lead;” then the leading refers to the streams of water, and the
bringing to the straight way; which is a kind of arrangement that is
often to be met with in Scripture. Two things, especially necessary for
travelers, are promised, water and a good road. “Straight” seems to
apply to the surface of the road as well as to its sides; hence some
render it “smooth” or even, such as would have nothing that might cause
one to stumble. — Ed.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc20002.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iii.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x-p20"></span> What is here said is no doubt true: but the
auxiliary verb is, “I was,” not “I shall be;” and so it is rendered by
the *Sept., Vulg.,* and *Targ.;* and by the *Syr.,* I am. Then the
Versions, very incorrectly, give the next clause, in which there is no
verb, in the present tense, while it ought to be in the past tense, like
the foregoing. The words literally are, —

<span id="iii.x-p21"></span>For I was (or, have been) to Jacob a
Father,  
And Ephraim, my first-born he *(i.e. was* he.)

<span id="iii.x-p22"></span>And to this purpose has *Blayney* rendered
the passage. Whenever the auxiliary verb is understood, its tense must
be regulated by the context. On “first-born,” see <span
id="iii.x-p22.1"></span>[Exod. 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#023.md)<span id="iii.x-p22.1"></span>, and
<span id="iii.x-p22.2"></span>[1Ch
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.x-p22.2"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc20002.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv-p8"></span> The difference between the two verbs seems
to be this:, <span id="iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>פדה is to rescue, to free,
to deliver, either by force or by a ransom; but <span
id="iii.xiv-p8.2"></span>גאל is to recover what one has a right to, and
this also either by force or by a ransom. So that the latter implies a
claim or right which is not intimated by the former, —

<span id="iii.xiv-p9"></span>For Jehovah will deliver Jacob,  
And recover him from a hand stronger than his own.

<span id="iii.xiv-p10"></span>Forcible deliverance is no doubt meant
here; and the latter verb is very striking, as it implies that God was
vindicating his own right in extricating Jacob from the grasp of a hand
stronger than his own. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc20002.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="iii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p11"></span> The verb <span
id="iii.xv-p11.1"></span>גהר rendered here, “flow together,” has another
meaning, “to be enlightened” or illuminated, (see <span
id="iii.xv-p11.2"></span>[Ps 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005.md)<span
id="iii.xv-p11.2"></span>;) and light in Scripture means comfort,
delight, or enjoyment. It is so taken by the *Syriac* and the *Targ.,*
and more suitably to the words which follow than in the sense here
given, —

<span id="iii.xv-p12"></span>And they shall be comforted by the bounty
of Jehovah,  
With corn, and with new wine, and with oil,  
Also with the young of the flock and of the herd;  
And their soul shall be like a watered garden,  
And they shall again hunger no more.

<span id="iii.xv-p13"></span>Or,

<span id="iii.xv-p14"></span>And they shall again feel want no more.

<span id="iii.xv-p15"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc20002.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="iii.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xv-p21"></span> The verb <span
id="iii.xv-p21.1"></span>דאב, here used, does not mean to mourn or to
“sorrow,” though this is the idea given to it by the *Targ.* It is
rendered “hunger,” by the *Sept.* and *Vulg.* According to *Parkhurst,*
its real meaning is, “to faint or fail through weariness, hunger, or
terror.” *Blayney* renders, “pine for hunger.” See the previous note. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc20002.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="iii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xvi-p8"></span> This clause may be rendered thus, —

<span id="iii.xvi-p9"></span>For I will turn their mourning into
rejoicing,  
And I will comfort them and cheer them above their sorrow.

<span id="iii.xvi-p10"></span>That is, “I will give them comfort and joy
more than the sorrow which they have had.” The preposition <span
id="iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>מ, has often the meaning of *above* or *more
than.* See <span id="iii.xvi-p10.2"></span>[De
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xvi-p10.2"></span>.
Their sorrow had been great, but the promise here is, to give them in
proportion a comfort and a joy still greater. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc20002.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iii.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p12"></span> “To be not,” according to the usage of the
Scripture, means either dead or absent. See <span
id="iii.xx-p12.1"></span>[Ge
42:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036.md)<span id="iii.xx-p12.1"></span>.
Joseph was not, he being dead; and Simeon was not, he being absent in
Egypt. To be not here refers to the absent, those driven into exile; but
the passage, as quoted by Matthew, refers to such as were dead. The
similarity was only in part, that is, as to the weeping. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc20002.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iii.xx-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p14"></span> The quotation in Matthew is neither from
the Hebrew nor from the *Sept.* It is substantially correct, but not
verbally; the sense and not the words, seems to have been chiefly
regarded by the Apostles. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc20002.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iii.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xx-p16"></span> “Ramah” is found in the *Sept.,* the
*Syr.,* and the *Targ.;* but “on the height,” or, on high, is the
*Vulg*. It seems better to retain the proper name, “Ramah.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc20002.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iii.xxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxi-p8"></span> Or the words may be rendered, “There is a
hope for thy posterity.” So *Gataker,* not without reason, renders the
words. The following clause explains what this *“hope”* was. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc20002.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="iii.xxii-p8.7"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p9"></span> The idea of “transmigrating” is alone
given by the *Vulg.,* the other versions and the *Targ.* have
“lamenting:” and the latter is more consonant with the context, and has
been adopted by almost all modern commentators. It is used in <span
id="iii.xxii-p9.1"></span>[Jer
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.xxii-p9.1"></span>,
in the sense of being moved or affected for another, of sympathizing or
condoling. It is there in its simple form, that is, in *Kal.* As it is
here in *Hithpael,* its meaning is, self-condoling, or condoling
himself, — an idea which is very expressive, and is more fully explained
in the next verse. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc20002.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iii.xxii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p11"></span> This is no doubt the right rendering,
and not, “Thou art Jehovah my God.” So in the first commandment, the
version ought to be, “I Jehovah,” or, I the Lord, “am thy God.” The
meaning is not, that he is Jehovah, but that he who is Jehovah is our
God. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc20002.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iii.xxii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxii-p15"></span> The *Vulg.* and the *Targ.* favor this
view of a different sense of the same verb in the second clause. The
*Sept.* retain the same meaning. There is no need of altering the sense;
indeed, another sense does not so well comport with the passage. He says
that God had chastised him, and that he was chastised as an untamed, or
rather untrained steer or bullock, implying that he was compelled to
bear the yoke, and also that he had been brought to submit to it: hence
the prayer that follows, “turn,” or rather, restore, etc. The verb <span
id="iii.xxii-p15.1"></span>יסר means to correct rather than to chastise,
even to correct by the rod, or by the goad; and then to teach as the
effect of correction, —

<span id="iii.xxii-p16"></span>Thou hast corrected me;  
Yea, I was corrected like a steer, not trained:  
Restore thou me, and I shall be restored;  
For thou, Jehovah, art my God.

<span id="iii.xxii-p17"></span>After a confession with regard to
correction, a confession that intimates that it had its proper effect, a
prayer for restoration seems suitable, and that prayer is founded on the
fact that Jehovah was their God. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc20002.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iii.xxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxv-p13"></span> What *Calvin* teaches here is
indisputable, but whether the passage warrants the view he takes of it,
is another thing, though most commentators have taken the same view. The
versions, especially the *Vulg.,* seem to have suggested this
explanation by giving to the verb <span id="iii.xxv-p13.1"></span>שוב,
in the former verse, the meaning of turning or conversion, instead of
returning or restoring, agreeably with the whole context, see verse 17th
(<span id="iii.xxv-p13.2"></span>[Jer
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.xxv-p13.2"></span>). *Gataker* suggested this idea; and it was
afterwards fully adopted by *Venema:* and, according to their views I
render this verse as follows, —

<span id="iii.xxv-p14"></span>For after I returned to myself, I
repented,  
And after I knew myself, I smote my thigh;  
I was ashamed and even confounded,  
Because I have borne the reproach of my youth.

<span id="iii.xxv-p15"></span>The *Vulg.* renders the first words,
“After thou hast turned,” or converted “me (convertisti me;)” the
*Sept.,* “After my captivity;” the *Syr.,* “After that I was converted;”
and the *Targ.,* “When we return to the Law.” Literally the words are,
“After my returning,” which, according to the Hebrew idiom may be
rendered, “After returning to myself,” as in the following line, “after
my knowing,” means evidently “after knowing myself.”

<span id="iii.xxv-p16"></span>The two verses contain the language of the
penitent, praying for restoration to their own land: and two reasons are
assigned for this prayer, — because Jehovah was their covenanted God, —
and because they repented, for to such had restoration been promised:
Hence for is used twice; it is therefore not right to render <span
id="iii.xxv-p16.1"></span>כי at the beginning of the 19th verse (<span
id="iii.xxv-p16.2"></span>[Jer
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.xxv-p16.2"></span>), verily or surely. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc20002.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p15"></span> This verse has been variously explained.
The two questions are taken by *Calvin* and by others as strong
negatives: but this is not always the ease; both <span
id="iii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>ה and <span id="iii.xxvi-p15.2"></span>אם are
often taken as strong affirmatives. See <span
id="iii.xxvi-p15.3"></span>[Jer
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="iii.xxvi-p15.4"></span>[1Sa
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p15.4"></span>;
<span id="iii.xxvi-p15.5"></span>[Eze
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#030.md)<span
id="iii.xxvi-p15.5"></span>; <span id="iii.xxvi-p15.6"></span>[Am
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p15.6"></span>.
This sense is what the context requires; for this verse is an answer to
penitent Ephraim. Neither the *Sept.,* nor the *Vulg.,* nor the *Syr.,*
nor the *Targ.* retain the interrogatory form: but they retain the
meaning, if the questions be taken affirmatively, not otherwise. The
next words I render thus, —

<span id="iii.xxvi-p16"></span>For since my words *are* in him,  
Remembering I will still remember him.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p17"></span>This is according to the *Sept.,* and the
general drift of the *Targ.* The *Syr.* gives another meaning, —

<span id="iii.xxvi-p18"></span>For at the time when I speak against
him,  
Remembering I still remember him.

<span id="iii.xxvi-p19"></span>There are no other versions which come so
near to the original. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc20002.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iii.xxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvi-p21"></span> The word for “sounded,” means to
tumultuate, to be agitated, to be greatly moved or disturbed. It is
rendered by the *Vulg.,* “are troubled — <span
id="iii.xxvi-p21.1"></span>conturbata;” by the *Syr.* and *Targ.,* “are
moved.” It may be rendered “trouble” here. See <span
id="iii.xxvi-p21.2"></span>[Isa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p21.2"></span>
l, where the action of the bowels is compared to the harp, not surely to
its sound, but to the vibration of its cords. See also <span
id="iii.xxvi-p21.3"></span>[Isa.
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015.md), [Cant.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.xxvi-p21.3"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc20002.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="iii.xxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p9"></span>

<span id="iii.xxvii-p10"></span>Raise up for thyself heaps, Fix for
thyself pillars.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p11"></span>Instead of <span
id="iii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>צינים many copies read <span
id="iii.xxvii-p11.2"></span>ציונים see <span
id="iii.xxvii-p11.3"></span>[2Ki
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#017.md)<span
id="iii.xxvii-p11.3"></span>; <span id="iii.xxvii-p11.4"></span>[Eze
39:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.xxvii-p11.4"></span>. That <span
id="iii.xxvii-p11.5"></span>תמרורים cannot mean “bitternesses,” as
rendered by the *Vulg.* and the *Targ.,* is evident from the verb that
precedes it, which means to place, to set, to fix. <span
id="iii.xxvii-p11.6"></span>תמר is the palm-tree; the word then means
palm-tree pillars, or pillars straight and high as the palm-tree. The
remainder of the verse is as follows, —

<span id="iii.xxvii-p12"></span>Set thy heart on the highway, The way
thou didst go;  
Return, O virgin of Israel, return, To thy cities ascend.

<span id="iii.xxvii-p13"></span>The word for “highway” means a raised
road, a road prepared for travelling. The “virgin” here signifies one
that is of an age to be married. When Israel repented, they were in a
fit state to be united to God, as their husband. The last line is
rendered according to the proposed emendation of *Houbigant* and
approved by *Horsley,* <span id="iii.xxvii-p13.1"></span>עלה instead of,
<span id="iii.xxvii-p13.2"></span>אלה which seems to have no meaning. —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc20002.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="iii.xxx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p8"></span> The verb, rendered “going about,” only
occurs here in *Hithpael,* and once in *Kal,* <span
id="iii.xxx-p8.1"></span>[So 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.xxx-p8.1"></span>; where it means to “withdraw,” or recede, or
turn aside. And this sense of withdrawing is what is given to it here
both by the *Sept.,* the *Targ.,* and the *Syr.;* but it is the
withdrawing from accepting the return offered. We may give this version,
—

<span id="iii.xxx-p9"></span>How long wilt thou decline, (i.e., to
return,) O daughter of the restoration?

<span id="iii.xxx-p10"></span>She had been before exhorted to return in
the previous verse: she is now blamed for her unwillingness, which seems
to have arisen from fear, and a sense of weakness. Then comes in most
appropriately what follows, if interpreted according to the explanation
of *Calvin.* The verb <span id="iii.xxx-p10.1"></span>שב, the root of,
<span id="iii.xxx-p10.2"></span>השובבה, means more frequently to turn
to, to return, than to turn away, to apostatize. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc20002.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="iii.xxx-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p16"></span> Whatever may be the meaning of this
clause, it cannot certainly be applied to the miraculous conception of
our Saviour, and for this plain reason, as *Blayney* observes, that the
only thing the passage announces, if viewed in this light, is this, —
that a woman shall conceive a male child, which is nothing new, but a
common event; for the word here for “woman,” is not what signifies a
virgin, but what designates only the sex; it means properly a female as
distinguished from a male. *Henry,* as well as *Blayney* and Adam
*Clarke,* agree materially with *Calvin,* as to the meaning of this
sentence. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc20002.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="iii.xxx-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xxx-p18"></span> The principal objection to this
interpretation has been, that it was not by overcoming their enemies by
force of arms that the Jews returned. The answer to this is, that this
is a sort of proverbial expression, intimating that the weakest would
prevail over the strongest. Besides, though the Jews returned by virtue
of the edict of the king of Persia, yet they had many and strong enemies
to oppose them. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc20002.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iii.xxxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxii-p9"></span> *Blaney* renders the verse, thus, —

<span id="iii.xxxii-p10"></span>And Judah shall dwell in it and all his
cities,  
Husbandmen together, and they shall go about with flocks.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p11"></span>Like *Calvin* he takes “cities” for
citizens; but still there is an inappropriateness in the words. I regard
the word “land” as understood before “Judah,” —

<span id="iii.xxxii-p12"></span>And dwell in it, *the land* of Judah,
And in all his cities together,  
Shall husbandmen; and they shall remove with *their* flocks.

<span id="iii.xxxii-p13"></span>See <span
id="iii.xxxii-p13.1"></span>[Jer.
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.xxxii-p13.1"></span>,where the meaning of what is here said is
made more evident “Remove,” that is, from place to place, as the word
means, for the purpose of feeding their flocks. This betokened a state
of liberty and of security. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc20002.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iii.xxxiii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p11"></span> Both the *Sept.* and Syr. render the
first word “thirsty,” and the second, “hungry,” agreeably with the verbs
which precede them. The “weary” and “sorrowful” of our version are no
doubt wrong; the first, adopted from the *Vulg.;* and the second from
the *Targ.*

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p12"></span>For I will water the thirsty soul, And
every hungry soul will I fill.

<span id="iii.xxxiii-p13"></span>“Soul” here means the person, the
individual, — “I will water him that is thirsty,” etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc20002.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p10"></span> It is difficult to see exactly the
purport of this verse: what does “beheld,” or saw mean? May not the verb
be considered as in *Hophal,* “I was made to see,” or, had a vision? The
verb is often used in this sense: see <span
id="iii.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>[Zec
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.xxxiv-p10.1"></span>.
Then we may give this version, —

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p11"></span>Hereupon I awoke and had a vision;  
And my sleep had been pleasant to me.

<span id="iii.xxxiv-p12"></span>Visions were of two kinds, given in
sleep, and given to persons awake: the previous vision was given to the
Prophet while he was asleep. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc20002.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iii.xxxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxv-p8"></span> I am disposed to render the latter part
of this verse according to the *Syriac,* —

<span id="iii.xxxv-p9"></span>That I will sow, as to the house of Israel
and the house of Judah,  
The seed of man and the seed of beast.

<span id="iii.xxxv-p10"></span>I take <span
id="iii.xxxv-p10.1"></span>את as a preposition, which it often is. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc20002.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvi-p8"></span> The words here used are the very same
with those in <span id="iii.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>[Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.xxxvi-p8.1"></span>,
except the addition, “to afflict;” and yet neither the *Targ.,* nor the
Versions, except the *Syriac,* render them alike, giving in some
instances the meaning of one verb to another, — a proof that they are
very loose versions. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc20002.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p9"></span> *Carm., Lib.* 3, *Od.* 6.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc20002.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iii.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xxxvii-p11"></span> The *Targum* thus interprets this
proverb, “The fathers have sinned, and the children have been smitten.”
“Blunted,” or deprived of feeling, *obstupuerunt,* is both the *Vulg.*
and the *Syr.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc20002.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iii.xl-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xl-p21"></span> This clause, as quoted in <span
id="iii.xl-p21.1"></span>[Heb 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009.md)<span
id="iii.xl-p21.1"></span>, is, “And I regarded them not,” according to
the *Sept.* and the *Syr.,* though the *Vulg.* is the same with our
version. *Houbigant* says, “Read <span id="iii.xl-p21.2"></span>געלתי I
have rejected, I have repudiated.” The only difference is in one letter;
and this word is used by Jeremiah in <span id="iii.xl-p21.3"></span>[Jer
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019.md)<span id="iii.xl-p21.3"></span>.
There would thus be a perfect correspondence, “and I rejected them,
saith Jehovah.”

<span id="iii.xl-p22"></span>“Which my covenant,” in the previous
clause, is the *Vulg.;* but according to the *Sept.,* the *Syr.,* and
the *Targ.,* it is, “because they have broken my covenant,” etc. <span
id="iii.xl-p22.1"></span>אשר is not used, as given in our version, in
connection with a noun that follows, though it is so used with pronouns.
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc20002.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iii.xli-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xli-p11"></span> All the nouns in Hebrew are of the
singular number, — “law, inward part, heart,” and also “iniquity and
sin;” and so are they in the *Vulg.,* except the second, which is
rendered “bowels;” but in the other versions and the *Targ.,* they are
mostly pluralized. The words as quoted in Hebrews are not exactly
according to any of the versions, but for the most part according to
that of the *Sept.*

<span id="iii.xli-p12"></span>There is in many copies a <span
id="iii.xli-p12.1"></span>ו before <span id="iii.xli-p12.2"></span>נתתי,
“I have put,” by which it is turned into a future, “I will even put.”
This seems to be the true reading, —

<span id="iii.xli-p13"></span>I will even put my law in their inmost
part,  
And on their heart will I write it.

<span id="iii.xli-p14"></span>It is the same as if it was said, “I will
put my law in the inmost part of each of them:” the persons are
individualized, in order to shew that the act extends to every one
alike. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc20002.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iii.xliv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xliv-p5"></span> Literally the words are, —

<span id="iii.xliv-p6"></span>And they shall teach no more, a man his
neighbor, And a man his brother, by saying, “Know ye Jehovah;” For all
of them shall know me, From the least of them to the greatest of them,
Saith Jehovah.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc20002.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iii.xlv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iii.xlv-p11"></span> “Ordinance,” and *“ordinances,”* would
perhaps be the best words. The word means a fixed order of things,
sometimes rendered in our version ”statute,” and sometimes “ordinance,”
—

<span id="iii.xlv-p12"></span>Thus saith Jehovah, —  
He who hath appointed the sun for light by day,  
The ordinance of the moon and stars for light by night,  
Who calms the sea when roar do its waves, —  
Jehovah of hosts is his name,

<span id="iii.xlv-p13"></span>Two opposite meanings are given by many
Lexicons to <span id="iii.xlv-p13.1"></span>רגע — to divide, to break,
to cleave, and also to give rest, to calm. *Parkhurst* holds that it has
only the last. However, that it means here to make quiet, or to calm, is
most probable, as God’s restraining power as to the sea is mentioned
before in <span id="iii.xlv-p13.2"></span>[Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022.md)<span id="iii.xlv-p13.2"></span>
as a proof of his greatness.

<span id="iii.xlv-p14"></span>The word for *“ordinance”* before *“moon”*
is left out in the *Sept.,* and in one MS.; and the passage would read
better without it — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc20002.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iii.xlix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlix-p19"></span> The whole of this passage is differently
rendered in the early versions and the *Targum;* some of them evidently
wrong and some doubtful. *Blayney* gives the most literal and most
consistent version. I give the following, —

<span id="iii.xlix-p20"></span>**38.** Behold the days are coming, saith
Jehovah, That built shall the city be for (or to) Jehovah, From the
tower of Hananeel to the gate of the corner:

<span id="iii.xlix-p21"></span>**39.** Yea, go forth again shall the
measuring line From over against it, over the hill of Oareb, And shall
surround Goath

<span id="iii.xlix-p22"></span>**40.** And all the valley of the
carcases and ashes, And all the fields to the river Kidron, To the
corner of the gate of the horses eastward: Holy to Jehovah, it shall not
be rooted up, Nor demolished any more for ever.

<span id="iii.xlix-p23"></span>The 38th verse (<span
id="iii.xlix-p23.1"></span>[Jer
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038.md)<span
id="iii.xlix-p23.1"></span>) contains a general description; this is
particularized in the following verses. The beginning of measuring was
to be at “the tower of Hananeel;” hence “from over against it,” or
before it: the “gate” being feminine cannot be meant; it is then “the
tower.” As to the word for “fields,” the reading of the *Keri* and of
several MSS., countenanced by the *Vulg.,* ought no doubt to be adopted.
“Eastward,” — thus the line came round to the same point where it began;
for the tower of Hananeel was eastward. But what is referred to in the
two last lines? The verbs are in the masculine gender, and “city” is
feminine; and there is nothing in the passage with which they can agree
except the tower of Hananeel. Then this tower seems to stand here for
the rebuilt city; and then rooting up, *i.e.,* undermining the
foundations, and demolishing, are suitably applied to a tower. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc20002.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iii.xlix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xlix-p30"></span> Some think, such as *Gataker* and
*Blayney,* that according to the description here given, the dimensions
of the city are much larger than what they had ever been before. The
“line” was to inclose a part at least of the hill of Gareb, the whole of
Goath, supposed to be Golgotha, the valley of the carcases, and the
fields of Kidron, all which were formerly without the walls of the city.
— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](cc20003.md)
