[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20000)  [Next](cc20002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 30

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1**. The word that came to Jeremiah from the
LORD, saying,

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Sermo qui fuit ad Jeremiam a Jehova
dicendo,

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Thus speaketh the LORD God of Israel,
saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book.

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Sic dicit Jehova, Deus Israel, dicendo,
Scribe tibi omnes sermones quos loquutus sum ad to in libro:

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span>**3**. For, lo, the days come, saith the LORD,
that I will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah,
saith the LORD: and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave
to their fathers, and they shall possess it.

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Quoniam ecce dies veniunt, dicit
Jehova, et reducam captivitatem populi mei Israel et Jehudah, dicit
Jehovah; et reducam eos in terram quam dedi patribus ipsorum et
possidebunt cam.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span><span id="ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>This and the next chapter contain, as we
shall see, a most profitable truth; and that the people might be the
more attentive, God introduced these prophecies by a preface. Jeremiah
spoke many things which afterwards, as it has elsewhere appeared, had
been collected and inserted in one volume by the priests and Levites;
but God reminds us in these words, that the prophecies which are to
follow respecting the liberation of the people, were especially to be
remembered.

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>There is, however, another circumstance to be
noticed. We have seen that such was the stubbornness of the people, that
Jeremiah spent his labor among them in vain, for he addressed the deaf,
or rather stocks and stones, for they were so possessed by stupor that
they understood nothing, for God had even blinded them, a judgment which
they fully deserved. Such was the condition of the people. We must
further bear in mind the comparison between the doctrine of Jeremiah and
the fables of those who fed the miserable people with flatteries, by
giving them the hope of a return after two years. God knew what would be
the event; but the people ceased not to entertain hope and to boast of a
return at the end of two years. Thus they despised God’s favor, for
seventy years was a long period: “What! God indeed promises a return,
but after seventy years who of us will be alive? Hardly one of us will
be found then remaining, therefore so cold a promise is nothing to us.”
They, at the same time, as I have said, were filled with a false
confidence, as with wind, and behaved insolently towards God and his
prophets, as though they were to return sound and safe in a short time.

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>But profane men always run to extremes; at
one time they are inflated with pride, that is, when things go on
prosperously, or when a hope of prosperity appears, and they carry
themselves proudly against God, as though nothing adverse could happen
to them; then when hope and false conceit disappoint them, they are
wholly disheartened, so that they will receive no comfort, but plunge
into the abyss of despair. God saw that this would be the case with the
people, except he came to their aid. Hence he proposes here the best and
the fittest remedy — that the Prophet, as he had effected nothing by
speaking, should write and convert as it were into deeds or acts what he
had spoken,  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) so that after the lapse
of two years they might gather courage, and afterwards acknowledge that
they had been deceived by unprincipled men, and thus justly suffered for
their levity, so that they might at length begin to look to God and
embrace the promised liberation, and not wholly despond. This, then, is
the reason why the Prophet was commanded to write the words which he had
before declared with his mouth.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>Now, as we understand the design of God, let
us learn that when it happens that we go astray and wander after false
imaginations, we are not on that account to cast away the hope of
salvation; for we see that God here stretches forth his hand to those
who had erred, and who had even wilfully cast themselves into ruin, for
they had been more than enough admonished and warned by true and
faithful prophets; their ears they had stopped; their hearts they had
hardened; and yet when they had sought as it were designedly to ruin
themselves, we see how God still recalled them to himself.

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span><span id="ii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>He says that God had commanded him to *write
in a book all the words* which he had heard; and the reason follows,
*For, behold, come shall the days, saith Jehovah, in which I will
restore the captivity of my people Israel and Judah*  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) There is to be understood a contrast between
the restoration mentioned here and that of which the false prophets had
prattled when they animated the people with the hope of a return in a
short time; for, as I have said, that false expectation, when the Jews
sought unseasonably to return to their own country, was a sort of mental
inebriety. But when they found that they had been deceived, despair only
remained for them. Hence the Prophet recalls them here to a quietness of
mind, even that they might know that God would prove faithful after they
found out that they had rashly embraced what impostors had of themselves
*proclaimed* We then see that there is here an implied comparison
between the sure and certain deliverance which God had promised, and the
false and stolid hope with which the people had been inebriated: *come,*
then, *shall the days* Now it appears that two years had taken away
every expectation; for they believed the false prophets who said that
God would restore them in two years; after the end of that time all the
hope of the people failed. Therefore the Prophet here removes that
erroneous impression which had been made on their minds, and he says
that *the days* would *come* in which God would redeem his people; and
thus he indirectly derides the folly of the people, and condemns the
impiety of those who had dared to promise so quick a return.

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span><span id="ii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span>We now, then, see why he says, *come shall
the days;* for every hope after two years would have been extinguished,
had not God interposed. *Come,* then, *shall the days in which I wll
restore the captivity of Israel and Judah* The ten tribes, we know, had
been already led into exile; the tribe of Judah and the half tribe of
Benjamin only remained. Hence the ten tribes, the whole kingdom of
Israel, are mentioned first. The exile of Israel was much longer than
that of Judah. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004)<span id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span>**4**. And these *are* the words that the
LORD spake concerning Israel and concerning Judah.

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span>**4**. Hi vero sunt sermones quos loquutus
est Jehova de Israele et Jehudah (vel, ad Israelera et ad Jehudah:)

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>**5**. For thus saith the LORD; We have heard
a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span>**5**. Certe ita dicit Jehova, Vocem
trepidationis audivimus, pavorem et non pacem (vel, pavoris et non
pacis)

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span>**6**. Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth
travail with child? wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his
loins, as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>**6**. Inquirite et aspicite an pariat
masculus? quare video cunctos viros manibus suis super lumbos tanquam
parturiens (solet mulier, subaudiendum est, vel, sicuti solet mulier
parturiens) et conversae sunt omnes facies in pallorem (vel, in
auriginem, ut alii vertunt, sed nomen palloris melius convenit?)

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span><span id="ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span>Both Jews and Christians pervert this
passage, for they apply it to the time of the Messiah; and when they
hardly agree as to any other part of Scripture, they are wonderfully
united here; but, as I have said, they depart very far from the real
meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span>They all consider this as a prophecy
referring to the time of the Messiah; but were any one wisely to view
the whole context, he would readily agree with me that the Prophet
includes here the sum of the doctrine which the people had previously
heard from his mouth. In the first clause he shews that he had spoken of
God’s vengeance, which rested on the people. But it is briefly that this
clause touches on that point, because the object was chiefly to
alleviate the sorrow of the afflicted people; for the reason ought ever
to be borne in mind why the Prophet had been ordered to commit to
writing the substance of what he had taught, which was, to supply with
some comfort the exiles, when they had found out by experience that they
had been extremely perverse, having for so long a time never changed nor
turned to repentance. The Prophet had before spoken at large of the
vices of the people, and many times condemned their obstinacy, and also
pointed out the grievous and dreadful punishment that awaited them. The
Prophet then had in many a discourse reproved the people, and had been
commanded daily to repeat the same thing, though not for his own sake,
nor mainly for the sake of those of his own age, or of the old. But
after God had destroyed the Temple and the city, his object was to
sustain their distressed minds, which must have otherwise been
overwhelmed with despair. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet here
touches but slightly on the vengeance which awaited the people. There
is, however, as we shall see, great force in this brevity; but he is
much fuller as to the second part, and for this end, that the people
might not succumb under their calamities, but hope in the midst of
death, and even begin to hope while suffering the punishment which they
deserved.

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>Now he says, *Thus saith Jehovah, A cry,*
or, *the voice of trembling*, or *of fear*, *have we heard.* The word
<span id="ii.ii-p13.1"></span>חרדה, *cherede,* is thought to mean
properly that dread which makes the whole body to tremble, and is
therefore rendered trembling. God speaks, and yet in the person of the
people. Why? In order to expose their insensibility; for as they were
obstinate in their wickedness, so they were not terrified by
threatenings, however many and dreadful. God dictated words for them,
for they were altogether void of feeling. We now see why God assumed the
person of those who were secure, though Jeremiah daily represented to
them God’s vengeance as near at hand. The meaning is, that though the
people were asleep in their sins, and thought themselves beyond the
reach of danger, even when God was displeased with them, yet the
threatenings by which God sought to lead them to repentance would not be
in vain. Hence God says, *We have heard the voice of fear;* that is,
“Deride and scoff as you please, or remain insensible in your delusions,
so as to disregard as the drunken what is said, being destitute of
feeling, reason, and memory, yet God will extort from you this
confession, this voice of trembling and fear.”

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span><span id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span>He then adds, *and not of peace* This is
emphatically subjoined, that the Prophet might shake off from the people
those foolish delusions with which they were imbued by the false
prophets. He then says, that they in vain hoped for peace, for they
could not flee from terror and fear. He enhances this fear by saying,
*Inquire and see whether a man is in labor?* Some one renders this
absurdly, “Whether a man begets?” by which mistake he has betrayed a
defect of judgment as well as ignorance; he was indeed learned in
Hebrew, but ignorant of Latin, and also void of judgment. For the
Prophet here speaks of something monstrous; but it is natural for a man
to beget. he asks here ironically, “Can a man be in labor?” because God
would put all men in such pains and agonies, as though they were women
travailing with child. As, then, women exert every nerve and writhe in
anguish when bringing forth draws nigh, so also men, all the men, would
have their hands laid on their loins, on account of their terror and
dread. Then he says, *and all faces are turned into paleness;* that is,
God would terrify them all.

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span>We now understand the meaning of the
Prophet; for as the Jews did not believe God’s judgment, it was
necessary, as the Prophet does here, to storm their hardness. If he had
used a common mode of speaking, they would not have been moved. Hence he
had respect to their perverseness; and it was on this account that he
was so vehement. *Inquire,* then, he says, *and see whether a man is in
labor?* God would bring all the men to a condition not manly, such as
that of a woman in labor, when in her last effort to bring forth, when
her pain is the greatest and the most bitter. Men would then be driven
into a state the most unbecoming, strange, and monstrous. It follows: —

<span id="ii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007)<span id="ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p2"></span>**7**. Alas! for that day *is* great, so
that none *is* like it; it *is* even the time of Jacob’s trouble; but he
shall be saved out of it.

<span id="ii.iii-p3"></span>**7**. Heus, quia magnus hic dies a non esse
sicut ipsum *(hoc est,* ut non sit similis, ut nunquam fuerit similis)
et tempus afflictionis (vel, augustiae), hoc ipsi Jacob. *(hoc est,*
populo Israelitico) et ab ea servabitur.

<span id="ii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.iii-p5"></span><span id="ii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet goes on in this verse to
describe the grievousness of that punishment for which the people felt
no concern, for they disregarded all threatenings, as I have already
said, and had now for many years hardened themselves so as to deem as
nothing so many dreadful things. This, then, was the reason why he dwelt
so much on this denunciation, and exclaimed, *Alas! great is that day:*
“great” is to be taken for dreadful; and he adds, *so that there is none
like it* It was a dreadful spectacle to see the city destroyed, and the
Temple partly pulled down and partly consumed by fire: the king, with
all the nobility, was driven into exile, his eyes were put out, and his
children were slain; and he was afterwards led away in a manner so
degraded, that to die a hundred times would have been more desirable
than to endure such indignity. Hence the Prophet does not say without
reason, that *that day* would be *great,* so that none would be *like
it:* and he said this, to shake away the torpidity of the people, for
they thought that the holy city, which God had chosen for his
habitation, could not fall, nor the Temple perish, he further says, that
it would be a *time of distress* to the people. But at the end of the
verse he gives them a hope of God’s mercy, even deliverance from this
distress. We now, then, see the design of the Prophet in these verses.
 <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) — There will be no Lecture tomorrow
on account of the Consistory.

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we cease not in
various ways perversely to provoke thy wrath against us, — O grant that
we may at length be turned to obedience by thy kind admonitions, and at
the same time submit also to thy just severity, and know that whenever
thou severely chastisest us, we are dealt with as we deserve: may we yet
never despond, but flee to thy mercy, not doubting but that thou in the
midst of wrath rememberest thy paternal love, provided we rely on that
favor which thou hast promised to us through thine only-begotten Son. —
Amen.

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.v-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fourteenth

<span id="ii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008)<span id="ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p2"></span>**8**. For it shall come to pass in that day,
saith the LORD of hosts, *that* I will break his yoke from off thy neck,
and will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves
of him:

<span id="ii.vi-p3"></span>**8**. Et erit die illo, dicit Jehova
exercituum, confringam jugum a collo tuo, et vincula tua disrumpam et
non adigent amplius eum ad servitutem alieni:

<span id="ii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p5"></span><span id="ii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p6"></span>Jeremiah proceeds with what he touched upon
in the last verse, even that the Lord, after having chastised his
people, would at length shew mercy to them, so as to receive them into
favor. He says, in short, that their captivity would not be perpetual.
But we must remember what we have before stated, that is, that
deliverance is only promised to the faithful, who would patiently and
resignedly submit to God and not disregard his paternal correction. If,
then, we desire God to be propitious to us, we must suffer ourselves to
be paternally chastised by him; for if we resist when goaded, no pardon
can by any means be expected, for we then, as it were, wilfully provoke
God by our hardness.

<span id="ii.vi-p7"></span>He therefore says, *in that day,* that is,
when the appointed time was completed. The false prophets inflamed the
people with false expectation, as though their deliverance was to take
place after two years. God bade the faithful to wait, and not to be thus
in a hurry; he had assigned a day for them, and that was, as we have
seen, the seventieth year. He then mentions the *yoke,* that is, of the
king of Babylon, and taking another view, *the chains* The yoke was what
Nebuchadnezzar laid on the Jews; and the chains of the people were those
by which Nebuchadnezzar had bound them. At last he adds, *And rule over
them shall no more strangers* The verb <span id="ii.vi-p7.1"></span>עבד,
*obed,* is to be taken here in a causative sense; even the form of the
sentence shews this, and they who render the words, “and strangers shall
not serve them,” wrest the meaning; for it could not be a promise; and
this is inconsistent with the context, and requires no confutation, as
it is evidently unsuitable. If the verb be taken in the sense of
serving, then “strangers” must be in the dative case. We have seen
before a similar phrase in <span id="ii.vi-p7.2"></span>[Jer
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#014)<span id="ii.vi-p7.2"></span>,
where the Prophet says that neither kings nor strong nations would any
longer rule over the Jews. The same verb is used, and the same form of
expression. *Strangers,* then, *shall make them serve no more;* that is,
they shall not rule over them so as slavishly to oppress them.  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="ii.vi-p12"></span>We now perceive the design of the Prophet;
he exhorts the Jews to patience, and shews that though their exile would
be long, yet their deliverance was certain. It follows, —

<span id="ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009)<span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p2"></span>**9**. But they shall serve the LORD their
God, and David their king, whom I will raise up unto them.

<span id="ii.vii-p3"></span>**9**. Et servient Jehovae Deo suo et Davidi
regi suo quem suscitabo ipsis.

<span id="ii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.vii-p5"></span><span id="ii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p6"></span>The former promise would have been defective
had not this clause been added; for it would not be enough for men to
live as they please, and to have liberty promised them, except a regular
order be established. It would, indeed, be better for us to be wild
beasts, and to wander in forests, than to live without government and
laws; for we know how furious are the passions of men. Unless,
therefore, there be some restraint, the condition of wild beasts would
be better and more desirable than ours. Liberty, then, would ever bring
ruin with it, were it not bridled and connected with regular government.
I therefore said that this verse was added, that the Jews might know
that God cared for their welfare; for he promises that nothing would be
wanting to them. It is then a true and real happiness, when not only
liberty is granted to us, but also when God prescribes to us a certain
rule and sets up good order, that there may be no confusion. Hence
Jeremiah, after having promised a return to the people into their own
country, and promised also that the yoke would be shaken off from their
neck, makes this addition, that having served strangers they would be
now under the government of God and of their own king. Now this
subjection is better than all the ruling powers of the world; that is,
when God is pleased to rule over us, and undertakes the care of our
safety, and performs the office of a Governor.

<span id="ii.vii-p7"></span>We hence see that the design of the Prophet
was to comfort the faithful, not only with the promise of liberty, but
also with this addition, that in order that nothing might be wanting to
their complete happiness, God himself would rule over them. *Serve,*
then, *shall they their God* The word *king* is added, because God
designed that his people should be governed by a king, not that the king
would sit in the place of God, but added as his minister. Now this was
said a long time after the death of David; for David was dead many years
before Jeremiah was born: nor did he live again in order that he might
rule over the people; but the name of David is to be taken here for any
one that might succeed him.

<span id="ii.vii-p8"></span>Now, as God had made a covenant with David,
and promised that there would be always one of his posterity to sit on
his throne, hence the Prophet here, in mentioning David, refers to all
the kings until Christ: and yet no one after that time succeeded him,
for the kingdom was abolished before the death of Jeremiah; and when the
people returned into their own country there was no regal power, for
Zerubbabel obtained only a precarious dignity, and by degrees that royal
progeny vanished away; and though there were seventy chosen from the
seed of David, yet there was no scepter, no crown, no throne. It is
therefore necessary to apply this prophecy to Christ; for the crown was
broken and trodden under foot, as Ezekiel says, until the lawful king
came. He intimated that there was no king to be for a long time, when he
said,

<span id="ii.vii-p9"></span>“Cast down, cast down, cast down the
crown.”  
(<span id="ii.vii-p9.2"></span>[Eze
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)<span id="ii.vii-p9.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.vii-p10"></span>He therefore commanded the name of a king
to be abolished, together with all its symbols, and that not for a short
time but for ages, even until he came forth who had a just right to the
crown or the royal diadem. We hence see that this passage cannot be
otherwise explained than by referring to Christ, and that he is called
David, as the Jews were always wont to call him before Christ appeared
in the world; for they called the Messiah, whom they expected, the Son
of David. We now understand the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="ii.vii-p11"></span>But we may hence gather a very useful
doctrine, even this, — that nothing is better for us than to be in
subjection to God; for our liberty would become that of wild beasts were
God to allow us to live according to our own humor and inclinations.
Liberty, then, will ever be destructive to us, until God undertakes the
care of us, and prepares and forms us, that we may bear his yoke. Hence,
when we obey God, we possess true and real happiness. When, therefore,
we pray, let us learn not to separate these two things which ought
necessarily to be joined together, even that God would deliver us from
the tyranny of the ungodly, and also that he would himself rule over us.
And this doctrine is suitable to our time: for if God were now only to
break down the tyranny of the Pope and deliver his own people, and
suffer them to wander here and there, so as to allow every one to follow
his own will as his law, how dreadful would be the confusion! It is
better that the devil should rule men under any sort of government, than
that they should be set free without any law, without any restraint. Our
time, indeed, sufficiently proves, that these two things have not,
without reason, been joined together; that is, that God would become the
liberator of his people, so as to shake off the yoke of miserable
bondage and to break their chains, and also that he would be a king to
govern his people.

<span id="ii.vii-p12"></span>But we ought also carefully to notice what
follows, — that God would not otherwise govern his Church than by a
king. He designed to give an instance, or a prelude, of this very thing
under the Law, when he chose David and his posterity. But to us
especially belongs this promise; for the Jews, through their
ingratitude, did not taste of the fruit of this promise: God deprived
them of this invaluable benefit, which they might justly and with
certainty have expected. As the favor which they have lost has now been
transferred to us, what Jeremiah teaches here, as I have said, properly
belongs to us; that is, that God is not our king except we obey Christ,
whom he has set over us, and by whom he would have us to be governed.
Whosoever, then, boast that they willingly bear the yoke of God, and at
the same time reject the yoke of Christ, are condemned by this very
prophecy; for it is not God’s will to rule uninterveniently, so to
speak, his Church; but his will is that Christ, called here David,
should be king; unless, indeed, we accuse Jeremiah of stating an
untruth, we must apply the word David to the person of Christ. Since it
is so, God then will not otherwise rule over us than by Christ, even to
the end of the world; we must obey him and render him service.

<span id="ii.vii-p13"></span>He adds, *Whom I will raise up* It was also
the office and work of God to raise up Christ, according to what is said
in the second Psalm,

<span id="ii.vii-p14"></span>“I have anointed my King.”

<span id="ii.vii-p15"></span>We must always come to the fountain of
God’s mercy, if we would enjoy the blessings of Christ, according to
what is said,

<span id="ii.vii-p16"></span>“God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son.”

<span id="ii.vii-p17"></span>We shall, indeed, find in Christ whatever
is necessary for our salvation; but whence have we Christ, except from
the infinite goodness of God? When he pitied us, he designed to save us
by his only begotten Son. Salvation then is laid up for us in Christ,
and is not to be sought anywhere else: but we ought, ever to remember
that this salvation flows from the mercy of God, so that Christ is to be
viewed as a testimony and a pledge of God’s paternal favor towards us.
This is the reason why the Prophet expressly adds, that God would *raise
up a* king to rule over his people. It follows —

<span id="ii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p1"></span><span id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010)<span id="ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p2"></span>**10**. Therefore fear thou not, O my
servant Jacob, saith the LORD; neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I
will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity;
and Jacob shall return, and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none
shall make *him* afraid.

<span id="ii.viii-p3"></span>**10**. Et tu ne timeas, Jacob, serve mi,
dicit Jehova, et ne paveas, Israel, quia ecce ego servans to a
longinquo, et semen tuum e terra captivitatis eorum; et sedebit Jacob et
quiescet et tranquillus erit, et nemo exterrebit (nemo exterrens, *ad
verbum)*

<span id="ii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.viii-p5"></span><span id="ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet enforces his doctrine by an
exhortation; for it would not be sufficient simply to assure us of God’s
paternal love and goodwill, unless we were encouraged to hope for it,
because experience teaches us how backward and slow we are to embrace
the promises of God. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet exhorts
and encourages the faithful to entertain hope. Were there in us that
promptitude and alacrity which we ought to have, we should be content
even with one word; for what can be wished for beyond God’s testimony
respecting his favor? But our listlessness renders many goads necessary.
Hence, when doctrine precedes, it is necessary to add exhortations to
stimulate us; and these confirm the doctrine, so that the grace of God
may flourish effectually in our hearts.

<span id="ii.viii-p7"></span>He addresses “Jacob” and “Israel;” but they
mean the same, as in many other places. These duplicates, as they are
called, are common, we know, in the Hebrew language; for the same words
are repeated for the sake of emphasis. So, in this passage, there is
more force when Jeremiah mentions two names, than if he had said only,
“Fear not thou, Jacob, and be not afraid.” He then says, *Fear not thou,
Jacob; and Israel, be not thou afraid*  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) And he does this, that the Jews might
remember that God had not only been once propitious to their father
Jacob, but many times; for from the womb he bore a symbol of that
primogeniture which God had destined for him; and he afterwards had, for
the sake of honor, the name of Israel given to him. As, then, God had in
various ways, and in succession, manifested his goodness to Jacob, the
people might hence entertain more hope.

<span id="ii.viii-p9"></span>He calls him his *servant;* not that the
Jews were worthy of so honorable a title; but God had regard to himself,
and his gratuitous adoption, rather than to their merits. He did not
then call them servants, because they were obedient, for we know how
contumaciously they rejected both God and his Prophets; but because he
had adopted them. So when David says,

<span id="ii.viii-p10"></span>“I am thy servant, and the son of thine
handmaid,”  
(<span id="ii.viii-p10.2"></span>[Ps
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016)<span
id="ii.viii-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.viii-p11"></span>he does not boast of his obedience, nor
claim to himself any deserving virtue, but, on the contrary, declares,
that before he was created in the womb, he was God’s servant through his
gratuitous adoption. Hence, he adds, “I am the son of thine handmaid,”
as though he had said, “I belong to thee by an hereditary right, because
I am descended from that nation which thou hast been pleased to choose
for thy peculiar people.” We now then see that the name *servant,* ought
not to be understood as intimating the merits of the people, and that
their obedience is not here commended, as though they had truly and
faithfully responded to the call of God, but that their gratuitous
adoption is alone extolled.

<span id="ii.viii-p12"></span>He adds, *Behold, I will save thee from
far* He first declares that he would be ready to save the people when
the suitable time came; for *behold* here intimates certainty. And he
subjoins, *from far,* lest the people should fail in their confidence;
for they had been driven into distant exile; and distance is a great
obstacle. Were any one to promise to us an advantageous retreat, without
calling us away to some unknown country, we could more easily embrace
the promise; but were any one to say, “I promise to you the largest
income in Syria, and you shall have there whatever may be deemed
necessary to make your life happy;” would you not reply, “What! shall I
pass over the sea, that I may live there? it is better for me to live
here in comparative poverty than to be a king there.” As, then, a
difficulty might have presented itself to the Jews, when they saw that
they had been driven away into very remote countries, the Prophet adds,
that this circumstance would be no obstacle so as to prevent God to save
them: *I will save you* then *from far;* as though he had said, that his
hands were long enough, so that he could extend them as far as Chaldea,
and draw them from thence.

<span id="ii.viii-p13"></span>He then adds, *and thy seed from the land
of their captivity* As the expectation of seventy years was long, God
refers what he promises to their seed. There is no doubt but that the
Prophet reminded the Jews, that the time determined by God was to be
waited for in patience, as was the case with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
for though they knew that they would be strangers in the land which God
had promised them, yet they did not on that account despise or disregard
the favor promised them. Abraham received in faith what he had heard
from God’s mouth,

<span id="ii.viii-p14"></span>“I will give thee this land;”

<span id="ii.viii-p15"></span>and yet he knew that he would be there a
stranger and a sojourner. (<span id="ii.viii-p15.1"></span>[Ge
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007)<span id="ii.viii-p15.1"></span>)
His children had to exercise the same patience. Abraham had indeed been
warned of a very long delay; for God had declared that his seed would be
in bondage for four hundred years. (<span id="ii.viii-p15.2"></span>[Ge
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013)<span id="ii.viii-p15.2"></span>)
Here, then, the Prophet exhorts the people of his time to entertain
hope, according to the example of their father, and not to despise God’s
favor, because its fruit did not immediately appear; for Abraham did not
enjoy the land as long as he lived, and yet he preferred it to his own
country; Isaac did the same; and Jacob followed the example of his
fathers. This, then, is the reason why the Prophet mentions *seed,* as
though he had said, “If the fruit of redemption will not come to you,
yet God will not disappoint your hope, for your posterity shall find
that he is true and faithful.”

<span id="ii.viii-p16"></span>If any one had then objected, and said,
“What is that to me?” the objection would have been preposterous; for
why had God promised to their posterity a return to their own country?
was it not thus to testify his love towards them? And whence came their
freedom, and whence God’s paternal love, except from the covenant? We
hence see that the salvation of the fathers was included in the benefit
which their sons enjoyed. And therefore, though the fruition of that
benefit was not visibly granted to the fathers, yet they partook in part
of the fruit, for it was made certain to them, that God would become the
deliverer of his people even in death itself.

<span id="ii.viii-p17"></span>He adds that which is the main thing in a
happy life, that they would be *at rest and in a quiet state,* so that
none would *terrify* them;  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) for a
return to their own country would not have been of any great importance,
without a quiet possession of it. Hence the Prophet, after having said
that God would come to save the people, and that distance would not
prevent him to fulfill and complete what he had promised, now adds, that
this benefit would be confirmed, for God would no more allow strangers
to lead the Jews into exile, or to rule over them as they had done. God
then promises here the continuance of his favor.

<span id="ii.viii-p21"></span>But as this did not happen to the Jews, we
must again conclude that this prophecy cannot be otherwise interpreted
than of Christ’s kingdom. And Daniel is the best interpreter of this
matter; for he says, that the people were to be exposed to many miseries
and calamities after their return, and that they were not to hope to
build the Temple and the city except in great troubles. The Jews then
were always terrified. We also know, that while building the Temple,
they held the trowel in one hand and the sword in the other, for they
often had to bear the assaults of their enemies. (<span
id="ii.viii-p21.1"></span>[Ne
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#017)<span id="ii.viii-p21.1"></span>)
Since, then, the Jews ever suffered inquietude until the coming of
Christ, it follows, that until his coming, this promise was never
accomplished. Then the benefit of which the Prophet speaks here is
peculiar to the kingdom of Christ. Now, since from the time Christ was
manifested to the world, we see that the world has been agitated by many
storms, yea, all things have been in confusion; it follows, that this
passage cannot be explained of external rest and earthly tranquillity.
It ought, therefore, to be understood according to the character of his
kingdom. As, then, Christ’s kingdom is spiritual, it follows that a
tranquil and quiet state is promised here, not because no enemies shall
disturb us or offer us molestation, but because we shall especially
enjoy peace with God, and our life shall be safe, being protected by the
hand and guardianship of God. Then spiritual tranquillity is what is to
be understood here, the fruit of which the faithful experience in their
own consciences, though always assailed by the world, according to what
Christ says,

<span id="ii.viii-p22"></span>“My peace I give to you, not such as the
world gives,”  
(<span id="ii.viii-p22.2"></span>[Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="ii.viii-p22.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.viii-p23"></span>and again,

<span id="ii.viii-p24"></span>“In the world ye shall have tribulation;
but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.” (<span
id="ii.viii-p24.1"></span>[Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="ii.viii-p24.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.viii-p25"></span>It follows —

<span id="ii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)<span id="ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p2"></span>**11**. For I *am* with thee, saith the LORD,
to save thee: though I make a full end of all nations whither I have
scattered thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will
correct thee in measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

<span id="ii.ix-p3"></span>**11**. Quoniam ego tecum, dicit Jehova, ad
servandum to; nam faciam consumptionem in cunctis gentibus, ad quas
dispergam to illuc; atqui tecum non faciam consumptionem, et castigabo
to in judicio, et mundando non mundabo to (vel, purgando non purgabo to,
vel, succidendo non succidam to: dicemus postea de verbo)

<span id="ii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.ix-p5"></span><span id="ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p6"></span>He repeats in other words what we have
already stated, but for the purpose of giving fuller support to
trembling and wavering minds. God then promises that he would be present
with his people to save them. Now as this could not easily be believed,
and as the Jews looking only on their state at that time could not but
despair, the Prophet added this comparison between them and the
Gentiles. The Chaldeans and the Assyrians flourished seventy years in
every kind of wealth, in luxuries, in honor — in short, they possessed
every thing necessary for an earthly happiness. What, then, could the
Jews have thought, but that unbelievers and God’s enemies were happy,
but that they were miserable, being oppressed by hard servitude and
loaded with many reproaches, and living also in poverty, and counted as
sheep destined for the slaughter? When, therefore, all these things were
plain before their eyes, what but despair must have laid hold on their
minds? Therefore God obviates this evil;  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

<span id="ii.ix-p8"></span>And he says that he would *make a
consummation among the nations,* as though he had said, “When I begin to
punish the Gentile nations, I will destroy them with an utter
destruction, no hope will remain for them. But *as to thee, I will not
make a consummation.”* Thus he makes a difference between the punishment
inflicted on the reprobate and ungodly and that by which he would
chastise the sins of his people; for the punishment he would inflict on
the wicked would be fatal, while the punishment by which he would
chastise his Church would be only for a time; it would therefore be to
it for medicine and salvation.

<span id="ii.ix-p9"></span>We now, then, perceive what the Prophet had
in view: he mitigated the bitterness of grief as to the faithful, for
God would not wholly cast them away. And he shews that their scourges
ought to be patiently borne, because they were to hope for an end of
them; but that it would be different when he visited the reprobate,
because he would leave them without any hope. In short, he says, that he
would be a severe judge to the last degree as to the unbelieving, but
that he would chastise his own people as a Father.

<span id="ii.ix-p10"></span>Other passages seem, however, to militate
against this view; for God declares that he would make a consummation as
to his chosen people, as in <span id="ii.ix-p10.1"></span>[Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023)<span id="ii.ix-p10.1"></span>,
and in other places. But the explanation is obvious; for there he refers
to the whole body of the people, which were alienated from him; but here
his word is addressed to the faithful,

<span id="ii.ix-p11"></span>“the remnant of grace,”

<span id="ii.ix-p12"></span>as Paul calls them, (<span
id="ii.ix-p12.1"></span>[Ro 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span
id="ii.ix-p12.1"></span>) We ought, therefore, ever to consider who
those are whom the Prophets address; for at one time they refer to the
promiscuous mass, and at another time they address apart the faithful,
and promise them salvation. Thus, then, we have before seen that God
would make a consummation as to his people, that is, the reprobate; but
the Prophet here turns his discourse to the Church and the seed which
God would preserve in safety among a people apparently cut off and lost.
Whenever, therefore, the devil would drive us to despair, whenever we
are harassed in our minds when God deals with us more severely than we
expect, let this consolation be remembered, that God will not make a
consummation with us; for what is here said of the Church may and ought
to be applied to every individual believer. God, indeed, handles them
often roughly when he sees it necessary for them, but he never wholly
consumes them.

<span id="ii.ix-p13"></span>*I will not make,* he says, *a consummation
with thee, but I will chastise thee in judgment* Here the copulative
ought to be taken as an adversative particle, and “judgment” has the
sense of moderation, as we have seen in <span
id="ii.ix-p13.1"></span>[Jer
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span id="ii.ix-p13.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.ix-p14"></span>“Chastise me, O Lord, but not in thy wrath;”

<span id="ii.ix-p15"></span>he had mentioned “judgment” before. In this
sense is judgment used here, that is, for that moderation which God
adopts towards his chosen, for he is ever mindful of his mercy, and
regards not what they deserve, but what they can bear. When, therefore,
God withholds his hand and gently chastises his people, he is said to
punish them in judgment, that is, moderately. For judgment is not to be
taken here for rectitude, because God never exceeds due limits so as to
be subject to the charge of cruelty; judgment is also opposed to just
rigor, and it is often opposed to injustice; but in this place we are to
understand that the contrast is between judgment and the just rigor of
God. Then judgment is nothing else but the mitigation of wrath.

<span id="ii.ix-p16"></span>At last he adds, *By cleansing I will not
cleanse thee,* or, “by cutting down I will not cut thee down.” The verb,
<span id="ii.ix-p16.1"></span>נקה*, nuke,* means sometimes to cleanse,
or to render innocent; and it means also intransitively to be pure and
harmless; but it is to be taken here transitively. It cannot, then, be
rendered otherwise than “by cleansing I will not cleanse thee,” or, “I
will not cut thee down;” for it has also this meaning, and either of the
two senses is suitable. If we read, “I will not cut thee down,” it is
the continuation of the same subject; “I will chastise thee in judgment,
and I will not therefore cut thee down,” that is, I will not make a
consummation. It would then be, as it is evident, a very suitable
connection, and it would run smoothly were we to read, “I will not cut
thee down.” But the other version is also appropriate, though it may
admit of a twofold meaning; some take it adversatively, “Though I shall
not make thee innocent;” that is, though I shall not spare thee, but
chastise thee moderately; and this intimation was very seasonable; for
the flesh ever seeks impunity. Now God sees that it is not good for us
to escape unpunished when we offend; it is then necessary to bear in
mind this doctrine, that though God will not allow us to be exempt from
punishment, nor indulge us, but smite us with his rods, he is yet
moderate in his judgment towards us. But others refer to this passage in
Isaiah,

<span id="ii.ix-p17"></span>“I made thee to pass through the furnace and
refined thee, but not as silver, otherwise thou wouldest have been
consumed.”  
(<span id="ii.ix-p17.2"></span>[Isa
48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010)<span id="ii.ix-p17.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.ix-p18"></span>God then tries his people, or cleanses them
with chastisements; but how? or, how long? — not as silver and gold, for
that would wholly consume them. For when silver is purged from its
dross, and also gold, the purer and clearer portion remains; but men, as
there is nothing in them but vanity, would be wholly consumed, were God
to try them as silver and gold. But as this interpretation is too
refined, I am more disposed to adopt one of the two first, that is, that
God would not wholly cut them down, though he would chastise them, or,
that though he would not count or regard them wholly innocent, nor so
indulge them as to let them go unpunished, he would yet be merciful and
propitious to them, as he would connect judgment with his chastisements,
that they might not be immoderate.  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)

<span id="ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are born
wholly alienated from thy kingdom and the hope of salvation, and as a
dreadful scattering awaits us except thou gatherest us by the power and
grace of thy Spirit, — O grant, that as thou hast once adopted us as thy
people, and hast been pleased to gather us under the yoke of Christ, we
may remain in obedience to him, and thus continue under thy government,
that after having completed our course in this life, we may at length
come unto that kingdom where we shall enjoy all those good things which
we now only by hope taste, through the same, Christ Jesus our Lord. —
Amen.

<span id="ii.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.xi"></span>

<span id="ii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifteenth

<span id="ii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)<span id="ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p2"></span>**12**. For thus saith the LORD, Thy bruise
*is* incurable, *and* thy wound *is* grievous.

<span id="ii.xii-p3"></span>**12**. Quoniam sic dicit Jehova, gravitas
confractioni tuae *(vel,* fracturae *alii vertunt,* contritionem, *qued
idem est, nam* <span id="ii.xii-p3.1"></span>שבר *significat etiam*
centerere) segra plaga tua.

<span id="ii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p6"></span>The design of the Prophet is first to be
noticed: he was fighting with those impostors who gave hope of a return
in a short time to the people, while seventy years, as it has been said,
were to be expected. The Prophet then wished to shew to the people how
foolishly they hoped for an end to their evils in so short a time. And
this is what ought to be carefully observed, for it was not without
reason that the Prophet dwelt much on this point; for nothing is more
difficult than to lead men to a serious acknowledgment of God’s
judgment. When any thing adverse happens, they are tender and sensitive
as to the evils they endure; but at the same time they look not to God,
and comfort themselves with vain imaginations. It was therefore
necessary for the Prophet to dwell on his doctrine at large; for he saw
that the Israelites promised to themselves a return after two years,
though they had been warned by the Prophets that they were to bear the
scourge of God for seventy years.

<span id="ii.xii-p7"></span>This is the reason why the Prophet speaks
here of the grievousness of evils, not because the Israelites were
insensible, but because they had been credulous, and were still hoping
for a return, so that they deceived themselves with false comfort. He
therefore says, that the *breaking* was *grievous;* some give this
rendering, “Unhealable, or hopeless, is thy bruising.” But <span
id="ii.xii-p7.1"></span>אנוש, *anush,* is here a substantive, for it is
followed by the preposition <span id="ii.xii-p7.2"></span>ל, *lamed;*
nor can what the Prophet says be rendered otherwise than in this manner,
“Grievousness is to thy bruising,” or breaking. He afterwards adds that
the *wound was grievous,* that is, difficult to be healed; for so I
understand the passage.  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) But the end
was to be hoped for; yet the people were not to think it near at hand;
they were, on the contrary, to prepare themselves for patient waiting
until the end prescribed by God had come. It follows, —

<span id="ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013)<span id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p2"></span>**13** *There is* none to plead thy cause,
that thou mayest be bound up: thou hast no healing medicines.

<span id="ii.xiii-p3"></span>**13**. Nemo judicans (hoc est, nemo est
qui judicet) judicium tuum (hoc est, qui suscipiat causam tuam) ad
sanitatem medelae et curatio non sunt tibi (alii vertunt, Nemo judicans
judicium tuum, ut emplastrum adhibeat; sed hoc durius; deinde, medela et
curatio non sunt tibi; sed videtur mihi simplex esse verborum sensus,
quod nemo judicet judicium, deinde quod nihil ad curationem remedii
suppetat)

<span id="ii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet speaks first without a figure,
then he illustrates the simple truth by a metaphor. He says that there
was *no one to undertake the cause* of the people; as though he had
said, that they were destitute of every aid. This was, indeed, in a
measure already evident; but so supine was the security of the people,
that they daily formed for themselves some new hopes. Then Jeremiah
declared what had already in part happened and was still impending; and
thus he proved the folly of the people, who still flattered themselves
while they were involved in evils almost without a remedy. “Thou seest,”
he says, “that there is no one to stretch forth a hand to thee, or who
is ready to help thee; and yet thou thinkest that thou wilt soon be
free: whence is this vain expectation?” He then comes to a metaphor,
*There is no one to apply medicine for thy healing* In one sentence he
includes the whole first chapter of Isaiah, who handles the subject, but
explains more fully his meaning. There is, however, nothing obscure when
the Prophet says that there was no one to heal the evils of the people.
 <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)

<span id="ii.xiii-p14"></span>We must ever bear in mind his object, that
is, that the people were too easily deceived, when they hoped to return
shortly to their own country. But we may hence gather a general truth, —
that men never understand the favor of God until they are subdued by
many and severe reproofs: for they always shun God’s judgment, and then
they become blind to their own sins, and foolishly flatter themselves.
And, further, when they only in words confess that they have sinned,
they think that they have done abundantly enough. They ought therefore
to be urged to the practice and duty of repentance. It afterwards
follows —

<span id="ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014)<span id="ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p2"></span>**14**. All thy lovers have forgotten thee;
they seek thee not; for I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy,
with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude of thine
iniquity; *because* thy sins were increased.

<span id="ii.xiv-p3"></span>**14**. Omnes amici tui obliti sunt tui, et
non requirunt; quia plaga tibi *(hoc est* percussi to) castigtione
crudelis (hominis, *aut,* saevi) propter multitudinem iniquitatum
tuarum, invaluerunt scelera tua.

<span id="ii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet again repeats, that nothing
remained for Israel as coming from men, for no one offered to bring
help. Some, indeed, explain the words as though the Prophet had said,
that friends, as it is usually the case, concealed themselves through
shame on seeing the condition of the people hopeless: for as long as
friends can relieve the sick, they are ready at hand, and anxiously
exert themselves, but when life is despaired of, they no longer appear.
But the Prophet, I have no doubt, condemns here the Jews for the false
confidence with which they had been long fascinated; for we know, that
at one time they placed hope in the Egyptians; at another in the
Assyrians; and thus it happened that they brought on themselves many
calamities. And we have seen elsewhere, in many passages, that these
confederacies are compared to impure lusts; for when the people sought
at one time the friendship of the Egyptians, at another, that of the
Assyrians, it was a kind of adultery. God had taken the Jews under his
care and protection; but unbelief led them astray, so that. they sought
to strengthen themselves by the aid of others. Hence, everywhere in the
Prophets the Egyptians and the Assyrians are compared to lovers. And
this view will suit well here; for it was not enough to point out the
miseries of the people, without making known the cause of them.

<span id="ii.xiv-p7"></span>Then the Prophet refers to those false
counsels which the Jews had adopted, when they thought themselves secure
and safe while the Egyptians, or the Assyrians, or the Chaldeans were
favorable to them. For this reason he says, that all *their friends* had
*forgotten* them, and also that they did not *inquire* for them, that
is, that they had cast off every care for them. And he adds the reason,
because God had *smitten,* the people *with an hostile wound* Here the
Prophet summons them again to God’s tribunal, that they might learn to
consider that these evils did not happen by chance, but that they were
the testimonies of God’s just wrath. God then comes forth here, and
declares himself the author of all those calamities; for the Prophet
would have spoken to no purpose of the miseries of the people, had not
this truth been thoroughly impressed on their minds, — that they had to
do with God.

<span id="ii.xiv-p8"></span>Now, that God calls himself an *enemy,* and
compares himself to a *cruel enemy,* must not be so understood as that
the covenant had been abolished by which he had adopted the children of
Abraham as his own; for he, through his mercy, always reserved some
remnants. Nor ought we to understand that there was excess in God’s
severity, as though he raged cruelly against his people, when he
executed his judgments: but this ought to be understood according to the
common perceptions of men. God also calls elsewhere the Israelites his
enemies, but not without lamentation,

<span id="ii.xiv-p9"></span>“Alas!” he says, “I will take vengeance on
my enemies.” (<span id="ii.xiv-p9.1"></span>[Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024)<span id="ii.xiv-p9.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xiv-p10"></span>He assumed there the character of one
grieving, as though he had said, that he unwillingly proceeded to so
much rigor, for he would have willingly spared the people, had not
necessity forced him to such severity. But, as I have already said, when
God calls himself the enemy of his people, it ought to be understood of
temporal punishment, or it ought to be explained of the reprobate and
lost, who had wholly alienated themselves from God’s favor, and whom God
had also cut off from the body of his Church as putrid members. But as
the Prophet here addresses the faithful, there is no doubt but that God
calls himself an enemy, because, according to the state of things at
that time, the Jews could not have otherwise thought than that God was
angry with them.

<span id="ii.xiv-p11"></span>With regard to *cruel one,* we have already
said, that excess is thereby denoted, as though too much rigor or
severity were ascribed to God: but the Jews could not have been
otherwise awakened to consider their sins, nor be sufficiently terrified
so as to be led seriously to acknowledge the judgment of God. And God
himself, in what follows, sufficiently proves, that though he compares
himself to a severe or cruel man, yet nothing wrong could be found in
his judgments.

<span id="ii.xiv-p12"></span>For he adds, *for the multitude of thine
iniquity, because thy sins have prevailed* Though the Jews thought that
God acted severely, when he threatened them with long exile, here their
mouth was closed by the *multitude* of their *iniquity;* as though he
had said, “Set in a balance on one side, the weight of the punishment of
which ye complain, and on the other side the heap of sins by which ye
have often, and for a long time, provoked my wrath against you.” God
then, by *multitude of iniquity,* shews that it could not be ascribed to
him as a fault that he so severely punished the Jews, because they
deserved to be so punished. And he confirms the same thing in other
words, not that there was anything ambiguous in what he had said, but
because the Prophet saw that he had to do with perverse men. That he
might then reprove their indifference, he says, that their *sins had
grown strong*  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) It follows —

<span id="ii.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015)<span id="ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p2"></span>**15**. Why criest thou for thine affliction?
thy sorrow *is* incurable for the multitude of thine iniquity: *because*
thy sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee.

<span id="ii.xv-p3"></span>**15**. Quid vociferaris propter
confractionem tuam? aeger est *(vel,* gravis) dolor tuus propter
multitu-dinum iniquitatis tuae, quoniam invaluerunt scelera tua, feci
haec tibi.

<span id="ii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p6"></span>The Prophet now anticipates an objection,
lest the Jews should expostulate with God; for it sufficiently appears
that they always complained of God’s extreme severity, when they
indulged themselves in their vices. As soon then as God treated them as
they deserved, they became exasperated and enraged against him. Hence
the Prophet now meets their perverse and unjust complaints, and asks,
why they *cried out for their bruising,* as though he had said, that
these clamors were much too late, when they had passed by the season for
repentance. For God had suspended his extreme threatenings until the
people had betrayed so much obstinacy, that there was no room for mercy.
When, therefore, the people’s wickedness had become unhealable, the
Prophet, as we have seen, proclaimed their exile.

<span id="ii.xv-p7"></span>Now, indeed, he derides their late crying,
for they had been too long torpid in their contempt of God: *Why,* then,
*dost thou cry for thy bruising? grievous is thy sorrow,* or,
grievousness is to thy sorrow;  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) but
*for the multitude of thine iniquity, and because thy sins have grown
strong, have I done these things to thee* Here God frees himself from
the calumnies of the people, and shews that those who murmured or made a
clamor, acted unjustly, having not considered what they merited: for
they were worthy of the heaviest punishment, because they not only in
one way brought ruin on themselves, and more and more kindled God’s
vengeance, but had also for many years hardened themselves in their
sins; and they had, besides, given themselves up, in various ways, to
every kind of wickedness, so that the Prophet justly upbraided them with
a *multitude of iniquity,* and also with a mass of *sins.* God then
says, that he had not exceeded the limits of moderation in the
punishment he inflicted on the people, because their desperate
wickedness and perverseness compelled him. But consolation is
immediately subjoined, —

<span id="ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#016)<span id="ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p2"></span>**16**. Therefore all they that devour thee
shall be devoured; and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall
go into captivity; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all
that prey upon thee will I give for a prey.

<span id="ii.xvi-p3"></span>**16**. Propterea omnes qui devorant to
devorabuntur, et omnes hostes tui, omnes, inquam, in captivitatem ibunt;
et erunt qui to diripiunt in direptionem, et omnes qui to praedantur
erunt in praedam.

<span id="ii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p6"></span>Here, again, the Prophet promises that God
would be gracious to his people, but after a long time, when that
perverseness would be subdued, which could not be soon cured. We ought,
then, ever to bear in mind the difference between the promise of favors,
of which Jeremiah was a witness and a herald, and those vain boastings,
by which the false prophets deceived the people, when they encouraged
them to expect a return in a short time, and said that the term of
deliverance was at hand.

<span id="ii.xvi-p7"></span>And this difference ought to be noticed on
this account, because a most useful doctrine may hence be gathered: the
unprincipled men who basely pretend God’s name, have this in common with
his true and faithful servants, — that they both hold forth the favor of
God: but those who falsely use God’s name bury the doctrine of
repentance; for they seek only to soothe people with flatteries: and as
they hunt for favor, they wholly omit the doctrine that may offend, and
is in no way sweet and pleasant to the flesh. Jeremiah did not, indeed,
deal so severely with the people, but that he gave them some hope of
pardon, and always mitigated whatever severity there was in the doctrine
of repentance: but at the same time he did not, by indulgence, cherish
the vices of the people, as was wont to be done by the false prophets.
But what did these do? they boasted that God was merciful, slow to
wrath, and ready to be reconciled to sinners: hence they concluded that
exile would not be long; and at the same time, as we have said, they
perfidiously flattered the people. So then, it ought to be borne in
mind, that we are not fit to receive the favor of God, nor are capable
of it, so to speak, until all the pride of the flesh be really subdued,
and also all self-security be corrected and removed.

<span id="ii.xvi-p8"></span>We now see why the Prophet subjoined the
promise of favor, after having spoken of the dreadful judgment of God.
But the illative, <span id="ii.xvi-p8.1"></span>לכן *laken,* does not
seem suitable; for how can this verse be connected with the threatenings
which we have noticed? *Therefore they who devour thee shall be
devoured* But *therefore* refers to what he had before said.  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) It is not then strange, that he draws the
inference, — that God having taken vengeance on the wickedness of the
people, would also execute vengeance on their enemies. Then the illative
is not unsuitable, because the time of mercy had arrived when the Jews
became subdued, so as to humble themselves before God and to repent of
their sins.

<span id="ii.xvi-p10"></span>But there is here a common doctrine which
we meet with everywhere in the Prophets, even that God, after having
made a beginning with his Church, becomes then a judge of all nations;
for if he by no means spares his elect, his own family, how can he leave
aliens unpunished? And it is the perpetual consolation of the Church,
that though God employs the wicked as scourges to chastise his people,
vet their condition is not better, for when they have triumphed for a
moment, God will soon bring them to judgment. There is, therefore, no
reason why the faithful should envy their enemies when they are
chastened by God’s hand, and when their enemies exult in their
pleasures; for their prosperity will soon come to an end, and with the
same measure will God mete unto them the reward of the wrong done to his
people.

<span id="ii.xvi-p11"></span>*Whosoever,* then, *devours thee shall be
devoured, and all thine enemies, yea, all, shall go into* captivity;
and, lastly, *they who plunder thee,* etc., which is rendered by some,
“they who tread thee shall be for treading.” But as the verb means
plundering, to avoid repetition, I prefer the former meaning: *“They,*
then, *who spoil thee shall become a spoil,* and *they who plunder thee
shall be for plunder.”* The reason follows, —

<span id="ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017)<span id="ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p2"></span>**17**. For I will restore health unto
thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, saith the LORD; because they
called thee an Outcast, *saying*, this *is* Zion, whom no man seeketh
after.

<span id="ii.xvii-p3"></span>**17**. Quia adducam sanationem tibi, et a
doloribus tuis sanabo to, dicit Jehova; quoniam expulsam vocarunt to
Sion, quam nemo requirit.

<span id="ii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p6"></span>When God promised favor to the Jews, he
referred to their enemies; for it would have been a grievous temptation,
which would have otherwise not only disturbed and depressed their minds,
but also extinguished all faith, to see their enemies enjoying all they
could wish, and successful in everything they attempted, had not this
consolation been granted them, — that their enemies would have at length
to render an account for the wickedness in which they gloried. But now
the main thing is here expressed, — that God, when reconciled to his
people, would heal the wounds which he had inflicted; for he who
inflicts wounds on us, can alone heal us. He exercises judgment in
punishing, he afterwards undertakes the office of a Physician, to
deliver us from our evils. It is, therefore, the same as though the
Prophet had said, “When the right time shall pass away, which God has
fixed as to his people, deliverance is to be hoped for with certainty;
for the Lord has decreed to punish his people only for a time, and not
wholly to destroy them.”

<span id="ii.xvii-p7"></span>*Iwill bring thee,* he says, *healing, and
will heal thee of thy wounds* And this admonition was very necessary,
for the Jews had nearly rotted in their exile when God delivered them.
They might have then been a hundred times overwhelmed with despair; but
God bids them here to raise upwards their minds, so as to expect help
from heaven, for there was none on earth. And he adds, *because they
called thee, Zion, an outcast whom no one seeketh;* that is, of whom, or
of whose welfare, no one is solicitous. He confirms what I have before
said, — that the extreme evils of the people would be no hinderance when
God came to deliver them, but, on the contrary, be the future occasion
of favor and mercy. When, therefore, the people should become so sunk in
misery as to make all to think their deliverance hopeless, God promises
that he would then be their Redeemer. And this is what we ought
carefully to notice: for we look around us here and there, whenever we
hope for any help; but God shews that he will be then especially
propitious to us, when we are in a hopeless state according to the
common opinion of men. It follows, —

<span id="ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)<span id="ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p2"></span>**18**. Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I
will bring again the captivity of Jacob’s tents, and have mercy on his
dwellingplaces; and the city shall be builded upon her own heap, and the
palace shall remain after the manner thereof.

<span id="ii.xviii-p3"></span>**18**. Sic dicit Jehova, Ecce ego
reducens captivitatem tabernaculorum Jacob et habitaculorum ejus
miserabor; et adificabitur urbs super excelsum suum *(vel,* super
acervum suum; *vel,* culmen) et palatium in sua statione *(vel,* regula)
sedebit.

<span id="ii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p6"></span>Jeremiah goes on with the same subject,
and dwells on it more at large; for as it was difficult to lead the
people seriously to repent, so it was difficult to raise up desponding
minds after they had been subjected to a multitude of calamities. God
then declares here again that he would come to restore his people from
captivity.

<span id="ii.xviii-p7"></span>*Behold,* he says, *I restore, etc.,* as
though he was already prepared with an outstretched hand to liberate his
people. Let it be noticed, that the Prophet did not in vain represent
God as present; but he, no doubt, had regard to the want of faith in the
people, and sought to remove this defect. Since then the Jews thought
themselves wholly forsaken, the Prophet testifies that God would be
present with them, and he introduces him as speaking, *Behold, I
restore, etc.,* as though he was already the liberator of the people. He
names the restoration of *tents* and *habitations,* because they had
been long sojourners in Chaldea and other countries, where they had been
scattered. As then they had their own dwellings, the Prophet reminds
them that they were yet but strangers among the nations, for God would
restore them to their own country, which was their real dwelling-place.
This is the reason why he speaks of tents and habitations. He, at the
same time, points out the cause of their redemption, even mercy, so that
the Jews might at length learn to flee to this their sole asylum, and
know that there was no other remedy for their calamities than this, —
that God should look on them according to his mercy, for he might have
justly destroyed them altogether. In short, the Prophet reminds them
that they must have perished for ever, had not God at length shewed
mercy to them.

<span id="ii.xviii-p8"></span>He mentions a fuller display of his favor,
— that he would again *build* Jerusalem *upon its own heap,* or hill, as
some render it; for the situation of the city was high, and towered
above other parts of Judea. But it seems to me that the Prophet means
that the city would be built on its own foundations, for he calls here
the ruins heaps, or piles. For the city had been destroyed in such a
manner, that yet some ruins remained, and some vestiges of the walls. It
is then the same as though he had said, that the city, however splendid
and wealthy in former times, would yet be so restored, that its dignity
would not be less than before. But he speaks of its extent when he says,
that it would be *built upon its heaps,* that is, on its ancient
foundations.

<span id="ii.xviii-p9"></span>And this point is confirmed by what
immediately follows, *the palace shall be set in its own form* or
station, <span id="ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>על משפטו *al meshephthu.* The
word <span id="ii.xviii-p9.2"></span>שפט *shepheth,* properly means
judgment, but it means also form, measure, manner, custom. Here, no
doubt, the Prophet means that the king’s palace would be equally
splendid to what it had been, and in the same place. Some think that
<span id="ii.xviii-p9.3"></span>ארמון *armun,* means the Temple; and
this sense I do not reject; but as the Hebrews for the most part
understand by this term a splendid, large, or high building, I prefer
the former sense, that is, that he speaks of the royal palace: *stand*
then *will* the king’s *palace in its own form* or place, as though it
had never been destroyed.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) In
short, he promises such a restoration of the city and kingdom, that no
less favor from God was to be expected in the second state of the
Church, than it had formerly; for God would obliterate all memory of
calamities when the Church again flourished, and the kingdom became so
eminent in wealth, honor, power, and other excellencies, that it would
evidently appear that God had only for a time been displeased with his
Church.

<span id="ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are so
slow to consider thy judgments, and become continually hardened in our
sins, — O grant, that being really touched by those many warnings by
which thou not only invitest, but also stimulatest us to repent, we may
learn to humble ourselves, and so Submit to thy chastisements, that we
may be capable of receiving that mercy which turns whatever evil may
happen to us to our good and salvation, until we shall at length be
gathered into that blessed rest which is prepared for us in heaven,
through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ii.xix-p3"></span> 

<span id="ii.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.xx-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixteenth

<span id="ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p2"></span>**19**. And out of them shall proceed
thanksgiving and the voice of them that make merry: and I will multiply
them, and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and they
shall not be small.

<span id="ii.xxi-p3"></span>**19**. Et egredietur ab ipsis laus et vox
laetitiarum; et augebo eos, et non minuentur; et decorabo eos, nec
attenuabuntur.

<span id="ii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms what he had said. We
have stated that the Jews, while any hope remained for them, were
perverse towards God, but that, after they were brought to extremities,
they became extremely dejected; for they lost all hope as to their
state, and became so desponding that they would receive no consolation.
It was not therefore enough, slightly, or in a few words, to promise
them restoration; it was necessary that the promise should be repeatedly
confirmed. This then is now the subject of the Prophet; he promises that
*praise and the voice of joy* would proceed from them.

<span id="ii.xxi-p7"></span>We ought to notice here the contrast between
sighings, groanings, complaints, lamentations, and giving of thanks; for
as long as they were detained in exile, no praise could have been heard
among them. Sorrow is, indeed, no hinderance to prevent us to bless God
in extreme misery; but we cannot with a full mouth, so to speak, bless
God, except when some cause of joy is presented to us. Hence is that
saying of James,

<span id="ii.xxi-p8"></span>“Is any joyful among you? let him sing.”
(<span id="ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>[Jas
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxi-p9"></span>As then the Prophet speaks of thanksgiving,
he intimates that God’s favor would be so great as to remove every
sorrow and sadness from the Jews. But he indirectly exhorts the faithful
to celebrate God’s kindness. Had he only said, “Go forth from them shall
the voice of joy,” it would, indeed, have been a complete sentence; but
it was also necessary to remind the faithful for what end God would deal
so kindly with his people, even that they might proclaim his goodness;
for this is the design for which we receive every good from God’s hand.
Thanksgiving is then usually connected with joy, when mention is made of
the Church.

<span id="ii.xxi-p10"></span>But we have said that the faithful cannot
with so much alacrity praise God, when they are pressed down by
distresses, as when God makes their hearts to rejoice; for grief holds
bound all the feelings of men; but joy, proceeding from a perception of
God’s paternal favor, dilates as it were their souls; and hence also
their tongues are set loose. For this reason it is said in <span
id="ii.xxi-p10.1"></span>[Ps
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxi-p10.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.xxi-p11"></span>“O Lord, open thou my lips,  
and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.”

<span id="ii.xxi-p12"></span>David there intimates that he had been for
a time silent; when God hid from him his face, he could not taste of his
paternal goodness. During that time David had his heart as it were bound
and his mouth closed; but he prays the Lord to open his mouth, that is,
to grant him joy that he might give him thanks.

<span id="ii.xxi-p13"></span>We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet:
he intimates, that though the Jews would be in sorrow for a time, would
groan and mourn, yet this condition would not be perpetual; for God
would at length comfort them, so that they would not only rejoice, but
also proclaim his mercy when liberated.

<span id="ii.xxi-p14"></span>He adds, *I will increase them, and they
shall not be lessened; I will adorn them,* etc. Some render this also,
“I will increase them:“ but the words are different; and <span
id="ii.xxi-p14.1"></span> כבד*cebed,* means sometimes to increase, and
sometimes to adorn, to glorify, to honor. The words which follow are
also different, <span id="ii.xxi-p14.2"></span>מעת *moth,* and <span
id="ii.xxi-p14.3"></span>צער *tsor.* And though the Prophet meant to
repeat nearly the same thing, yet there is no doubt but that he intended
to set forth the favor of God by this variety, as though he had said,
that so remarkable would be the mercy of God, that the Jews would
acknowledge, that what had been promised to their father Abraham had
been fillfilled to them,

<span id="ii.xxi-p15"></span>“Thy seed shall be as the sand of the sea,
and as the stars of heaven.” (<span id="ii.xxi-p15.1"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="ii.xxi-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxi-p16"></span>The perpetuity also, or the continuity of
his favor is denoted, when he says, they shall not be *lessened,* they
shall not be *made small.* It is possible for a people to increase for a
short time; but such a thing is often of no long duration, for the form
of this world passeth away. God then promises stability and perpetuity
to his Church, for he would manifest his favor to it from day to day,
and from year to year.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) This is the
meaning. It follows —

<span id="ii.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p2"></span>**20**. Their children also shall be as
aforetime, and their congregation shall be established before me, and I
will punish all that oppress them.

<span id="ii.xxii-p3"></span>**20**. Et erunt filii ejus sicut ab
initio, et coetus ejus coram facie mea stabilietur *(vel,* dirigetur,
*nam* <span id="ii.xxii-p3.1"></span>כון utrumque significat) et
visitabo super omnes oppressores ejus.

<span id="ii.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p6"></span>This abundance of words which the Prophet
employs is by no means useless; for we ought always to remember how hard
were their temptations when no token of God’s favor appeared for seventy
years. It was hence necessary to sustain minds overwhelmed with evils by
many supports, so that they might not wholly faint; and he adds promises
to promises, that the Jews might see as it were a spark of light from
the deep abyss. And hence, also, we may gather a useful admonition:
Though the Lord may favor us today, so that we are not exercised by very
grievous trials, yet every one knows by his own experience, how prone we
are to despond; and then when we once begin to faint, how difficult it
is to be raised up to the confidence of hope. Let us then learn to join
promises to promises, so that if one will not suffice, another may.

<span id="ii.xxii-p7"></span>He now says that their *children* would *be
as from the beginning* Some give this refined explanation, that the
children of the Church would be as from the beginning, that is, before
the Law; for the covenant of grace was made by God with Abraham before
the Law was proclaimed: they hence think that the abrogation of the Law
is here denoted, as though he had said, that the Church would be free
when Christ came, and that the servile yoke of the Law would then be
removed. But this kind of refinement I cannot approve; for I do not
think that such a notion ever entered into the mind of the Prophet. I
have then no doubt but that the reference here is to the kingdom of
David, as though the Prophet had said, that the state of the Church
would be no less prosperous and happy under Christ than formerly under
David. Were any one to object and say, that Christ’s kingdom is much
more happy than that of David: this I grant; but the prophets ever
compare the kingdom of Christ with the kingdom of David, and they were
content with this way of teaching, as it exceeded the hope of the
people; for the Jews thought it not credible that they could ever attain
their ancient renown. When, therefore, he says here, that the children
of Judah would be as *at the* beginning, there is no doubt with me but
that he had a regard to that promise, which declares that the seed of
David would be for ever on his throne, as long as the sun and moon shone
in the heavens. (<span id="ii.xxii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)<span id="ii.xxii-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxii-p8"></span>The meaning is, that though the kingdom
would through a dreadful ruin become extinct, together with all its
dignity, the Jews would yet, through Christ, recover what they had lost
through their sins, ingratitude, and perverseness.

<span id="ii.xxii-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *His seed shall be
established before my face, and I will visit all his oppressors* Here
again God confirms the promise concerning the perpetuity of his Church.
He therefore says that the *assembly of the people would be established
before him,*  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) by which words he
bids the Jews to look upwards, for in the world nothing was to be found
but despair. God then calls the attention of the Jews to himself, when
he says that the Church would be established before his face. And as the
power of enemies was so great, that the faithful might justly object and
say, that every avenue was closed up against God’s favor, he adds, that
God on the other hand had sufficient power to destroy and to reduce to
nothing all their enemies; and he mentions *all,* because the Chaldean
monarchy was widely extended and consisted of many nations; and there
was no part of it which was not most hostile to the Jews. As, then, the
miserable exiles saw that not only the Chaldeans were inimical to them,
but also other nations, so that they were hated almost by the whole
world, God here comes to their aid, and declares that he had power
enough to destroy *all* their enemies.

<span id="ii.xxii-p11"></span>A useful doctrine may be hence deduced:
The Church was in such a manner perpetual, that its condition was yet
variable; for it often seemed good to God to break off the course of his
favor before the coming of Christ. What then happened we may accommodate
to our own time. As, then, the Prophet says here, that the children of
the Church would *be as at the beginning,* we need not wonder when the
Church happens at any time to be scattered, as indeed the case was under
the Papacy. For the Church was not only dead, but also buried, and was
not only as a putrid carcase, but like the dust it had wholly vanished;
for what remnants could have been found fifty years ago? We hence see
that what happened under the Law has also taken place under the kingdom
of Christ; for the Church has sometimes been overwhelmed with troubles,
and has been hid without any glory or beauty. But, in the meantime, we
embrace this promise, that the children of the godly shall be as
formerly; for as the kingdom of Christ in former times flourished, so we
ought to feel assured that there is sufficient power in God to restore
to the Church its glory, so that Christ’s kingdom may again rise up, and
all God’s blessings shine forth in it. But as many enemies surround the
Church on every side, and the Devil ever excites everywhere commotions
and disturbances, let us know that there is another clause added, even
that God will be the defender of his people; so that how much soever the
whole world may attempt to tread under foot his favor, he will yet not
suffer them to accomplish their fury; for he has the power not only to
restrain their assaults, but also wholly to destroy them and to
obliterate their memory; for this is what is implied in the word
*visiting.* It then follows —

<span id="ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021)<span id="ii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p2"></span>**21**. And their nobles shall be of
themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst of them; and
I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for who
*is* this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? saith the LORD.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p3"></span>**21**. Et erit fortis ejus *(vel,*
magnificus) ab ipso, et dominator ejus e medio ejus exibit, et
appropinquare eum faciam, et aceedet ad me; nam *(vel,* certe) quisnam
hic qui applicet, *(vel,* qui adaptet) cor suum ut accedat ad me? *(alii
vertunt,* qui alliciat cor suum; *dicemus postea de sensu)* dicit
Jehova.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p6"></span>The Prophet, no doubt, explains here more
at large what he had said of the restoration of the Church; for we know
that the Jews had been so taught, that they were to place their whole
confidence as to their salvation on David, that is, on the king whom God
had set over them. Then the happiness and safety of the Church was
always founded on the king; he being taken away, it was all over with
the Church, as the Anointed is said to be the Lord, in whose spirit is
our spirit. (<span id="ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>[La
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>)
Hence God has even from the beginning directed the attention of his
people to their king, that they might depend on him, not that David was
able by his own power to save the people, but because he typically
personated Christ. We have not now an earthly king who is Christ’s
image; but it is Christ alone who vivifies the Church. But it was at
that time set forth figuratively, that the king was, as it were, the
soul of the community; and we have before seen, that when the Prophet
animated the Jews with hope, he set before them David, and afterwards
the Son of David.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p7"></span>For the same reason, he says here, *His
valiant one,* or, illustrious one, *shall be from himself* For we must
remember the condition of that miserable and calamitous time when God
took away every source of joy, by depriving the people of all the
dignity with which they had been honored. It was the same then as though
Jeremiah had promised the Jews a resurrection, for they were in their
exile as dead men, as their hope of public safety had vanished when
their king was destroyed. Here, then, he bids them to entertain good
hope, because the Lord was able to raise them from death to life. And
doubtless it was a wonderful resurrection when the Jews returned to
their own country, a way having been opened for them; for they had been
driven away, as it were, into another world. And who could have ever
thought that so many obstacles could have been removed, when the
Chaldeans extended their dominion even over Judea? The miserable exiles
had certainly no refuge. It was not then to no purpose that Jeremiah
testifies here, that the *strong* or valiant, that is, the king, would
be from the people, and that there would come forth a *Ruler* from the
midst of them. To come or go forth does not mean here to depart, as
though the king would go elsewhere; but to go forth signifies here to
proceed: *Go forth* then, or proceed, *shall a Ruler from the midst* of
the people: how this took place it is well known.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p8"></span>But Isaiah had foretold what his successor
here confirms, saying,

<span id="ii.xxiii-p9"></span>“Come forth shall a shoot from the root
(or stem) of Jesse, and a rod shall spring up from the root of his
tree.” (<span id="ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p10"></span>He calls it there the house of Jesse,
which was a private house: he would have dignified the favor with a more
glorious name, had he mentioned David; but as there was then no kingdom,
he refers to Jesse; for as David came forth as an unknown rustic from
the folds of the sheep, so also the Lord would raise up a shoot from the
stem of a tree that had been cut down. We hence see in what sense
Jeremiah uses the expression, “Come forth;” for Christ rose up beyond
the expectation of men, and rose up as a shoot when a tree is cut down,
that is, when there was no resemblance of majesty among the people.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *I will cause him to
draw near, and he will come to me* This may be either confined to the
head or extended to the whole body; and the second idea is what I mostly
approve; for the people were a long time removed from the presence of
God, even as long as they were exiled from their country. Hence God
adds, “I will cause them again to draw nigh, and they shall come to me.”
If, however, any one prefers to explain this of the head, or of the king
himself, I offer no objection.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p12"></span>Now, we are taught from this passage,
that whenever God speaks of the restoration of the Church, he ever
declares that he will be entreated by us; in short, that whenever he
invites us to the hope of favor and salvation, we ought always to look
to Christ; for except we direct all our thoughts to him, all the
promises will vanish away, for they cannot be valid except through him;
because in Christ only, as Paul says, they are yea and amen. (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>[2 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>)
But as this truth often occurs in the Prophets, it is enough here to
touch on it by the way, as I have handled it more fully elsewhere.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p13"></span>As to the latter part of the verse, there
is some ambiguity, — *for who is he, this, etc* There are two
demonstrative pronouns, <span id="ii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>הוא זה *hua,
ze.* Afterwards comes <span id="ii.xxiii-p13.2"></span>ערב *oreb,
fitting* his heart. The verb <span id="ii.xxiii-p13.3"></span>ערב
*oreb,* means to be a surety, and also to fit, to adapt, to accommodate,
or to form, and sometimes to render sweet or pleasant; and on this
account some have thus translated, “Who will allure his heart?” He then
adds, *that he may come to me, saith Jehovah?* I have said that this
passage is obscure, and it has hence been turned into various meanings
by interpreters. Some apply the words to Christ, that he alone has of
his own accord come to the Father. Others consider a negative to be
understood, as though it was said, that no one prepares his heart to
come to God. But there are some who regard the passage as an
exhortation, “Who is he who will apply his heart that he may come to
me?” Now, if we read it as expressing astonishment or wonder, it would
be, in my view, its real meaning. I am not aware that any one has
mentioned this; but the Prophet, I have no doubt, intended his words to
be so understood.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p14"></span>He said before, “I will cause him to draw
nigh; that he may come to me.” I have already explained this of the
people, who had been long rejected. God then promises here a gathering,
as though he had said, “For a time I scattered the people here and there
like chaff; I will now gather them again together, and they shall be
under my care and protection as formerly.” Having said this, he now
touches on the ingratitude of the people by this question, “Who is there
who comes to me? who will frame his heart that he may be reconciled to
me?” It is, then, an expression of wonder, intended to make the Jews
know that their hardness and insensibility are condemned; for when God
kindly invited them, they rejected his favor, when he sought to embrace
them, they fled far off from him.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p15"></span>But an objection may be here made, “Why
then did God promise that he would cause the Jews to come to him?” To
this I answer, that God performs or fulfils this promise in various
ways: he might have called the Jews to himself by an outward invitation,
as he did when the liberty of returning was given them: and then,
indeed, a few of the Jews accepted his favor; but all the Israelites,
already habituated to the pleasures and enjoyments of those countries,
regarded as nothing what God had promised. Thus very few returned to
their own country, and restoration was despised by them, though they had
once been very anxious about it. God, however, even then made the people
to draw nigh; for he stretched forth his hand as though he would gather
them and cherish them under his wings. But as the greatest part despised
his invaluable favor, God here justly complains of so great an impiety,
and exclaims as through wonder or astonishment, *Who is he who will form
his heart, that, he may come to me?*

<span id="ii.xxiii-p16"></span>Had it been simply said, “Who is he who
comes to me?” the meaning, through brevity, would have been obscure. But
God here clearly distinguishes between the two kinds of access: the
first was, when liberty was given to the people, by the decree of Cyrus,
and a permission given to build the city and the temple. God, therefore,
caused them then to draw nigh that they might come to him; this was the
first access. But he now adds, that the Jews did not form or prepare
their heart. He indeed speaks of future time, but yet he charges them
with ingratitude, which afterwards was fully manifested. Hence he says,
“Who is this, that he may come to me?” that is, “I will contrive means
that they may unite again in one body, call on me and enjoy their
inheritance: this will I do that they may come to me; but many will
still live in their own dregs, and prefer Chaldea and other countries to
the temple and religion. Many, then, will be they who will not form
their heart to come to me.”

<span id="ii.xxiii-p17"></span>We now understand the meaning of the
Prophet. But we must at the same time bear in mind, that by saying
above, “I will cause him to draw near that he may come to me,” God does
not speak of the hidden working of his Spirit; for it is in his power,
as we shall presently remark, to draw the hearts of men to himself
whenever he pleases. But when he said, *I will cause him to draw nigh,*
etc., he spoke only of an outward restoration; and now he adds a
complaint, that the Jews would wickedly repudiate this favor, for no one
would prepare his heart. We yet see that the whole fault is cast on the
Jews, that they were to be deprived of their own country: for it was
owing to nothing on God’s part that they were not restored, but to
themselves, because they were devoted to their own pleasure, and
regarded their return and to be counted God’s people as nothing. It was
therefore the object of the Prophet to ascribe to the Jews the whole
fault that God’s favor would not come to them, or that it would not be
effectual as to the greatest part of them, even because they would not
prepare or form their heart, that they might come to God, in order that
they might be partakers of that invaluable privilege offered to them.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p18"></span>Now, the Papists lay hold on this passage
to prove that there is a free-will in man to come to God; but to do so
is indeed very absurd. For whenever God condemns the hardness of the
people, he doubtless does not argue the question, what power there is in
men, whether they can turn to do what is good, whether they can guide
their own hearts. To hold this would be extremely foolish. When it is
said in <span id="ii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)<span id="ii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>,

<span id="ii.xxiii-p19"></span>“To-day, if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as your fathers in the wilderness,”

<span id="ii.xxiii-p20"></span>shall we say that as they hardened their
hearts they were capable of turning, so that they could by the power of
free-will choose either good or evil? To say this would be puerile and
extremely sottish. We hence see that the Papists are unworthy of being
reasoned with, when they seek to prove free-will by such arguments. They
would, indeed, adduce something plausible were their exposition adopted;
for they render the words thus, “Who is this,” etc., as though God
praised the promptitude of the faithful, who willingly offer themselves
and prepare their hearts. But opposed to this view is the whole context.
It hence appears that it was very far from the Prophet’s design to
represent God as commending the obedience of the godly; but, on the
contrary, he exclaims with wonder, as Isaiah does when he says,

<span id="ii.xxiii-p21"></span>“Who hath believed our report? and to
whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?” (<span
id="ii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>[Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p22"></span>He surely does not set forth the
obedience of the faithful in receiving promptly and gladly the Gospel;
but, on the contrary, (as though something monstrous terrified him) that
the world would not believe the Gospel, when yet it offered to them
salvation and eternal life. So also in this place, *Who is he?* etc. For
what could have been more desirable than that God should at length, by
outstretched arms, gather the Jews to himself? ”I wish you to draw nigh,
ye have been for a time, as it were, banished from me, I had driven you
to distant lands; but I am now ready to gather you.” As, then, God so
sweetly and kindly allured them to himself, it was doubtless a most
abominable and monstrous ingratitude for them to reject the offer and to
turn their backs as it were on God, who so kindly invited them. As,
then, the Prophet is here only condemning such insensibility and
perverse wickedness in the Jews, there is no reason why we should be in
quest of a proof in favor of free-will.  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p29"></span>We may add, that David uses the same verb
in <span id="ii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>[Ps.
119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073),
[125](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#125)<span id="ii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>,
when he says,

<span id="ii.xxiii-p30"></span>“Cause thy servant to approach thee, that
he may learn thy commandments.”  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p32"></span>Some render the words, “Be a surety for
thy servant,” etc.; for the verb: <span
id="ii.xxiii-p32.1"></span>ערב*,* which is here, is found there also.
Therefore the passage might be aptly turned against the Papists, who
hold that it is in the power of man to form his own heart. But David
testifies that this is peculiarly the office and work of God; for by
asking this from him he doubtless confesses that it was not in his own
power. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)<span id="ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p2"></span>**22**. And ye shall be my people, and I
will be your God.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p3"></span>**22**. Et eritis mihi in populum, et ego
ero vobis in Deum *(Quod postea confirmat primo versu capitis,* 31, *cum
dicit,* In tempore illo, dicit Jehova, Ero in Deum cunctis cognationibus
Israel, et ipsi erunt mihi in populum)

<span id="ii.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiv-p6"></span>As this verse and what occurs in the first
verse of the next chapter are materially the same, they shall be both
explained here. God then says that the Jews would become a *people* to
him, and that he would become a *God* to them. This mode of speaking is
what we meet with everywhere in the Prophets; and it is very expressive,
and includes the whole of true happiness. For when have we life, except
when we become the people of God? We ought also to bear in mind that
saying of the Psalmist,

<span id="ii.xxiv-p7"></span>“Blessed are the people whose God is
Jehovah.”  
(<span id="ii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>[Ps
144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxiv-p7.2"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxiv-p8"></span>It confirms what I have just said, that a
happy life is complete in all its parts, when God promises to be a God
to us and takes us as his people. The Prophets, therefore, do not
without reason so often inculcate this truth; for though nothing else
might be wanting to us that could be expected, yet until we feel assured
that God is a Father to us, and that we are his people, whatever
happiness we may have, it will only end in misery.

<span id="ii.xxiv-p9"></span>But the Prophet expresses himself more
fully, when he says, *At that time,* that is, when God restored his
Church, *will I be a God to all the families of Israel* They had been so
scattered, that they were not one body; but God promises the gathering
of that Church, from which the ten tribes had fallen off, when they
revolted from the family of David. I cannot proceed farther now.

<span id="ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="ii.xxv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
manifested to us in thine only-begotten Son all the paternal goodness of
which the fathers formerly tasted, and hast so really and fully
exhibited it, that nothing more can be desired by us, — O grant, that we
may remain fixed in our trust in thee, and so cleave by true faith and
in sincerity of heart to our Redeemer, that we may expect from him all
things necessary for our salvation: and may we know that whatever may
happen to us, we are still blessed, provided we enjoy this singular
privilege, to call on thee as our Father through the name of the same
thy Son. — Amen.

<span id="ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventeenth

<span id="ii.xxvi-p2"></span>We compared yesterday the two verses in
which God promises that he would yet be a God to his people. We stated
what this promise means. But the latter verse specifies the time, in
order that the Israelites might wait for and expect this favor, though
not as yet evident: hence it is said, *At that time.* He afterwards
adds, *I will be a God to all the families of Israel,* and for this
reason, because they had been so dispersed, that they did not appear as
one people, and were like different nations. Here, then, a promise is
made that the people would be collected together, so that they might be
united, and become one body, as they were before their dispersion. It
follows, —

<span id="ii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023)<span id="ii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p2"></span>**23**. Behold, the whirlwind of the LORD
goeth forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain
upon the head of the wicked.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p3"></span>**23**. Ecce tempestas *(sed subaudienda
est nota similitudinis* <span id="ii.xxvii-p3.1"></span>כ*,* sicut
tempestas) Jehovae furor *(vel,* iracundia) egredietur, tempestas sese
involvens, super caput impiorum residebit.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxvii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p6"></span>The Prophet seems to speak abruptly; for
nothing could be more delightful than the promise that God gives, that
he would be a Father to the people; but he immediately adds, that there
would arise an involving *whirlwind,* which would abide on the head of
the wicked. These things, at the first view, seem not to harmonize. But
the latter sentence may be applied to the heathens, or to any of the
enemies of the Church; for whenever God appears as the Savior of his
people, his vengeance goes forth, and is poured on the wicked. Hence
such declarations as the following often occur,

<span id="ii.xxvii-p7"></span>“The day of my vengeance is nigh, and the
year of my visitation.” (<span id="ii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
63:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#004)<span id="ii.xxvii-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxvii-p8"></span>Isaiah joins both, the favor of God and
his vengeance: and this is often done by the other Prophets, in order
that we may see that God’s mercy cannot be clearly and distinctly
perceived towards the faithful, except when his judgment on the other
hand be made conspicuous as to the wicked. So this passage may be
explained. But we may well thus connect the words of the Prophet, — that
he kindly endeavored to allure the people by offering them God’s favor;
but that having seen that it would be despised, as we stated yesterday,
by the greater part of them, he now seasonably threatens them, that if
they refused the favor offered them, such ingratitude could not be borne
by God. And this is a mode of teaching common in Scripture. For God on
his part thus manifests his kindness so as to stimulate men; but as he
sees them not only slothful and tardy, but also wicked and ungrateful,
he declares that they shall not be unpunished if they despise his favor.
The former truth then well agrees with what the Prophet now says, — that
the *wrath of* God would *arise* like a tempestuous storm.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *a whirling* or
involving *tempest,* properly, a tempest gathering itself. The verb is
<span id="ii.xxvii-p9.1"></span>גור *gur,* in a reduplicate form and in
*Hithpael.* A similar sentence is found in <span
id="ii.xxvii-p9.2"></span>[Jer
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019)<span id="ii.xxvii-p9.2"></span>;
but there the Prophet used another word as required by the subject.
 <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) Some render it “falling,” for
<span id="ii.xxvii-p11.3"></span>גור*, gur*, means to fall; and this
meaning is suitable, “a falling storm,” that is, impetuously descending,
so as to abide on the head of the wicked. But the former sense has been
more generally taken, and I am disposed to embrace it; for it tends to
shake men with terror, when the storm is said to be like a whirlwind,
for it turns and twists around, so that it cannot be avoided. The
meaning then is, that God’s vengeance would be fatal to all the wicked.
But we may take the wicked, <span id="ii.xxvii-p11.4"></span>רשעים
*reshoim,* for the despisers of God, though boasting of his name, as
well as for aliens: but I am inclined to include both, even domestic and
foreign enemies of God; as though the Prophet had said, that no remedy
remained, except they fled to the mercy of God. It afterwards follows, —

<span id="ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p1"></span><span
id="ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024)<span id="ii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p2"></span>**24**. The fierce anger of the LORD
shall not return, until he have done *it,* and until he have performed
the intents of his heart: in the latter days ye shall consider it.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p3"></span>**24**. Non revertetur *(vertunt)* furor
irae Jehovae, donec exequatur ipsum, et donec surgere faciat (attollat,
*vel,* stabiliat) cogitationes cordis sui: in extremo dierum
intelligatis in hac re.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxviii-p5"></span><span id="ii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p6"></span>He confirms the last sentence, and
compares the wrath or the vengeance of God to a messenger or a minister,
who is sent to carry a message, or to perform what has been commanded
him. Of God’s word, that is, of his threatenings as well as of his
promises, Isaiah speaks thus,

<span id="ii.xxviii-p7"></span>“My word shall not return to me void.”
(<span id="ii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>)

<span id="ii.xxviii-p8"></span>The meaning is, that whatever God
promises or threatens, is never without its effect. But they wrongly
understand the passage who say that the word of God returns not void,
because it brings forth fruit; for he speaks of the effect of the word,
whether for salvation or for perdition. So now also God declares that
his vengeance, when gone forth, shall not return until it fulfils what
has been commanded.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p9"></span>He then adds, *and until he shall have
confirmed,* etc.; for so the verb <span id="ii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>הקימו
*ekimu,* properly means: until God then *shall have confirmed* or
established *the thoughts of his heart* The thoughts of his heart he
calls the decrees or purposes of God; but it is a mode of speaking taken
from men, and therefore metaphorical; for it is not consistent with what
God is, either to think or to deliberate. But, as to the subject itself,
there is nothing ambiguous; for the Prophet means, that when God sends
forth his vengeance, all the wicked must perish, for so has God decreed,
and his purposes can never be frustrated. Then he shews that God’s
vengeance will be accomplished, because God has so determined. For God
does not dissemble when he promises salvation to men, or denounces on
them the punishment which they have deserved; but he executes the
decrees or purposes of his heart.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="ii.xxviii-p13"></span>Then the Prophet here condemns the
stupidity of all those who thought that they could escape, though they
had often heard that their guilt was so great that they must at last be
visited with judgment. Though they had often heard this, yet they were
deaf to all warnings; and it was for this reason that the Prophet spoke
of the thoughts of God’s heart.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p14"></span>At last he adds, *At the extremity of
days ye shall understand this* This may be applied to the faithful no
less than to the wicked. For though the faithful embraced God’s
promises, and relied on them, yet, as they had to contend constantly
with the heaviest trials, it was necessary to stimulate and animate them
to patience. It might then be suitably said to them, “Ye shall
understand this in the last days;” it being a kind of exhortation, as
though he had said, “Ye indeed think the wicked happy, because God does
not immediately punish them, because his vengeance does not instantly
break forth in thunders against them; but patiently bear your miseries,
and ye shall at length find that their destruction has not been in vain
predicted; and ye shall also receive a reward for your faith and
patience, if ye continue resigned to the last.” But the sentence may
also be suitably applied to the wicked, because they were wont to form
their judgment according to the present aspect of things. Hence the
Prophet exposes the false opinion by which they deceived themselves, and
says, that too late they would understand what they were then unwilling
to perceive.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p15"></span>If then we explain this sentence of the
children of God, it is an exhortation to bear patiently their evils
until God appeared as their defender: but if we apply it to the
unbelieving, it is a derision of their insensibility, because they
regarded as fables all threatenings; but the Prophet exclaims, “Ye shall
at last become wise, but it will be too late.” Even experience becomes a
teacher when there is no more opportunity to repent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc20001.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span> “In a book:” the <span
id="ii.i-p13.1"></span>אל before “book” is in some copies <span
id="ii.i-p13.2"></span>על, as in other places when preceded by “write.”
It may be more literally rendered, “on a roll;” but if <span
id="ii.i-p13.3"></span>אל be retained, the rendering may be, “for a
record,” or memorial. *Venema* thinks that these two chapters were
written *after* the destruction of Jerusalem, and that as there were no
people to be addressed, Jeremiah was bidden to commit to writing what he
had often previously delivered by word of mouth. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc20001.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span> The words literally are, “For behold the
days coming, saith Jehovah, when I shall restore the migration of my
people, Israel and Judah, saith Jehovah; and I will restore them to the
land which I gave to their fathers, and they shall inherit it.” To
render <span id="ii.i-p17.1"></span>ו *when,* when preceded by a
participle, is what may be done, and ought, in my view, to be commonly
done. The word <span id="ii.i-p17.2"></span>שבות means a migration, as
given in the *Targum,* rather than captivity. It is rendered by the
*Sept.* <span id="ii.i-p17.3"></span>ἀποικία, removal from home. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc20001.htm#fr_2) <span
id="ii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii-p7"></span> “That day” in this verse, and “that day” in
the following verse, seem to be the same. Then <span
id="ii.iii-p7.1"></span>הוי must not be rendered “Alas,” but “Ho!” or
“Hark!” according to its most common meaning. The passage from verse the
4th (<span id="ii.iii-p7.2"></span>[Jer
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004)<span id="ii.iii-p7.2"></span>,)
to the end of this, including the beginning of the 8th (<span
id="ii.iii-p7.3"></span>[Jer 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008)<span
id="ii.iii-p7.3"></span>), may be thus rendered, —

<span id="ii.iii-p8"></span>**4.** Even these are the words which
Jehovah hath said respecting Israel and respecting Judah:

<span id="ii.iii-p9"></span>**5.** Verily thus hath Jehovah said — (The
voice of trembling have we heard, Of fear and not of peace:

<span id="ii.iii-p10"></span>**6.** Ask ye now and see, Does a man
travail with child? How is it? I see every man *With* his hands on his
loins like a woman in travail, And turned are all faces to paleness:)

<span id="ii.iii-p11"></span>**7.** Hark! for great *shall be* that day,
none like it; Though a time of distress shall be to Jacob, Yet from it
shall he be saved:

<span id="ii.iii-p12"></span>**8.** And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah of hosts, That I shall break, etc.. etc..

<span id="ii.iii-p13"></span>The parenthesis accounts for what is said
at the end of the 7th verse (<span id="ii.iii-p13.1"></span>[Jer
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007)<span id="ii.iii-p13.1"></span>)
and is intended as a contrast with the great day of deliverance that is
promised. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc20001.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.vi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.vi-p9"></span>I render the verse as follows, —

<span id="ii.vi-p10"></span>**8.** And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah of hosts, *That* I shall break his yoke from thy neck, And thy
chains will I burst: And make him to serve shall strangers no more: 9.
But serve shall they Jehovah, etc..

<span id="ii.vi-p11"></span>The transition from the second to the third
person, “thy” and “him,” and from the singular to the plural, “him” and
“they,” is very common in the Prophets. On the last line in the 8th
verse (<span id="ii.vi-p11.1"></span>[Jer
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008)<span id="ii.vi-p11.1"></span>). —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc20001.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p8"></span> The word is stronger than “fear;” it means
to be broken down in mind, to be dispirited, so as to give up all hope.
The distance, mentioned in the following clause, was calculated to
dispirit them, and they feared lest their children should continue in
bondage. Hence it is said, “Fear not,” that is, as to a final return;
and “be not dispirited,” or disheartened, with respect to the distance.
The order, as is commonly the case, is reversed. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc20001.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii-p18"></span> *Calvin* renders <span
id="ii.viii-p18.1"></span>שב, “dwell,” as though it came from <span
id="ii.viii-p18.2"></span>ישב but most render it “return,” as in our
version. Then, “to be at rest,” and “in a quiet state,” are not
sufficiently distinct. I render the clause thus, —

<span id="ii.viii-p19"></span>And return shall Jacob and be at rest,  
And secure shall he be, and none making him afraid.

<span id="ii.viii-p20"></span>Security is freedom from disturbance: “he
shall be prosperous,” as rendered by some, is by no means suitable.
“Jacob,” being the father of the twelve patriarchs, is to be understood
as including both Israel and Judah, according to the 4th verse (<span
id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>[Jer
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#004)<span id="ii.viii-p20.1"></span>).
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc20001.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p7"></span> There is no verb in the first clause,
“Because I with thee.” The context shews that the future is meant; then
the rendering ought to be, “Because I *shall be* with thee;” that is, at
the restoration of the people to their own land, mentioned in the
preceding verse. So *Calvin* understood the clause, though the early
versions, like our own, gave the verb in the present tense, which is by
no means correct. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc20001.htm#fr_7) <span
id="ii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix-p19"></span> This clause is rendered by the *Vulg.,*
“that thou mayest not seem to thyself innocent;” by the *Syr.,* “but I
will not suffer thee to be wholly unpunished;” and by the *Targ.,* “and
destroying I will not destroy thee.” Both *Venema* and *Blayney* follow
the meaning of the *Targum;* the later version is, “And will not make
thee altogether desolate.” The phrase occurs in <span
id="ii.ix-p19.1"></span>[Jer
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029)<span id="ii.ix-p19.1"></span>,
and also in <span id="ii.ix-p19.2"></span>[Ex
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)<span id="ii.ix-p19.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.ix-p19.3"></span>[Nu
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span id="ii.ix-p19.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.ix-p19.4"></span>[Na
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003)<span id="ii.ix-p19.4"></span>; in
which places the idea of the verb is, to hold guiltless or innocent, to
acquit, to let go unpunished, and not to make desolate, to cut off or to
destroy. That the former is its meaning in <span
id="ii.ix-p19.5"></span>[Ex 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)<span
id="ii.ix-p19.5"></span>, is evident from the explanation which follows,
“holding guiltless he will not hold guiltless, visiting the iniquity of
the fathers,” etc.; visiting the fathers’ iniquity proves that it is not
held guiltless or suffered to go unpunished. The verb, <span
id="ii.ix-p19.6"></span>נקה means to be free, or to count one free, from
pollution, crime, guilt, or punishment. To let free from punishment, is
the idea most suitable here; God would chastise them in some measure,
and would not suffer them to be wholly unpunished. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc20001.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ii.xii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xii-p8"></span> The <span id="ii.xii-p8.1"></span>ל in
Hebrew is sometimes the, <span id="ii.xii-p8.2"></span>κατὰ in Greek; it
means, as to, with regard to; so here, —

<span id="ii.xii-p9"></span>Incurable as to thy bruise, Grievous *has
been* thy stroke.

<span id="ii.xii-p10"></span>Or we may give this rendering, inverting
the order, —

<span id="ii.xii-p11"></span>As to thy bruise, *it is* incurable;
Grievous *has been* thy stroke.

<span id="ii.xii-p12"></span>The “bruise” occasioned by the “grievous
stroke” was incurable, that is, by human means. The effect is mentioned
first, “the bruise;” then the cause, “the stroke.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc20001.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p7"></span> According to *Calvin,* the verse reads
thus, —

<span id="ii.xiii-p8"></span>No one undertakes thy cause; For a cure,
medicines and healing thou hast not.

<span id="ii.xiii-p9"></span>This division is made by the *Sept.,*
though not by the other versions, nor the *Targ. Venema* adopts it. The
word <span id="ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>מזור, rendered above “cure,” means
evidently a wound. It only occurs here, and <span
id="ii.xiii-p9.2"></span>[Obadiah
7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007)<span id="ii.xiii-p9.2"></span>, and
twice in <span id="ii.xiii-p9.3"></span>[Ho
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013)<span id="ii.xiii-p9.3"></span>,
where it is rendered “wound.” It comes from <span
id="ii.xiii-p9.4"></span>זור, in the sense of compressing or binding up;
but the noun taken passively, signifies what is compressed or bound up,
and that is a wound. Then the literal rendering would be —

<span id="ii.xiii-p10"></span>None *is* pleading thy cause; As to the
wound, medicatives, binding up, none to thee;

<span id="ii.xiii-p11"></span>*or in other words,* —

<span id="ii.xiii-p12"></span>As to the wound, thou hast no medicatives,
no binding up.

<span id="ii.xiii-p13"></span>The word <span
id="ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>רפאות means medicatives or medicaments, rather
than medicines, as it designates here, and in most places, outward
applications to wounds and bruises. The order, as in the foregoing
verse, is reversed, the medicaments are put before the binding up. See
<span id="ii.xiii-p13.2"></span>[Eze
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#021)<span id="ii.xiii-p13.2"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc20001.htm#fr_10) <span
id="ii.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiv-p13"></span> It is better to retain the literal word
“lovers,” than “friends,” as rendered by the *Sept.,* the *Syr.,* and
the *Targ.,* though not by the *Vulg.* The particle <span
id="ii.xiv-p13.1"></span>על is commonly a preposition, but not when
preceding a verb, as here; and that <span id="ii.xiv-p13.2"></span>רב is
a verb here is proved by the sentence which follows, which is in
apposition; and it is so rendered by *Blayney.* The verse may be thus
rendered —

<span id="ii.xiv-p14"></span>**14.** All thy lovers have forgotten thee,
Thee they seek not: Verily with the stroke of an enemy have I struck
thee, — With a violent correction; Because multiplied had thine
iniquity, Grown strong had thy sins, etc.

<span id="ii.xiv-p15"></span>The word for “violent,” or cruel, is so
construed in the early versions; the *Targ.* alone countenances our
version. The last line conveys a different idea from the preceding. The
verb, indeed, means strong in number as well as strong in power; but as
number is expressed in the previous line, we may justly consider that
power is meant here: their sins were not only many, but strong and
vigorous, so strong as to resist all exhortations and all threatenings.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc20001.htm#fr_11) <span
id="ii.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xv-p8"></span> Rather “sore,” or wound. The word <span
id="ii.xv-p8.1"></span>מכאב indeed means sometimes the soreness or wound
of the mind, that is, sorrow or grief; but here, no doubt, it retains
its primary idea, correspondently with stroke, bruise, and wound. The
*Targ.* retains this meaning, while the versions go all astray. Then it
is, “Miserable is thy sore.” The rest of the verse is as follows, —

<span id="ii.xv-p9"></span>Because multiplied had thine iniquity,  
Grown strong had thy sins,  
Have I done these things to thee.

<span id="ii.xv-p10"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc20001.htm#fr_12) <span
id="ii.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p9"></span> What seems to be his meaning is, that as
God had punished his people, *therefore* he would punish the nations.
The versions and the *Targ.* render it “therefore;” but *Lowth* gives
“yet surely;” and *Blayney,* “afterwards.” But we may render it
“therefore,” or for this reason, as anticipative of what is contained at
the end of the next verse, “Because an outcast have they called thee.
Sion, whom no one seeks.” *Venema,* apprehending this to be the sense of
the passage, supposed that the two verses have been transposed: but this
kind of construction is not unfrequent in Scripture. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc20001.htm#fr_13) <span
id="ii.xviii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="ii.xviii-p10"></span> The versions and the *Targ.* render the
word for “palace,” temple; and as the former clause has “on its heap,”
or, on its ruins, so in this the same preposition is used, and seems to
require a similar construction, “on its former spot,” or, on its wonted
place. The word <span id="ii.xviii-p10.1"></span>משפט denotes what is
customary or usual, as well as what is right and just. Then the two
lines would read thus, —

<span id="ii.xviii-p11"></span>And built shall be the city on its
ruins,  
And the palace on its wonted seat shall be fixed, (or shall stand.)

<span id="ii.xviii-p12"></span>But the versions and the *Targ.* vary the
meaning of the preposition. The *Vulg.,* with which the rest essentially
agree, is, “And the temple according to its order, shall be founded.”
*Blayney* renders the line thus, —

<span id="ii.xviii-p13"></span>And the palace shall be established upon
its (former) plan.

<span id="ii.xviii-p14"></span>As in the previous line, the place is
designated, it is probable that the place also is meant here. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc20001.htm#fr_14) <span
id="ii.xxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxi-p17"></span> The meaning of the latter verbs in these
clauses is to be ascertained by the preceding verbs: “I will multiply,”
or increase “them;” then the opposite to this is, “and they shall not be
lessened,” or decreased: and when it is said, “I will glorify,” or honor
“them,” the corresponding contrast to this is, “they shall not be
degraded,” or dishonored. The first clause refers to number, and the
second to honor, dignity, or renown. Then the right version would be as
follows, —

<span id="ii.xxi-p18"></span>And I will multiply them, and they shall
not be lessened,  
I will also honor them, and they shall not be degraded.

<span id="ii.xxi-p19"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc20001.htm#fr_15) <span
id="ii.xxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxii-p10"></span> It would be better to observe the order
of the original, “And his assembling before me shall be confirmed,” or
according, to the *Vulg.* and *Syr.,* “shall continue.” The reference is
to the assembling at the stated festivals. The verb means to be
confirmed, to be fixed, to be made certain; so that “continue” conveys
the right idea: the assembling was to be made fixed, so as to become
permanent; and it is said to be before God, in order to distinguish it
from any other kind of assembling· — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc20001.htm#fr_16) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p23"></span> The *Vulg.* favors the meaning advocated
by *Calvin,* “For who is this *(iste)* that will apply his heart to draw
nigh to me, saith the Lord?” The *Sept.* is nearly the same, “For who is
this (<span id="ii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>οὕτος) who has given his heart to
tuae to me, saith the Lord?” The *Syr.* is, “For I will turn his heart
to me, saith the Lord.” The *Targ.* is as follows, “For who is this who
will in his heart come to my worship, saith the Lord?”

<span id="ii.xxiii-p24"></span>Many explanations have been given which
are wholly inadmissible, having nothing in the context to support them,
such as the application of these words to our Savior. They are evidently
connected with the previous clause, being joined with it by “for:” they
in a manner explain and qualify that clause, and may be deemed
parenthetic, for the former clause and that which follows these words,
are connected together, —

<span id="ii.xxiii-p25"></span>And I will bring him nigh that he may
come near to me,  
(For who is he who pledges his heart To come near to me, saith Jehovah!)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p26"></span>**22.** And ye shall be to me a people,
And I will be to you a God.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p27"></span>By “him” we are to understand “Jacob,”
the subject of the whole passage, and not the “governor,” who was to
come from “the midst of him,” *i.e.,* Jacob, a name by which the whole
nation is here called. The promise is to bring Jacob, or the people,
nigh; and then to shew that this is alone God’s work, the words in the
parenthesis are introduced, and by a question, which implies the
negative in the strongest manner, as though he had said, “This work, to
bring you nigh, is mine alone, for no one among you pledges or engages
his heart to come near to me.”

<span id="ii.xxiii-p28"></span>Both the *Sept.* and the *Targ.* render
“him” in the first line in the plural number, “them,” *i.e.,* the
people. And the *Syr.,* though the form of the expression is changed,
yet gives the *meaning* of the words within the parenthesis, for the
work of turning the heart is ascribed to the Lord. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc20001.htm#fr_17) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p31"></span> There is a mistake as to this reference,
for the word is only found in <span id="ii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>[Ps
119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc20001.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.xxvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxvii-p10"></span> This verse is literally the same, word
for word, with the passage referred to here, with the exception of the
word that is noticed; and yet neither the early versions nor the
*Targum* are the same: it is singular how they differ from themselves,
so that we can have no confidence in their verbal accuracy. Instead of
“the pregnant tempest” in <span id="ii.xxvii-p10.1"></span>[Jer
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xxvii-p10.1"></span>, we have here “the violent tempest;” it is a
participle from a verb which means to agitate, to excite, to stir up;
and being passive, it means what is agitated or in great commotion, and
hence violent or turbulent.

<span id="ii.xxvii-p11"></span>Many copies have <span
id="ii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>ו here before <span
id="ii.xxvii-p11.2"></span>סער, as in the former passage, where it is
omitted only in one copy. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc20001.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxviii-p10"></span> The verse is literally as follows, —

<span id="ii.xxviii-p11"></span>Turn not away shall the burning of
Jehovah’s wrath,  
Until his execution and until his completion  
Of the purposes of his heart:  
In the latter days ye shall understand it.

<span id="ii.xxviii-p12"></span>A verb in the infinitive mood in Hebrew
is used often as a noun, “his execution.” A similar form exists in
Welsh, <span id="ii.xxviii-p12.1"></span>*nes gwneuthur ohono* “Until he
hath confirmed,” or “performed,” according to our version, is better
rendered in the *Vulg.,* “until he hath completed.” Here is the
execution and the completion. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](cc20002)
