[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20015)  [Next](cc20017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span> <span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixty-Fourth

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 45

<span id="xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
45:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span>**1**. The word that Jeremiah the prophet
spake unto Baruch the son of Neriah, when he had written these words in
a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son
of Josiah king of Judah, saying,

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span>**1**. Sermo quem loquutus est Jeremias
Propheta ad Baruch filium Neriae cum scriberet sermones istos in libro
ex ore Jeremiae anno quarto Joiakim filii Josiae regis Jehudah, dicendo,

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span>**2**. Thus saith the LORD, the God of
Israel, unto thee, O Baruch;

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span>**2**. Sic dicit Jehova, Deus Israel ad to
(vel, de to) Baruch,

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span>**3**. Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for
the LORD hath added grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I
found no rest.

<span id="xvii.ii-p7"></span>**3**. Dixisti, Vae nunc mihi, quia addidit
Jehova moerorem super dolorem meum, laboravi (vel, defessus sum) in
gemitu meo et requiem non inveni:

<span id="xvii.ii-p8"></span>**4**. Thus shalt thou say unto him, The
LORD saith thus; Behold, *that* which I have built will I break down,
and that which I have planted I will pluck up, even this whole land.

<span id="xvii.ii-p9"></span>**4**. Sic dices ad eum, Sic dicit Jehova,
Ecce quae aedificavi ego diruo, et quae plantavi evello, nempe totam
terram hanc;

<span id="xvii.ii-p10"></span>**5**. And seekest thou great things for
thyself? seek *them* not: for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh,
saith the LORD: but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all
places whither thou goest.

<span id="xvii.ii-p11"></span>**5**. Et tu quaeres tibi magnifica? Ne
quaesieris; quia ego adducam malum super universam carnem, dicit Jehova;
et dabo tibi animam tuam in spolium omnibus locis quocunque tu veneris.

<span id="xvii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xvii.ii-p13"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p14"></span>We have said that prophetic books were not
written by their authors in the order in which they are now read. But
when a Prophet had preached, and committed to writing a summary of his
doctrine, he fixed it to the doors of the Temple. And there were scribes
who collected the summaries, and the volumes now extant were made from
these. I now repeat the same thing, because some one may wonder that the
order of time was not observed by Jeremiah: for hereafter he will
prophesy of heathen nations; and it is certain, that these prophecies
were announced, in part, before the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim,
some during his reign, and some in the time of Zedekiah. But the reason
I have stated ought to be borne in mind, that this book we have now in
our hands was not written by Jeremiah himself, but that it contains
collected summaries, afterwards formed into one volume.

<span id="xvii.ii-p15"></span>Here is told us a special prophecy
concerning Baruch, who, as we know, was the Prophet’s scribe, and not
only his scribe or amanuensis, but also his disciple. And here Jeremiah
relates, that he was gravely and severely reproved, because he shewed
not a mind sufficiently firm, when the book mentioned in chapter
thirty-six was to be written. Some think that there was a just reason
for his grief, because Jeremiah declared that the ruin of the city and
the people was nigh at hand. They then think that Baruch was anxious,
nay, oppressed with sorrow when he heard that so dreadful a judgment of
God was near; for there is no doubt but that he regarded his country
with becoming devotion, and that he was solicitous concerning the
worship of God, and for the safety of the people whom God had chosen out
of all nations, and adopted. But as we shall hereafter see, he looked
rather to himself, and was led to grief and sorrow on his own account;
and for this he was severely reproved by the Prophet. Others bring
forward an explanation by no means satisfactory, that he coveted the
gift of prophecy, when he saw that Jeremiah pronounced, as from on high,
words so weighty, and was the instrument of the Holy Spirit, as though
he *exercised* a celestial judgment. They *hence* think that Baruch was
stimulated by a vain desire for the prophetic office, and that he was
reproved because he assumed more than what was right. But this fiction,
as I have already said, has nothing to support it.

<span id="xvii.ii-p16"></span>I do not doubt, therefore, but that he
apprehended danger to himself, because the message which the Prophet had
committed to him was greatly disliked. For we see in the chapter to
which I have referred, that the Prophet did not go to the king, but
dictated the contents of the book, and gave it to Baruch. When,
therefore, he saw that he could not discharge his duty without danger,
he began to complain and to murmur; and it was on this account that the
Prophet, by God’s command, reproved his weakness. The meaning then is,
that Baruch, as he feared for his life, was affected with too much
grief, so that he wished to be freed from all trouble, and that God was
offended with this extreme fear, and gave a command to his Prophet to
reprove Baruch, as he deserved. Let us now come to the words.

<span id="xvii.ii-p17"></span>*The word which Jeremiah the prophet spoke
to Baruch the son of Neriah.* We must notice, that the holy man did not
spare his own disciple, whom yet he no doubt loved; for he had employed
him, and Baruch had acted faithfully, not only as his scribe, but also
as his fellow-helper. As then Jeremiah had proved the fidelity, care,
and diligence of Baruch in many things, he wished, no doubt, to treat
him with kindness; but as God would have this fault in Baruch to be
corrected, the Prophet performed this duty that belonged to his office.
We hence see that he forgot flesh and blood, when he had to do his work
for God. The circumstance as to time is added: and hence we may infer
what I have already stated, that Baruch, when in danger of his life, was
anxious, and complained of his own case, as though God had laid on him a
burden too heavy and hard to be borne; for the Prophet says that he
received this command *when Baruch wrote the words in the book, in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim.*

<span id="xvii.ii-p18"></span>We have briefly related how this happened;
but it must be added, that Baruch did not fear without reason, because
the king was already displeased with Jeremiah. He was not indeed
altogether cruel, but he had bad counselors, who were like fans, ready
to kindle up his rage; and the issue proved, that this fear was not
without cause; for the king took a penknife and cut the book in pieces,
and then threw it into the fire: and if Jeremiah could then have been
found, no doubt all would have been over with him, as to his life. But
Baruch had been warned by kind men to conceal himself together with the
Prophet. We hence see that Baruch was frightened, because his message
was so disagreeable, and calculated to drive the king to extremities, as
it happened. At the same time, he was too much given to care for
himself, for he ought to have presented his life as a sacrifice to God.
For all who are called to such an office, are in duty bound to undergo
all dangers with courage, so as to disregard life when necessary, or at
least to commit it to the care of God; and when they see dangers nigh,
they ought still to proceed in the course of their office. Though, then,
Baruch wished faithfully to serve God, yet in the conflict he was
overcome by temptation, so that he was more anxious for his life than
animated to proceed in his course. It is to this that the time mentioned
by the Prophet refers, when he says, that Baruch was reproved *when he
wrote the words in a book*

<span id="xvii.ii-p19"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p20"></span>The prophecy is afterwards more clearly
expressed, *Thus saith Jehovah of Baruch.* The Prophet sets on him and
accosts him, in order that he might fill his mind with holy fear, in
order to correct that sinful fear, by which he was impeded in
strenuously serving God. *Thou hast said,* the cause of the reproof is
*expressed* — *thou hast said, Wo is to me now! for Jehovah has added
sorrow to my grief* Barnch no doubt wished to withdraw from his office,
as is the case with those who are too much pressed, when they find that
they are unequal to their task; they seek hiding-places and become
runagates. Such, then, was the feeling of Baruch when he said, *Wo is to
me now!* It was highly honorable to be a scribe to a Prophet, for it was
the same thing as though he received words from the mouth of an angel.
It was then unworthy and disgraceful for the holy servant of God to
complain of his own misery, when yet it was an evidence of singular
favor, that God had been pleased to choose him for such an office. Here
then the ingratitude of Baruch is condemned, when he exclaimed that he
was miserable, while yet he ought to have deemed it a singular
happiness, that God had called him to that work.

<span id="xvii.ii-p21"></span>He says, *Jehovah has added sorrow to my
grief* Here the ingratitude of Baruch breaks out still more; for he
ex-postulated with God, as though he had said, that he was not kindly
treated. And there is an implied reproach in this complaint; for it is
the same thing as though he called in question God’s justice, and
charged him with too much severity. At the same time he complains that
there was no end, as though he had said, that he had already suffered
too much, and that God was not acting kindly with him, because he added
evils to evils, *Jehovah,* he says, *has added sorrow to my grief.* It
seems that <span id="xvii.ii-p21.1"></span>יגון, igun, is more than
<span id="xvii.ii-p21.2"></span>מכאב, *mecab,* for Baruch intimates that
he had already suffered *grief* there being an occasion for it; but that
now an addition of *sorrow* or mourning was made to so many griefs.

<span id="xvii.ii-p22"></span>We hence conclude, that Baruch did not
shrink immediately at the first conflict, as slothful men do; but that
he vacillated in the middle of his course. And this ought to be
carefully observed; for they who have once courageously performed their
office, think themselves endued as with angelic fortitude. Hence it
comes that they boldly disregard all dangers, because they believe
themselves to be invincible. But we see that Baruch was for a time a
strenuous and courageous servant of God; but when there appeared no end,
he began to grow faint. Let us then learn constantly to flee to God and
to seek of him a new increase of grace, so that he may sustain us by the
power of his Spirit, and raise us up, when fallen, for otherwise we
cannot but fall every moment, even when our career seems glorious; but
let us learn, being mindful of our infirmities, to ask the Lord to hold
us up and to stretch forth his hand to us every day. This is what we are
to observe in the example of Baruch, when he says, that sorrow was added
to his grief.

<span id="xvii.ii-p23"></span>But he afterwards expresses the same thing
more clearly; *I have labored in my groaning,* he says, *and found no
rest* By these words also, he testifies that he had been exposed to
various evils, that his troubles were not as yet alleviated, or that he
was not freed from dangers, and that at length he succumbed, for no rest
was given him. We hence see what I have already stated, that Baruch was
not refractory immediately at starting, but that when he had already
made progress, having completed a part of the race, he was overcome with
trials and overwhelmed, before he reached the goal.

<span id="xvii.ii-p24"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p25"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thus shalt thou say
to him,* etc. Here the Prophet shews that he was not roused against
Baruch through any private displeasure, but that he had only conveyed to
him God’s message. *Behold, what I have built I pull down,* and what I
have planted *I root up.* Here it is evident that the cause of the
reproof was, that Baruch loved himself too much, and wished to evade
dangers when God ordered him to engage in the conflict. Jeremiah sets
forth what would be to the whole people. The comparison shews what I
have stated, that Baruch, disregarding the public safety, was too
cautious, and was thus timid and tender as to his own life. This is the
reason why God mentions the whole people, as though he had said, “Dost
thou wish to be deemed of more importance than the whole people? Is thy
life of more value than the wellbeing of the whole community?” It was a
disgrace to Baruch to prefer himself to the whole people, and even to
the Temple and the worship of God. When, therefore, the severity of God
was now ready to fall on the whole people, though Baruch might have
endangered his life a hundred times, yet he ought not to have made so
much account of his life. Then the Prophet shews here that Baruch was
too delicate as to himself; and because he was blinded by the love of
himself, he did not consider the public safety of the people, nor did he
regard the Temple and the holy land.

<span id="xvii.ii-p26"></span>These metaphors of building and planting
often occur in Scripture, I shall not therefore dwell on them here. But
we must observe, that though God be the creator of the whole world, yet
the people of Israel were peculiarly his work, and also the land of
Israel. For God had consecrated that land to himself that he might be
served in it, and had adopted the people. Hence he often *compares* that
people to a vineyard.

<span id="xvii.ii-p27"></span>“O my vineyard, I have planted thee.”  
(<span id="xvii.ii-p27.2"></span>[Jer.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021), [Isa.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii-p27.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.ii-p28"></span>I will not multiply quotations, for in a
thing so *easy* it would be a foolish ostentation to heap together many
texts. God, then, had built his people, because they dwelt there as in
their own habitations, and the land was called his rest He had also
planted his people. We may remark, in short, that the building mentioned
here and also the plantation, refer to those special favors which God
had bestowed on that people. For though he had planted the whole world
and all nations, yet the people of Israel was especially his planting,
as it is said by Isaiah,

<span id="xvii.ii-p29"></span>“The planting of the Lord is for glory,”

<span id="xvii.ii-p30"></span>that is, this people had been planted,
that God through them might manifest his own glory. (<span
id="xvii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Isa
61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)<span id="xvii.ii-p30.1"></span>)

<span id="xvii.ii-p31"></span>Let us come now to what is here declared;
he says, *I pull down what I have built, I root up what I have planted;*
as though he had said, “I have hitherto adorned this people with
singular endowments; for I chose them as a heritage to myself, it is a
holy race, it is a priestly kingdom, I dwell in the midst of them, I
have undertaken the care of defending them, I am their Father, they are
to me not only as a son, but also as a first-born; and titan this land
is holy, because I have set my name in it: I have therefore built and
planted this people and this land; but now, he says, I am pulling down
and rooting up.”

<span id="xvii.ii-p32"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p33"></span>It afterwards follows, *And seekest thou
great things for thyself?* We now see clear enough why he reproved
Baruch, it was, because he was too careful as to himself, and too timid;
and thus it was that he was impeded in his duty. He then says, *And dost
thou seek for thyself?* The particle <span
id="xvii.ii-p33.1"></span>לך*, lac,* for thyself, is put here
emphatically; for here God sets Baruch in the balance, and the whole
people together, with the temple and divine worship. *“Dost thou,”* he
says, *“outweigh* them? Is thy life of more value than the temple, the
safety of the people, and all my gifts which so much excel?” It was then
God’s purpose in this way to make Baruch ashamed of himself, because he
preferred a frail life to so many things and so glorious. *Dost thou,*
then, he says, *seek great things,* <span
id="xvii.ii-p33.2"></span>גדלות*, gidalut, for thyself?* that is,
*“Shall* thy state be eminent while the temple is burnt with fire, while
the land is laid waste, while most men perish, and the remnant are
driven into exile and captivity? Art thou then alone to be deemed
sacred? Art thou alone to be exempt from loss and trouble? See, is all
this right?” Here then he made Baruch himself the judge.

<span id="xvii.ii-p34"></span>But as Baruch might as yet flatter
himself, he immediately restrains him; *Seek not,* he says, for we know
how men from self-love seek their own indulgence. That Baruch then might
not persist in his course, God puts a *check* on all his ambitious
feelings; *Seek not,* he says. He afterwards adds a ground of
consolation. Baruch has been thus far severely reproved, as he deserved,
on account of his self-indulgence; but God now forgives him, and adds a
comfort which might in part alleviate his sorrow; *For behold,* he says,
*I will bring evil on all flesh, and 1 will give thee thy life for a
prey in all p1aces whither thou goest* Here God frees Baruch from that
distressing fear by which he had been debilitated, so as not to possess
suitable firmness for his work. he then says, “Fear not, for thy life
shall be safe to thee while all around thee are destroyed.” Baruch
thought that he should perish while the people were safe and secure; but
God declares that none of the people would be safe, and that he would be
safely preserved while all the rest were perishing.

<span id="xvii.ii-p35"></span>*I will bring evil,* he says, *on all
flesh* He speaks indeed briefly, but Baruch must have well considered
what he had received from the mouth of the Prophet, for he ought to have
been fully persuaded as to the faithfulness and immutable purpose of
God. God then assumes this fact, that ruin was nigh as to the whole
people and other nations. He afterwards adds, *Thy life will I give thee
as a prey* Of this kind of language we have before spoken. To give one
his life for a prey was to deliver him as it were from instant death. As
when all things are exposed to plunder, if one snatched this or that and
escaped, he would have something saved; or as if one plucked anything
from the burning, he would have it preserved; so when all things were
thrown into such a confusion, that death would beset men on every side,
he who could escape in safety would have his life as a prey when removed
from all danger. Then God bids Baruch to be content with the benefit of
being safe, while others, as I have said, were perishing. Now follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](cc20017)
