[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc20013)  [Next](cc20015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 20: Jeremiah and Lamentations, Part IV*,
tr. by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>Chapter 43

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
43:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1**. And it came to pass, *that* when
Jeremiah had made an end of speaking unto all the people all the words
of the LORD their God, for which the LORD their God had sent him to
them, *even* all these words.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1**. Et factum est quum finiisset Jeremias
loqui ad totum populum cunctos sermones Jehovae Dei ipsorum, pro quibus
miserat ipsum Jehova Deus ipsorum ad ipsos omnes (*inquam*) hos
sermones;

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span>**2**. Then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah,
and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto
Jeremiah, Thou speakest falsely: the LORD our God hath not sent thee to
say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn there:

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**2**. Tune dixit Azarias filius Ozaiae, et
Joannes filius Kareae, et omnes duces, et omnes viri superbi, dicentes
Jeremiae, Mendacium tu loqueris, non misit to Jehova Deus noster ad
dicendum, Ne eatis in Aegyptum ad peregrinandum illic:

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>**3**. But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth
thee on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans,
that they might put us to death, and carry us away captives into
Babylon.

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>**3**. Sed Baruch filius Neriae incitat to
contra nos, ut tradat nos in manum Chaldaeorum ad interficiendum nos et
transferendum nos Babylonem.

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span><span id="xv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span>Here the Prophet proceeds with the remaining
part of the narrative. He says that the *whole people* obstinately
persevered in their wicked design, so that he effected nothing by his
warning and protest. Now this stupidity of the people was monstrous; for
they had found out by experience the fidelity of the Prophet for many
years; and further, they had gone to him because they believed that he
was a faithful and an approved servant of God. He had not merely
answered them in God’s name, but as he knew their hardness, he added
protestations which might have moved even stones. But he addressed the
deaf; and it hence appears that they were wholly fascinated by the
devil. And thus let us learn not to mock God, nor bring a double heart
when we inquire as to his will, but to suffer ourselves to be ruled by
his word.

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span><span id="xv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>Now he says, that when he had *finished
speaking to the whole people, as God had commanded, then John the son of
Kareah, and Azariah the son of Hoshaiah,* being the first among them,
spoke against him. As to Azariah, we cannot know with any certainty what
he was. But we have here in John the son of Kareah an example deserving
of notice. We have seen that he was a bold, wise, and prudent man, and
also of an upright mind. In short, when we consider what the Prophet has
before said of him, we cannot but think he was by nature a heroic man;
nay, when he is compared with Gedaliah, who, at the same time, was an
excellent man, and whom the Prophet has adorned with high commendations,
he yet far excelled him. Gedaliah, indeed, had a kind disposition, he
was courageous in protecting the people, he was a man of integrity; and,
besides, he was a father to the people, and so conducted himself when
things were in a hopeless state, that, beyond the expectation of all, he
gathered together the remnant of the people; and we have also seen that
by his efforts the Prophet had been delivered from instant death. But
John the son of Kareah had been a remarkable helper to him, having come
to him of his own accord, and offered to him his assistance; and
further, he faithfully and prudently warned him to beware of the perfidy
of that unprincipled man, by whom he was afterwards killed. Gedaliah
fell through extreme credulity. John, then, the son of Kareah, had a
greater appearance of excellency than Gedaliah had exhibited. But what
does the Spirit of God now declare respecting him and his associates?
They are said to have been proud and obstinate. We hence see that some
men excel in greatness of mind, and are yet of a refractory disposition;
and this is for the most part the case during’ a disturbed state of
things. For some come forth wonderfully courageous; but when things do
not fall in with their wishes, they become ferocious and rebel against
God and men, and besides, they will never bear to be brought under
submission. Such, then, was John the son of Kareah: at one time he
manifested extraordinary virtue, but at length it appeared what he
really was.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>The Prophet, with the authority of a judge,
declares that he and his associates were *proud*: *then Azariah the son
of Hoshaiah, and John the son of Kareah, and all the proud men,* said,
*A falsehood dost thou speak.* This was extremely insolent and
reproachful; for they had lately testified that they regarded Jeremiah
as God’s faithful servant, and that they would receive whatever he might
bring as God’s true oracle; but now they charge him with falsehood! how
great was this presumption! But it hence appears how deep and various,
and how tortuous are the recesses which are in the hearts of men; for at
one time they announce honied words, and afterwards they utter nothing’
but virulence. So from the same mouth, as it were, almost in the same
moment, comes forth what is sweet; and what is bitter.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>Let us hence learn that the heart of man is
full of every kind of deceit, until it be cleansed by the Spirit of God.
We also see, when once impiety boils up, to what extremes it will
*proceed;* for these men were not only insolent and reproachful towards
*Jeremiah,* but also towards God himself. And they did not now make
evasions as before, nor did they raise objections; but they openly raved
against the Prophet. Thus hypocrisy has indeed for a time its coverings,
but when the ungodly are urged by God, then they observe no bounds:
*Thou speakest what is false*

<span id="xv.i-p15"></span><span id="xv.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p16"></span>They afterwards throw the blame on Baruch,
who had been the Prophet’s faithful servant. As they could not find out
any reason why Jeremiah should speak falsely, they turned their fury
against Baruch. They did not then spare Jeremiah for honor’s sake, but
as they had no reason whatever to speak evil of him, they fixed the
blame on Baruch, who yet was as innocent as Jeremiah. *Baruch,* they
said, *excites thee against us* Had Jeremiah so prophesied through the
influence of another, yet his crime might have been at least extenuated.
Now they said that he was mendacious, and brought forth nothing but
impositions; but the ungodly do not regard what they say, for the devil
drives them on headlong. And they charged Baruch with a very groat
crime, that he wished to betray them to the Chaldeans, and then to
expose them to slaughter, and to deliver them that they might be driven
into exile. All this would have been the greatest cruelty.: But then if
we consider what sort of man Baruch had been, and how innocently he had
conducted himself, how he had endangered his life in defending the true
worship of God and prophetic doctrine, there was surely no reason for
loading him with so great a reproach.

<span id="xv.i-p17"></span>But we see that God’s servants have been
always exposed to extreme reproaches, even when they have exhibited the
greatest integrity. If then, at this day, we hear of evil reports, after
having labored to act uprightly, it ought not to appear to us a hard or
a new thing to bear them with patience. We must, indeed, do what we can
to stop the mouths of the malevolent and the wicked; nor ought we to
give occasion, as Paul admonishes us, to the malignant. But when we have
done our duty faithfully, if yet dogs bark at us, if we be loaded with
many reproaches and crimes, let us learn patiently to endure them. This,
then, ought to be done by us, since we see that Baruch was accused of
extreme perfidy and cruelty.

<span id="xv.i-p18"></span>What now had Baruch to do with the Chaldeans?
Had he fled to them? Was he anxious to gain influence for himself? or to
procure favor for himself? There was no such thing; he always followed
Jeremiah wherever he went. Jeremiah had indeed obtained some favor; but
this was to be attributed to the gratuitous kindness of God. Baruch,
then, had got leave from the Chaldeans to remain with the Prophet; for
the condition of both was the same. But yet he had not followed the
Chaldeans, when his option was given to him. For when the Chaldeans
offered quietness and rest to Jeremiah, Baruch might have also gone to
that fertile country; but he chose to remain in the land. We hence see
that he had removed from himself every suspicion, and yet he could not
stop the mouths of the malevolent, but they slandered and. calumniated
him. Let us then know that God’s servants prove their firmness and
constancy, when they are assailed on every side by the calumnies of men,
and yet are satisfied with the testimony of their own conscience, and go
on in their course, and look forward to the judgment of God, and care
not what men think or speak, provided God approves of them, and is their
judge in heaven.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we see what
thou didst formerly threaten to all the despisers of thy word, we may
learn to suffer ourselves to be ruled by thee, and so surrender all our
powers and faculties to thy will, that we may receive immediately
without any dispute whatever thou commandest, and so prove our
sincerity, that our deeds may correspond with our words, and that our
life may shew that we do not falsely profess thy holy name, but declare
what we have in our minds and what thou thyself knowest, until the last
day shall at length appear, when the books shall be opened, and all the
thoughts of men shall be revealed, so that we may then appear upright in
thy sight, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Fifty-Ninth

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#004)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**4**. So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces, and all the people, obeyed not the voice of
the LORD, to dwell in the land of Judah.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span>**4**. Et non audivit Joannes filius Kareah,
neque omnes principes (duces) copiarum, neque torus popu-lus, vocem
Jehovae, ut habitarent in terra Jehudah.

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span><span id="xv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet had sufficiently shewn that John
the son of Kareah and the rest had not in good faith inquired of the
Prophet what the will of God was; for when they saw that God’s counsel
did not harmonize with their wicked and foolish desire, they rose up
against the Prophet. But he now more clearly condemns their obstinacy in
not obeying God; and it is said emphatically, that they did not obey the
voice of God, because they denied that God had spoken. Though then they
sought to evade, Jeremiah on the other hand declares, that he was a true
interpreter of God’s will, that he had announced nothing but what had
come from God. He then brings them all in as guilty, the leaders and the
whole people, that no man might think it strange that innocent men,
willing to submit to God, were driven into Egypt. *Hence* the Prophet
shews here that they were all implicated in the same sin, since the
leaders alone did not resist the oracle, but also the whole people. It
now follows,

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span><span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
43:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#005)<span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**5**. But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all
the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were
returned from all nations whither they had been driven, to dwell in the
land of Judah;

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span>**5**. Et assumpsit Joannes filius Kareah et
cuncti duces copiarum reliquias Jehudah, quae reversae fuerant e cunctis
gentibus, ad quas illuc expulsae fuerant (sed abundat illuc) ad
habitandum in terra Jehudah;

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span>**6.** *Even* men, and women, and children,
and the king’s daughters, and every person that Nebuzaradan the captain
of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of
Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah.

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span>**6**. Nempe viros et mulieres (assumpsit tam
viros quam mulieres,) et pueritiam et filias Regis, et omnem animam,
quam reliquerat Nabuzardan, princeps interfectorum, apud Godoliam filium
Achikaro, filii Saphan, et apud Jeremiam Prophetam, et apud Baruch
filium Neriae:

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span>**7**. So they came into the land of Egypt:
for they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: thus came they *even* to
Tahpanhes.

<span id="xv.v-p7"></span>**7**. Et venerunt in terram Aegypti, quia non
obedierunt voci Jehovae, et venerunt usque ad Taphnees.

<span id="xv.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="xv.v-p9"></span><span id="xv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p10"></span>The Prophet now gives us a narrative of what
he had briefly touched upon. He then says that John and the rest of the
leaders took the remnant of the people, who were there alive, and those
who had returned from various countries; for many had become fugitives
among the Moabites and the Idumeans, when they saw the city surrounded
by the forces of King Nebuchadnezzar. Then they fled here and there, as
it usually happens, and waited for the issue of the war. But after
Nebuchadnezzar had departed, and a permission had been given to Gedaliah
to collect what remained of the people and to place them in cities and
towns, many returned into the land, now desolate; for they had dwelt
with aliens, and had been miserably treated. As then they could not
settle out of their own land nor find any quiet habitation, they
returned, as it is usual with men reduced to want, who have no settled
dwelling. They then returned, that they might live under the protection
of Gedaliah.

<span id="xv.v-p11"></span>Now the Prophet says, that they were taken by
*John* and brought into. *Egypt.* This then was the way in which they
shewed their obstinacy. We hence see how audacious must these leaders
have been, that they hesitated not to go into Egypt, though it was shewn
to be a fatal step. There was not indeed at that time any army of
Nebuchadnezzar in Judea, though his vengeance might have been dreaded.
And then, having fled to: Egypt, they might have been ill-treated there,
and not hospitably received.: But we hence *perceive,* that when men
once shake off the yoke of God, they are hurried on by a diabolical
madness, so that there is nothing insurmountable to them. Had they been
asked whether they acted rightly, they might have raised a thousand
arguments as excuses; but when they followed their own propensity, they
in a manner, so to speak, leaped over the clouds. Impiety then is always
full of rashness and audacity. But as we see that the ungodly thus rush
headlong into ruin, even when God pronounces a curse on their counsels
and proceedings, let us learn to take encouragement ever to obey God;
for he promises a joyful and blessed issue at all times when we follow
the ways pointed out by him. *John* then and *the other leaders of the
forces took the remnant of the people*

<span id="xv.v-p12"></span>And then he shews how little those exiles
consulted their own good, who had returned to dwell in the land of
Judea; for they might have still rested in safety among the nations who
had in kindness received them; but in Egypt God soon executed his
judgments on the natives as well as on strangers. But they deserved such
a reward, because they preferred to obey the command of the perverse and
obstinate, rather than to obey the voice of God speaking by his Prophet.

<span id="xv.v-p13"></span><span id="xv.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p14"></span>The Prophet also mentions particularly who
they were; they were men and *women and children* Some render the last
word “puberty,” which I do not approve, since Scripture speaks thus of
children. Then John and his associates took *childhood,* or children;
and he adds, *the daughters of the king* We have before inquired who
these daughters of the king were: the probability is that they were his
daughters by his concubines; and that they had been put in some safe
place, so that if any great evil happened, they might not fall into the
hands of enemies. Then these daughters of the king had returned with the
other exiles, but were afterwards carried into Egypt.

<span id="xv.v-p15"></span><span id="xv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p16"></span>At last he adds, *all the souls which* had
been left by *Nebuzaradan with Gedaliah, with Jeremiah, and with Baruch*
This had not been expressed elsewhere, that is, that Jeremiah and Baruch
were joined with Gedaliah as rulers over the remnant of the people. But
it was not the design of Jeremiah to relate everything that then took
place. Now then, when an occasion occurred, he says that he and also
Baruch were made governors in connection with Gedaliah. He then adds,
that they all *came into Egypt,* or that they entered into Egypt,. For
the word first used, <span id="xv.v-p16.1"></span>ויבאו*, vaibau,* may
be rendered, *“and* they entered into Egypt;” and then he adds, <span
id="xv.v-p16.2"></span>ויבאו עד-תחפנחס*, vaibau od-tachephnuches, “and*
they entered (or penetrated) as far as Tachephnuches.” It was formerly
one of the chief cities of Egypt; but its name has perished together
with is wealth; for in heathen writers hardly the name of this city is
found. They indeed mention the city Taphnim, but speak not of Taphnees.
It is then probable, as changes take place in a country, that this city
became by degrees forsaken, so as to become obscure and mean, and that
other cities were built which exceeded it in wealth. He then says that
they *came to Taphnees* It now follows, —

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
43:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#008)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**8**. Then came the word of the LORD unto
Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span>8. Et fuit sermo Jehovae ad Jeremiam in
Taphnees, dicendo,

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span>**9**. Take great stones in thine hand, and
hide them in the clay in the brickkiln, which *is* at the entry of
Pharaoh’s house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah;

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span>**9**. Sume in manu tua (accipe in manu tua)
lapides grandes (*vel,* magnas,) et absconde eos in luto (*vel,*
caemento,) in fornace laterum, (*vel,* lacuna, *unde sumitur materia ad
formandos lapides,*) qui locus (*vel,* quae fornax) est in porta domus
Pharaonis in Taphnees, in oculis hominum Judaeorum;

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span>**10.** And say unto them, Thus saith the
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will send and take
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne
upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his royal
pavilion over them.

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span>**10.** Et dices ad eos, Sic dicit Jehova
exercituum, Deus Israel, Ecce ego mitto (mittam,) et assumam
Nabuchadnezer regem Babylonis, servum meum, et ponam solium ejus super
lapides istos, quos abscondi, et extendet tenterium suum super ipsos.

<span id="xv.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="xv.vi-p9"></span><span id="xv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p10"></span>This passage shews that the Prophet was by
force drawn away with others, so that he became an exile in Egypt
contrary to his own wishes; for he did not go there of his own accord,
inasmuch as we have seen how strictly he forbade them all to go down to
Egypt. He was, however, compelled to go there, as though he had been
bound with chains. He did not then go there designedly, nor did he
through despair follow those miserable men; for he would have preferred
to die a hundred times through famine and want in the land of Judah
rather than to have sought in this way the lengthening of his life. It
then appears that he was driven there as it were by enemies.

<span id="xv.vi-p11"></span>But as nothing happens except through God’s
purpose, so from this prophecy it appears that God ordered the going
down of his servant, and that he was not so subjected to the will of the
wicked, but that he was always guided by the hidden influence of God;
for it was God’s will to have his herald even in the midst of Egypt,
that he might declare to the Jews what, was to be. His doctrine, indeed,
was not of any benefit to them; but it was God’s purpose to drive them
as it were into madness, inasmuch as their wickedness was wholly
irreclaimable; for it is a harder thing for the wicked to hear God’s
voice when he threatens vengeance, than to feel his hand. When,
therefore, the unbelieving avoid the word of God, they are still
constrained, willing or unwilling, to hear what they willfully reject,
even that God will be their judge. The Prophet then was sent, according
to the hidden purpose of God, into Egypt, that he might there perform
his wonted vocation and proceed in the discharge of his office, and
there carry on his prophetic work.

<span id="xv.vi-p12"></span>But this prophecy was greatly disliked; for
as the Jews had been already much exasperated, this threatening was
still more calculated to kindle up their fury; and Jeremiah did also
create danger to himself from the Egyptians, for he not only threatened
the Jews, but also the whole kingdom of Egypt. We hence perceive how
invincible was his courage, for he marched through certain deaths, and
was yet terrified by no dangers, but performed the office entrusted to
him by God. Some think that he was on this account stoned by the Jews;
but this is not probable, nay, it may be gathered from other places that
he died a natural death. However this may have been, his perseverance
and firmness were wonderful, for he struggled to the end, and without
weariness, with those wild beasts, whose savageness he had more than
enough experienced.

<span id="xv.vi-p13"></span>Let us now see what this prophecy is: *The
word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah;* and the sum of it is, that the
Prophet was bidden not only to proclaim the vengeance of God, but also
to confirm it by a visible symbol, as it was necessary to arouse
unbelieving men. For so great was their stupidity, that unless God
roused all their senses, they would have never attended; they were deaf.
Then the Lord set before their eyes what they were unwilling and refused
to hear. For this reason the Prophet was bidden to add an outward sign
to his prophecy; according to what we have stated in other places, signs
were often connected with the doctrine on account of the tardiness, or
rather the stupidity of men.

<span id="xv.vi-p14"></span><span id="xv.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p15"></span>He was then commanded to take *great
stones,* and to *hide* them in *the clay,* or cement, *in a brick-kiln,*
that is, in a kiln where bricks were burnt, or in a place where they
were usually made, or where materials were taken to form them. And this
place was not far from the palace of the king in the city of Taphnees,
as the Prophet expressly declares; nay, he says that it was nigh the
gate. As, then, this place was near the palace, the Prophet was bidden
to hide there the stones, and in the sight of the Jews. This was the
symbol. Now, it is shewn for what end God would have the stones to be
fixed in the clay or cement; for if the stones were only rolled there
with great labor by the Prophet, there would have been no instruction;
and all signs we know are unmeaning and without any importance without
the word. It is God’s word, then, that in a manner gives life to signs,
and applies them for the benefit and instruction of men. Therefore God’s
command is added, that he was to speak to the Jews: *Thou shalt say to
them, Thus saith Jehovah.* He brings in God as the speaker, that the
threatening might be more effectual, as it has been stated elsewhere;
for if he had only related the words of God, he could not have thus
arrested their attention, which was very tardy. This, then, is the
reason why he speaks in the person of God himself.

<span id="xv.vi-p16"></span><span id="xv.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p17"></span>*Behold, I,* — *the* particle demonstrative
and the pronoun are both emphatical, <span id="xv.vi-p17.1"></span>הנני,
*enni; Behold, I send,* he says, *to bring Nebuchadnezzar, the king of
Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne on these stones* We now
understand the drift of the whole, even that these stones were thrown
into the *cement,* that God might build up a throne for Nebuchadnezzar.
The time, indeed, for building the throne had not yet *come;* but God’s
purpose was to lay the foundations, so that they might be hid until the
time arrived. The Prophet, then, built a throne for Nebuchadnezzar, when
he cast; these stones into the place of the brick-kiln.

<span id="xv.vi-p18"></span>We must now examine each particular in
order. God says that he would send to bring Nebuchadnezzar, the king of
Babylon. This mission must not be understood otherwise than that of the
secret providence of God; for he had no attendants by whom he might send
for Nebuchadnezzar, but he called him, as it were, by his nod only.
Moreover, this mode of speaking is borrowed, taken from men, who, when
they wish anything to be done, intimate what their object is; and then,
when they give orders, they issue their commands. This is what earthly
kings do, because they can by a nod only accomplish whatever comes to
their minds. But God, who needs no external aids, is said to send when
he executes his own purpose, and that by his incomprehensible power. And
further, God intimates that when Nebuchadnezzar came, it would by no
means be by chance, but to take vengeance on the perverse Jews, who
hoped for a safe retirement in Egypt, when yet God promised them a quiet
habitation in the land of Judah, had they remained there. Then God
declares that he would be the leader of that march when Nebuchadnezzar
came into Egypt, as though he had said that the war would be carried on
under his banner. Nebuchadnezzar did not from design render obedience to
God; for ambition and pride led him to Egypt when he came, and for this
reason, because the Egyptians had so often provoked him, so that without
dishonor to himself he could no longer defer vengeance. It was, then,
for this reason he came, if we look to his object. But God declares that
he overruled the king as well as all the Babylonians, so that he would
arm them when he pleased, and bring them into Egypt, and by their means
carry on war with the Egyptians.

<span id="xv.vi-p19"></span>For the same reason he calls him *his
servant;* not that Nebuchadnezzar was worthy of so honorable a name, for
he had nothing less, as we have said, than a design to serve God; but he
is called God’s servant, because he executed what God himself had
decreed: for the Scripture sometimes calls even the devils the servants
of God; but in strict language, angels and the faithful are alone his
servants. Kings and prophets are also, for a special reason, called
God’s servants, to whom is committed the authority to rule or to teach.
But in this place, as in many other places, the Scripture calls those
God’s servants whom he employs to effect his purpose, even when they
themselves have no such design. But the Prophet, no doubt, had also in
view the Jews, so that they might know that this war was approved by
God; for Nebuchadnezzar would not have come except he had been brought
there by God.

<span id="xv.vi-p20"></span>It then follows, *and I will set his throne*
This, also, is what God claims for himself, even the erecting of the
throne of the King Nebuchadnezzar before the palace of the king of
Egypt. The king of Babylon, doubtless, thought that the war was carried
on through his own efforts and valor, and the courage of his soldiers;
moreover, he sacrificed to his own fortune, as heathens use to do; and
hence it is said in Isaiah of the Assyrian,

<span id="xv.vi-p21"></span>“He will not think so.” (<span
id="xv.vi-p21.1"></span>[Isa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007)<span
id="xv.vi-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="xv.vi-p22"></span>But God designed this to be declared to the
Jews before the time, that they might then know that the just reward of
their obstinacy would be rendered to them, for they were to be taught,
as we have said, for their good and benefit. But as they were already
inexcusable, it was God’s purpose to shame them more and more, so that
they might know that a just punishment would be inflicted on them,
because they had so obstinately rejected all the counsel of God.

<span id="xv.vi-p23"></span>*I will,* then, *erect his throne on the
stones which I have hidden* The Prophet here speaks irregularly, now in
God’s name, then in his own; but this was not done without reason. We
have stated why he introduced God as the speaker, even that he might
make the Jews more attentive; for he knew that all his threatenings
would be derided except God’s majesty was set before them: but now he
connects himself with God, as though he had said that he had nothing
apart from God. This is the reason why he said, *upon the stones which I
have hid* God had not hidden the stones, but the Prophet speaks,
nevertheless, in the person of God. But, as I have already said, this
connection shews that the prophetic word is so connected with the hand
and power of God, that when the Prophet speaks, it ought to be counted
the same, as though God openly thundered from heaven. And this mode of
speaking ought to be carefully noticed, so that we may learn reverently
to receive whatever faithful teachers declare in his name, while
performing the duties of their office; for they are not to be looked
upon as men, for otherwise whatever proceeds from them may be
disregarded; but we ought to receive the doctrine proclaimed by their
mouth as though God himself had descended from heaven to speak to us.

<span id="xv.vi-p24"></span>He afterwards adds, *and he shall extend*
his tabernacle or his tent; for <span id="xv.vi-p24.1"></span>שפריר,
*shepherir,* is taken from a word which means beauty, and properly means
here a royal tent.  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) The hebrews
do not give this name to the tents of shepherds, but only to those tents
which excel in magnificence and splendor, according to what we say in
French, *Le pavillon du Roy.* It now follows —

<span id="xv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#011)<span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p2"></span>**11.** And when he cometh, he shall smite
the land of Egypt, *and deliver* such *as are* for death to death; and
such *as are* for captivity to captivity; and such *as are* for the
sword to the sword.

<span id="xv.vii-p3"></span>**11.** Et veniet et percutiet terram
Aegypti; qui ad mortem, ad mortem; et qui ad exilium, ad exilium; et qui
ad gladium, ad gladium.

<span id="xv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.vii-p5"></span><span id="xv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p6"></span>He confirms the former verse by what he says
here and in the two following verses to the end of the chapter. As Egypt
had cities well fortified and deemed impregnable, the Jews never thought
that the Chaldeans could so easily penetrate into them. For, first, that
country is situated in a plain; and, secondly, in the midst of lakes:
and it is in part surrounded by the Nile and the Red Sea. As, then,
Egypt was on every side so well fortified, they thought that there would
be there a quiet nest for them. But God declares that King
Nebuchadnezzar would become the conqueror of the whole land; and he
removes all *objections* when he says, —

<span id="xv.vii-p7"></span>*Those for death, to death; those for
captivity, to captivity; those for the sword, to the sword;* as though
he had said, “Were Egypt ever so populous, yet the immense multitude of
men will avail nothing, for they shall be conquered by their enemy; for
some shall perish by the sword, and some by various kinds of death, and
some shall be driven into exile; and Egypt shall be destroyed, as though
no one stood up in its defense.” We hence see that this was added, that
the Prophet might shake off the false confidence of the Jews. To the
same purpose are the two following verses.

<span id="xv.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
43:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#012)<span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p2"></span>**12.** And I will kindle a fire in the
houses of the gods of Egypt; and he shall burn them, and carry them away
captives: and he shall array himself with the land of Egypt, as a
shepherd putteth on his garment; and he shall go forth from thence in
peace.

<span id="xv.viii-p3"></span>**12.** Et accendam ignem in aedibus deorum
Aegypti; et comburet eas (vel, ipsos deos) et captivos abducet et
involvet terram Aegypti, quemadmodum involvere solet pastor vestem suam;
et egredietur illinc in pace.

<span id="xv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.viii-p5"></span><span id="xv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p6"></span>He goes on with the same subject; and he
ascribes to God the kindling of the fire, that the Jews might know that
the war would be conducted by a divine power, and that Nebuchadnezzar
would not come except through God’s providence. For though, as it has
been said, he had his own reasons, yet God, by his wonderful power, led
him, as it were, by the hand, to punish the Egyptians. They, indeed,
deserved such a destruction, because they had by their fiat-teries
deceived the miserable Jews, and had corrupted them. Besides, their
allurements had been very ruinous, for through them the aid of God had
been despised, and all the prophecies rejected. As then they had been
the authors of all kinds of evils to the Jews, we hence infer that they
deserved a dreadful vengeance; and this had been in due time made known
to the Jews, but they did not believe it. Then the Prophet fully
confirms what had been declared in his former prophecies.

<span id="xv.viii-p7"></span>*I will kindle a fire,* says God, *in the
temples of the gods of Egypt* And he mentions temples, that the Jews
might understand that no part of the land would be safe or secure from
destruction: for it often happens that when the cruelty of enemies rages
greatly, the temples are spared; for religion commands respect, and
honor has been given also to idols, so that their temples have often
remained untouched, when enemies have wholly overthrown all other
things. But it is probable, that the Chaldeans had so great a
presumption and pride, that they wished to destroy all the temples, that
there might be no religion anywhere except among themselves. And some
also among the Persians had this barbarity, as Xerxes, who, when he
entered into Greece, and some parts of Asia, burnt and destroyed all the
temples, and said also in derision, that all the gods in Greece were
taken captive, and were shut up in the temples, and that he accomplished
everything through his own valor. There is, indeed, no doubt but that
Xerxes thus arrogantly triumphed over the gods of the Greeks; and such
was probably the insolence displayed by the Chaldeans. However this may
have been, yet God shews, that no place in Egypt would be held sacred:
for the Chaldeans would even burn their temples. But at the same time he
meant to cast a reproach on the obstinacy of the Jews, because they went
down to Egypt, whose safety depended on idols. God then shews that they
were more than blind, and wholly beside themselves, as though they were
brute animals, when they hoped for a quiet port in Egypt, which was
under the protection of false gods. God then says, that he would *kindle
a fire* by which the temples of the gods of Egypt would be burned.

<span id="xv.viii-p8"></span>And he adds, *and it* or *he will burn
them* This may be applied to the fire; but he, no doubt, speaks of the
King Nebuchadnezzar, for it immediately follows, *and shall carry them
captives,* and *shall roll up the land of Egypt, as a shepherd his
garment* The verb properly means to cover, but it means also sometimes
to gather up. It may be rendered here to roll up, as we say in French,
*trousser et entortiller.* He intimates, that Nebuchadnezzar would,
according to his own will, so rule in Egypt, that he would heap together
all the wealth of the whole land: and as a shepherd, when he leads his
flock to another place, collects his utensils, and rolls up his
garments, or folds himself in them; so Nebuchadnezzar, says the Prophet,
would gather together, or *roll up the whole land of Egypt* He mentions
*land,* as signifying the wealth which Nebuchadnezzar accumulated. At
length he adds*, and thence shall he depart in peace* He shews that the
conquest would be complete, for the Egyptians would not dare to mutter,
nor dare to follow their enemy on his departure; for he would be as
though he were in a peaceable place, and in his own kingdom.  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130)

<span id="xv.ix"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p1"></span>PRAYER

<span id="xv.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast not
only once shewn to us the way in which we are to walk, but also daily
exhortest us to continue in it, and ever to go forward towards the right
mark, — O grant, that we may never turn aside, but suffer ourselves to
be ruled by thy voice; and though temptations may drive us here and
there, may we ever follow thy command, and so persevere in obedience to
thee, that we may at length, by experience, find that it is our
happiness to commit ourselves to thee, and to follow thee as our leader,
until thou bringest us into that celestial kingdom, which has been
prepared for us by thine only-begotten Son.-Amen.

<span id="xv.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.x"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixtieth

<span id="xv.xi"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Jeremiah
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013)<span id="xv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p2"></span>**13** He shall break also the images of
Bethshemesh, that *is* in the land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods
of the Egyptians shall he burn with fire.

<span id="xv.xi-p3"></span>**13.** Et conteret statuas Beth-semes
(*vel,* Heliopolios) quae est in terra Aegypti, et domos deorum.­Aegypti
(*hoc est,* templa) exuret igni.

<span id="xv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xi-p5"></span><span id="xv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p6"></span>WE stated yesterday why Jeremiah spoke
especially of the temples of the gods, even that the Jews might
understand that nothing would escape destruction: for even the cruel-est
enemies have usually withheld their hands from the temples of gods. If
sanctity and religion would not preserve the temples, what then would
become of private houses? He intimates, in short, that such would be the
ruin of Egypt, that no part would escape.

<span id="xv.xi-p7"></span>But as Heliopolis was then in the greatest
repute, he says, that the *statues* of all the gods in that city would
be broken, for there the gods were especially worshipped. All heathen
writers call it Heliopolis, to which the Hebrew word corresponds; for
Bethsemes means the city of the sun; and Heliopolis means the same. As
then this was the chief place where the gods of Egypt were found, the
Prophet, in order to shew that the ruin of the whole land would be
extreme, says that no temple would be there inviolate. So also Isaiah
says, when speaking of the ruin of Egypt,

<span id="xv.xi-p8"></span>“Behold, God will come into Egypt, and will
cut down before him all the idols.”  
(<span id="xv.xi-p8.2"></span>[Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span id="xv.xi-p8.2"></span>)

<span id="xv.xi-p9"></span>He spoke of God’s coming, because, under his
guidance it was, that Nebuchadnezzar led there his army, as it has been
stated. God did not, indeed, appear from heaven, but the army of
Nebuchadnezzar was a living representation of God’s power, when he
punished the Egyptians. Now, he says, that when God came there armed,
and carried on a warlike expedition, all the idols would be destroyed;
for God would thus shew that the gods in whom the Egyptians trusted were
false, that they were mere fictions, which could give no help when
things came to an extremity. Now follows, —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc20014.htm#fr_129) <span
id="xv.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p25"></span> It is rendered by the *Sept. and Syr.,*
“arms;” by the *Vulg.,* “throne;” by the *Targum.,* “tent.” Strange that
there should be such a difference. It was something to be stretched out
or extended, for such is the meaning of the verb; and it was something
beautiful, for so the word means. It was probably a canopy erecton over
the throne, which was to be set on *the stones.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc20014.htm#fr_130) <span
id="xv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p9"></span> The first verb is rendered in the third
person, by the *Sept.,* the *Vulg.,* and the *Syriac.,* “He will
kindle;” but in the first by the *Targum.,* “I will kindle.” The third
person runs better with the context; but if a causative sense be given
to the verb, it will be equally the same, *“And* I will cause *him* to
kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt, and he will burn them,
and carry them away captive; that is, he will burn the parts made of
wood, and carry away the gold and the silver; “and he will put on the
land of Egypt as the shepherd puts on his coat,” that is, he will put on
the spoils of the land with the same ease and facility as the shepherd
puts on his coat, and carry them away, no one molesting or hindering
him. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 44](cc20015)
