[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa17)  [Next](psa19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### CHAPTER XVII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! having thus preserved them all,
Shree Krishnù Chund began to play at ball with the cowherds' children;
and where Kalee was, the water of the Jumna for the distance of four
koss boiled in consequence of poison; no beast or bird could approach
it: If any went by mistake, they were scorched by the heat, and fell
into the whirlpool; and no tree was produced on its banks. There was a
solitary, everlasting kudum tree on one shore. The Raja enquired,--"O
great king! how did that kudum tree escape?" The sage said, On one
occasion the bird of Vishnù having ambrosia in its beak, alighted on
that tree; a drop fell from its bill, and for this reason, that tree
escaped. Having proceeded thus far in the narration, Shree Shookdeo Jee
said to the Raja,--O great king! Shree Krishnù Chund Jee having
determined upon the destruction of Kalee, whilst engaged in playing at
ball, climbed up the kudum. tree; and as one of his companions threw the
ball from below, it fell into the Jumna, and Shree Krishnù jumped in at
the same time. Having heard the sound of his jumping in, Kalee began to
vomit forth poison, and hissing flames to say, "Who is this that can
live so long in the whirlpool? Perhaps the undecayable tree, not able to
bear my heat, has fallen into

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

the water, broken in pieces; or some great beast or bird has come, the
noise of which is still heard." Having thus said the serpent vomited
forth poison from a hundred and ten hoods, while Shree Krishnù continued
swimming. At this time, his companions, weeping and stretching out their
hands, called out; the cows with their mouths open ran about on all
sides, lowing and panting; the cowherds apart were saying, "Krishnù come
out quickly; otherwise, what answer shall we give, if we go home without
you?" They were grieved, and continued speaking thus, when one of them
went to Brindabun, and mentioned, that Shree Krishnù had jumped into the
whirlpool of Kalee. On hearing this, Rohnee, Jusodha and Nund, with the
cowherdesses and cowherds, came running out weeping, and tumbling over
each other on the way, reached the whirlpool all together. Not seeing
Shree Krishnù there, Nund's wife being agitated, rushed straight forward
to throw herself into the waters. The cowherdesses, interposing, laid
hold of her; and the cowherds' children having seized Nund Jee, thus
addressed him--"Having left the great forest, we have come into this
one; nevertheless devils have vexed us exceedingly. Great good fortune
has befallen from evil spirits, (that is, Krishnù has obtained many
successes over them) now how will Huri come forth from the whirlpool?"
In the meantime, Buldeo Jee arrived there also after them, and explained
to all the inhabitants of Bruj--"The immortal Krishnù will come forth
immediately; why are you sad? I did not come with him to-day; Huri has
gone into the whirlpool without me." Having told so much of the story,
Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the Raja Pureechit,--O great king! whilst
Bulram Jee was thus instilling confidence into all the inhabitants of
Bruj, Shree Krishnù went swimming close to Kalee, who came, and wound
himself round his whole body. Upon this Shree Krishnù became so large,
that having quitted him, Kalee came into the jungle. When hissing, he
attacked Krishnù with his hoods, he guarded himself. Seeing that the
inhabitants

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of Bruj were very much grieved, Shree Krishnù, having jumped up
suddenly, sat all at once on Kalee's head. Having the weight of three
worlds, Krishnù was very heavy: he continued dancing on the different
hoods, and beat time with his foot. Upon this, Kalee began to die from
the weight, and having dashed his hoods against the ground, put out his
tongues, from which streams of blood flowed. When all pride of his
poison and strength had departed, he thought "That the first man had
descended upon the earth; otherwise, who has such power that he could
escape from my poison?" Thinking thus, and having abandoned all hope of
life, he remained stupified with fear. The serpent's wife then came and
joining her hands, and bowing her head, said to Shree Krishnù Chund in a
supplicating tone, "O great king! you have done well in having destroyed
the pride of this tyrannous and presumptuous creature; he has been
fortunate in having now seen you--the feet, which Bruhmù and all the
other gods contemplate, offering up prayers with devout austerity, shine
conspicuously on the head of Kalee." Having spoken thus, she said again,
"O great king! have compassion on me, and release Kalee; if not, destroy
me also with him; because it is proper for a wife without her husband,
(that is, deprived of her husband,) to die: and if you consider, he is
not all in fault, this is the custom of our kind, that by having milk
given us to drink, our poison increases." Having heard this speech of
the serpent's wife, Shree Krishnù Chund jumped down from Kalee's head.
Then Kalee, making an obeisance and joining his hands, said, "Lord! be
pleased to forgive my offence: I, through ignorance, attacked you with
my hoods; I am a serpent of an inferior caste, whence could I have the
intelligence to recognize you?" Shree Krishnù said, "What has happened,
has happened; but do not live here any longer, go and dwell with your
family in the island of Kounuck." On hearing this, Kalee said with fear
and trembling, "O lord of liberality! if I go there, the bird, upon
which Vishnù rides,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

will eat me up; from dread of which I ran off, and have come here."

Shree Krishnù said, "Go there now without fear; no one will say any
thing to you, after having seen the marks of my feet on your head."
Having thus spoken, and sent for the bird of Vishnù, Shree Krishnù Chund
dissipated the fears of Kalee's mind. Then Kalee having offered up
devotion in the manner prescribed, with perfumes, lamps and consecrated
food, and having placed many gifts before Krishnù, joining his hands,
said in a supplicatory tone, after he had obtained permission to
depart--"You have danced for four ghurees on my forehead: Lord! remember
this act of friendship." Thus having spoken, and made an obeisance,
Kalee went with his family to the island of Kounuck, and Shree Krishnù
Chund came out of the water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](psa19)
