[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa13)  [Next](psa15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO said,--O great king! Shree Krishnù went one day early to
the jungle to feed the calves; and all the cowherds' children, taking
provisions with them from their homes, accompanied him. Having gone to
the pasture ground, and deposited their food, and let the calves loose
to graze, staining their bodies with white and red earth, making
necklaces of jungle fruits and flowers, they put them on, and imitating
the sounds of beasts and birds, and indulging in sports of various
kinds, they began to dance and sing.

In the meantime, a demon named Ooghasoor, sent by Kuns, arrived; and
being transformed into a. huge serpent, sat with his-mouth open; and
Shree Krishnú playing, sporting and taking his companions with him, came
to the spot where the serpent, having prepared his ambuscade, was
sitting with his mouth open. Having beheld him from a distance, the
cowherds' children began to say amongst themselves, "Brother! this is
some great mountain, the chasm of which is so large." Thus conversing,
and leading the calves, they came near the serpent. One child then
seeing its mouth open, said, "Brother! this is some very frighful cave,
do not let us go inside it, we are frightened on even looking at it."
One of the companions, named Tokh, then said, "Come, let us go inside,
what fear have

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

we, whilst Krishnù is with us? If it should be any demon, he will be
destroyed as Bukasoor was." They were all standing and conversing thus,
when the serpent drew such a deep breath, that all the cowherds'
children together with the calves fell into his mouth. There was such a
poisonous, hot vapour, that the calves alarmed, began to low, and
Krishnù's companions to call out, "O beloved Krishnù! quickly take
thought of us, or we shall be burnt to death." Hearing their cries,
Shree Krishnù, being distressed, went also into his mouth; and the
serpent delighted shut its mouth. Upon this, Shree Krishnù increased his
body to such a size, that the serpent's stomach was burst. All the
calves and cowherds' children fell out. At this time, the gods
delighted, and raining flowers and nectar, took away the heat, under
which all were suffering. Upon this, the cowherds' children began to say
to Shree Krishnù, "Brother! by putting this demon to death, you have
well saved us: otherwise, all would have perished--(or had perished,)"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](psa15.md)
