[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa28)  [Next](psa30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CHAPTER XXVIII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--O great king! early in the morning,
taking the cows, cowherdesses and cowherds with them, Krishnù and Bulram
playing on the flute, and singing sweet notes, were proceeding to the
jungle to give grazing to the cows, when Raja Indrù, accompanied by all
the gods, preceded by the cow Ramdhenoo, and mounted upon the elephant
Yerawut, having come to Brindabun from the region of the gods, stood
obstructing the road to the jungle. When he beheld Shree Krishnù Chund
at a distance, dismounting from his elephant, he came bare-footed and
trembling, with a cloth thrown about his neck, and fell at the feet of
Krishnù; and expressing great regret, and shedding tears began to say,
"O lord of Bruj! have mercy on me. I have been very proud, and
presumptuous; and have given up my mind to sensual enjoyment and
illusion. Intoxicated with wealth I have placed my enjoyment in riches.
Your nature I have not understood at all; you are god, the lord of all;
who, except you, is the lord of the world? Bruhmù, Roodrù and all
others, who grant boons, have obtained prosperity by your gift. You are
lord of the world, dwelling in the Vedas. Luchmee, constantly attending
on you, has become your servant. You descend upon the earth for men's
sake; and

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

then remove all the burthens of the earth. Put away all my faults: I
have been very presumptuous and foolish."

When Indrù had eulogized Krishnù with such humility, Shree Krishnù
Chund, taking compassion on him, said, "You have come now with the cow
Ramdhenoo; and, therefore, I pardon your sin. Do not again indulge in
pride, because by doing so the understanding is destroyed: and
foolishness, from which disrespect proceeds, is increased."

On hearing these words from the mouth of Shree Krishnù, Indrù having
risen, performed poojah according to the injunctions of the Vedas; and
having pronounced the name of Gobind, took the water, in which his feet
had been washed, and circled to the right hand by way of adoration of
Krishnù. At this time the heavenly musicians, playing upon instruments
of different kinds, began to celebrate the praises of Shree Krishnù; and
the gods, seated in their chariots, to rain down flowers from the sky.
And the crisis appeared the same, as if Shree Krishnù had been born for
the second time.

When Indrù had finished the poojah, he stood before Krishnù with hands
joined: and Shree Krishnù gave him the order to return to leis own city
With the cow Ramdhenoo. On receiving the order, Ramdhenoo and Indrù
taking their departures, after having made obeisance, went to the region
of Indrù. And Shree Krishnù Chund having allowed the cows to graze,
returned, in the evening with all the cowherds' children to Brindabun.
They having gone to their homes, related that they had that day seen
Indrù in the jungle, through the glory of Huri.

Having related so much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja Pureechit,--Raja! by hearing and reciting this account of Shree
Gobind, which I have narrated to you, the four blessings of religion,
substance, desire and deliverance are obtained in the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](psa30)
