[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa33)  [Next](psa35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund, who is
acquainted with the secrets of the heart, knew that the cowherdesses
would not survive without him, then appeared amongst them the son of
Nund, just as a juggler would appear again, after having been concealed,
whilst a person shut his eyes. When they saw that Huri had come, the
senses of all of them were revived, just as the organs of perception are
restored to animation, when life is revived in a dead man. Whilst they
did not see him, their minds were in a state of agitation, as though
they had all been bitten by the mind-agitating snake. Their troubles
were ended on the arrival of him they loved, as creepers are revived by
being sprinkled with the water of life. In the same way that the lotus
appears withered at night, but revives on beholding the splendour of the
sun, the large eyes of the women of Bruj were restored to animation on
beholding Krishnù.

Having recited thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said, O great king! the
cowherdesses, on seeing Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, being all
at once released from the sea of despondency, approached him, and were
as much rejoiced, as a man, drowning in the unfathomable ocean, would be
to find a shallow place. And they collected round him on all sides.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then Shree Krishnù
took them with him to the place where they had first engaged in festive
songs and dances. On their arrival, one of the cowherdesses took off her
scarf, and spread it for Krishnù to sit down upon. As he sat down upon
it, many of the cowherdesses were angry, and said, "O great king! you
are very deceitful, and steal away the minds and wealth of others, but
do not respect the good qualities of any one."

After this, they said to each other, "He has abandoned what is good, and
embraced what is bad. Deceit suits his mind. Consider, friend! how can
we possibly form an association with him."

On hearing this, one of them said, "Friends! do you remain apart; as we
derive no benefit from our own speaking, I will make Krishnù himself
speak." Saying these words, she smiled and enquired from Shree
Krishnù,--"O great king! explain to us who is a good man, and who a bad
man in the four following instances:--One, who without having done a
good action, shall expect good actions from others, (or shall expect to
have his non-performance of good actions considered in the light of the
performance of them:) a second shall make a return for a good action: a
third shall return evil for good: a fourth shall take no thought
whatever of any good, that may be done to him." Shree Krishnù Chund
replied, "All of you listen with attention, whilst I explain who is the
good, and who the bad man, in the cases mentioned. The best is he who
does good without receiving any, as a father loves a son. It is no
virtue to return good for good, in the manner that a cow gives milk for
the food she receives. Consider as your enemy one who regards good and
evil alike. The most ungrateful of all is he who forgets good done to
him."

When the cowherdesses, on hearing these words and looking at each other,
began to laugh, Shree Krishnù Chund was frightened, and said, "I am not
to be reckoned amongst any of these four kinds of persons, which you
seem to think by

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

your laughing; moreover, it is my custom to grant the accomplishment of
any wish or desire a person may ask from me. Perhaps you will say, if
this is your practice, why did you abandon us in the jungle? The reason
was, that I made trial of your affection. Do not think ill of me for
this, but believe what I say."

After this, he again said, "I have now tried you: remember and meditate
upon me. You have increased your affection for me, who am like a poor
man that has obtained wealth. You have met my wishes in every respect;
and in doing so, have foregone the reproach of the world, and the Vedas;
just as a religious devotee, who abandons his home, and entertains a
love for Huri with sincerity of mind. If I should live for a hundred
years of Bruhmú, I should never be quit of my debt to you."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](psa35.md)
