[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa35)  [Next](psa37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

### CHAPTER XXXV.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--Raja! listen with attention, and I will
relate to you, how Shree Krishnù Jee released a celestial dancer, and
destroyed Sunkhchoor. Nund Jee one day called all the cowherds, and said
to them, "Brothers! when Krishnù was born, I made a vow to my family
Dewee and Unbika, that I would go in musical procession with all the
city, and perform poojah on his twelfth birth-day. As, through the mercy
of Dewee, I have lived to see his twelfth birth-day, which is to-day, we
must go and perform the poojah."

All the cowherds arose, on hearing these words of Nund Jee, and
immediately brought forth from their houses all things necessary for the
poojah. Nund Rae did the same, and loaded carts and bhangees with milk,
curds and butter; and accompanied them with all his relations, and
arrived at the abode of Unbika. Having gone and bathed in the river
Suruswutee, Nund Jee sent for a family priest, and went, accompanied by
all his retinue, to the temple of Dewee, and performed poojah. And
having placed before her all the different articles they had brought to
offer, and having performed the act of going round to the right by way
of adoration, they exclaimed with joined hands and in a supplicating
manner, "O mother! through

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

your beneficence, Krishnù has attained the age of twelve years."

Having thus spoken, and bowing their heads, they quitted the temple, and
fed a thousand Brahmins. In consequence of the delay which this caused,
Nund Jee remained there with all the inhabitants of Bruj, and they
fasted, as they would at a place of holy pilgrimage. As they were
sleeping at night, a boâ came and seized Nund Rae's foot, and began
swallowing it. He was alarmed at seeing this, and called out, "Krishnù!
Krishnù! take thought of me quickly: otherwise the snake will swallow me
up." On hearing his voice, all the inhabitants of Bruj, both men and
women, started from sleep, and came to where Nund was. Having struck a
light, they saw a boa lying on the ground, having hold of his foot. In
the meantime, Shree Krishnù Chund Jee having arrived, placed his foot
upon its back in sight of them all. On which the snake, immediately
abandoning its former body, was transformed into a handsome man; and
having made an obeisance, stood before them with joined hands. Then
Shree Krishnù enquired, "Who art thou, and explain for what crime thou
wast transformed into a snake?" He, bowing his head, said in a
supplicating voice, "O thou who knowest the secrets of the heart! all
the circumstances of my origin are known to thee. I am a celestial
dancer, named Soodursun, and dwelt in the region of the gods; and
through pride thought myself superior to all others in beauty and
excellence of mind; I went forth one day, seated in my chariot, to the
place where Angira, the saint, was sitting, engaged in religious
devotion. And I went backwards and forwards a hundred times over him.
Once on seeing the shadow of my chariot, he looked up, and being angry
pronounced a curse upon me, saying, 'O presumptuous: be thou changed
into a boâ.' As he uttered these words, I fell to the earth, in the form
of a boâ.

"The saint told me at the time that my release would be accomplished by
Shree Krishnù Chund. For this reason, I

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

came and seized the foot of Nund Rae Jee, in order that you might come
and grant me release. O lord of compassion! you have come, and
mercifully released me." Thus having spoken, the celestial dancer
circled to the right by way of adoration; and having obtained Krishnù's
permission to depart, ascended his chariot, and went to the region of
the gods.

On beholding this wonderful act, all the inhabitants of Bruj were
astonished. In the morning, having gone to see Dewee, they all returned
together to Brindabun.

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo, the sage,
said,--O lord of the earth! Huldhur and Gobind one moonlight night were
singing in the forest with the cowherdesses, and enjoying themselves,
when a demi-god, attendant of Kooverù, named Sunkhchoor, who had a jewel
on his head, and was very powerful, came forth amongst them. He saw the
cowherdesses engaged in sports on one side, and in another direction
Shree Krishnù and Buldeo intoxicated, and singing in a state of great
delight. A thought having occurred to him, he collected all the women of
Bruj together, and drove them before him. The women were frightened, and
called out to Krishnù and Bulram to protect them. The brothers having
heard the cries of the women, uprooted a tree, and seizing it in their
hands, rushed forth as drunken elephants rush upon lions, and told the
cowherdesses not to be at all alarmed, as they had arrived. The
demi-god, looking upon them as the agents of his destruction, was filled
with fear; and ran off for his life, leaving the cowherdesses. Nund Lal
left Buldeo with them, and went after Sunkhchoor himself, and seizing
him by the hair behind, brought him to the ground. After this, lowering
his hand, he cut off his head, and taking possession of his jewel, gave
it to Bulram.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](psa37)
