[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa34)  [Next](psa36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIV.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--Raja! when Shree Krishnù Chund had
spoken in this agreeable manner, all the cowherdesses, laying aside
their anger, and being greatly rejoiced, arose, and having united with
Huri, began to indulge in every kind of pleasure, delight and pastime;
when Krishnù had recourse to his deceptive power, and divided his body
into numberless particles, desiring to give pleasure to them all; and
engaging in their sports with the greatest affection, Shree Krishnù
Chund, having assumed as many bodies as there were cowherdesses, took
them all with him to the circular terrace, where he had before gone; and
again began engaging in festive dances and songs.

The cowherdesses, in pairs, joined their hands, and Huri was in the
midst of them. Each thought he was at their side, and did not recognize
him near any one else. They placed their fingers within his fingers, and
whirled about with the greatest enjoyment, taking Huri with them. The
son of Nund in the midst of the cowherdesses was like thick masses of
clouds, surrounded on all sides by lightning. The dark-blue Krishnù
amongst the fair women of Bruj was like a sapphire on a necklace of
gold.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

O great king! standing thus together, the cowherdesses and Krishnù began
to tune various kinds of musical instruments, preluding difficult airs,
and played and sang, producing great varieties of tone, and singing
whilst they danced. And so delighted were they, that they seemed to lose
all recollection of their very existence. Sometimes the breast of one
was uncovered, and the diadem of another slipped off. At one place, the
pearl necklaces of some were broken, and the pearls fell on the ground:
at another, garlands of flowers were strewed about. The drops of
perspiration on their foreheads glittered like strings of pearls; and
the ringlets of the cowherdesses were spread in such a loose and
dishevelled manner over their faces, that they resembled young snakes,
who had flown up, and then become fastened to the moon, from an eager
desire to obtain the water of life.

Sometimes a cowherdess, singing in high tones, accompanied Krishnù's
flute: and sometimes one of them sang without accompaniment. And when
any one of them, having stopped Krishnu's flute, poured forth the same
notes from her own voice, he was as much fascinated as a child on
beholding its own image in a mirror.

Thus singing and dancing, and practising all kinds of coquetry and
ogling, they passed the hours in mutual enjoyment, and being pleased
with each other, they laughed and embraced and made a propitiatory
offering of their dresses and ornaments. At that time, Bruhmù, Roodrù,
Indrù and all the gods and celestial musicians, seated in their chariots
with their wives, looked down upon the festivities, and showered down
flowers with delight. And the wives, gazing on this scene of pleasure
with eager desire, thought to themselves, that if they could be born in
Bruj, they also might join in festivities with Huri. And to such a pitch
were the musical notes and tones carried, that on hearing them, the air
was stilled, and water ceased to flow; and the moon, together with the
whole of the stars, was astonished, and poured down the water of life
from its rays.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The night was
prolonged so that six months passed away, whence that night was named,
Bruhmù's night.

Having proceeded thus far with the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
lord of the earth! whilst engaged in these festive sports, a whim seized
Krishnù, and he went with the cowherdesses to the banks of the Jumna.
Going into the water and engaging in aquatic pastimes, after he had got
rid of his fatigue, he came out; and having accomplished the wishes of
them all, said to them, "There are four ghurees of the night remaining;
go all of you to your homes." The cowherdesses were sad at these words,
and said, "Lord! how shall we go home, leaving your lotus-like feet? Our
greedy minds do not approve of what you have suggested." Shree Krishnù
replied, "Meditate on me in the manner that religious devotees meditate;
and wherever you may be, I will always be with you." They were gratified
at these words, and taking leave returned home; and no one at their
houses was aware that they had not been all along at their respective
house.

Having heard thus much of the history, Raja Pureechit said to Shree
Shookdeo, the sage,--"O kind to the poor! Shree Krishnù Chund had come
upon the earth to destroy evil spirits, and remove the burthens of the
world, and, having conferred happiness on saints and religious men, to
promote piety. Explain to me, why he engaged in festivities with other
men's wives; as it is the act of a dissolute person to enjoy himself
with another man's wife?" Shookdeo Jee replied, Raja! you do not
understand this mystery, and regard the deity as a mortal. His body is
glorious and pure, by remembrance of whom sin is obliterated, just as
any thing falling into fire, itself becomes fire.

What cannot the powerful do? because by their acts they overcome fate:
as Shivù took poison, and after having taken it made of it an ornament
for his neck, and formed a black snake into a necklace. Who can
understand his actions? Beings with

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

power do nothing for themselves, but confer boons on all petitioners,
who worship and hold them in remembrance.

The nature of Krishnù is this; that he seems to associate with all: but
if you consider, you will perceive, that he appears as separate as the
lotus leaf from the water. I have already narrated to you the history of
the cowherdesses' birth, and that Dewee and the mystical prayers of the
Vedas were born, and came to Bruj to see and touch Huri. And in this
manner Shree Radhika also, having obtained a blessing from Bruhmù, was
born to be a servant to Krishnù Chund; and remained in the service of
her master.

Shree Shookdeo Jee continued, O great king! we are told to believe all
the acts that Krishnù performed, but not to turn our thoughts to the
manner in which, and the means by which, they were performed. Whoever
celebrates the fame of the lord of the cowherdesses, obtains, fearless
and unmoved, the highest dignity. And the same benefits which are
procured by bathing in the sixty-eight places of pilgrimage, are
procured by celebrating the great renown of Shree Krishnù.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV](psa36.md)
