[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa38)  [Next](psa40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### CHAPTER XXXVIII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! listen attentively, and I will
narrate how Shree Krishnù Chund killed Kesee, and Narud came and
eulogized the act; and afterwards how Huri destroyed Byomasoor. At dawn
of day, Kesee came to Brindabun in the form of an immense horse of
terrifying aspect; and began to paw the ground, and dig up the earth;
having blood-shot eyes, and uplifted nostrils, and ears and tail erect;
and continued neighing and writhing its shoulders and kicking.

On seeing the animal, the cowherds' children were frightened, and ran
off and told Krishnù, who came to the spot: and on beholding it, made
preparations for an encounter, and striking the upper parts of his arms,
roared like a lion, exclaiming, "If you are a great friend of Kuns, and
have come here in the form of a horse, why do you run after others? Come
and fight with me, that I may see your strength? How long will you
wander about, like a moth circling round a lamp? Your death is at hand."
On hearing these words Kesee was enraged, and began to say to himself,
"To-day I will make trial of his power, and laying hold of him and
chewing him like sugar-cane, will do what Kuns wishes." He then rushed
forward with his mouth open, as though he would devour the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

whole world. On his first approach he attacked Krishnù with his mouth,
who drove him back; when he rushed forward the second time with his
mouth open, after having recovered from the first shock, Shree Krishnù
thrust his hand into his mouth, and so enlarged his hand, which was like
an iron club, that it blocked up the ten passages of the horse's body.
Kesee was alarmed, and began 'to say to himself, "My body is now
bursting, how has this happened? I have admitted my own death into my
mouth, and have lost my life, as a fish loses its life by swallowing a
hook."

He then attempted many plans of extricating the hand, not one of which
succeeded. At length, he ceased to breathe, and his belly burst, so that
he fell backwards. The blood streamed from his body like a river. At
this time the cowherds' children came to see what had happened; and
Shree Krishnù Chund advanced into the jungle, and stood under the shade
of a kudum tree. In the mean while Narud, the sage, arrived with a lute
in his hand. Having made an obeisance, he stood up, and playing on the
lute, and singing of the past and future sports and exploits of Shree
Krishnù Chund, he said, "O lord of compassion! your sports are
unlimited. Who has power to describe your actions? But through your
favour I know so much, that you frequently descend and are manifest upon
the earth to confer happiness on your worshippers, protect virtuous men,
destroy demons and evil spirits and remove the burthens of the world."

On hearing these words Krishnù permitted Narud, the sage, to depart; and
he bowed his head and went away. Krishnù took all the cowherds' children
and his companions with him; and sitting under a fig tree, he made one a
minister, another a counsellor of state, a third the chief of an army,
and being himself a Raja, they all began to play a game in imitation of
royalty, and afterwards at blind man's buff.

Having recited so much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O lord
of the earth! Kuns having heard that Kesee had

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

been killed, early in the morning, raving and trembling, said to
Byomasoor, "O powerful Byomasoor! the extirpator of enemies, great is
your fame in the world! As the son of Poonuvú (the ape Hunooman) is
Rain's messenger of death, so are you mine. Destroy the sons of
Basoodeo, effect this object for me to-day."

Byomasoor with joined hands said in reply, "O great king! to-day I will
do all in my power. My body is yours. They, who are fond of life, shrink
from sacrificing it for their masters. The good name and virtue of
servants and wives consist in giving up their lives for their lords."

Having thus spoken, and taken up the beera of betel in token of
undertaking the project, proposed by Kuns, against Krishnù and Buldeo,
Byomasoor made an obeisance to Kuns, and set out for Brindabun. On the
road he assumed the appearance of a cowherd, and arrived in that
disguise at the place where Huri was playing at blind man's buff with
the cowherds' children and their companions. When, as he was going
along, he said to Krishnù from a distance with his hands joined, "O
great king! allow me also to play with you," Huri invited him to come
near, and said, "Do not conceal any wish you may have formed, but play
with us at any game you prefer?" He was delighted, and replied, "The
wolf and rams is a good game." Shree Krishnù Chund smiled and said,
"Very good, you be the wolf, and the cowherds' children shall be the
rams."

Byomasoor was rejoiced at these words, and became a wolf, and the
cowherds' children were rams, and they began to play the game together.
The demon took them off one by one, and placed them in the cave of a
hill, and shut them up there, by placing a stone across the entrance.
When he had thus placed them all there, and Shree Krishnù alone
remained, he called out, "I will to-day accomplish Kuns' business for
him, and destroy all the family of Judoo."

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

Having thus spoken, and abandoned the appearance of a cowherd, and
having been transformed into a real wolf, he rushed upon Krishnù, who
seizing him despatched him by means of suffocation and blows, in the way
the sacrificial goat is killed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIX](psa40.md)
