[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa44)  [Next](psa46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

### CHAPTER XLIV.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! when Nund, Oopnund and all the
older cowherds had joined the assembly at the place of amusement, Shree
Krishnù Chund said to Buldeo, "Brother! all the cowherds have already
gone, do not delay now, but let us take our companions, the cowherds'
children, with us, and go quickly to visit the place of amusement." On
hearing these words, Bulram Jee arose, and said to the cowherds'
children, his friends, "Brothers! let us go and see the preparations at
the place of amusement." At these words they all accompanied him. Shree
Krishnù and Bulram afterwards assumed the appearance of jugglers, and
proceeding with their companions, the cowherds' children, came to the
gate of the place of amusement, and stood near where the "*must*"
elephant Koobliya, possessing the strength of ten thousand elephants,
was moving to and fro. Beholding the elephant in a state of the greatest
excitement at the gate, Bulram called out to the keeper, "Mahout! listen
to what I say, and drive away the elephant from the gate. Let us have
access to the Raja; lest the elephant should be destroyed. I tell you
beforehand it will not be our fault, do not consider Huri a child. He is
lord of the three worlds, and has descended upon the earth to destroy
the wicked and

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

remove the burdens of the world." To this speech, the driver replied
angrily, "I am aware that while tending herds, he has become lord of the
three worlds, and for this reason has made his appearance here as a very
great hero. Do not look upon his breaking the bow as any thing: my
elephant possesses the strength of ten thousand. You shall not obtain
entrance, until you fight with it. You have destroyed many powerful
creatures; but if you escape to-day from this elephant, I will
acknowledge that you are very strong." Huldhur was enraged, and said,
"Hear me! you foolish, low creature, be cautious what you say, or I will
presently dash you in pieces, and the elephant also; to hesitate is not
advisable, as the elephant will be put to death immediately. Believe
what I am saying, and calling out to you." At these words the driver was
in a great passion, and drove the elephant towards them. As the elephant
charged Buldeo Jee, he struck it such a blow with his hand, that it
folded up its trunk, and reeled back, screaming. When the strong men of
Kuns, who were standing near, beheld this wonderful act, they began to
despair, and say to themselves, "Who can possibly win against two such
powerful antagonists?" And the elephant driver, perceiving that the
elephant had been forced back, was very much alarmed, and began to
reflect, "That unless these two children were killed, Kuns would not
allow him to escape with life." With these thoughts in his mind, he
goaded on the elephant again, with his iron goad, and made it enraged,
and impelled it against the two brothers. When he laid hold of Huri with
his trunk, and, in his rage, endeavoured to crush him between his teeth,
Krishnù assumed a very subtile body, and escaped between his teeth.

At this time all rose up through fear, gods, sages, men and women.
Krishnù escaped between the elephant's two tusks, and the treasury of
strength clapped his hands. He rose up with the elephant, and then in
sport drove him forward. All became conscious of being restored to their
lord, on beholding

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the exploits of Krishnù. On hearing the sound of Krishnù impelling
Koobliya, many more elephants rushed to the spot, enraged, and with
trunks uplifted. Moorari remained crouched under Koobliya's belly, who
thinking he had gone, continued looking after him. Huri then appearing
behind the animal called out, and Buldeo circumvented it in front. They
both began to make the elephant sport and gambol; and all were
frightened at seeing this. O great king! sometimes Bulram laid hold of
its trunk, and Krishnù of its tail; and when the elephant ran to lay
hold of them, they slipped away.

They remained sporting with it for some time in the same way that they
used to play with calves in their infancy. At length Huri seizing it by
the tail, and whirling it round, dashed it on the ground, and killed it
with blows. He pulled out the elephant's tusks, and blood streamed like
a river from its mouth.

On the death of the elephant, the driver came bawling out to Krishnù,
who instantly destroyed him, and threw him under the feet of the
elephant. And the two brothers laughing and disguised as jugglers, each
with an elephant's tusk in his hand, went and stood in the centre of the
place, which had been prepared for amusement (the theatre.) Whoever
beheld Nund Lal at this time, he appeared to him in the same form as the
beholder; wrestlers thought him a wrestler; Rajas a Raja; the gods as
their lord; the cowherds' children, as a companion; Nund and Oopnund as
their child; the women of the city regarded him as the abode of beauty;
Kuns and all evil spirits looked upon him in the light of death.

O great king! whilst looking at Krishnù and Buldeo, Kuns being very much
afraid called out to the wrestlers, "To knock them down and destroy
them; or drive them away from his presence." When Kuns had thus spoken,
the wrestlers, accompanied by their instructors, their sons and pupils,
and adopting various different appearances, striking their arms in
preparation for battle, collected together on all sides to attack
Krishnù

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

and Bulram, who remained firm, as they advanced. Chanoor, one of the
wrestlers, looking towards them, said with sly impertinence of manner,
"Our Raja is a little out of spirits to-day, and wishes to see you fight
by way of amusing his mind; because during your abode in the jungle, you
have learnt all the science of fighting. Be not at all anxious in your
minds, but come and wrestle with us, and give pleasure to our Raja."
Shree Krishnù replied, "The Raja Jee has acted with great kindness in
having invited us to-day; what shall we be able to do for him? You are
very powerful, and possessed of skill; and we are ignorant children; how
shall we be able to encounter you? It is said, that we ought to marry,
and have friendship and enmity with equals; but we have no power over
the Raja Jee; and therefore consent to what you propose; save us and do
not exert your strength to dash us to pieces. It is proper that both
parties should act with due regard to justice, and unite in endeavouring
to please the Raja"

On hearing these words, Chanoor was alarmed and said, "It is impossible
to understand your nature and condition. You are not two children, but
powerful men in disguise. Whilst playing with the bow you broke it into
two pieces; the elephant Koobliya was immediately killed and obtained
deliverance. You never sustain defeat in fighting, every one knows these
circumstances."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV](psa46.md)
