[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa42)  [Next](psa44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

### CHAPTER XLII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! when Shree Krishnù, with a
delusive power, like that of jugglers, had shown himself in many shapes
to Akroor, and had stolen away his senses, Akroor came out of the water,
and standing on the bank, made an obeisance to Huri. Nund Lal then
enquired from Akroor, "Uncle! why do you stay so long in the water, when
it is so cold? I was very anxious about you, supposing that you had
forgotten to proceed on your journey! Have you seen any thing strange?
Explain to me, that the doubts of my mind may be removed?"

On hearing these words, Akroor said, joining his hands, "Lord of Bruj!
you know every thing? You have shewn yourself admirably to me in the
water. Nothing is too wonderful for Krishnù to perform. I have
confidence in thee, let us proceed, lord! on the road to Muthoora? Let
us not delay here, but go on quickly, and perform what we have to do."
At these words Huri went into the ruth, accompanied by Akroor, and stood
up. Nund and all the cowherds had proceeded on their journey, and on
arrival had pitched their tents outside the city of Muttra; and in
anxious expectation of the arrival of Bulram and Krishnù, said to one
another, "What has been the reason of the delay they have

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

made in bathing, and why has Huri not yet arrived?" when Shree Krishnù
Chund, the root of joy, arrived and met them.

Then Akroor Jee, with joined hands, and bowing his head, said in a
supplicating manner, "O lord of Bruj! come and make my house pure, and
gratify your worshippers with a sight of you?" Huri said in reply to
Akroor, "First acquit yourself of your debt to Kuns, then show me your
house. Present our humble compliments." Akroor bowed his head at these
words, and departed.

Having descended from his ruth, he arrived after some time at the place
where Kuns was holding a court. On seeing him, Kuns descended from his
throne, and gave him a most friendly reception; and taking hold of his
hand with great respect, seated him on a throne near himself, and asked
him to communicate all the news, and the occurrences of his late visit.

Akroor replied, "The greatness of Bruj cannot be explained. How shall I
speak in fitting terms of the greatness of Nund. I have accomplished
what you instructed me to do. Bulram and Krishnù have both come here;
and all the inhabitants of Bruj have brought presents. They are encamped
on the banks of the river; great numbers of them have come with numerous
carts."

Kuns was delighted at these words, and said, "Akroor Jee! you have
executed a most important business for me to-day, in having brought
Bulram and Krishnù; go now to your home, and repose."

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the Raja
Pureechit,--O great king! on receiving permission from Kuns, Akroor Jee
went home; and was occupied with many thoughts and reflections. And
Huldhur and Gobind, having gone to where Nund and Oopnund were sitting,
and asked their permission to look at the city, Nund Rae Jee produced
some sweetmeats, which the two brothers ate; and afterwards he gave them
permission to go, and not to delay long.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

When Nund, the chief, had thus spoken, the two brothers being greatly
rejoiced, took their companions, the cowherds' children, with them, and
went forth to see the city. As they proceeded, they saw woods and
orchards on all sides of the city, in full blossom and fruit: and birds
were pouring forth in them all kinds of agreeable melodies. There were
large tanks, filled with pure water. In them, lotuses were in full
flower, on which swarms of bees were humming. And on the bank, geese and
herons, and other birds were sporting. A cool, fragrant breeze was
blowing. And on the margins of the enclosed grounds, gardens of betel
were planted. In the midst, for many koss, beds of flowers were
blooming. At different places, wheels and leather buckets were in full
play at the wells; and the gardeners, singing sweet songs, were
sprinkling water.

Being pleased at beholding this beautiful appearance of the woods and
groves, Krishnù entered the city of Muthoora with his companions. There
were castles of copper on all sides of the city, and there was a deep,
broad ditch, with water springing at the bottom. There were four crystal
gates, whose doors were composed of eight metals, and inlaid with gold.
And in the city, there were five-storied and seven-storied houses of all
colours, red, yellow, green and white, which vied with the clouds in
height. The brilliancy of the ornaments on their domes shone like
lightning: flags and banners were waving: the sweet scent of the
perfume, burnt at the time of worshipping, came forth from the
trellis-work, lattices and air-holes. At the doors there were pillars
formed of plantain trees; and golden waterpots filled with sprouts.
There were garlands and nosegays, and strings of flowers suspended in
every direction. There was music in every house. And on one side, the
jewelled and golden palace of the Raja stood apart in its splendour, of
which the beauty admits not of description. Such was the beautiful and
elegant city of Muthoora, which Shree Krishnù and Buldeo, accompanied by
the cowherds' children, went to see.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

There was great bustle in Muthoora on the arrival of Nund's son; all the
people, on hearing it, rushed forth from their houses, leaving their
domestic business. And the women of Muthoora, on hearing the news, were
very much agitated. They exclaimed to each other, "Bulbhudrù and Moorari
are come, let us go friend! and see those whom Akroor went to bring."
Some ran off in the middle of their dinner: others, while bathing; and
others, while engaged in plaiting their hair. They forgot all amorous
sport and dalliance with their husbands; and put on their dresses and
ornaments in a most confused, irregular manner. They got up, and went
off in the state they were then in, and came to look upon Krishnù.
Laying aside shame, modesty and fear, some stood at the windows, some in
the balconies, some at the doors, and some wandered about the lanes.
Wherever the women stood, they pointed to Krishnù, stretching out their
hands. The fair Bulram was dressed in blue, and Krishnù in a yellow silk
vest. These are the two nephews of Kuns, from whom no evil spirit
escapes. Let us behold with our own eyes the forms of those, of whom our
ancestors have only heard. One of us in a former birth must have
performed a most meritorious act, as a reward for which Bruhmù has
granted us an opportunity of seeing them."

Shree Shookdeo, the sage, continued,--O great king! in this manner, the
inhabitants of the city, both men and women, conversed with each other,
making all kinds of remarks, and were rejoiced at beholding Krishnù and
Bulram. In whatever market, road or cross-road, they and their
companions made their appearance, the inhabitants stood upon their
houses, and through joy sprinkled them with, and poured down upon them,
perfumes and sandal, and flowers. And whilst admiring the beauty of the
city, they said to the cowherds' children, "Brothers! do not any of you
mistake the road; and if any should mistake it, let him go to our last
encampment." When they had gone some distance, they saw the dhobees of
Kuns

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

with loads of washed clothes and bundles. They were drunk and besmeared
with coloured earths, and singing the praises of Kuns, as they were
coming out of the city. On seeing them, Shree Krishnù Chund said to
Buldeo Jee, "Take away all their clothes, and wear some yourself, and
give some to the cowherds' children to wear, and allow them to steal
whatever is surplus." When he had spoken thus to his brother, they all
went up in a body to the dhobees, and Huri said to them, "Give us the
fine white clothes, and receive them back again, when we have paid our
visit to the Raja. We will give you some dresses from amongst those,
which the Raja presents us with."

At these words, the head dhobee amongst them, laughed, and said, "We
will arrange and place the clothes at the Raja's gate; come there, and
take them, and give us what you please. You wander about the jungle,
tending cows; you are of the cowherd caste, and wear blankets. You have
come here disguised as jugglers: do you flatter yourselves, that you are
to wear the Raja's garments? By going all together to the Raja, with the
hope of obtaining his dresses, you run an almost sure risk of losing
your lives."

At this speech of the dhobee's, Huri smiled, and again said, "We ask you
for the clothes in a proper manner; why do you misunderstand us? It will
be no loss to you, giving us the clothes: but you will gain a good name
by doing so."

The dhobee was enraged at these words, and said, "Just look at the
fellow, who wants to wear the Raja's clothes: be off with you; or I will
put you to death instantly." Krishnù was angry at these words, and gave
him a blow with the side of his hand, so that his head flew off like a
stalk of Indian corn. Then all his companions and assistants, fearing to
meet the same fate, left their bundles and loads behind them, and ran
off to Kuns, and bawled out, "Shree Krishnù Jee has taken all our
clothes: some he wears himself, and has given some to his brother to
wear, and distributed some to the cowherds'

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

children, and allowed them to steal the remainder." In the meantime, the
cowherds' children were much pleased, and began to put the clothes on
wrong. Having tightened their waists, they put the upper garments on
their feet, and their arms in drawers. They did not understand the
proper way of putting on the different articles. Krishnù laughed on
seeing what took place.

When they proceeded thence, a tailor came, and making a salutation said,
standing before them with joined hands, addressing Krishnù, "O great
king! I am called the servant of Kuns, but in my mind I am constantly
celebrating your many virtues; if you will be so kind as to give me the
order, I will put on the clothes for them, and from doing so, shall be
called your servant."

When he had thus spoken, Shree Krishnù Chund, acquainted with the
secrets of the heart, knowing him to be one of his worshippers, called
him near, and said, "You have come at a lucky moment; (or it is lucky
you have come,) fit the clothes well on them."

Upon this he began at once to unseam and unravel, and cut and patch; and
sewed the clothes up again so as to fit exactly; then having selected
dresses for Krishnù and Bulram and all the rest, he assisted in dressing
them. After this, Nund Lal, having granted him absolution from sin, took
him with him and went on.

Soodama, gardener, came there and brought them to his house. He placed
garlands upon all of them; there were songs of congratulation and
rejoicing in the gardener's house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](psa44.md)
