[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa45)  [Next](psa47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

### CHAPTER XLV.

SHREE SHOOKDEO, the sage, said,--O lord of the earth! having made
various speeches of this kind, and striking his arms in preparation for
the contest, Chanoor opposed himself to Krishnù, and Moostuk encountered
Bulram Jee, and both parties began to wrestle. They joined head to head,
arm to arm, eye to eye, and leapt about laying hold of each other's
feet, and entwining themselves round each other's bodies, hugged and
shook each other.

The spectators said to each other, "Brothers! great cruelty is being
perpetrated at this meeting; what comparison is there between these
beautiful children, and those strong wrestlers, (or what chance have
these beautiful children with those strong wrestlers?) If we prohibit
the wrestling, Kuns will be angry; and if we do not, our character for
justice will be forfeited. It is not proper for us to stay here as
spectators, since we have no power to act."

O great king! whilst the spectators were carrying on this conversation,
Krishnù and Bulram were contending with the wrestlers. At length the two
brothers threw their adversaries and killed them. On their death all the
other wrestlers rushed upon them; but Krishnù destroyed them also in a
second. At this time the worshippers of Huri were rejoiced,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and playing upon musical instruments, raised shouts of victory; and the
gods, seated in their chariots in the firmament, celebrated the praises
of Krishnù, and rained flowers. Kuns being greatly afflicted, restless
and enraged, said to his attendants, "Why are you playing on musical
instruments? What! is the victory of Krishnù agreeable to you?"

He afterwards added "These two children are very wanton, seize and
remove them from this assembly, and also lay hold of Dewukee and
Oogursen, and the treacherous Basoodeo, and bring them here. I will
first destroy them, and afterwards these two children?" When Kuns had
thus spoken, Krishnù, the friend of his worshippers, in an instant put
all the evil spirits to death, and leapt upon a lofty platform, on which
Kuns was sitting in great pride and pomp, wearing a coat of mail, and
with a helmet, shield and sword. On seeing Krishnù approach, Kuns
regarding him as death, stood erect, and was greatly terrified, and
began to tremble violently. His secret wish was to fly, but through
shame he could not; seizing his sword and shield, he commenced an attack
upon Krishnù, who contrived to escape from all his attempts to wound
him. And the gods, men, sages and celestial musicians, who beheld this
great encounter, were alarmed, and exclaimed, "O lord! O lord! destroy
this wicked sinner quickly." The fighting continued for some time on the
platform. At length, Krishnù, perceiving that all the spectators were
afflicted, seized Kuns by the hair, and dashed him down from the
platform, and leapt down himself.

Life departed from the body of Kuns, when all the assembled people.
exclaimed, "Shree Krishnù Chund has destroyed Kuns." All the gods, men
and sages were delighted at hearing this exclamation.

The gods being overjoyed then began to glorify Krishnù, and to shower
upon the earth heaps of flowers. In their delight they played upon the
large kettle-drum, raising shouts of victory, and eulogizing Nund. The
men and women of the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

city of Muttra were in the highest degree pleased. And as the beautiful
lotus of the forest expands into full bloom on beholding the light of
the moon, in like manner the inhabitants of Muttra experienced the
greatest joy on again beholding Huri.

Having narrated thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja Pureechit,--O incarnation of justice! on the death of Kuns, his
eight brothers, who were possessed of great strength, came to fight with
Krishnù, who destroyed them all. When Huri saw that not a single evil
spirit was left, he dragged away the body of Kuns, and brought it to the
banks of the Jumna, where the two brothers sat down and rested; and from
that day, the name of that place was "The ghaut of rest."

On hearing of Kuns' death, his wives and brothers' wives came in a state
of great agitation, and with lamentation and tears, to the banks of the
Jumna, where the brothers were sitting and had brought the corpse. They
began to look upon the face of their lord, and to call to mind the
happiness he had conferred upon them, and to celebrate his many good
qualities; and through excessive grief and affliction they reeled about,
and suffered all the agonies of death. In the mean while Krishnù, the
receptacle of compassion, taking pity on them, approached and said, "Be
not grieved, mothers! but perform the last funeral offices of my uncle,
Kuns. No one lives for ever; he speaks falsely, who calls any relation
his own. Mothers, fathers, sons, brothers and other relations belong
exclusively to none: the revolutions of birth and death constantly
succeed each other. So long as a relation remains with us, we should
derive pleasure from associating with him."

O great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund had given this explanation to the
wives of Kuns, they rose up; and being restored to tranquillity of mind,
came to the banks of the Jumna, and performed the last obsequies to the
corpse of their husband, and Krishnù himself assisted in the funeral
rites by lighting the pile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI](psa47.md)
