[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa54)  [Next](psa56.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### CHAPTER LIV.

SHOOKDEO JEE said,--Raja! Shree [Krishnù](errata.htm#10.md) Chund, having
thus inspired the brahmin with confidence, said, "As a burning flame
comes forth from wood by rubbing it, so will I bring away the beauteous
Rookmunee, having destroyed the army of wicked demons."

Having thus spoken, and arrayed himself in an elegant and handsome
dress, covered with jewels, Krishnù went to the Raja Oogursen, and said
with joined hands, "O great king! Bheekmuk, the Raja of Koondulpore, has
written me a letter, offering his daughter, which he has sent by the
hand of his family priest, and has invited me to come alone; with your
permission I will go, and, having married his daughter, bring her here."
Oogursen said in reply, "Why have you fixed your affections in so
distant a country? You are going there alone, Moorari; avoid entering
into quarrels, or wrangling with any one; who will send us intelligence
here of you?" Oogursen afterwards added, "Well, if you must go there,
take all your army with you, and go accompanied by your brother, and
return quickly after the marriage; do not fight or quarrel with any one
there; because you will live long and will be able to obtain many very
beautiful women." On receiving his permission, Shree Krishnù Chund said
to Oogursen,

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "O great king! you
have spoken truly, but I will proceed in advance; and please send Bulram
Jee after me with the army." With these words, Huri took leave of
Oogursen and Basoodeo; and, having gone to the brahmin, sent for his
ruth, and Daruk, his charioteer. On receiving Krishnù's order, he
immediately harnessed a chariot with four horses, on which Shree Krishnù
ascended; and, having seated the brahmin by his side, proceeded from
Dwarka to Koondulpore. On emerging from the city, he saw herds of deer
running on his right hand; and lions and lionesses, rushing roaring from
opposite him, with their food.

Upon observing this good omen, the brahmin reflected and said, "O great
king! from beholding this omen, I am of opinion, that you will obtain a
full accomplishment of your wishes, just as these animals have obtained
the object of their desires." Shree Krishnu Chund replied, "By your
favour it will happen so." Having then spoken, Huri advanced thence; and
beholding new countries, cities and villages arrived at Koondulpore; and
observed, on his arrival, that the beauty of the city had been very much
increased by the marriage preparations, which were being everywhere
made. The lanes were swept clean, and the cross-roads spread over with
cloths, and sprinkled with perfumes and sandal wood. There were clusters
of betelnut and vegetables, in the midst of which, cocoanuts of gold
were distributed. There were innumerable garlands in each house,
composed of green leaves, fruits and flowers; flags, banners and wreaths
were waving in the air, and elegant golden spires were attached to the
tops of domes, and there was rejoicing in each house. O great king! such
was the beauty of the scene in the city; but it is impossible to give a
description of the festivities inside the palace, which required to be
seen to be properly appreciated. Shree Krishnù Chund having, in the
course of his progress, seen all the city, encamped in an enclosed
ground, belonging to the Raja Bheekmuk, and seated in the refreshing
shade, having cooled

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

himself after his journey, said to the Brahmin, "O divinity! go first of
all, and inform Rookmunee Jee of my arrival, that she may acquire
confidence, and banish her sorrows. Afterwards acquaint me with all that
has transpired there, that I may arrange my plans accordingly." The
brahmin said, "O lord of mercy! to-day is the first day of the marriage;
and there is great confusion and bustle of preparation in the palace, I
will go and take an opportunity of mentioning your arrival to Rookmunee
Jee, when I find her alone." With these words the brahmin went thence. O
great king! Huri thus arrived quietly and alone; whilst on the other
hand, Raja Sissoopal, accompanied by Joorasindhoo and armies of demons,
arrived with boundless show and splendour, and brought such a crowd with
him, that the king of the serpent race, the snake Sheshù, on one of the
heads of which the world rests, began to totter from the weight, and the
earth to be upset. Having received information of their arrival, Raja
Bheekmuk advanced with his ministers and relations to receive them: and
having met the bridegroom with great honour and dignity, robing all the
party in robes of honour, and presenting them with arms studded with
jewels, and ornaments, elephants, and horses, brought them into the
city; and having fixed upon a place in the bride's house for the
reception of the [bridegroom](errata.htm#11.md) and his train, entertained
them with deferential respect.

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo, the sage,
said,--O lord of the earth! I will now narrate an intermediate story, to
which be pleased to listen with attention. When Shree Krishnù Chund left
Dwarka, all the descendants of Judoo went to Raja Oogursen, and said, "O
great king! we have heard, that Raja Sissoopal has got to Koondulpore
with Joorasindhoo and all his army of evil spirits to the marriage; and
Huri has gone alone. From this "we are certain, that there will be
fighting between them and Shree Krishnù Jee. With this opinion, firmly
fixed in our mind, how can we remain here, pretending ignorance, and
abandon Huri? Our

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

own wishes are averse to this, and we are ready to act according to your
instructions."

On hearing these words, the Raja Oogursen was greatly alarmed and
frightened; and having sent for Bulram Jee, explained to him and said,
"Go quickly with all my army to Koondulpore, so as to reach the city
before Shree Krishnù's arrival, and bring him back with you." On
receiving the Raja's order, Buldeo Jee took with him to Koondulpore
fifty-six crores of the descendants of Judoo. The elephants of the army
of all colours, black, white and purple, appeared like clouds, and their
white tusks appeared like rows of cranes. The large kettle-drums sounded
like thunder, and their arms shone like lightning. Troops of horsemen,
dressed in red and yellow, were seen scattered here and there: whole
ranges of chariots advanced, glittering with splendour; on beholding the
beauty of which, the gods were delighted, and with the greatest . joy
rained down flowers from the sky, seated in their cars and expressed
wishes for Krishnù's success and victory. In the mean while, and about
the time of Huri's arrival, Bulram Jee arrived also at Koondulpore.
After this, Shree Shookdeo Jee added, O great king! Shree Krishnù Chund,
the sea of beauty and light of the world, arrived thus at Koondulpore;
but Rookmunee, not having been informed of his coming, was displeased,
and gazed in every direction, like the moon, which is dimmed on the
approach of morning. Her elegant mind was greatly overwhelmed by excess
of anxious thought; and she stood gazing and looking in every direction
from a lofty balcony. She peeped through the windows and doors, tears
streaming from her eyes. Dissatisfied, and greatly depressed in mind,
she sighed deeply, weeping from agitation, and oppressed with sad
thoughts she said, "Why has Huri not come yet, whose name is 'the
acquainted with the secrets of the heart?' What fault have I committed,
that he has not yet thought of me? Has the brahmin not gone to him, or
does he think me ugly,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

and not wish to return my affection, or has he been prevented by the
arrival of Joorasindhoo? To-morrow is the marriage-day, and the demon
has come. If he should take my hand to-morrow, how can this sinful soul
survive without Huri? Prayers, penance, vows and acts of charity have
been no protection to me. What shall I do? Whither shall I go? Sissoopal
has come with his marriage procession; why has the merciful Krishnù
delayed coming so long?"

When Rookmunee had thus spoken, one of her companions said, "How can
Huri come to such a distant country, without permission from his father
and brother?" Another said, "He, whose titles are 'acquainted with the
secrets of the heart and merciful to the poor,' will certainly not fail
in coming. Be of good cheer, Rookmunee; be not agitated, I have a firm
belief, that some one will come presently, and announce Huri's arrival."
O great king! whilst these two were thus engaged in discourse, the
brahmin arrived; and having pronounced a blessing said, "Shree Krishnù
Chund Jee has arrived, and is encamped in one of the royal enclosures;
and Buldeo Jee is following with all the army."

On seeing the brahmin, and hearing what he had said, Rookmunee Jee's
spirits were revived; and then she was as happy as a devotee, who leas
obtained the fruit of his penance. After a short time, Shree Rookmunee
Jee, with joined hands, and bowing her head, began to say in presence of
the brahmin, "By coming to-day, and mentioning the arrival of Huri, you
have restored me to life; what return shall I make you for this? If I
were to give the wealth of the universe, I should still be in your
debt."

Having thus spoken, she remained fearful, and abashed. The brahmin being
highly gratified, and pronouncing a benediction, rose and went thence to
the Raja Bheekmuk, and explained all the circumstances of Shree
Krishnù's arrival. On hearing this authentic account, the Raja Bheekmuk
rose up and

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

proceeded to the enclosure where Shree Krishnù and Bulram, the abodes of
pleasure, were living; prostrating himself on his arrival so as to touch
the ground with the eight principal parts of his body, he appeared
before them, and with joined hands said, "You are the root of my mind,
Huri; how shall I explain to you what our wicked enemies have done? My
desires have been accomplished by your coming here."

Having thus spoken, and having had Krishnù comfortably housed, Raja
Bheekmuk returned to his own palace, and reflecting began to say, "Every
one knows the exploits of Huri; who can say, how his arrival here has
been brought about?" And all the inhabitants of the city, male and
female, came to where Shree Krishnù and Buldeo were, and sung of their
renowned actions, and celebrated their praises, saying to each other,
"Rookmunee is a fit bride for Shree Krishnù. Bruhmù grant that this
match may take place, and last long." In the mean while, upon a sudden
thought the two brothers went to look at the city; crowds of men and
women were collected at every market, road and cross-road, to which the
two brothers went; who sprinkling perfumes and sandal, and rose-water,
and raining down flowers on them stretched out their hands, and pointed
out the two brothers to each other: "Bulram is dressed in blue, and
Krishnù in yellow silk, they have crowns on their heads, and tremulous
ear-rings; their lotus eyes, wish to steal away our hearts." The two
brothers went on viewing the city; at length, having seen all the city
and the forces of Raja Sissoopal, they returned to their own army.

On hearing of their arrival, Raja Bheekmuk's eldest son was exceedingly
wroth, and going to his father began to say, Say, truly, at whose
invitation has Shree Krishnù come here? I cannot understand how he can
have come, without being invited. A marriage is an occasion and affair
of pleasure, what business has he here? Wherever these two

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

deceitful, perverse creatures go, they occasion injury. If you value
your own welfare, tell me, truly, by whom were they invited?"

O great king! Rookum having thus endeavoured to terrify his father, rose
and went thence, uneasy and disturbed in mind, to the court of Sissoopal
and Joorasindhoo, and said to them, "Bulram and Krishnù have come here;
inform all your people of this, that they may be on their guard."

On hearing the names of the two brothers, Raja Sissoopal looking back
upon the exploits and history of Huri became low-spirited, and began to
be very thoughtful, and Joorasindhoo said, "Wherever these two come they
commit some violence or other, they are very powerful, and treacherous.
In Bruj they have slain with ease Kuns and other mighty demons; do not
look upon them as children, they have never been defeated in any
encounter. Shree Krishnù destroyed my army seventeen times; when I
attacked the eighteenth time, he ran away, and climbed up a mountain,
which I set on fire, and he, by some trick, escaped to Dwarka. No one
understands Krishnù's nature, he has come hereto commit violence. He is
very deceitful, and will practise great deceit, and no one will be able
to understand him. Arrange, therefore, your plans, so that our
characters maybe preserved." When Joorasindhoo had thus spoken Rookum
replied, "What things are they, that you are so apprehensive about them?
I know them well; they wander about the jungles, singing and dancing,
and playing the flute, and tending herds. What do those village children
know of the science of war? Banish all anxiety from your mind, I will in
a second repel and slay Shree Krishnù and Bulram, and all the
descendants of Judoo."

Shree Shookdeo Jee said, O great king! Rookum returned home that day
after having entered into explanations with Joorasindhoo and Sissoopal,
and inspired them with confidence, and they spent the night in
uneasiness.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

In the morning Rajas Sissoopal and Joorasindhoo, considering it the
marriage-day, were engaged in all the bustle and preparation of bringing
forth the marriage procession: and there were festive rejoicings also at
the palace of the Raja Bheekmuk. In the mean while Rookmunee Jee sent a
message to Shree Krishnù Chund by a brahmin, saying, "O abode of
kindness! this is the marriage-day; when two ghurees of the day are
left, I will go to perform poojah at a temple of Dewee, eastward of the
city. My modesty and good name have been entrusted to you; act, so that
they may be preserved."

Afterwards, when the day was somewhat advanced, her female friends and
companions, and relatives arrived; on coming there, having first filled
up a square place in the courtyard with large pearls, and arranging upon
it a golden chair, studded with ornaments, they seated Rookmunee upon
it, and had her rubbed with oil by the hands of seven married women.
Afterwards, having applied perfumes and scented paste, and bathed and
washed her, they decked her out completely with jewels and ornaments;
and arraying her in a red boddice, they placed her in her full bridal
dress on the chair. When about four ghurees of the day remained, the
youthful Rookmunee, accompanied by her female friends and companions,
went forth in musical procession to perform poojah to Dewee; and Raja
Bheekmuk sent some of his people to protect her. On hearing that the
Raja's daughter had gone outside the city to worship Dewee, Raja
Sissoopal, through dread of Shree Krishnù Chund, summoned some of his
mighty heroes, and powerful warlike attendants; and, having given them
most minute instructions, sent them to guard Rookmunee Jee. They came,
bringing with them their arms and weapons of all kinds, and accompanied
the Raja's daughter. At that time Rookmunee, accompanied by crowds of
her female companions, proceeding veiled under the guard and protection
of black demons, appeared as beautiful as the moon surrounded by stars,
in the

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

midst of a black cloud. At length, after proceeding some distance, she
reached the temple of Dewee. Having gone to the temple, she washed her
feet and hands, and sipping water from the palm of her hand, became
purified. The Raja's daughter having made an offering of sandal, rice,
flowers, perfumes, lamps and consecrated food, went through the ceremony
of worshipping Dewee with great faith, and according to the injunctions
of the Vedas. Having afterwards prepared food agreeable to female
brahmins, she arrayed them in elegant dresses, and making sectarial
marks on their foreheads, and fastening thereon the unbroken rice used
in the oblation, made them presents, and received their blessing. Having
afterwards offered adoration to Dewee by going round to the right, that
lovely creature, with a face like the moon, of the colour of the flower
chumpa, with deer-like eyes, a voice like the kokila, and the gait of an
elephant, taking her companions with her, was occupied with the thought
of meeting Huri. And as she was on the point of returning, after having
finished all the necessary rites and ceremonies, Shree Krishnù Chund,
seated on his ruth, arrived alone at the spot where the warlike
attendants of Rookmunee were standing fully armed.

Having recited thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--When she was
returning, after having worshipped Dewee one of her companions said, in
a state of agitation, "O beautiful Rookmunee! Huri has arrived: behold
his waving banner." Having heard this speech of her companions, and
beholding the flag attached to Krishnù's ruth, the Raja's daughter was
so overjoyed, that her body could not contain her. Placing her hand in
that of her companion, she advanced amongst them all in the hope of
meeting Huri, with such a fascinating look, smiling, and at such an
easy, composed pace, that all description is impossible of the beauty of
her appearance. The guards on seeing Shree Krishnù Chund all seemed to
be deprived of sense, and stood still; and the screen of cloth, behind
which

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rookmunee was
concealed, dropped from their hands. And on beholding the beautiful and
fascinating face of Rookmunee, they were more distracted, and were so
upset, that they lost all thought and recollection. She raised her
eye-brow, in the form of a bow, and having shot forth the arrows of her
eyes from the bowstring of her darkened eye-lashes, in the act of
killing them, restored them to life.

O great king! at that time all the demons stood gazing like painted
pictures; and Shree Krishnù Chund, having advanced his chariot amongst
them, stopped near Rookmunee, who, on beholding her soul's lord, was
suffused with blushes; and, as she stretched out her hand to meet
Krishnù, he raised her up with his left hand, and seated her on his
ruth; she trembled and was greatly abashed; and, having abandoned all
others, went off with Huri. Like a religious ascetic who abandons his
home, and fixes his affections on the feet of Krishnù.

O great king! Rookmunee Jee obtained the fruit of all the prayers,
penance, fasts and acts of charity she had performed, and forgot all her
former sorrows. Her enemies seized their arms, and stood gazing at her.
Krishnù carried off Rookmunee from the midst of them, just as a lion
would spring amongst large troops of jackals, and seizing its prey, go
off fearless and roaring. After Shree Krishnù Chund's departure, Bulram
Jee, sounding the kettle-drum, joined him with all his army.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LV](psa56.md)
