[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa51)  [Next](psa53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

### CHAPTER LI.

WE now write the last half of the history. Shree Shookdeo, the sage,
said,--O great king! I will relate, how Shree Krishnù Chund conquered
Joorasindhoo and his army, destroyed the right of the dead, released
Moochkoond, and, having left Bruj, took up his abode in Dwarka: listen
with the greatest attention.

The Raja Oogursen ruled over Muttra with great skill and policy; and
Shree Krishnù and Bulram, like servants, were obedient to his orders.
Under his government all his subjects were happy; except the widows of
Kuns, who were greatly grieved at the loss of their husband. They could
not sleep, and had no sensation of hunger or thirst. During the whole
eight puhurs, they were in a state of sorrow.

One day the two sisters, being deeply engaged in thought, said to each
other, "A woman has no excellence without her husband, as the subject
has no excellence without his lord, or night without the moon. As we
have lost our husbands, we ought not to stay here now; and it is better
for us to go and live in the house of our father."

O great king! the two queens, having thus determined, sent for a ruth,
and travelled in it from Muttra to their father's house, in the Behar
country; and with tears related to him, how Shree Krishnù and Bulram
had. destroyed Kuns and all evil spirits.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

On hearing their account, Joorasindhoo entered his court in great wrath,
and said, "What powerful men are these, who have been born in the family
of Judoo, and have made my daughters widows, after destroying the very
powerful Kuns and all evil spirits? I will attack them with my whole
army; and destroying with fire the city of Muttra, and all the family
and descendants of Judoo, will carry off Bulram and Krishnù bound and
alive: otherwise my name is not Joorasindh."

Having thus spoken, he wrote letters to all the neighbouring Rajas,
asking them to come to him with their armies; as he was about to revenge
himself for the death of Kuns, by destroying all the descendants of
Judoo, and making their race extinct. On receiving Joorasindhoo's
letters, all the Rajas of the different countries came quickly with
their forces; and Joorasindhoo also arranged and prepared his army.

At length when Joorasindhoo took his departure from the Behar country to
Muttra with all his army of demons, he had twenty-three complete armies
with him; each army consisting of 21,817 charioteers and as many men
mounted on elephants: 109,350 foot soldiers and 66,000 horsemen. Such
were the twenty-three complete armies he had with him, each demon of
which was powerful beyond description. O great king! when Joorasindhoo,
accompanied with all his army of evil spirits, advanced, sounding the
kettle-drum, the guardians of the ten quarters began to shake and
tremble, and the gods to fly through fear. The earth apart began to be
agitated, like the roof of a house, from the load. At length, after some
days' progress he arrived, and surrounded the city of Muttra on all
sides. Upon this, the inhabitants of the city went in the greatest alarm
to Shree Krishnù Chund, and exclaimed, "O great king! Joorasindhoo has
encompassed our city on all sides; what shall we do, and where shall we
go?"

On hearing these words, Huri reflected for a short time; and Bulram
having, in the mean while, come to him, said, "O great king, you have
descended upon the earth to remove the

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

miseries of your worshippers, be pleased now to assume a body of fire,
and destroy the forest in the form of an evil spirit." At these words
Shree Krishnù Chund went with him to Oogursen, and said, "O great king!
give us an order to fight, and do you, having taken all the descendants
of Judoo with you, [protect](errata.htm#7.md) the fort." After these words,
when they came to their father and mother, all the inhabitants of the
city came round them and being greatly agitated began to say, "O
Krishnù! how shall we escape from the hands of these demons?" Huri,
perceiving that his mother and father and all the other people were
alarmed, explained to them and said, Suffer not any anxiety; this army
of demons, which you now see, shall in a moment be dispersed in every
direction, in the same manner that bubbles disappear in the water."

Having thus explained, and restored their confidence, he took leave; and
as Krishnù advanced, the gods sent two ruths, filled with arms for him.
The chariots stood before them, and the two brothers entered them.

The two chiefs of the family of Judoo went forth and reached
Joorasindhoo's army safely, they came to the place where Joorasindhoo
was standing. On seeing them Joorasindhoo said with great haughtiness to
Shree Krishnù Chund, "Fly from before me, why should I kill you, you are
not my equal that I should attack you? I will see what Bulram is made
of." Shree Krishnù Chund replied, "O proud fool! what silly talk is this
of yours. The brave never make high sounding speeches to any one; but
behave with moderation to all; when occasion requires they exhibit their
power; can they be called brave, who extol their own greatness? There is
a saying, that when it thunders, it does not rain; so, wherefore, do you
talk boastingly?"

At these words, Joorasindhoo was enraged; and Shree Krishnù and Buldeo
retired a short distance, and stood in a state of preparation. He
pursued and attacked them with his whole army, and called out, "O wicked
wretches! where will

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

you fly from my presence? You have long escaped alive; I know not what
may be your thoughts, but you shall live no longer, I will send you and
all the descendants of Judoo to the same place, where Kuns and all his
demons have gone."

O great king! when that devil had made this wicked speech the two
brothers retired some distance further, and stood. Shree Krishnù was
armed with weapons of all kinds, and Bulram Jee with a plough and wooden
pestle. As the army of demons approached them, the two heroes shouted
and rushed upon them like lions on a herd of elephants, and encountered
them sword in hand. Then the kettle-drums sounded like thunder, and the
assembled army of the demons was spread in every direction like clouds;
the din of arms was as continued rain; in the midst of which Krishnù and
Bulram, whilst fighting, appeared as brilliant and beautiful, as
lightning amidst thick clusters of clouds. All the gods were sitting in
their chariots, and viewing the battle from the sky, they celebrated the
praises of Krishnù, and earnestly wished that he might be victorious;
and Oogursen and all the descendants of Judoo were extremely anxious,
and regretted that they had allowed Shree Krishnù and Bulram to go forth
to the army of demons.

Shree Shookdeo, the sage, having proceeded thus far in his narrative,
said, O lord of the earth! when in the course of the battle a great
portion of the army of demons had been destroyed, Buldeo Jee descended
from his chariot, and bound . Joorasindhoo. Upon this, Shree Krishnù
Chund said to him; "Brother! let him live, do not kill him, because he
will return and again bring more demons with him; whom we will destroy,
and remove the burthens of the world, and if we do not spare his life,
we shall lose the evil spirits, who have fled." In consequence of this
expostulation of Krishnù, Buldeo Jee released Joorasindhoo, who went off
and joined those who had fled from the field. Looking around he said
with regret, "My whole army has vanished, the greatest calamity has
befallen me. Why should I live?" I will abandon my home, and turn

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

devotee." A councillor said to him, expostulating, "Why should a wise
man like you regret, sometimes there is defeat, and sometimes victory?
No one should abandon his government and home: What matters it that you
have been defeated in this battle, we will collect our forces again, and
send Krishnù and Buldeo, and all the descendants of Judoo to heaven;
banish all anxious thought."

O great king! the councillor having thus expostulated, returned home
with Joorasindhoo, and all the demons, who had fled from the battle; and
there began to assemble another army. Shree Krishnù and Bulram saw blood
flowing in a stream on the battle-field, in which chariots without their
charioteers were carried along like boats; in different places the dead
elephants appeared like hills, from whose wounds blood spouted forth
like springs. There Muhadeo, accompanied by goblins and spirits, and
wearing a necklace of human heads, was dancing and singing in the
greatest glee; and female spirits and goblins, and the attendants of
Devee were drinking blood out of skulls; vultures, jackalls and crows
were devouring the bodies, and contending with each other, for the
flesh.

Having recited thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O. great king! the
regent of the winds collected all the chariots, elephants, horses and
demons together, and fire burnt them to ashes in a second. The five
elements were re-united with each other, all saw them come but no one
saw where they departed. Having thus put the demons to death, and
removed the burthens of the earth, Shree Krishnù and Bulram, the
benefactors of their worshippers, cane to Oogursen, and, making a
salutation, said with joined hands, "O great king! through your
excellence and majesty, we have destroyed and routed the army of the
demons, rule now without fear, and promote the happiness of your
subjects." The Raja Oogursen was very much pleased at these words, and
made great rejoicings, and began to rule with justice.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

After some time, Joorasindhoo came forth to attack with another army as
large as the former one, which Shree Krishnù and Buldeo destroyed and
dispersed as before. In this manner, Joorasindhoo attacked seventeen
times with his twenty-three armies, which Krishnù drove back, after
having inflicted great slaughter on them.

After reciting thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo, the sage, said
to the Raja Pureechit,--O great king! at this time upon a sudden thought
Narud Jee rose, and went off to the abode of Kaljumun. On seeing him, he
stood up with all his court, and making a salutation, enquired in a
respectful manner, and with joined hands, the reason of his coming. At
these words Narud, after a little thought, said,
"[Bulbhudrù](errata.htm#8.md) and Krishnù are at Muttra, no one, except
you, can drive them away, Joorasindhoo has not met with any success.
"You are immortal and very powerful, Buldeo and Huri are children."
Narud Jee added, "Do not cease to follow him, "whom you observe of the
colour of the clouds, with lotus eyes, a very elegant person dressed in
yellow silk, and with a yellow scarf."

Having thus spoken, Narud, the sage, departed; and Kaljumun began to
prepare his army. After some days, he collected three crores of very
unclean men of terrifying aspect, with stout arms and thick necks, large
teeth, dirty appearance, brown hair, red eyes, like small red and black
seeds; with whom, sounding the kettle-drum, he advanced against the city
of Muttra, and surrounded it on all sides. Shree Krishnù Chund, having
seen what he had done, thought to himself, "It is not right to remain
here, because to-day he has come to attack, and to-morrow Joorasindhoo
will come; the inhabitants will be distressed; wherefore, it is most
advisable, that all should leave this place, and go and dwell
elsewhere."

O great king! Huri, having thus reflected, sent for Bishookurma, and,
explaining to him, said, "Go and build a city in the midst of the sea,
in which all the descendants of Judoo

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

may live comfortably, without knowing that they are not living in their
own houses; and convey them all there in a second."

On hearing these words Bishookurma departed, and, according to the
injunction of Shree Krishnù Jee, built, during the night, in the sea, on
the quoit of Vishnù, a city, forty-eight coss in extent; and having
named it Dwarka, returned and informed Huri, who ordered him to convey
all the descendants of Judoo there in such a manner, that no one might
know, whence they had come, and who had brought them. When Krishnù had
thus spoken, Bishookurma conveyed all the descendants of Judoo, together
with Oogursen and Basoodeo to the city in the course of the night, and
Shree Krishnù and Bulram also went there. In the mean while, on hearing
the sound of the waves of the sea, the descendants of Judoo awoke; and
being greatly astonished began to say to each other, "Whence has the sea
come to Muttra? We cannot understand this mystery at all."

Having proceeded thus far in his narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to
the Raja Pureechit,--O lord of the earth! having thus had the
descendants of Judoo brought to Dwarka, Shree Krishnù Chund said to
Buldeo Jee, "Brother! let us go now, and afford protection to our
subjects, and kill Kaljumun." Upon these words, the two brothers went
thence to Brujmundul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LII](psa53.md)
