[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa60)  [Next](psa62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### CHAPTER LX.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--Raja! on one occasion the earth, having
assumed mortal shape, began to perform a very difficult penance. Upon
this, the three gods, Bruhmù, Vishnù and Roodrù, came and enquired, "Why
do you perform such excessively severe penance?" The earth replied, "O
seas of compassion! I am very desirous of having a son; and am therefore
performing this great penance; have compassion on me and grant that I
may have a very powerful, renowned and glorious son, who shall not have
an equal in the world, and who shall never die." The three gods were
delighted at hearing these words; and, having granted the boon she
solicited, said, "Thy son, by name Nurkasoor, shall be very potent, and
of great reputation, and no one shall obtain a victory over him in
battle. He shall conquer, and bring under subjection, all the kings of
the world; having gone to the sky, he shall destroy and put to flight
the gods, and carrying off the ear-rings of Aditee, the mother of the
gods, shall wear them himself, and carry off and place the canopy of
Indrù over his own head. He shall collect together, without marrying
them, sixteen thousand one hundred virgin daughters of different Rajas.
Shree Krishnù Chund shall then attack him with all his army, and you
shall tell him to

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

kill your son, which he will do, and take away with him to Dwarka all
the Rajas' daughters."

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the
Raja Pureechit,--O great king! when the three gods, having granted the
boon, had thus spoken, the earth said, "Why should I ever tell any one
to kill my son?" and was silent. After the lapse of some days, the
earth's son, Bhomasoor, was born, who is also called Nurkasoor; and
dwelt in Pragojotikpore. The city was protected on all sides by hills;
and, having built forts of water, fire and air, he carried off by
violence the young daughters of all the Rajas in the world, and brought
them, and kept them there with their nurses. He was incessantly occupied
with arrangements for their food and clothes, and brought them up with
the greatest care. One day, Bhomasoor was in a great passion, and
sitting in a chariot of flowers he had brought from Lunka (Ceylon,) went
to the regions above, and began to vex the gods. From the troubles he
brought upon them, the gods fled for their lives in every direction,
abandoning their celestial abodes. He then carried off the ear-rings of
the mother of the gods and the canopy of Indrù, and began to inflict
great griefs on all the gods, mortals and sages of the world.

Having heard of all his practices, Shree Krishnù Chund, the brother of
the world, said to himself, "I will destroy him, and carry off all the
women, and will convey Indrù's canopy to the celestial regions, I will
restore Aditee's ear-rings, and will arrange that Indrù shall govern,
free from all fear."

Shree Krishnù Chund then said to Sutbhama, "O wife! if you come with me,
Bhomasoor shall be put to death; because you are a portion of the earth,
and in this manner are his mother. When the gods granted the earth the
boon of a son, they said to her, 'Thy son shall die, when thou givest
the order: otherwise, no one will be able to put him to death.'"
Sutbhama, hearing and reflecting upon these words, remained thoughtful.
"O great king! my son is also your

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

son; why will you kill him?" Krishnù evaded this question, and said, "I
am not very anxious to destroy him; but on one occasion, I made you a
promise, which I wish to fulfil." Sutbhama enquired, "What promise?"
Krishnù said, "Narud Jee once came, and gave me a flower of the tree
Kulpù, which I sent to Rookmunee. You were angry, when you heard of
this. I then made an agreement, that if you would not be uneasy, I would
bring the Kulpù tree to you. I, therefore, take you with me, in order
that I may fulfil my promise, and show you the paradise of Vishnù."

Sutbhama was much pleased at hearing these words, and prepared to
accompany Huri; who seated her behind him on the sovereign of the
feathered race, the vehicle of Vishnù, and set off on his journey. After
they had gone some distance, Shree Krishnù Chund said to Sutbhama, "Say,
truly, why were you displeased, when I first mentioned this subject to
you; explain the reason of this, that the doubts of my mind may be
removed? Sutbhama replied, "O great king! after killing Bhomasoor, you
will bring away his sixteen thousand one hundred damsels, and will
consider me as one of them. This is the reason of my having been
displeased." Shree Krishnù Chund said, "Do not allow yourself to suffer
anxiety on any account. I will bring the tree Kulpù, and place it in
your house. And do you make a present of it, and also of me to Narud,
the sage. Having afterwards purchased me again, keep me near you, I will
always be subservient to you. In this manner, Indranee made a present of
Indrù, together with the tree; and Aditee also made a present of Kusyp.
If you bestow this gift, no wife of mine will be equal to you."

Discoursing, O great king! in this manner, Shree Krishnù arrived at
Pragojotikpore; there beholding a hill fort, protected by fire, water
and air, Krishnù gave the order to the sovereign of the feathered race,
and to the quoit, Soodursun, who, by levelling, making smooth, lopping
away and fixing,

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

made a good road in a second. When Huri, advancing, was about to enter
the city, the demons, who were guarding the fort, came out to fight;
Krishnù easily killed and overthrew them with a club. On hearing the
news of their death, a devil, named Moor, with five heads, who was
sentinel over the city and fort, was greatly enraged, and made an attack
upon Shree Krishnù with a trident in his hand, and his eyes red with
fury, and gnashing his teeth, began to say, "Who, in the world, is more
powerful than me? I should like to see him here." With these words, O
great king! the devil, Moor, rushed at Shree Krishnù Chund, as the king
of the feathered race would rush upon a snake. He then aimed blows with
the trident, which Krishnù parried with a quoit. As many weapons as
Moor, in his rage, made use of, and discharged against, Huri, he, with
the greatest ease, warded off. He then ran and threw himself upon
Krishnù, in a state of great confusion, and began to wrestle; when the
fight had lasted some time, Shree Krishnù, perceiving that Sutbhama was
alarmed, cut off his five heads with the quoit, Soodursun. Bhomasoor,
having heard the sound of the heads falling from the body, enquired,
"What very loud noise was that?" Some one came and informed him that
Shree Krishnù had killed the devil, Moor. Bhomasoor was very sorrowful
on first hearing this account; but afterwards gave the order to his
commander-in-chief to fight. He arranged his forces, and stood ready for
battle at the gate of the fort. After this, the seven sons of Moor, who
were very potent and mighty warriors, hearing of their father's death,
came to fight with, and encounter, Krishnù, armed with weapons of all
kinds. Bhomasoor, after a while, sent a message to his
commander-in-chief, and the sons of Moor to fight cautiously, as he was
also coming. On receiving the order to fight, the commander-in-chief of
Bhomasoor and the sons of Moor, accompanied by their armies of evil
spirits, came forth to fight with Shree Krishnù Jee; and all at once,
their troops spread like clouds in every direction

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

round Krishnù. The warriors of Bhomasoor began to shower from all sides
missiles of every description, and to make use of all kinds of arms
against Shree Krishnù Chund; which he, parrying with ease, collected in
heaps. At length Huri perceiving that Sutbhama was greatly disquieted,
cut in pieces, in a second, with the quoit, Soodursun, the whole army of
demons, together with the seven sons of Moor; just as a husbandman would
cut a field of "*jowar*."

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to
the Raja Pureechit,--O great king! on hearing of the destruction of all
his army, and of the sons of Moor, Bhomasoor was at first very
thoughtful, and perplexed. On subsequent reflection, he recovered his
confidence; and taking several very powerful demons with him, his eyes
inflamed with rage, tightening his waist belt, preparing his arrows,
talking foolishly, he got ready to fight with Shree Krishnù Jee.
Bhomasoor was exceedingly wroth when he saw Shree Krishnù; and, seizing
arrows by the handful, began to discharge them. Huri cut them into three
pieces. Then Bhomasoor drew a sword, and howled angrily at Krishnù; he
sent forth a sound like thunder, exclaiming, "You shall not escape from
me now, you villager." Having spoken these harsh words, Bhomasoor
engaged in a fierce encounter.

He, O great king! attacked violently with a club; and his blows made as
much impression on the body of Shree Krishnù, as a stick of flowers
would make on the body of an elephant. He fought with Krishnù with
weapons of all kinds, which Huri cut in pieces. Bhomasoor then returned
to his house, and brought forth a trident; and prepared for an
encounter. Then Sutbhama called out, "When will the lord of the Judoos
kill him?" On hearing these words, Krishnù poised his quoit, and killed
Bhomasoor by cutting off his head. His head fell, together with the
ear-rings and crown. The snake, on which the world rests, trembled when
the body fell. There was joy in the three worlds; and the cares and
miseries of all were

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

removed. His splendour went into the body of Huri. Gods and wise men
raised shouts of victory. They rained down flowers from their chariots,
which were assembled together. The gods singing praises to the Vedas,
celebrated the exploits of Krishnù.

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo, the sage,
said,--O great king! on hearing of Bhomasoor's death, the earth and
Bhomasoor's wife with her son came to Krishnù; and standing in his
presence, with joined hands and bended heads, began to say, in a most
supplicating manner, "O luminous form of Bruhmù! Beharee, thou friend of
thy worshippers, for the sake of holy and virtuous men, thou assumest
numberless shapes; your greatness, exploits and delusive power are
boundless, who can understand them, and who has power to explain them
without your favour? You are the god of all the gods; no one understands
your nature."

O great king! having thus spoken, and placed the canopy and ear-rings
before Krishnù, the earth again said, "O lord of the poor and sea of
compassion! this son of Bhomasoor, Soobhugdunt, has come to you for
protection. Take compassion on him, and be pleased to place your soft,
lotus-like hand on his head, and grant that he may be free from all
dread of you."

On hearing these words, the abode of mercy, Shree Krishnù,
compassionately placed his hand on Soobhugdunt's head, and caused him to
be free from all fear of him. Then Bhogawuttee, the wife of Bhomasoor,
having brought many gifts to Huri, standing before him with joined
hands, and bowing her head, said with the greatest humility, "O kind to
the poor compassionate being, as you have fulfilled all our desires by
showing yourself to us, be pleased now to make our houses pure by going
to them."

On hearing this request, Shree Moorari, acquainted with the secrets of
the heart, the friend of his worshippers, went to the

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

house of Bhomasoor. The mother and sons, having spread silken cloths for
Krishnù to walk upon; and having accompanied him into the house, seated
him upon a throne; and having given him an oblation with eight
ingredients, and taken the water with which his feet had been washed,
said, with the greatest submissiveness, "O lord of the three worlds! you
have done well, in having destroyed this great demon; who that has done
acts of enmity towards Krishnù, has ever obtained happiness in the
world? Rawun, Kanbhkurun, Kuns and others, who were your enemies, have
lost their lives; and whatsoever persons have borne malice toward you,
have none in the world to perform the commonest offices for them."
Bhomawutee proceeded to say, "O lord! listen to my supplication; and,
looking upon Soobhugdunt as your servant, be pleased to marry the
sixteen thousand one hundred young unmarried daughters of Rajas, whom
his father kept confined."

Having thus spoken, she, O great king! brought out all the young
daughters of Rajas into the presence of Krishnù, and arranged them in
rows. On seeing the light of the world, the sea of beauty, Shree Krishnù
Chund, the root of joy, they were fascinated; and imploring him
earnestly, and with expressions of deep grief, they said, joining their
hands, "O lord! as you have come and released us, poor, weak creatures,
from the bonds of this great affliction, be pleased now to show us
favour, and take us with you, and permit us, your servants, to attend
upon you."

On hearing this petition, Shree Krishnù Chund said to them, "I will
procure ruths and palkees to convey you hence;" and looked at
Soobhugdunt. Soobhugdunt, understanding the thoughts of Krishnù's mind,
went to the seat of his empire, and brought back with him elephants and
horses fully equipped, carriages with four wheels, and shining,
glittering ruths, and all sorts of splendid palkees. On seeing them,
Huri gave orders to all the Rajas' daughters to get into them. He took

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Soobhugdunt with
him to the royal palace; and having seated him on the throne, made the
royal marks on his forehead with his own hand, and took leave. The
splendour of the scene, in the course of his journey with the Rajas'
daughters thence to Dwarka cannot be described. The splendour of the
elephants and horses the glitter of the white and black trappings, and
the brilliancy of the iron armour of the horses, the beauty of the
coverings of the chariots, wheeled carriages and palkees and the lustre
of their fringes of pearls, shone forth, equalling the sun in
brightness.

Shree Krishnù Chund arrived, after a few days' journey, with the Rajas'
daughters, at Dwarka. On arrival there, he placed them in the royal
palace, and having gone to the Raja Oogursen, and made a salutation,
Shree Krishnù related all the circumstances of his slaying Bhomasoor,
and releasing and bringing away the Rajas' daughters. Then taking leave
of the Raja, Krishnù, accompanied by Sutbhama, and taking the canopy and
ear-rings with him, seated on the sovereign of the feathered race, went
to the paradise of Vishnù. On arrival there, he gave the ear-rings to
the husband of Aditee, and placed the canopy over the head of the lord
of the gods.

Having received intelligence of this event, Narud came there, to whom
Huri said, "Go and tell Indrù, that Sutbhama asks for the tree Kulpù
from him, let us see what he will say, and bring his answer back to me,
I will form my plans after receipt of his reply."

Narud Jee, O great king! having heard this request of Shree Krishnù
Chund, went to the lord of the gods, and said, "Sutbhama, your brother's
wife, solicits from you the tree Kulpù. Tell me what answer I am to take
back from you to this [request](errata.htm#14)." When Indrù had heard
what Narud said, he was at first confused and thoughtful; and afterwards
went and mentioned to Indranee all that Narud, the sage, had said.
Indranee, on hearing the account, was angry, and said, Your dulness of
intellect, O lord of the gods! will never leave

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

you. You are a great fool, O blind husband! Who is Krishnù, and whose
brother is he? Do you remember or not, that in Bruj he abolished the
adoration of you, and caused the inhabitants to worship a hill, and
deceitfully ate the sweetmeats, which had been prepared for your poojah?
Again, having caused you to pour down rain on the hill, for seven days,
he lowered your pride, and dishonoured you throughout the world. Are you
not ashamed of this? He respects what his wife says. Why do you not
listen to my suggestions?"

When Indranee, O great king! had thus addressed Indrù, he was annoyed;
and returned to Narud Jee and said, "O chief of the sages! go and say to
Shree Krishnù Chund from me, that the tree Kulpù shall never leave the
forest of Nundun to go elsewhere; nor shall it remain any where else.
Explain also to him, that there will be a great battle between us if he
should injure me as he did formerly; when having misled the inhabitants
of Bruj, and pretending to worship a hill, he ate up all the sweatmeats
and other confections, which had been collected for my worship."

Narud Jee, on hearing these words, returned to Shree Krishnù Chund, and
having repeated Indrù's speech, said, "O great king! Indrù would have
given the tree Kulpù; but his wife would not let him." On hearing these
words, Shree Moorari, the destroyer of pride, went into the forest of
Nundun; and having slain, and put to flight the keepers, carried off the
tree Kulpù, and brought it away with him on the bird, which is the
vehicle of Vishnù. The keepers who had been wounded by Krishnù and fled,
went to Indrù and called out, mentioning what had happened.

O great king! Raja Indrù was greatly enraged, when he received
intelligence of the tree Kulpù having been carried off; and taking
thunderbolts in his hand, and summoning all the gods, he mounted the
elephant Yerawut, and prepared for battle with Shree Krishnù Chund.
Narud, the sage,

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

having come again to Indrù, said, "Raja! you are very foolish in
preparing to contend with Bhugwan at the instigation of your wife. Are
you not ashamed of having said what you did? If you intended fighting,
why did you not do so, when Bhomasoor carried off your canopy and the
ear-rings of Aditee? Now that Krishnù has slain Bhomasoor, and restored
the canopy and ear-rings, you are preparing to fight with him. Why did
you not fight with Bhomasoor, if you are so powerful? Have you forgotten
that day, on which you went to Krishnù at Bruj, and asked forgiveness of
your fault with the greatest humility, and obtained it? And do you now
proceed to fight with him again?"

O great king! on hearing this speech of Narud Jee's, Indrù regretted and
was ashamed, and repented having made preparations for battle. When
Shree Krishnù Chund reached Dwarka, all the Judoos were highly delighted
at seeing him. Krishnù took the tree Kulpù and placed it in Sutbhama's
palace; and the Raja Oogursen gave the sixteen thousand one hundred
unmarried daughters of Rajas in marriage to Shree Krishnù Chund, in the
manner prescribed by the Vedas, There were festive rejoicings according
to the prescribed injunctions of the Vedas; thus did Krishnù enjoy
himself in the world. Huri showed great affection for the sixteen
thousand one hundred daughters of Rajas; and had an unceasing love for
his eight queens. Having narrated thus much of the history, Shree
Shookdeo Jee said, Raja! thus did Huri slay Bhomasoor, and restore the
ear-rings of Aditee and the canopy of Indrù. Then having contracted
sixteen thousand one hundred and eight marriages, Shree Krishnù Chund
brought all his wives to Dwarka and began joyfully to indulge in sports
and diversions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXI](psa62)
