[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa68)  [Next](psa70) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

### CHAPTER LXVIII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! I will now relate how Bulram,
the abode of happiness, the receptacle of beauty, killed the monkey,
Doobid, listen with attention. One day Doobid, who was the minister of
Soogreet, and brother of the monkey Mindree, and the friend of Bhomasoor
began to say, "There is a thorn in my mind, which always pains me." On
hearing this, some one enquired, "What is it?" He replied, "I will kill
him, who has destroyed my friend Bhomasoor, in order that the grief of
my mind may depart."

O great king! having thus spoken, he went, on one occasion, in great
wrath, to the city of Dwarka, laying waste the country of Shree Krishnù.
Chund, and harassing the people. He set some afloat by pouring down
rain, he sent down flames and burnt others, some he knocked down with a
hill, he dashed hills upon others, some he drowned in the sea, he bound
others, and hid them in caves, he ripped open the bellies of some, some
he killed with uprooted trees. He thus constantly vexed the people; and
wherever he found sages, holy men and gods sitting, he poured down upon
them dung, urine and blood, thus afflicting and oppressing the people,
he went at length to the city of Dwarka; and assuming a very small form,
sat on the palace of Shree Krishnù. Chund. On seeing

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

him, Krishnù's wives, shutting all the inner doors, ran off and hid
themselves; he, then having obtained intelligence of Bulram, ascended
the hill Kewut, thinking to himself, "I will first kill Bulram, and
afterwards destroy Krishnù's life." At the place, where Buldeo Jee was
diverting himself with his wives, Doobid, O great king! who was
concealed, saw that Bulram had been drinking, and that he had taken all
his wives with him into the middle of a tank, and was engaged in various
sports with them, and singing and bathing. On witnessing this scene
Doobid climbed up a tree and chattering, and uttering angry cries, began
to leap and jump about the branches, and play all kinds of tricks; and
defile a water-pot, filled with spirituous liquor, and the clothes of
all of them which were lying about. On seeing the monkey the women were
frightened, and exclaimed, "O great king! whence has this monkey come,
who has frightened us, and defiled all our dresses?" When Buldeo heard
this speech, he came out of the tank, and laughingly threw a clod of
earth at the monkey, who supposing him to be intoxicated, came down from
the tree, chattering and enraged; he first upset the contents of the
large earthen vessel, filled with spirituous liquor, which was placed on
the bank of the tank, and tore all the clothes into strips. Bulram Jee
was then angry, and poised in his hand his plough and pestle, and the
monkey becoming as large as a hill, came in front of Bulram, prepared to
fight. Buldeo brought into play his plough and pestle, and the monkey
hurled trees and hills. They both closed and had a fierce encounter, and
neither moved back at all from his position.

O great king! these two mighty beings were contending resolutely with
each other, and practising all kinds of feints and stratagems; but the
spectators were ready to die of fright; at length Bulram perceiving that
they were all distressed, threw down and killed Doobid. Gods, men and
sages were all rejoiced at his death, and their griefs were dispelled;
the delighted gods rained flowers and raised shouts of victory for
Bulram.

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! that monkey had existed since the Treta age, which Buldeo
Jee killed and released from existence. Bulram, the abode of happiness,
having gratified them all, brought them with him thence to the city of
Dwarka, and related all the circumstances of the destruction of Doobid
to the descendants of Judoo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIX](psa70)
