[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa71)  [Next](psa73.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

### CHAPTER LXXI.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE, said,--O great king! on one occasion Shree Krishnù
Chund was diverting himself with Rookmunee during the night, and she was
sitting in a state of ecstatic delight, and feasting her partridge-like
eyes by gazing on the moon-like countenance of her beloved, when in the
mean while the night passed away, birds chirped, there was a red colour
in the sky; the chukoor suffered from separation; ruddy geese were in
pairs, the lotus bloomed and water lilies withered, the beauty of the
moon was diminished, and the splendour of the sun increased; all people
were awake and began to occupy themselves with their domestic affairs,
at that time Rookmunee Jee, quitting Huri's side, began to engage
thoughtfully and modestly in household matters; and Shree Krishnù Jee,
having performed his ablutions, washed his hands and face, bathed and
finished his prayers, meditations, adoration and oblations of water,
having given gifts of various kinds to brahmins, completed his daily
work, received the daily offering presented to him early in the morning,
and eaten it with cloves, cardamums, mace and nutmegs, arrayed himself
in elegant clothes and ornaments; and putting on arms, went to the Raja
Oogursen, and having afterwards come into the court of the descendants
of Judoo, sat upon a jewelled throne.

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

O great king! at that time a brahmin went and said to the door-keepers,
"Go and tell Shree Krishnù Chund Jee, that a brahmin is standing at the
gate, who is desirous of seeing him; and with his permission, the
brahmin will come in." On hearing what the brahmin said, a door-keeper
went and informed Bhugwan, "O great king! a brahmin is standing at the
gate, desirous of seeing you; and, with your permission, he will come
into your presence." Huri replied, "Bring him immediately." On Krishnù
uttering these words the door-keepers ushered the brahmin quickly into
his presence; and, on seeing him, Shree Krishnù Chund descended from his
throne, and, having made an obeisance, and advancing and taking him by
the hand, brought him into the palace, and having seated him by his side
on the jewelled throne, thus addressed him, "Say, O divinity! whence and
for what purpose hast thou come?" The brahmin replied, "O sea of
compassion and brother of the poor! I have come from the Mugudh country,
and bring a message from twenty thousand Rajas." Krishnù enquired, "What
message?" The brahmin replied, "O great king! the twenty thousand Rajas,
whom Joorasindhoo has forcibly confined, putting handcuffs and leg-irons
upon them, have, with the utmost submissiveness, sent this message by me
to you. O lord of the poor! this is your custom that whenever demons vex
your worshippers you descend upon the earth and afford them protection.
O lord! in the same manner, that you released Purhlad from Hirunkusyp,
and an elephant from the shark, be pleased, compassionately, to release
us also now from this great affliction; we are in grievous trouble; and,
with exception of you, no one has power to rescue and deliver us from
this heavy calamity."

O great king! on hearing these words, Krishnù being mercifully disposed
towards them, said to the brahmin, "O divinity! do not suffer anxiety
any more on their account, it shall now be my office to remove their
afflictions." The

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

brahmin was gratified by this speech of Shree Krishnù Chund's, and began
to give him a blessing. In the mean while Narud Jee made his appearance
there, and Shree Krishnù Chund, having made a salutation to him,
enquired, "Narud Jee! you go and come every where, tell me how are
Joodisthur and the other Pandoos, my five brothers, getting on
now-a-days, and what are they about? It is long since I heard any thing
about them; and for this reason my thoughts are occupied with them."
Narud Jee replied, "O great king! I am just come from them, they are
quite well, but are much, and anxiously occupied in making preparations
for a royal sacrifice, and are saying repeatedly, 'Without Shree Krishnù
Chund's assistance, our sacrifice will not be complete.' For this
reason, O great king! be pleased to adopt my suggestion, and first make
arrangements for their sacrifice, and afterwards proceed elsewhere."

O great king! on hearing this speech of Narud Jee's, Krishnù sent for
Oodho Jee, and said to him, "Oodho! you are my friend, never absent from
my mind or sight, there is an immense crowd at both places; to which
will you go first O brave warrior? so many Rajas, suffering grievous
misfortune, are expecting my approach and here the Pandoos have prepared
a sacrifice." Thus did Krishnù address Oodho.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXII](psa73.md)
