[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa86)  [Next](psa88) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

### CHAPTER LXXXVI.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--Raja! I will now relate how Urjoon carried off
Shree Krishnù Chund Jee's sister, Soobhudra, from Dwarka; and how Shree
Krishnù Chund went and abode in Mithila, listen with attention: when
Dewukee's daughter, whose name was Soobhudra, and who was younger than
Shree Krishnù Jee, was marriageable; Basoodeo Jee having invited several
of the descendants of Judoo, and Shree Krishnù and Bulram said, "The
girl is now of a fit age to be married, to whom shall we give her?"
Bulram Jee replied, "It is said, 'That we ought to contract marriage,
enmity and friendship with equals; one thing occurs to me, that we ought
to marry this girl to Doorjodhun, and obtain renown and greatness in the
world." Shree Krishnù Chund said, "In my opinion, we shall obtain a high
reputation in the world by giving her to Urjoon."

Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! on Bulram's speaking, no one
uttered a word; but when Shree Krishnù Chund Jee had spoken, all
exclaimed, "It is most advisable to marry the girl to Urjoon." Bulram
Jee was offended at hearing this, and rose up and went away; and the
party present, observing that he was offended, remained silent; when
Urjoon afterwards received information of these circumstances, he
assumed the disguise of a religious mendicant; and, taking

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

a staff and wooden pot went to Dwarka; and, having selected a convenient
spot spread a deer's skin, and sat upon it: he remained thus for four
months during the whole rains, and no one discovered his secret purpose;
looking upon him as a guest, they all paid him attention; and, for the
sake of Vishnù, entertained affection for him; Krishnù knew all his
secrets, but did not reveal them to any one.

O great king! one day Buldeo Jee also invited and brought with him
Urjoon to an entertainment at ibis house, when Urjoon sat down to eat,
he beheld Soobhudra, with a body like the moon, and eyes like the deer.
On seeing her Urjoon was fascinated; and, avoiding the gaze of all,
began to look upon her with averted glance; and thought to himself,
"When will Bruhmù accomplish what is destined in my fate?" Whilst on the
other hand Soobhudra Jee, pleased with the brilliancy of his
countenance, was saying to herself, "He is some prince and not a
religious mendicant, why is he sad?"

Having thus spoken, Soobhudra Jee went into the house and began to think
of obtaining a husband.; and on the other hand, Urjoon, after he had
finished eating, came to his seat, and was occupied with all kinds of
anxieties as to how he should gain possession of his beloved. Some days
afterwards, on the occasion of the festival of Shivùrat, all the
inhabitants of the city, male and female, went outside the city to
worship Shivù. Soobhudra went there also with her female companions and
attendants. Having heard of her going, Urjoon mounted his chariot, and
taking his bow and arrows, went there and was ready.

Whilst, O great king! Soobhudra was returning with her female friends
after having worshipped Shivù, Urjoon at sight of her abandoned all
reserve and modesty; and seizing her by the hand, lifted her into his
chariot, and went off. Bulram was greatly enraged, when he heard of it;
he took his plough and wooden pestle on his shoulder; his eyes were
bloodshot, he spoke in a voice of thunder; "I will now go and

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

utterly destroy him, and will lift up the world and place it upon my
forehead, how shall a beggar carry off my beloved sister, Soobhudra?
Wheresoever I may catch this religious mendicant, I will destroy him,
and search out and utterly destroy all his family."

O great king! Bulram Jee continued to make many idle and very angry
speeches, when, having heard what had occurred, Purdiyomun, Unroodrù,
Sumboo and other noble descendants of Judoo came into the presence of
Buldeo Jee, and said with joined hands, "O great king! if you give us
the order, we will lay hold of, and bring your enemy here."

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! when Bulram taking all the descendants of Judoo with him,
was ready to go in pursuit of Urjoon, Shree Krishnù Chund went and
explained to Buldeo all the [secrets](errata.htm#26) connected with the
carrying off Soobhudra; and said in a tone of the greatest
submissiveness, "Brother! Urjoon, in the first place, is the son of our
paternal aunt; and in the second, he is my greatest friend; he has
committed this act heedlessly, and without due thought; but it is not at
all right for us to fight with him; this would be contrary to religion,
and contrary to the custom of the world; and whoever might hear of our
fighting would say, 'That the friendship of the descendants of Judoo is
like a wall of sand.'" On hearing these words, Bulram Jee beating his
head, and being greatly enraged said, "Brother! this is a common custom
with you to raise a fire, and then run for water; otherwise, if you had
not taken part in the business, what power had Urjoon to carry off my
sister?" Having thus spoken, Bulram Jee suffered great regret, and was
very angry, and looking at his brother dashed his plough and wooden
pestle on the ground, and sat down; and all the descendants of Judoo sat
down also with him.

Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--Raja! whilst Shree Krishnù Chund entered into
explanations with them all, Urjoon went

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

home and married Soobhudra, in the manner prescribed by the Vedas. On
receiving intelligence of the marriage, Shree Krishnù and Bulram Jee
sent off to Hustinapoor, in charge of a brahmin, clothes, jewels, male
and female servants, elephants, horses, chariots and a large sum of
money; afterwards Shree Moorari, the friend of his worshippers, mounted
his chariot and went to Mithila, where there were two worshippers of
his, named Sootdeo and Buhoolas, the one a Raja, and the other a
brahmin.

O great king! on Krishnù's departure, Narud, Bamdeo, Byas, Atri,
Purshooram, and many other sages came and accompanied Shree Krishnù
Chund Joe; whatever countries Krishnù passed through, the Rajas of them
came out to meet him, and worshipped him, and gave him presents; at
length, after a journey of some days, Krishnù arrived there; when they
heard of Huri's arrival, the two worshippers rose up, and came running
hastily to him with presents. During their interview with Krishnù, they
both placed their presents before him; and, making obeisance, and
standing in his presence with joined hands, said, with the utmost
submissiveness, "O sea of compassion and brother of the poor! you have
shown great mercy, in having allowed sinners like us to see you, and
thereby made us pure, and put an end to our being born and dying."

Having recited thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! Shree Krishnù Chund, acquainted with the secrets of the
heart, having beheld the sincere faith [of](errata.htm#27) those two
worshippers, assumed two bodily forms, and went and dwelt in the houses
of both; they entertained and amused him in an agreeable manner; and
Huri made a stay of some days, and made them exceedingly happy; after
this, when Krishnù having gratified all their wishes, and increased
their knowledge, went to Dwarka; the sages and saints took leave of him
on the road, and Huri went and abode happily at Dwarka.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXVII](psa88)
