[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa87)  [Next](psa89.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

### CHAPTER LXXXVII.

HAVING heard so much of the narrative, Raja Pureechit said to Shree
Shookdeo Jee, "O great king! you said, on a former occasion, that the
Vedas glorified the supreme deity; explain to me, in order that the
doubts of my mind may be removed, how the Vedas offered praise to the
Bruhm without passions or human qualities?" Shree Shookdeo Jee
replied,--O great king! the lord, who is the author of the intellect, of
the organs of action and perception, of the mind, soul, religious and
moral merit, wealth, desire and salvation, constantly remains in a
passionless form, without human qualities, but when he creates the
world, he is possessed of all qualities, and assumes his own natural
form; for this reason, that one [deity](errata.htm#28.md) is both without,
and with passions and qualities.

Having thus said, Shookdeo, the sage, added, Raja! Narud Jee on one
occasion asked Nurnarain the question you have now asked me. Raja
Pureechit said, "O great king! please explain this subject to me, that
the perplexities of my mind may be removed."

Shookdeo Jee replied, Raja! once on a time during the age of truth,
Narud Jee went into the world of truth (that is, the world of the
virtuous age) to the place where Nurnarain was sitting engaged with many
other sages in devout religious austerities, and enquired, "O great
king? be pleased to do me the

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

favour to say, how the Vedas glorify the incorporeal Bruhm." Nurnarain
said, "Hear me Narud! the perplexity, which you have asked me to
explain, is the same as occurred in the world of mortals, at a place
where Sunatun and other sages were seated, occupied with religious
penance. Sunundun, a sage, then narrated a story, and entirely removed
the doubts of all present." Narud Jee said, "O great king! I also dwell
there, and if this story had been told, I should have heard it."
Nurnarain said, "Narud Jee! this story was told, when you had gone to
the white island to visit Bhugwut and, therefore, you did not hear it."
Having heard this, Narud Jee said, "O great king! kindly inform me what
story was related there," Nurnarain replied, "Listen! Narud, when the
sages asked this question, Sunundun, the saint, began to say to them,
'Listen to me! at the time of the general destruction, when fourteen
worlds became the semblence of water, then the complete Bruhm remained
alone asleep, when Bhugwan wished to create the world, the Vedas having
come forth from his breath and joined their hands, sang praises to him,
just as bards, by singing songs of eulogy of his renown very early in
the morning, might awaken a Raja, who was asleep in his own house; in
order, that being awake, he might quickly perform any business he had to
do.'"

Having proceeded thus far in the story, Nurnarain added, "Listen to me,
O Narud! the Vedas having come forth from the mouth of the lord were
saying, 'O lord! awake quickly and create the world, and remove your
deceptive power far from the minds of animated beings; then they will
recognize your appearance; your deceptive power is predominant, and
deprives all beings of intelligence; the being who escapes from it, will
have knowledge to understand you. O lord! no one except you can reduce
this power to subjection; he, in whose breast you dwell in the form of
knowledge, overcomes this deceptive power; otherwise, who has ability to
escape from the influence of this power? You are the creator of all;

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

all animated beings, having derived their origin from you, are contained
in you; just as many things being produced from the earth, are again
mixed up in the earth; whoever worships or glorifies any god whatsoever,
worships and glorifies you, just as a man may make many ornaments of
gold, and give them various names, but it is still gold; so you have
many forms; and consider this point, that not one of those forms is any
thing, and that on what sidesoever we look, there you are presented to
our sight. O lord! your deceptive power is infinite; this power becoming
the three qualities of truth, passion and darkness; having assumed three
forms, and created the universe, preserves and destroys it; no one has
discovered its mystery, and no one ever will discover it; wherefore, it
is right for an animated being to abandon all desires and meditate upon
you; his welfare depends upon his doing so.'"

O great king! having proceeded thus far in his story, Nurnarain said to
Narud, "Narud! when Sunundun, the sage, having related this history of a
former age, had removed the perplexities of all their minds, then Sunuk
and the other sages offered worship to Sunundun according to the sacred
precepts of the Vedas."

Having related thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--Raja!
whoever shall hear this conversation of Narain and Narud, shall without
doubt obtain the fulfilment of all his desires, and be saved hereafter.
The account of the complete Bruhm, which the Vedas sang of, Sunundun,
the sage, recited to Sunuk and other saints, then Nurnarain related it
before Narud; and Byas obtained it from Narud; and Byas explained it to
me, and I have now mentioned it to you; whoever shall hear or relate
this history, shall obtain whatever benefits he desires, whatever virtue
there is in penance, sacrifice, gifts, fasting and pilgrimage, there is
the same merit in reciting and hearing this history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXVIII](psa89.md)
