[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa84)  [Next](psa86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

### CHAPTER LXXXIV.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! listen with attention, while I
relate the story of the coming of all the sages, and of the performing
of sacrifice by Basoodeo Jee: One day Rajas Oogursen and Soorsen,
Basoodeo, Shree Krishnù and Bulram were seated in full assembly with all
the descendants of Judoo, and the kings of other countries were also
present; at this time Byas, Bushisht, Bishwamitrù Bamdeo, Purashur,
Bhrigoo, Poolusk, Bhurdooaj, Markundeyù and eighty-eight thousand other
sages, having a desire to see Shree Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, came
there; and Narud Jee also came with them. On seeing them, the whole
court rose up; and then, having performed obeisance, and thrown down
silken cloths for them to walk upon, they conducted all the sages into
the assembly, after this Shree Krishnù Chund having placed them all upon
seats, and having washed their feet drank the water with which their
feet had been washed, and sprinkled it upon the whole assembly; then
having offered sandal, unbroken rice, flowers, perfumes, lamps and
consecrated food, Bhugwan worshipped them all, and went round to the
right by way of adoration; and, standing in their presence with joined
hands, Huri said, "Great is our good fortune that you have come and
visited us, and sat in our

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

house; the sight of a good man is equal to bathing in the Ganges, he who
has seen a holy man (or received a visit from a holy man) has had the
crime of each birth effaced."

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! when Shree Bhugwan had thus spoken, then all the sages
remained reflecting, "When the lord, who is in the form of light, and
the creator of the universe, says this, what need we care what any one
else may say, or has said?" Whilst the sages thought thus in their
minds, Narud Jee said, "Listen to me all ye of the assembly with
attention: the delusive power of Huri cannot be comprehended this power,
in the form of Bruhmù, creates; as Vishnù, it preserves; as Shivù, it
destroys: its nature is infinite, beyond the comprehension of man's
intellect; but by his favour we know so much, that Vishnù frequently
descends upon the earth to confer happiness upon holy men, destroy the
wicked and promote what is eternally right."

When, O great king! having thus spoken, Narud Jee was on the point of
rising up and leaving the assembly, Basoodeo came before him, and, with
joined hands and with submissiveness, said, "O chief of the sages! be
pleased to favour us by saying, how a man, having come into the world,
can escape from fate."

O great king! when Basoodeo Jee had thus spoken, all the holy men and
sages remained looking at the countenance of Narud Jee; then Narud Jee,
understanding the wishes of their minds, said to the sages, "O
divinities! be not astonished at this speech; the delusive power of
Shree Krishnù is mighty, it has overcome and conquered the whole world,
and therefore Basoodeo Jee has thus spoken, and some one else has also
thus said, 'Near whom, whoever remains, he is under the influence of his
good qualities, and subjected to the illusion of his glory, without
being aware of it.' As

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

any one living on the banks of the Ganges, who goes elsewhere; and,
having abandoned the Ganges, drinks well water, so have the Judoos
become unintelligent; and do not comprehend at all the nature of
Krishnû." Narud Jee having by these words removed the perplexities of
the sages, said to Basoodeo Jee, "O great king! it is written in the
Shastrùs, that the man, who performs pilgrimage, makes offerings, or
performs penance, or fasts or offers sacrifice, having escaped from the
bonds of the world, will obtain supreme felicity." On hearing these
words, Basoodeo Jee was delighted, and immediately procured and made
ready all things necessary for a sacrifice, and said to the saints and
sages, "Please favour me by commencing the sacrifice."

When, O great king! Basoodeo Jee had thus spoken, all the brahmins
prepared and arranged a building for the sacrifice. Upon this Basoodeo
Jee went and sat with his wives near the altar; and all the Rajas and
the Judoos prepared to assist in the sacrifice.

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to
the Raja,--O great king! when Basoodeo went and sat at the altar, the
sages began the sacrifice according to the injunctions of the Vedas;
and, after reading incantations from the Vedas, they began to offer
oblations with fire to the deities; and the gods in bodily shape came
running to receive them.

When, O great king! the sacrifice was begun; above, the celestial
choristers and musicians, playing upon pipes and drums, began to sing of
the excellences of the gods; and bards and panegyrists to celebrate
their praises. Oorbusee and the other celestial courtezans danced; and
the gods, seated in their chariots, rained down flowers; and below, the
singers and dancers sang and danced, and engaged in festivities; and
beggars raised cries of exultation and rejoicing, in midst of which the
sacrifice was completed. And Basoodeo Jee, having offered the final
oblation and arrayed the brahmins in silken clothes, and adorned them
with ornaments,

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

presented them with many jewels, and much wealth: and they read
incantations from the Vedas, and pronounced their blessing. After this,
Basoodeo presented robes to, and entertained the kings of different
countries, who then offered the sacrificial gifts; and taking leave,
returned home. On the departure of the Rajas, all the sages and saints
and Narud Jee also took leave.

It is not possible to describe the subsequent scene, when Nund Rae Jee
and the cowherdesses, and the cowherds and their children were about to
take leave of Basoodeo. The descendants of Judoo, on the one hand, made
all kinds of affectionate speeches; and the inhabitants of Bruj, on the
other hand, did so likewise; this happy scene must have been witnessed
to be understood, I cannot attempt to describe it. At length, Basoodeo
and Shree Krishnù, and Bulram, having entered into explanations with
Nund Rae Jee and the rest of the party, and made them understand, and
having arrayed them in honorary dresses, and bestowed great wealth upon
them, allowed them to take leave.

Having recited thus much of the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund and Bulram Jee returned to the city
of Dwarka with the rest of the party, after having bathed during the
festival, and offered sacrifice, there were rejoicings and festivities
in every house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXV](psa86)
