[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa82)  [Next](psa84) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

### CHAPTER LXXXII.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--Raja! I will now relate the story of Krishnù's
journey to the country about Delhi; listen with attention, how Shree
Krishnù Chund and Bulram went to Koorchetrù to bathe on the occasion of
an eclipse of the sun, accompanied by all the descendants of Judoo. The
Raja said, "O great king! be pleased to recite the story; I will listen
with attention." Then Shree Shookdeo Jee said, O great king! on one
occasion, having obtained intelligence of an eclipse of the sun, Shree
Krishnù Chund and Buldeo Jee having gone to Raja Oogursen said, "O great
king! an eclipse of the sun has, after a long interval, occurred, it
will be a very virtuous act, if you go to Koorchetrù, and hold this
festival there; because it is written in the Shastrùs, 'That whoever
shall offer gifts or do acts of moral or religious merit at Koorchetrù,
shall be deemed a thousand fold excellent.'" On hearing these words, the
descendants of Judoo enquired from Shree Krishnù Chund Jee, "O great
king! how did Koorchetrù become so eminent a place of pilgrimage, be
pleased to do us the favour to explain?" Shree Krishnù Jee replied,
"Listen, Jumdugun, the sage, was very wise, given to religious
meditation, a strict performer of penance and of a glorious reputation.
He had three sons, the eldest of whom was Purshooram, who having

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

abandoned the pleasures of the world, went and dwelt in Chitrùkoot, and
began to perform penance in honor of Sudashivù. On the birth of his
children, Jumdugun, the sage, having given up house keeping and forsaken
the world, went into the forest with his wife, and began to practise
devout austerity; his wife's name was Renooka, who went one day to
invite her sister, who was the wife of the Raja Suhusrajoorun; when she
had given the invitation, Raja Suhusrajoorun's wife, the sister of
Renooka, indulging in pride, said laughing, 'If sister, you can feed me
and my army, give the invitation, otherwise do not give it.' O great
king! having heard this, Renooka was annoyed and rising up thence
without speaking a word came home. Perceiving that she was in low
spirits, Jumdugun, the sage, enquired, 'What has happened to-day, that
you are out of humour.' Upon his making the enquiry, Renooka shedding
tears, mentioned all the circumstances, as they had occurred. On hearing
them, Jumdugun, the sage, said to his wife, 'Well! go now and invite
your sister with her army.' When Renooka received her husband's order,
she went to her sister's house and invited her. The sister said to her
husband, 'You and I, together with our army, must go to-morrow to eat
our food at the house of Jumdugun, the sage.' Having heard and assented
to what his wife said he laughed and was silent. Jumdugun rose very
early next morning and went to Raja Indrù, and asked for the cow
Kamdhenoo, and afterwards went and invited, and brought back with him
the Raja Suhusrajoorun; he came with his army, and Jumdugun Jee
entertained them all with every kind of food they desired. When he and
his army had eaten their food, Raja Suhusrajoorun was very much ashamed
and began to say to himself, 'Whence has he obtained the means of
feeding so many people during the night, and how he has prepared the
food, I cannot understand the secret of all this.' Having thus spoken,
and taken leave he went home, and despatched a brahmin, saying

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

to him, 'O divinity! go to the house of Jumdugun, and bring me
information, by whose power he has, in one day, invited and entertained
me and my army.' On hearing these words, the brahmin went off quickly,
and having made his observations came back, and said to Suhusrajoorun,
'O great king! the cow Kamdhenoo is in his house, through whose power he
has been able to invite, and entertain you in the course of a day.'
Suhusrajoorun said to the brahmin, in reply to this intelligence, 'O
divinity! go from me, and say to Jumdugun the sage, that I beg the cow
Kamdhenoo from him.' The brahmin on hearing these words, went with the
message to the sage, and mentioned what Suhusrajoorun had said. The sage
replied, 'The cow does not belong to me, that I can give it, it belongs
to Raja Indrù, and I cannot give it; go and tell your Raja so.' Upon his
saying this, the brahmin came, and said to Raja Suhusrajoorun, 'O great
king! the sage says that the cow Kamdhenoo is not his, but belongs to
Raja Indrù; and he cannot give it to you.' When the brahmin had thus
spoken, Suhusrajoorun sent for several of his warriors, and said to
them, 'Go now, and loosen and bring here from the house of Jumdugun the
cow Kamdhenoo.' The warriors, on receiving their master's order, went to
the sage's house; and when, after having loosened the cow, they carried
it off in presence of Jumdugun, the sage ran and stopped Kamdhenoo on
the road. Having received intelligence of this, Suhusrajoorun was
enraged, and came and cut off the sage's head, Kamdhenoo ran off to
Indrù, and Renooka came stood near her husband's body, she rolled upon
the ground, tearing her hair, and sat down, laying hold of his feet; she
struck her breast, shedding tears; and calling tenderly upon her
husband, poured forth lamentations. At that time, the guardian deities
of the ten quarters trembled, when they heard the cries and weeping of
Renooka; and the seat of Purshooram, shook, as he was engaged in
penance, and his meditations were interrupted. On his meditations being
disturbed, Purshooram,

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

having reflected, took his axe, and came to the spot, where his father's
corpse had fallen, and where his mother was standing, striking her
breast. On seeing this, Purshooram Jee became very wroth; and at the
same time, Renooka explained with tears to her son all the circumstances
of her husband's slaughter. When he had heard the account, Purshooram
went to where Suhusrajoorun was seated in the midst of his court, having
first said to his mother, 'Mother! I will first slay my father's enemy,
and afterwards come and take up my father's body.' On seeing the Raja,
Purshooram Jee said angrily, 'O pitiless, cowardly, malicious enemy of
your family! you have killed my father, and brought great grief upon
me.' When having thus spoken, Purshooram seized his axe, and advanced in
great wrath, the Raja confronted him with a bow and arrows. The two
strong men began a mighty contest. At length, after they had fought
about four hours, Purshooram Jee killed and overthrew Suhusrajoorun,
whose army then attacked him, and which he also destroyed near the
Raja's body; he afterwards came thence, and performed his father's
funeral obsequies; and having comforted his mother, Purshooram Jee then
offered sacrifice to Roodrù at that place; and from that time, the place
has been called, and become famous as a place of holy pilgrimage,
whoever goes there during an eclipse of the sun, and offers gifts, or
bathes or performs penance or sacrifice, will receive a reward of a
thousand fold excellence."

Having proceeded thus far in the narrative, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to
the Raja Pureechit,--O great king! on hearing this story, all the
descendants of Judoo were delighted, and said to Shree Krishnù Chund
Jee, "O great king! be pleased to go quickly to Koorchetrù, and do not
now delay, because it is necessary to arrive there in time for the
festival." On hearing this, Shree Krishnù Chund and Bulram Jee enquired
from the Raja Oogursen, "Who, O great king! will remain here to guard
the city if all go to Koorchetrù?" Raja Oogursen said, "Leave Unroodrù
Jee and go." Having received the Raja's

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

order, and having sent for and explained to Unroodrù, Krishnù said,
"Son! remain here, defend the cow and the brahmin and protect the
subject, I and the Raja Jee, and all the descendants of Judoo will
return, after having bathed at Koorchetrù." Unroodrù Jee replied, "I
will act according to your order."

Having, O great king! left Unroodrù Jee only to guard the city, Soorsen,
Basoodeo, Oodho, Akroor, Kritbruma, and all the high and low descendants
of Judoo with their wives prepared to set out for Koorchetrù. When the
Raja Oogursen encamped outside the city with his army, the whole party
assembled together; and afterwards Shree Krishnù Chund Jee joined them,
accompanied by his brother's wife, eight queens, sixteen thousand eight
hundred wives, and their sons and grandsons, Raja Oogursen decamped
thence on Krishnù's arrival; and advanced with great pomp and bustle,
like Raja Indrù.

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! after
a pleasant and safe journey of some days, Shree Krishnù Chund and all
the descendants of Judoo arrived at Koorchetrù; and having gone there,
they all bathed during the festival; and, each, to the utmost of his
means, offered elephants, horses, ruths, palkees, dresses, jewels,
ornaments, grain or money, and afterwards they all encamped there.

O great king! having heard of the journey of Shree Krishnù Chund and
Bulram Jee to Koorchetrù, Rajas from the four quarters came with their
families and armies, and met them. Then all the Kouruvùs and Panduvùs
came there with their relatives and their troops; at that time Koontee
and Dropudee went into the female apartments of the descendants of
Judoo, and had interviews with their wives; after this Koontee having
gone into her brother's presence, said, "Brother! I am very unfortunate,
from the very day I was betrothed I have been suffering affliction, you
have not thought of me from the time you gave me in marriage; and Ram
Krishnù, who is the bestower of happiness upon all, has not shown any
kindness towards me."

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

On hearing these words, O great king! Basoodeo Jee taking compassion on
her, said, his eyes being filled with tears, Sister! what dost thou say
to me? I have had no [control](errata.htm#24) in these matters, the
condition or circumstances of fate are not known. The will of Huri is
very powerful, behold! what griefs I endured at the hands of Kuns; the
whole world has become subservient to Krishnù; behold! whatever griefs
one may suffer, the universe is put into circular motion."

O great king! having thus spoken, and having entered into explanations
with his sister, Basoodeo Jee went to the place, where all the Rajas
were seated in the court of Raja Oogursen and Raja Doorjodhun and other
great Rajas, and" the Panduvùs were doing honour to Oogursen: "Raja! you
are very fortunate in constantly beholding Shree Krishnù Chund, and
obliterating the sins of each birth; the lord, whom Shivù, Bruhmù and
all the other gods wander about seeking, continually protects you; the
Huri, whose mysteries jogees and sages, or whose passions are under
complete subjection, and saints and wise men cannot discover, comes to
receive your orders; and he, who is god of the whole world, bows his
head to you."

Having related thus much of the history, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O
great king! all the Rajas having come were thus applauding Raja
Oogursen, and he, with great propriety, pleased and satisfied them all.
In the mean while, having heard of the arrival of Shree Krishnù and
Bulram Jee, Nund and Oopnund came, accompanied by their relations and
all the cowherdesses and cowherds, and their children. When they were at
leisure after bathing and offering gifts, Nund Jee went to the place,
where Basoodeo and Dewukee were living with their son, in a state of
ease and enjoyment. On seeing them, Basoodeo Jee rose and met them; and
mutually expressing and feeling affection they were as happy as a man
would be, who had found a lost thing. Basoodeo Jee then mentioned to
Nund Rae all that had transpired at Bruj formerly,

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

how Nund Rae Jee had brought up Shree Krishnù and Bulram.

On hearing this account, O great king! Nund Rae Jee's eyes filled with
tears, and he remained gazing on the face of Basoodeo. At that time,
Shree Krishnù and Buldeo, having, with all becoming propriety, performed
obeisance and salutation, first to Nund and Jusodha Jee, went afterwards
and had a meeting with the cowherds' children. The cowherdesses came
there, and gazed upon the moon-like countenance of Huri, and delighted
their partridge-like eyes (that is, their eyes, which gazed at Krishnù,
in the same manner as the eyes of the Chukoor, or Greek partridge, gazes
at the moon, of which the bird is said to be enamoured) and received the
fruit, or the greatest enjoyment of their lives.

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! I
cannot describe the love displayed by Nund, Oopnund, Jusodha, the
cowherdesses, the cowherds and their children on meeting with Basoodeo,
Dewukee, Ranee, Shree Krishnù and Bulram; it must have been witnessed to
be understood. At length, seeing that they were all greatly agitated by
their affection, Shree Krishnù Chund Jee said, "Listen! whatever mortal
shall have faith in me, shall be fearlessly carried across the sea of
existence; you have made an offering of your bodies, minds and wealth,
and have looked upon me with a never ending affection; no one is equal
to you in good fortune; not Bruhmù, Roodrù, Indrù or any one else,
whoever he be, I have not come into the meditations of Shivù, but have
dwelt with you, and constantly increased my affection. I dwell in the
body of each individual: what I now say is incomprehensible and
unfathomable, as light, water, fire, earth and air abide in the body, so
also my splendour dwells in the human form."

Shree Shookdeo Jee said,--O great king! when Shree Krishnù Chund had
mentioned all these mysteries, all the inhabitants of Bruj recovered
their confidence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXIII](psa84)
