[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](psa90) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

### CHAPTER XC.

SHREE SHOOKDEO JEE said,--O great king! Shree Krishnù Chund constantly
dwelt in the city of Dwarka, where increase and plenty flourished in the
houses of all the descendants of Judoo; the men and women were decorated
with jewels and ornaments, and had a lively appearance; they applied
scents, sandal and perfumes to their bodies; the mahajuns had places
cleanly swept and sprinkled with water in the markets, roads and
cross-roads, where traders of different countries brought all kinds of
articles of merchandize for sale. Here and there the inhabitants of the
city amused themselves. In different places brahmins read the Vedas, and
in every house persons recited the Pooranùs; holy and virtuous men sung,
the praises of Huri during the eight watches. Charioteers brought
chariots, horses and bullocks, harnessed to the royal gate. Brave, bold,
resolute, powerful descendants of Judoo in chariots and carriages, and
mounted on elephants and horses came to pay their respects to the Raja.
Persons of skill amused him by dancing, singing and playing upon musical
instruments. Bards and panegyrists received elephants, horses, dresses,
arms, grain, money and golden ornaments, studded with jewels, for
celebrating his renown.

Having narrated thus much, Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the Raja, O great
king! whilst Raja Oogursen engaged

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

thus in various diversions in the metropolis of his empire, Shree
Krishnù Chund, the root of joy, constantly amused himself with his
sixteen thousand one hundred and eight wives. Sometimes the wives being
overcome by their passion, made a figure in the likeness of Krishnù; and
sometimes Huri, powerless from love, dressed his wives; and the sports
and diversions they carried on together cannot be described. I cannot
speak of them, they required to be seen. Shookdeo Jee after this
said,--O great king! one night Shree Krishnù Chund was amusing himself
with his women, when the celestial musicians and choristers, having
beheld the various pastimes and diversions of Krishnù, played upon
lutes, timbrels, pipes and kettle-drums, and sang of his excellent
attributes; there was an harmonious concert, when, upon a thought
occurring to Krishnù, whilst engaged in diversion, he took them all with
him, and went to the banks of a tank, and going into the water began to
sport and carry on pastimes in it; after this, his wives, whilst thus
amusing themselves in the water, were overjoyed with love for Krishnù,
and forgetting every thing, said, on seeing a ruddy goose and its mate,
calling out to each other from opposite sides of the tank, "O Chukwee!
why do you call out mournfully, and not sleep during the night, whilst
separated from your mate? You call upon him in a very troubled and
restless manner, you discourse of your beloved to us, we have become
Krishnù's slave girls." Having thus spoken they went on. They then began
to say to the sea, O sea! thou who heavest deep sighs and remainest
awake day and night, art thou afflicted at being separated from any one
or grieved for the loss of thy fourteen jewels?" They then addressed the
moon, "O moon! why dost thou continue emaciated and in low spirits,
what! hast thou consumption, that thy form . diminishes and increases
daily, and thy body and mind are fascinated, as ours are on beholding
Shree Krishnù Chund."

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

Having recited thus much Shree Shookdeo Jee said to the Raja,--O great
king! the women, in like manner, addressed all kinds of speeches to the
air, clouds, cuckoos, hills, rivers and geese. Afterwards all his wives
diverted themselves with Shree Krishnù Chund, and constantly attended
upon him and sang of his excellences, and obtained whatever they desired
and Krishnù carried on his domestic affairs in the manner prescribed for
all virtuous house-keeper.

O great king! the sixteen thousand one hundred and eight wives of Shree
Krishnù Chund whom I mentioned before, had each ten sons and one
daughter, and their progeny was numberless, I have not the power to
describe it; but I know so much, that there were three crores,
eighty-eight thousand one hundred schools for instructing the offspring
of Shree Krishnù Chund and the same number of schoolmasters. None of
Shree Krishnù Chund's sons or grandsons was deficient in beauty,
strength, physical power, wealth or moral and religious merit, each one
excelled and surpassed the other, how shall I attempt to describe them.
The sage proceeded to say, O great king! I have sung of the games of
Bruj and Dwarka, which confer pleasure upon all. Whoever shall sing of
them with affection, shall undoubtedly obtain supreme and eternal
happiness, and salvation. Whatever benefit is derived from, religious
penance, sacrifice, gifts, fasting, pilgrimage and bathing at holy
places, the same benefit is derived from hearing, and reciting the
history of Huri.

 

 

THE END.

W. RIDSDALE, MILITARY ORPHAN PRESS.

 

 
