[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](csus06)  [Next](csus08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486215806/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Communistic Societies of the United States*, by Charles Nordhoff,
\[1875\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### IV.—RELIGION AND LITERATURE.

"If one gives himself entirely, and in all his life, to the will of God,
he will presently be possessed by the Spirit of God."

"The Bible is the Word of God; each prophet or sacred writer wrote only
what he received from God."

"In the New Testament we read that the disciples were 'filled with the
Holy Ghost.' But the same God lives now, and it is reasonable to believe
that he inspires his followers now as then; and that he will lead his
people, in these days as in those, by the words of his inspiration."

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

"He leads us in spiritual matters, and in those temporal concerns which
affect our spiritual life; but we do not look to him for inspired
directions in all the minute affairs of our daily lives. Inspiration
directed us to come to America, and to leave Eben-Ezer for Iowa.
Inspiration sometimes directs us to admit a new-comer to full
membership, and sometimes to expel an unworthy member. Inspiration
discovers hidden sins in the congregation."

"We have no creed except the Bible."

"We ought to live retired and spiritual lives; to keep ourselves
separate from the world; to cultivate humility, obedience to God's will,
faithfulness, and love to Christ."

"Christ is our head."

Such are some of the expressions of their religious belief which the
pious and well-instructed at Amana gave me.

They have published two Catechisms—one for the instruction of children,
the other for the use of older persons. From these it appears that they
are Trinitarians, believe in "justification by faith," hold to the
resurrection of the dead, the final judgment, but not to eternal
punishment, believing rather that fire will purify the wicked in the
course of time, longer or shorter according to their wickedness.

They do not practice baptism, either infant or adult, holding it to be a
useless ceremony not commanded in the New Testament. They celebrate the
Lord's Supper, not at regular periods, but only when by the words of
"inspiration" God orders them to do so; and then with peculiar
ceremonies, which I shall describe further on.

As to this word "Inspiration," I quote here from the Catechism their
definition of it:

"*Question*. Is it therefore the Spirit or the witness of Jesus which
speaks and bears witness through the truly inspired persons?

"*Answer*. Yes; the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Jesus, which

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

brings to light the hidden secrets of the heart, and gives witness to
our spirits that it is the Spirit of truth.

"*Q*. When did the work of inspiration begin in the later times?

"*A*. About the end of the seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth
century. About this time the Lord began the gracious work of inspiration
in several countries (France, England, and, at last, in Germany),
gathered a people by these new messengers of peace, and declared a
divine sentence of punishment against the fallen Christian world.

"*Q*. How were these 'instruments' or messengers called?

"*A*. Inspired or new prophets. They were living trumpets of God, which
shook the whole of Christendom, and awakened many out of their sleep of
security."

\* \* \* \* \*

"*Q*. What is the word of inspiration?

"*A*. It is the prophetic word of the New Testament, or the Spirit of
prophecy in the new dispensation.

"*Q*. What properties and marks of divine origin has this inspiration?

"*A*. It is accompanied by a divine power, and reveals the secrets of
the heart and conscience in a way which only the all-knowing and
soul-penetrating Spirit of Jesus has power to do; it opens the ways of
love and grace, of the holiness and justice of God; and these
revelations and declarations are in their proper time accurately
fulfilled.

"*Q*. Through whom is the Spirit thus poured out?

"*A*. Through the vessels of grace, or 'instruments' chosen and fitted
by the Lord.

"*Q*. How must these 'instruments' be constituted?

"*A*. They must conform themselves in humility and child-like obedience
to all the motions and directions of God within them; without care for
self or fear of men, they must walk in the fear of God, and with
attentive watchfulness for the inner

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

signs of his leading; and they must subject themselves in every way to
the discipline of the Spirit."

Concerning the Constitution of the Inspiration Congregations or
communities, the same Catechism asserts that it "is founded upon the
divine revelation in the Old and New Testament, connected with the
divine directions, instructions, and determinations, general and
special, given through the words of the true inspiration."

"*Question*. Through or by whom are the divine ordinances carried out in
the congregations?

"*Answer*. By the elders and leaders, who have been chosen and nominated
to this purpose by God.

"*Q*. What are their duties?

"*A*. Every leader or elder of the congregation is in duty bound, by
reason of his divine call, to advance, in the measure of the grace and
power given him, the spiritual and temporal welfare of the congregation;
but in important and difficult circumstances the Spirit of prophecy will
give the right and correct decision.

"*Q*. Is the divine authority to bind and loose, entrusted, according to
Matt, xvi., 19, to the apostle Peter, also given to the elders of the
Inspiration Congregations?

"*A*. It belongs to all elders and teachers of the congregation of the
faithful, who were called by the Lord Jesus through the power of his
Holy Spirit, and who, by the authority of their divine call, and of the
divine power within them, rule without abuse the congregations or flocks
entrusted to them.

"*Q*. What are the duties of the members of the Inspiration
Congregations?

"*A*. A pure and upright walk in the fear of God; heartfelt love and
devotion toward their brethren, and childlike obedience toward God and
the elders."

These are the chief articles of faith of the Amana Community.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

They regard the utterances, while in the trance state, of their
spiritual head as given from God; and believe—as is asserted in the
Catechism—that evils and wrongs in the congregation will be thus
revealed by the influence, or, as they say, the inspiration or breath of
God; that in important affairs they will thus receive the divine
direction; and that it is their duty to obey the commands thus delivered
to them.

There were "inspired instruments" before Christian Metz. Indeed, the
present "instrument," Barbara Landmann, was accepted before him, but by
reason of her marriage fell from grace for a while. It would seem that
Metz also was married; for I was told at Amana that at his death in
1867, at the age of sixty-seven, he left a daughter in the community.

The words of "inspiration" are usually delivered in the public meetings,
and at funerals and other solemn occasions. They have always been
carefully written down by persons specially appointed to that office;
and this appears to have been done so long ago as 1719, when "Brother
John Frederick Rock" made his journey through Constance, Schaffhausen,
Zurich, etc., with "Brother J. J. Schulthes as writer, who wrote down
every thing correctly, from day to day, and in weal or woe."

When the "instrument" "falls into inspiration," he is often severely
shaken—Metz, they say, sometimes shook for an hour—and thereupon follow
the utterances which are believed to proceed from God. The "instrument"
sits or kneels, or walks about among the congregation. "Brother Metz
used to walk about in the meeting with his eyes closed; but he always
knew to whom he was speaking, or where to turn with words of reproof,
admonition, or encouragement"—so I was told.

The "inspired" words are not always addressed to the general
congregation, but often to individual members; and their feelings are
not spared. Thus in one case Barbara Landmann, being "inspired," turned
upon a sister with the words,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "But you, wretched
creature, follow the true counsel of obedience;" and to another: "And
you, contrary spirit, how much pain do you give to our hearts. You will
fall into everlasting pain, torture, and unrest if you do not break your
will and repent, so that you may be accepted and forgiven by those you
have offended, and who have done so much for you."

The warnings, prophecies, reproofs, and admonitions, thus delivered by
the "inspired instrument," are all, as I have said, carefully written
down, and in convenient time printed in yearly volumes, entitled
"Year-Books of the True Inspiration Congregations: Witnesses of the
Spirit of God, which happened and were spoken in the Meetings of the
Society, through the Instruments, Brother Christian Metz and Sister B.
Landmann," with the year in which they were delivered. In this country
they early established a printing-press at Eben-Ezer, and after their
removal also in Iowa, and have issued a considerable number of volumes
of these records. They are read as of equal authority and almost equal
importance with the Bible. Every family possesses some volumes; and in
their meetings extracts are read aloud after the reading of the
Scriptures.

There is commonly a brief preface to each revelation, recounting the
circumstances under which it was delivered; as for instance:

"No. 10. *Lower Eben-Ezer*, November 7, 1853.—Monday morning the
examination of the congregation was made here according to the command
of the Lord. For the opening service five verses were sung of the hymn,
'Lord, give thyself to me;' the remainder of the hymn was read. After
the prayer, and a brief silence, Sister Barbara Landmann fell into
inspiration, and was forced to bear witness in the following gracious
and impressive revival words of love."

The phrase varies with the contents of the message, as, on another
occasion, it is written that "both 'instruments' fell into

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

inspiration, and there followed this earnest admonition to repentance,
and words of warning;" or, again, the words are described as
"important," or "severe," or "gentle and gracious and hope inspiring."

During his wanderings in Germany among the congregations, Metz appears
to have fallen into inspiration almost daily, not only in meetings, but
during conversations, and even occasionally at dinner—whereupon the
dinner waited. Thus it is recorded that "at the Rehmühle, near Hambach,
June 1, 1839—this afternoon the traveling brethren with Brother Peter
came hither and visited friend Matthias Bieber. After conversation, as
they were about to sit down to eat something, Brother Christian Metz
fell into inspiration, and delivered the following words to his friend,
and Brother Philip Peter."

The inspired utterances are for the most part admonitory to a holier
life; warnings, often in the severest language, against selfishness,
stubbornness, coldness of heart, pride, hatred toward God, grieving the
Spirit; with threats of the wrath of God, of punishment, etc. Humility
and obedience are continually inculcated. "Lukewarmness" appears to be
one of the prevailing sins of the community. It is needless to say that
to a stranger these homilies are dull reading. Concerning violations of
the Ten Commandments or of the moral law, I have not found any mention
here; and I do not doubt that the members of the society live, on the
whole, uncommonly blameless lives. I asked, for instance, what
punishment their rules provided for drunkenness, but was told that this
vice is not found among them; though, as at Economy and in other German
communities, they habitually use both wine and beer.

When any member offends against the rules or order of life of the
society, he is admonished (*ermahnt*) by the elders; and if he does not
amend his ways, expulsion follows; and

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

here as elsewhere in the communities I have visited, they seem
vigilantly to purge the society of improper persons.

The following twenty-one "Rules for Daily Life," printed in one of their
collections, and written by one of their older leaders, E. L. Gruber,
give, I think, a tolerably accurate notion of their views of the conduct
of life:

"I. To obey, without reasoning, God, and through God our superiors.

"II. To study quiet, or serenity, within and without.

"III. Within, to rule and master your thoughts.

"IV. Without, to avoid all unnecessary words, and still to study silence
and quiet.

"V. To abandon self, with all its desires, knowledge, and power.

"VI. Do not criticize others, either for good or evil, neither to judge
nor to imitate them; therefore contain yourself, remain at home, in the
house and in your heart.

"VII. Do not disturb your serenity or peace of mind—hence neither desire
nor grieve.

"VIII. Live in love and pity toward your neighbor, and indulge neither
anger nor impatience in your spirit.

"IX. Be honest, sincere, and avoid all deceit and even secretiveness.

"X. Count every word, thought, and work as done in the immediate
presence of God, in sleeping and waking, eating, drinking, etc., and
give him at once an account of it, to see if all is done in his fear and
love.

"XI. Be in all things sober, without levity or laughter; and without
vain and idle words, works, or thoughts; much less heedless or idle.

"XII. Never think or speak of God without the deepest reverence, fear,
and love, and therefore deal reverently with all spiritual things.

"XIII. Bear all inner and outward sufferings in silence,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

complaining only to God; and accept all from him in deepest reverence
and obedience.

"XIV. Notice carefully all that God permits to happen to you in your
inner and outward life, in order that you may not fail to comprehend his
will and to be led by it.

"XV. Have nothing to do with unholy, and particularly with needless
business affairs.

"XVI. Have no intercourse with worldly-minded men; never seek their
society; speak little with them, and never without need; and then not
without fear and trembling.

"XVII. Therefore, what you have to do with such men, do in haste; do not
waste time in public places and worldly society, that you be not tempted
and led away.

"XVIII. Fly from the society of women-kind as much as possible, as a
very highly dangerous magnet and magical fire.

"XIX. Avoid obeisance and the fear of men; these are dangerous ways.

"XX. Dinners, weddings, feasts, avoid entirely; at the best there is
sin.

"XXI. Constantly practice abstinence and temperance, so that you may be
as wakeful after eating as before."

These rules may, I suppose, be regarded as the ideal standard toward
which a pious Inspirationist looks and works. Is it not remarkable that
they should have originated and found their chief adherents among
peasants and poor weavers?

Their usual religious meetings are held on Wednesday, Saturday, and
Sunday mornings, and every evening. On Saturday, all the people of a
village assemble together in the church or meeting-house; on other days
they meet in smaller rooms, and by classes or orders.

The society consists of three of these orders—the highest, the middle,
and the lower, or children's order. In the latter fall naturally the
youth of both sexes, but also those older and married persons whose
religions life and experience are not

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

deep enough to make them worthy of membership in the higher orders.

The evening meeting opens a little after seven o'clock. It is held in a
large room specially maintained for this purpose. I accompanied one of
the brethren, by permission, to these meetings during my stay at Amana.
I found a large, low-ceiled room, dimly lighted by a single lamp placed
on a small table at the head of the room, and comfortably warmed with
stoves. Benches without backs were placed on each side of this chamber;
the floor was bare, but clean; and hither entered, singly, or by twos or
threes, the members, male and female, each going to the proper place
without noise. The men sat on one side, the women on the other. At the
table sat an elderly man, of intelligent face and a look of some
authority. Near him were two or three others.

When all had entered and were seated, the old man at the table gave out
a hymn, reading out one line at a time; and after two verses were sung
in this way, he read the remaining ones. Then, after a moment of
decorous and not unimpressive silent meditation, all at a signal rose
and kneeled down at their places. Hereupon the presiding officer uttered
a short prayer in verse, and after him each man in his turn, beginning
with the elders, uttered a similar verse of prayer, usually four, and
sometimes six lines long. When all the men and boys had thus prayed—and
their little verses were very pleasant to listen to, the effect being of
childlike simplicity—the presiding elder closed with a brief extemporary
prayer, whereupon all arose.

Then he read some verses from one of their inspired books, admonishing
to a good life; and also a brief homily from one of Christian Metz's
inspired utterances. Thereupon all arose, and stood in their places in
silence for a moment; and then, in perfect order and silence, and with a
kind of military precision, benchful after benchful of people walked
softly out of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the room. The women departed first; and each went home, I judge, without
delay or tarrying in the hall, for when I got out the hall was already
empty.

The next night the women prayed instead of the men, the presiding
officer conducting the meeting as before. I noticed that the boys and
younger men had their places on the front seats; and the whole meeting
was conducted with the utmost reverence and decorum.

On Wednesday and Sunday mornings the different orders meet at the same
hour, each in its proper assembly-room. These are larger than those
devoted to the evening meetings. The Wednesday-morning meeting began at
half-past seven, and lasted until nine. There was, as in the evening
meetings, a very plain deal table at the head, and benches, this time
with backs, were ranged in order, the sexes sitting by themselves as
before; each person coming in with a ponderous hymn-book, and a Bible in
a case. The meeting opened with the singing of six verses of a hymn, the
leader reading the remaining verses. Many of their hymns have from ten
to fourteen verses. Next he read some passages from one of the
inspirational utterances of Metz; after which followed prayer, each man,
as in the evening meetings, repeating a little supplicatory verse. The
women did not join in this exercise.

Then the congregation got out their Bibles, the leader gave out the
fifth chapter of Ephesians, and each man read a verse in his turn; then
followed a psalm; and the women read those verses which remained after
all the men had read. After this the leader read some further passages
from Metz. After the reading of the New Testament chapter and the psalm,
three of the leaders, who sat near the table at the head of the room,
briefly spoke upon the necessity of living according to the words of
God, doing good works and avoiding evil. Their exhortations were very
simple, and without any attempt at eloquence, in a conversational tone.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

Finally another hymn was sung; the leader pronounced a blessing, and we
all returned home, the men and women going about the duties of the day.

On Saturday morning the general meeting is held in the church. The
congregation being then more numerous, the brethren do not all pray, but
only the elders; as in the other meetings, a chapter from the New
Testament is read and commented upon by the elders; also passages are
read from the inspired utterances of Metz or some other of their
prophets; and at this time, too, the "instrument," if moved, falls into
a trance, and delivers the will of the Holy Spirit.

They keep New-Year's as a holiday, and Christmas, Easter, and the
Holy-week are their great religions festivals. Christmas is a three
days' celebration, when they make a feast in the church; there are no
Christmas-trees for the children, but they receive small gifts. Most of
the feast days are kept double—that is to say, during two days. During
the Passion-week they have a general meeting in the church every day at
noon, and on each day the chapter appropriate to it is read, and
followed by prayer and appropriate hymns. The week ends, of course, on
Sunday with the ascension; but on Easter Monday, which is also kept, the
children receive colored eggs.

At least once in every year there is a general and minute
"Untersuchung," or inquisition of the whole community, including even
the children—an examination of its spiritual condition. This is done by
classes or orders, beginning with the elders themselves: and I judge
from the relations of this ceremony in their printed books that it lasts
long, and is intended to be very thorough. Each member is expected to
make confession of his sins, faults, and shortcomings; and if any thing
is hidden, they believe that it will be brought to light by the inspired
person, who assumes on this occasion an important part, admonishing
individuals very freely, and denouncing the sins and evils which exist
in the congregation. At this time,

<span id="img_05400"></span>

[![CHURCH AT AMANA.](tn/05400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05400.jpg)  
CHURCH AT AMANA.  

<span id="img_05401"></span>

[![INTERIOR VIEW OF CHURCH.](tn/05401.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05401.jpg)  
INTERIOR VIEW OF CHURCH.  

<span id="img_05402"></span>

[![PLAN OF THE INSPIRATIONIST VILLAGES.](tn/05402.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05402.jpg)  
PLAN OF THE INSPIRATIONIST VILLAGES.  

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

too, any disputes which may have occurred are brought up and healed, and
an effort is made to revive religious fervor in the hearts of all.

Not unfrequently the examination of a class is adjourned from day to
day, because they are found to be cold and unimpressible; and I notice
that on these occasions the young people in particular are a cause of
much grief and trouble on account of their perverse hardness of heart.

The celebration of the Lord's Supper is their greatest religious event.
It is held only when the "inspired instrument" directs it, which may not
happen once in two years; and it is thought so solemn and important an
occasion that a full account of it is sometimes printed in a book. I
have one such volume: "*Das Liebes- und Gedächtniszmahl des Leidens und
Sterbens unsers Herrn und Heilandes Jesu Christi, wie solches von dem
Herrn durch Sein Wort und zeugnisz angekündigt, angeordnet und gehalten
warden, in Vier Abtheilungen, zu Mittel und Nieder Eben-Ezer, im Jahr*
1855" ("The Supper of Love and Remembrance of the suffering and death of
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: How it was announced, ordered, and
held by his word and witness, in four parts, in Middle and Lower
Eben-Ezer, in the year 1855"). It is a neatly printed volume of 284
pages.

The account begins with the announcement of the Lord's command: "Middle
Eben-Ezer, April 21st, 1855, Saturday, in the general meeting, in the
beginning, when the congregation was assembled, came the following
gracious word and determination of the Lord, through Brother Chr. Metz."
Thereupon, after some words of preface, the "instrument" kneeled down,
the congregation also kneeling, and said: "I am commanded humbly to
reveal, according to the sacred and loving conclusion, that you are to
celebrate the supper of love and remembrance in the presence of your
God. The beginning and the course of it shall be as before. There will
be on this

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

occasion humiliations and revelations, if in any the true Worker of
righteousness and repentance has not been allowed to do his work. The
Lord will make a representation of the lack of his understanding in many
of you; his great love will come to light, and will light up every one."
After more of this kind of address, the "instrument" said: "You are to
begin the Lord's Supper on Ascension-day, make ready then all your
hearts, clean out all filth, all that is rotten and stinks, all sins and
every thing idle and useless; and cherish pious thoughts, so that you
shall put down the flesh, as you are commanded to," and so on.

On a following Sunday, the "instrument" recurred to the subject, and in
the course of his remarks reproved one of the elders for disobedience to
the Lord and resistance to grace, and displaced him in the assembly,
calling another by name to his place. At the close, he spoke thus,
evidently in the name and with the voice of God: "And I leave it to you,
my servants, to take out of the middle order here and there some into
the first, and out of the third into the second, but not according to
favor and prejudice, but according to their grace and conduct, of which
you are to take notice."

A day was given to admonitions and preparation; the "instrument"
speaking not only to the congregation in general, in the morning and
afternoon meetings, but to a great many in particular—admonishing,
exhorting, blaming, encouraging them by name. The next morning there was
a renewal of such hortatory remarks, with singing and prayer; and in the
afternoon, all being prepared, the elders washed the feet of the
brethren. This is done only in the higher orders.

Thereupon tables are brought in, and bread and wine are placed. After
singing, the "inspired" person blesses these, and they are then received
by the brethren and sisters from the hands of the elders, who pronounce
the customary words of Scripture.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

This being accomplished, the assembly temporarily adjourns, and persons
previously appointed for this office spread on the tables a modest
supper of bread and cake, coffee, chocolate, and a few other articles of
food, and to this all sit down with solemn joy. At the conclusion of
this meal, a hymn is sung, and the assembly retire to their homes.

When the three regular orders have gone through this celebration, there
is a fourth, consisting of children under sixteen years, and of certain
adult members who for various reasons have been thought unworthy to
partake with the rest; and these also go through a thorough examination.

I asked one of their leading elders whether they believed in a
"prayer-cure," explaining what the Oneida communists understand by this
phrase. He replied, "No, we do not use prayer in this way, to cure
disease. But it is possible. But if God has determined death, ten
doctors cannot help a man."

The present inspired instrument being very aged, I asked whether another
was ready to take her place. They said No, no one had yet appeared; but
they had no doubt God would call some one to the necessary office. They
were willing to trust him, and gave themselves no trouble about it.

It remains to speak of their literature.

They have a somewhat ponderous hymnology, in two great volumes, one
called "The Voice from Zion: to the Praise of the Almighty," by "John
William Petersen (A.D. 1698)," printed at Eben-Ezer, N. Y., in 1851, and
containing 958 pages. The hymns are called Psalms, and are not in rhyme.
They are to be sung in a kind of chant, as I judge from the music
prefixed to them; and are a kind of commentary on the Scripture, one
part being taken up with the book of Revelation.

The other volume is the hymn-book in regular use. It contains 1285
pages, of which 111 are music—airs to which the different hymns may be
sung. The copy I have is of the third

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

edition, and bears the imprint, "Amana, Iowa, 1871." Its title is
"Psalms after the manner of David, for the children of Zion." It has one
peculiarity which might with advantage be introduced in other
hymn-books. Occasional verses are marked with a \*, and it is
recommended to the reader that these be taught to the children as little
prayers. In practice, I found that in their evening meetings the grown
persons as well as the children recited these simple and devotional
little verses as their prayers: surely a more satisfactory delivery to
them and the congregation than rude and halting attempts at extemporary
utterance.

Many of the hymns are very long, having from twelve to twenty-four
verses; and it is usual at their meetings to sing three or four verses
and then read the remainder. They do not sing well; and their
tunes—those at least which I heard—are slow, and apparently in a style
of music now disused in our churches. The hymns are printed as prose,
only the verses being separated. I was told that they were "all given by
the Spirit of God," and that Christian Metz had a great gift of
hymn-writing, very often, at home or elsewhere, writing down an entire
hymn at one sitting. They are all deeply devotional in spirit, and have
not infrequently the merit of great simplicity and a pleasing quaintness
of expression, of which I think the German language is more capable than
our ruder and more stubborn English.

Their writers are greatly given to rhyming. Even in the inspirational
utterances I find frequently short admonitory paragraphs where rude
rhymes are introduced. Among their books is one, very singular, called
"Innocent Amusement" ("*Unschuldiges Zeitvertreib*"), in a number of
volumes (I saw the fifth). It is a collection of verses, making pious
applications of many odd subjects. Among the headings I found Cooking,
Rain, Milk, The Ocean, Temperance, Salve, Dinner, A Mast, Fog, A Net,
Pitch, A Rainbow, A Kitchen, etc., etc.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is a mass of
pious doggerel, founded on Scripture and with fanciful additions.

Another is called "Jesus's A B C, for his scholars," and is also in
rhyme. Another is entitled "Rhymes on the sufferings, death, burial, and
resurrection of Christ." There are about twelve hundred pages of the
A B C book.

They have printed also a miniature Thomas à Kempis, "for the edification
of children;" two catechisms; a little work entitled "Treasure for those
who desire God," and other works of similar character. A list, not
complete, but containing all the books I have been able to collect, will
be found in the Bibliography at the end of this volume.

At the end of the Catechism are some pages of rules for the conduct of
children, at home, in church, at school, during play hours, at meals,
and in all the relations of their lives. Many of these rules are
excellent, and the whole of them might well be added to the children's
catechisms in use in the churches. Piety, orderly habits, obedience,
politeness, cleanliness, kindness to others, truthfulness, cheerfulness,
etc., are all inculcated in considerable detail, with great plainness of
speech, and in sixty-six short paragraphs, easily comprehended by the
youngest children. The fifty-fourth rule shows the care with which they
guard the intercourse of the sexes: "Have no pleasure in violent games
or plays; do not wait on the road to look at quarrels or fights; do not
keep company with bad children, for there you will learn only
wickedness. Also, *do not play with children of the other sex*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I.—Economy In 1874](csus08)
