[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Virgil](../index)  [Index](index)  [Latin](ecll08)  [Previous](ecl07) 
[Next](ecl09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ECLOGUE VIII.--THE SORCERESS

### DAMON--ALPHESIBOEUS

THE Muse of the shepherds Damon and Alphesiboeus, at whose strife the
wondering heifer forgot the grass, at whose song the lynx stood
breathless and the streams changed their current and were still, the
Muse of Damon and Alphesiboeus we will tell.

Thou, my friend, whether thou climbest now great Timavus' rocks or dost
skirt the coast of the Illyrian sea, ah shall ever the day come when I
may tell of thy deeds? ah shall it come that I may blason over all the
world thy strains that alone challenge the buskin of Sophocles? From
thee I began; for thee will I end: take the songs that were essayed at
thy commands, and let this ivy curl among the conqueror's laurel around
thy brows.

The chill shadow of night had hardly retreated from the sky, when the
dew on the tender grass is sweetest to the flock: Damon, leaning on his
smooth olive-staff, thus began:

Rise, Morning Star, and herald in the gracious day, while, beguiled by
Love's tyranny, I complain over Nisa the bride, and though it has
availed me nothing that the gods were witnesses, yet in this utmost hour
call on them as I die.

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus. Maenalus ever keeps his
vocal forest and talking pines: ever he bears the loves of shepherds,
and Pan who of yore would not let the reeds lie idle.

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

Mopsus gets Nisa: what may we lovers not look for? now will gryphons
couple with horses, and in following time shy fallow deer come with the
hounds to drink.

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

Mopsus, cut fresh torches: for thee a wife is led home. Scatter

{p. 285}

nuts, O bridegroom: for thee the Evening Star leaves Oeta forlorn.

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

O wedded to thy mate! while thou scornest all the world, and while my
pipe and while my she-goats annoy thee, and my shaggy eyebrows and
untrimmed beard, nor fanciest thou that any god cares for human things.

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

In our orchard-close I saw thee, a little girl with her mother--I guided
you both--gathering apples wet with dew: the next year after eleven had
just received me: I could just reach the brittle branches from the
ground. As I saw, how I perished, how the fatal craze swept me away!

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

Now I know what Love is: on iron flints of Tmaros or Rhodope or the
utmost Garamants is he born, no child of our kin or blood.

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

Fierce Love taught the mother to dabble her bands with her children's
blood: cruel thou too, O mother! Crueller the mother or the boy
insatiate? insatiate the boy; cruel thou too, O mother!

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

Now even let the wolf flee unchased before the sheep; let gnarled oaks
bear apples of gold: let the alder flower into narcissus, and rich amber
ooze from tamarisk bark: yes, let screech-owls vie with swans, let
Tityrus be Orpheus, Orpheus in the forest, Arion among the dolphin
shoals--

Begin with me, my flute, the verses of Maenalus.

Even let mid-ocean cover all. Farewell, O woodlands! from my watchtower
aloft on the hill I will plunge headlong into the waves: keep thou this
my last gift as I die.

Cease, O flute, cease now the verses of Maenalus.

Thus Damon: you, maidens of Pieria, tell of Alphesiboeus' reply: we
cannot all do everything.

Fetch water forth, and twine the altars here with the soft fillet, and
burn resinous twigs and male frankincense, that I

{p. 286}

may try by magic rites to turn my lover's sense from sanity: nothing is
wanting now but the songs.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

Songs have might even to draw down the moon from heaven: with songs
Circe transformed the crew of Ulysses: by singing the cold snake is
burst asunder in the meadows.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

Threefold first I twine about thee these diverse triple-hued threads,
and thrice round these altars I draw thine image: an odd number is god's
delight.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

Tie the threefold colours in three knots, Amaryllis, tie them then: and
say, 'I tie Venus' bands.'

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

As this clay stiffens and as this wax softens in one and the selfsame
fire, so let Daphnis do for love of me. Sprinkle barley-meal, and kindle
the brittle bay-twigs with bitumen. Cruel Daphnis burns me: I burn this
bay at Daphnis.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

So may Daphnis love, as when the heifer, weary with seeking the steer
through woodland and high grove, sinks on the green sedge by a water
brook, in misery, and recks not to retire before the falling night: so
may love hold him, nor may I care to heal.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

This dress he wore of old the traitor left me, dear pledges of himself:
which now I even in the doorway, O earth, commit to thee: for these
pledges Daphnis is the debt.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

These herbs, and these poisons gathered in Pontus, Moeris himself gave
me; in Pontus they grow thickest. By their might I have often seen
Moeris become a wolf and plunge into the forest, often seen him call up
souls from their deep graves, and transplant the harvests to where they
were not sown.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

Fetch ashes, Amaryllis, out of doors, and fling them across thy head
into the running brook: and look not back. With

{p. 287}

these I will assail Daphnis: nothing cares he for gods, nothing for
songs.

Draw from the city, my songs, draw Daphnis home.

See! the embers on the altar have caught with a flickering flame,
themselves, of their own accord, while I delay to fetch them. Be it for
good! something there is for sure; and Hylax barks in the doorway. May
we believe? or do lovers fashion dreams of their own?

Forbear: from the city, forbear now, my songs, Daphnis comes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eclogue IX.--Moeris](ecl09)
