[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hhl12)  [Next](hhl14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

# IX

# LAA FROM TAHITI

WHEN history is told by genealogies, rather than by cycles of years, the
time-problem is difficult to solve. But in the story of
Laa-mai-Kahiki <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) the stories and
genealogies of two widely separated groups of Pacific islands produce a
certain degree of apparent accuracy. The Society Islands have the story
of Raa who became a ruler and established a line of rulers which has
continued to the present day. The genealogy of this Raa family coincides
very closely in extent with the number of names given in the Hawaiian
genealogies from the time of the visit of Laa from Tahiti to his uncle
Moi-keha the Restless and his subsequent return to Tahiti. This places
the time of Laa in the thirteenth century.

Moi-keha sailed away from the Hawaiian

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Islands with his brother Olopana and his nephew
Laa. He returned alone, and won the island Kauai as his kingdom. Olopana
and Laa remained in the "wide spreading" valley under the shadow of what
the Hawaiians called the mountain Kapa-ahu the Tapa Cloak in far away
Tahiti.

The mountains of Tahiti have been built upward from the floors of the
ocean until their rugged ravines rise several thousand feet above the
surf-washed beach. The centuries have softened the harsh mountain
outlines and swept vast masses of debris down into the valleys, until at
last tropical luxuriance dominates mountain slope and level plain. Here
Laa's youth was spent, and his manhood gained. Here he proved his
superiority over the Tahitian chiefs among whom he had found his
permanent home. Laa's record is that of a Polynesian viking. He was born
on the island Oahu. He went to Hawaii with his uncles and spent a part
of his boyhood in the royal valley of Waipio. With these same uncles he
sailed the many hundred miles to Tahiti.

It has always been the ambition of Hawaiian chiefs to excel in all
athletic sports and warlike exercises. This was a course of training
well fitted to make Laa high-spirited, courageous and ever ready to take
the leadership among his fellow-chiefs in the new land where he made his
home.

Years passed by. Moi-keha was held back

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

from longed-for sea journeys by the cares of his kingdom and the restful
delights of a prosperous home. Children whose names became noted in
Hawaiian legends grew to manhood and womanhood around him. Kahai, the
sea-rover, a grandson of Moi-keha, is said to have sailed to Upolu in
the Samoan Islands and there found a new species of breadfruit which he
thought might well be placed by the older Hawaiian breadfruit. This he
brought back with him and planted at Pearl Harbor.

Kila, the third son of Moi-keha, was made a messenger to Tahiti by his
father. A great longing had taken possession of Moi-keha to see the
foster son whom he had carried away many years before. Kila was said to
be very careful and courageous with a strong desire to emulate the deeds
of his ancestors. The call to the sea was hereditary and with eagerness
he grasped the opportunity. The largest double canoes were selected,
their mat sails were made from new and strong hala leaves and they were
equipped for the long voyage. Fornander says that some of Kila's
brothers went with him. The old astrologer and sailor, Kama-hua-lele,
who had come from Tahiti with Moi-keha, was selected to be the guardian
of the young chiefs and pilot of the expedition.

Kila sailed from island to island until at last he left the high
mountains of the island Hawaii and

 

<span id="img_08800"></span>

[![CHIEFS IN FEATHER CLOAKS AND HELMETS&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;By courtesy
Paradise of the Pacific&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/08800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08800.jpg)  
CHIEFS IN FEATHER CLOAKS AND HELMETS  
*By courtesy Paradise of the Pacific*.  

 

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

sailed away to the South. The Kalakaua legends say that Kila bore with
him a brilliant royal mantle made from the rare feathers of the mamo,
and that Moi-keha had been many months in the manufacture of the mantle,
assisted by hundreds of bird hunters and skilled workmen. This was an
especial offering to Laa, a reminder of the high esteem in which his
foster father still held him, and a proof of the intense desire for him
to visit his native land.

The long canoe voyage appears to have been blessed with favouring winds
and clear skies. The stars were easily observed and followed until
Tahiti was found. It seems to those who now cross the ocean in great
ships that such a voyage is almost incredible, but the Hawaiians were
vikings and were as intrepid sailors as the Norsemen who were sailing
across the Atlantic Ocean about the same time.

At Tahiti they found Laa and his uncle Olopana. Fornander says that one
set of legends gives the story of Laa's speedy return to Hawaii with
Kila. Another set of legends rehearses the age of Olopana and his desire
for Laa to remain with him until his life should end. All the legends
agree in stating that Laa returned to the Hawaiian Islands, that he had
with him a large retinue when he visited the home of his childhood and
that he brought the drum known through all

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

the later years as Ke-eke-eke. It was made by cutting out the pithy
heart of a section of a large cocoanut tree, and thinning the shell as
far as safety would allow. Then the ends were covered with the skin of a
shark. Fornander says that "every independent chief, and every temple
where human sacrifices were offered, had their own drum and drummer from
Laa-mai-Kahiki's time to the introduction of Christianity."

The great event by which Laa was indelibly impressed upon the legends of
Hawaii was his triple marriage with three selected chiefesses of the
island Oahu.

The highest chiefs among the Hawaiians were glad to ally themselves with
Laa-mai-Kahiki. Not only did the romance of far-away lands and mighty
deeds attract attention, but his personal appearance and royal bearing
seemed to have conquered all who came near. There was the general
feeling that this powerful chief, who would soon return to Raiatea, must
leave descendants among the Hawaiians.

Offerings were sent to the temples and the priests were consulted. The
most sacred tests were made of the most important auguries known by the
priesthood. The decision was announced that Laa must have wives given to
him from among the young women of highest rank on Oahu, the home of Laa
in his boyhood and still the place where the larger portion of his
nearest relatives resided.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

The daughters of the chiefs of the districts Kualoa, Kaalaea and
Kaneohe, all on the island Oahu, were selected and married to him in the
midst of a great round of feasts and games.

It was always known that Laa would return to Tahiti, and yet many
inducements were placed be-fore him to lead him to stay. But he only
waited until each of the three chiefesses gave birth to a son, and then
sailed away to establish a lasting line of rulers in Tahiti, where,
according to Tahitian custom, he was called Raa.

The ancient Hawaiian chants recorded the names of the three sons of Laa
thus:

    "O Laa from Tahiti, the chief.  
    O Ahukini, son of Laa.  
    O Kukona, son of Laa.  
    O Lauli, son of Laa, the father.  
The triple canoe of Laa-mai-Kahiki.  
The sacred first-born of Laa,  
Who were born on the same one day."

This gift of three sons--a "triple canoe"--to the Hawaiians is one of
the most fully accepted facts of the traditions of long ago. They
established families of great prominence and their descendants were
proud of this distinction as "children of Laa."

Apparently there was little intercourse later with the southern groups
of the islands of the Pacific Ocean. The vikings passed away and their
descendants failed to conquer the dangers of the seas. It may be that a
prolonged season of volcanic activity

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

discouraged sea roving. It is probable that many sailed away and were
never heard of again. History seldom records the long list of failures
among men. It has been better to tell of victories.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[86:1](hhl13.htm#fr_1) Laa-mai-Kahiki means
Laa-from-Kahiki in the Hawaiian language, or Raa-from-Tahiti in the
Tahitian dialect. In the Hawaiian stories he was always known as
Laa-mai-Kahiki. He was a very high chief from Hawaii absorbed in the
royal line of Tahiti. The letter "r" being used for "1" and "t" for "k"
explains the slight difference in the names, Laa and Raa-Kahiki and
Tahiti. This is simply such a change as is found in dialects everywhere.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. First Foreigners](hhl14)
