[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hhl17)  [Next](hhl19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

# XIV

# THE LAST PROPHET OF OAHU

### IN THE DAYS OF KAHAHANA, 1782

PAUMAKUA was one of the great voyagers among the ocean-rovers of over
eight hundred years ago. Fornander in his "Account of the Polynesian
Race" says: "One of the legends relates that Paumakua, on his return
from one of his foreign voyages, brought back with him to Oahu two white
men said to have been priests A-ua-ka-hinu and A-ua-ka-mea, afterwards
named Kae-kae and Ma-liu, from whom several priestly families in after
ages claimed descent and authority." These persons were described as:

"Ka haole nui maka alohilohi  
(A large foreigner, bright sparkling eyes)  
A aholehole maka as  
(White cheeks, roguish staring eyes)  
Ka puaa keokeo nui maka ulaula!  
(A great white pig with reddish eyes)."

In the later years of Hawaiian history, two of the most prominent high
priests in all the islands

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

were among the descendants of these foreigners. Ka-leo-puu-puu had been
high priest of Oahu, but on the death of his king he was superseded by
his elder brother, Ka-o-pulu-pulu. He was angry and jealous and gladly
welcomed an opportunity to go to Maui as the high priest of Kahekili,
the king of Maui. Born on the island of Oahu and belonging to one of the
most famous families of priests, he understood thoroughly the
temperament of the chiefs of that island and was able to give valuable
counsel to his new ruler. He also tried to make as much trouble as
possible for his brother Kao-pulu-pulu.

It was said that Kahekili followed his advice in creating a division
between the king of Oahu and Ka-o-pulu-pulu. He made Kahahana believe
that the high priest was secretly hoping to take Oahu from its king and
turn it over to himself. This statement was drilled into the mind of the
Oahu king while visiting on the island of Molokai. When Kahahana
returned to Oahu he did not hesitate to show his enmity toward the high
priest. He refused to listen when the priest attempted to give counsel
in the meetings of the chiefs. He slighted him in all ways possible and
made the fact very evident that he had no confidence in him.

The king not only drove away his high priest, but also estranged his
chiefs. It is probable that some of the chiefs rebuked the king for his
treatment of such a wise priest and prophet. At any rate the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

king "became burdensome to the people as well as capricious and
heedless."

After nearly two years of distrust and dissension in the court of the
king of Oahu, the king of Maui decided to attempt the conquest of his
young friend's kingdom. Internal troubles among the chiefs of the island
of Hawaii had arisen in connection with the destruction of the Alapa
chiefs and Ka-meha-meha's ascent to rulership. There was therefore no
danger of an immediate attack from that quarter. Oahu was entirely
unsuspicious of danger. The chief difficulty in the way of conquest was
the wise and powerful priest Ka-o-pulu-pulu.

The king of Maui sent one of his most trusted servants to Oahu to bring
to a climax the enmity of the king toward his priest. This servant came
with an appearance of great concern and told Kahahana very
confidentially that the priest had once more sent word to the Maui king
that he was ready to turn over Oahu to him and aid in the overthrow of
Kahahana, but the Maui king felt such great affection for his friend on
Oahu that he could not accept such treachery. His feeling, how-ever, was
that he ought to warn Kahahana against such a deceitful subject.

The poison again entered into the soul of the king and his anger grew
hot within him. He determined that the priest should die. He knew well
that he was king by virtue of the choice of his

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

chiefs and not by blood descent. He had already found that his word was
not the only law in the kingdom. He could not openly declare war against
the priest, but he could command him to render assistance in worship and
sacrifice. Therefore he announced that he was intending to journey
around the island for the avowed purpose of consecrating certain temples
and offering sacrifices in others. As king he had the right to perform
those duties in person, assisted by his priest.

When he had made full preparation he started on his journey, attended by
the usual large train of servants and companions. He proceeded as far as
the village Wai-anae on the southwestern coast of the island. From
Wai-anae the king sent servants with a command to the priest to come to
him.

Throughout all the Hawaiian Islands no priest had a reputation for
ability to read the signs of the sacrifices, utter oracles and prepare
incantations against enemies greater than that of Ka-o-pulu-pulu. He was
thoroughly skilled in all the deep mysteries of priestly lore. He
understood the dread power of "praying to death," a power which causes
even the intelligent natives of the twentieth century to tremble.

Ka-o-pulu-pulu was fully aware of the enmity of his king and the danger
which attended his yielding obedience. He knew also that the plea of the
need of omens and sacrifices was well founded.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

To him the future of Oahu looked very dark. He felt that he could not
refuse attendance upon the king in this round of public sacrifices. If
any opportunity arose for consulting the omens in regard to the future
welfare of Oahu it was his duty to give the benefit of his wisdom to his
people. It was one more instance of going into the jaws of death for the
sake of loyal obedience.

He took his son, Ka-hulu-pue, with him and went to Wai-anae. There he
was given no opportunity to offer sacrifice, but was attacked by the
servants of the king. The priest's son was forced backward toward the
sea. The spirit of prophecy came upon the father as he saw the danger of
his son and he gave utterance to one of the oracles for which the
Hawaiian priesthood has been noted. He called out to his son: "I nui ke
aho a moe i ke kai (it is far better to sleep in the sea), no ke kai ka
hoi ua aina" (for from the sea shall come the life of the land).
Fornander says that the servants drove the young man into the sea, where
he was drowned. The seer no longer felt the compulsion of duty impelling
him to seek the king. The king's purpose was evident to all the chiefs
and Ka-o-pulu-pulu would not be misjudged if he attempted to escape;
therefore he fled eastward toward Honolulu, but was overtaken at Pearl
Harbour and killed.

When Kahekili learned of the death of this great

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

priest he hastened to gather his warriors together and fit out an
immense fleet of canoes in order to undertake the conquest of Oahu.

The decisive battle was soon fought and Kahekili secured control over
Oahu. Kahahana escaped and for many months wandered over the mountains
back of Honolulu, but was at last betrayed and killed.

The oracle of Ka-o-pulu-pulu uttered at the time of the death of his son
was kept in the hearts of the natives and its method of fulfilment has
been noted. The oracle was easily remembered, although the words
concerning the death of his son are repeated in various forms. The
oracle reads: "No ke kai ka hoi ua aina" (from the sea comes the life of
the land).

When Kahekili landed from his fleet of canoes, and conquered Kahahana,
the people said, "The life of the land has come from the sea." Then
again when Ka-meha-meha came from Hawaii, conquered Oahu and made
Honolulu the centre of his kingdom, the old natives of the island
repeated the prophecy and considered it fulfilled.

And yet once more the prophecy was remembered when the foreigners came
over the ocean filling the land with new ideas, and with the bustle of
new and enlarged business, beautifying and enriching all the island life
with new homes and new arts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. The Eight Of Oahu](hhl19.md)
