[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hhl15)  [Next](hhl17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

# XII

# THE IVORY OF OAHU

### KING KAHAHANA, ABOUT 1773

THE story of the ivory of Oahu is a tale of treachery and triumph on the
part of Kahekili, King of Maui, and of defeat and death for Kahahana,
the last independent king of Oahu.

Kahahana was the son of Elani, chief of Ewa, one of the most powerful
among the high chiefs of Oahu. While still a child, he was sent to Maui
to pass the years of his young manhood in close contact with one of the
most noted courts among the different island kings--the court of his
relative, Kahekili.

After many years had gone by the Oahu chiefs deposed their king and
drove him away to the island of Kauai. Then they met in a great council
to select a new king from the high chief families. After careful
consideration, it was decided that Kahahana was the most available of
all who could be accepted for their future ruler, and an embassy was
sent to Maui to recall him and inform him

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of the exalted position for which he had been chosen by his
fellow-chiefs of Oahu.

The Maui king was wise in his own generation and determined to make all
the use possible of this selection. Therefore, he objected to the young
chief's acceptance of the place of ruler of the neighbouring island.
When this objection had been overruled by the high chiefess, who had
been sent from Oahu to bring back the young king, Kahekili again delayed
proceedings by refusing to permit the young wife to go with him. Then
there came another season of councils and consultations. It was easy for
the King of Maui to control the line of thought as advanced by his
chiefs. It seems that they argued that it was best for the wife to go if
a suitable return should be made in some way by the new King of Oahu.
Then again it was conceded on all sides that Kahahana was very deeply in
debt to his relative for the protection afforded him and the careful and
royal attention bestowed upon him in the court of Maui.

Kahekili and his chiefs were pronounced worshippers of the various
Hawaiian gods, therefore they argued that they should receive a place on
the northeastern shores of Oahu where a noted heiau or temple was
located. The cession of the Kua-loa lands, with this temple, would be a
very satisfactory partial recompense. The young king thought that this
was a small part of his kingdom and would scarcely be missed, hence he
readily

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

promised to grant the Kua-loa district to his friend.

There were certain gifts of the sea which were very highly prized by all
the chiefs of the Hawaiian Islands. Among these, whalebone and the very
scarce whale's teeth were most prominent. These were "the ivory" of the
Islands. The whalebone and the teeth were called *palaoa*. The "ivory"
was usually made into a "hooked ornament" with a large hole almost in
the middle, through which was passed a large number of strings of human
hairs, thus forming a necklace unique and costly. Small portions of the
ivory were pierced and fashioned into beads. These were strung together
and also used as necklaces. It was a burial custom to place the *palaoa*
in the burial cave in which the bones of any dead chief might be
secreted.

Kahekili and his ready followers argued that as a slight return for the
royal favour which had been shown to Kahahana in caring for him at court
and in permitting his wife to go with him, he could very readily
covenant to bestow upon Kahekili all the ivory which might be found on
the shores of Oahu. Probably this matter was not presented as the
payment of tribute, but as a recognition of benefits received, and
Kahahana again readily promised the ivory--the gift of the seas.

This was as far as Kahekili dared to go in his demands. Apparently the
two kings then discussed the continuance of the friendly relations which
had bound them together so many years, and

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

entered into some kind of an alliance by which Kahekili might receive
assistance in his wars with the chiefs of the large island of Hawaii.
Two, or perhaps three, years after this consultation, Kahahana sent
heavy reinforcements from Oahu to Maui, which aided Kahekili in the
complete annihilation of the Alapa Regiment, about eight hundred chiefs,
from Hawaii, in the noted "Battle of the Sand-Hills," near Wailuku.

Soon the morning came for sailing to Oahu. Kahahana, his wife, and the
high chiefess who had come from Oahu to bring the news of his election,
and a large retinue of retainers left Maui in regal state, while the
good-bye "aloha" rang out over the waters from crowds of friends.

When the Oahu priests in the heiaus on the slopes of Leahi or Diamond
Head saw the fleet of canoes coming from Maui, swift runners were
despatched to all the high chiefs of the island that they might assemble
at Waikiki and give welcome to their new king. It is not difficult to
imagine the barbaric splendour of the royal canoes and their occupants
as they crossed the outer coral reefs and drew near to the white sands
of the most famous beach in Hawaiian history. The canoes were fitted
with triangular sails made from the leaves of the hala tree, while
brilliant pennants floated from every mast head. The king and high
chiefs wore the feather cloaks and helmets betokening their rank. From
these the sunlight flashed in gold

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

and crimson fire. The retainers wrapped their garments of richly
coloured tapa around them, while the boatmen, whose bronzed bodies
glistened with freshly applied oil, formed a pleasing back-ground to the
gaudy display of those highest in rank. Thus Kahahana came to his own.

The Oahu chiefs made a display no less gorgeous along the sands of
Waikiki, as they received their king. Nights were spent in revelry and
days in feasting until the ceremonies of installation were completed.

At last Kahahana called the high chiefs and those belonging to the
highest priesthood together for consultation concerning the affairs of
the kingdom.

At this time he broached the agreement he had entered into with Kahekili
concerning the ivory of Oahu and the temple lands of Kualoa.

Kahahana was an elected, rather than a hereditary, king of Oahu.
Therefore, when, in 1773, he came from Maui to take the reins of
government in his hands, it was very important for him to keep the
friendship of the high chiefs who had given him the position. He could
not assume any self-sufficient aspect and not care whether the other
chiefs were well pleased or not. His power to fulfil his agreement
depended upon the willingness of the council of high chiefs to ratify
what he had promised.

Kahahana gave in full his reasons for agreeing

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

to the demands. He spoke of the experience gained in the wars between
the kings of Maui and Hawaii, and stated that the bestowal of the ivory
and the temple lands upon Kahekili might readily be granted as an
honourable return from the chiefs of Oahu for the training given to
their young king.

A number of chiefs at once yielded to this argument. It was a strong
appeal to their honour. They were willing to pay for what they received.
But other chiefs were doubtful of the expediency of this action. They
desired to please their king and do all that honour required. Yet the
wisdom of doing what was asked was not clear. Moreover, Kahahana was not
trained to become a king. He had been kept at the court of Maui because
he was a relative of the king. Perhaps the king of Maui was asking more
than he ought.

Then arose Ka-o-pulu-pulu, the high priest of Oahu, one of the most
far-seeing and statesman-like men in all the islands. He understood the
Maui king and his ambitious designs for the conquest of the islands
Molokai and Oahu.

Ka-o-pulu-pulu carefully pointed out the fact that there was a great
deal to the demands of Kahekili which did not appear on the surface. The
surrender of the temple and the ivory was practically accepting Kahekili
as sovereign. It was the same as yielding the independence of Oahu.
Kualoa with the temple and the lands surrounding it was, in reality, one
of the most sacred places in

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the islands. Here were kept the two war drums sacred from ancient times.
The high priest argued that the chiefs could not afford to give these
war drums to Kahekili because the favour and protection of the war gods
belonged to the king who could call them by the beating of the drums.
Moreover, their anger would be against those who had lightly given away
the drum-voices.

Then again the chiefs must remember that the consecrated hill of
Ka-ua-kahi would go as a part of the temple lands. This would give to
Kahekili a basis for invasion, a powerful influence over the gods of
Oahu, and would make it still more difficult for the Oahuans to maintain
this independence.

The high priest reminded the chiefs also concerning the ivory of Oahu,
that this, too, was a proof of the favour of the gods. This time it
meant the gods of the sea. To surrender the ivory would turn away the
favour of the gods whose assistance was prayed for in all things
connected with the great waters. They must not give to Kahekili the gods
of both land and sea.

Again Ka-o-pulu-pulu, the high priest, argued that if Kahahana, this new
king, had come with warriors and subdued Oahu, the chiefs of Oahu could
have nothing to say concerning the disposition of anything belonging to
the island. The conqueror could do as he wished with the people or the
land. Inasmuch as the chiefs had called Kahahana to the throne, however,
"it would be wrong

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

for him to cede to another the national emblems of sovereignty and
independence."

This rather full argument from the lips of the high priest shows the
exceedingly strong hold which the tabus and worship of the gods had upon
the most enlightened and upright men of the days immediately preceding
the discovery of the islands by Captain Cook. The chiefs had deeply
rooted principles of loyalty and honour toward each other, and yet the
reign of the gods was supreme even while accompanied by a host of
burdens such as continual human sacrifices and tabus extremely hard to
bear.

Kahahana and the chiefs of Oahu readily accepted the views of the high
priest and decided that they could not accede to the demands of
Kahekili. One thing, however, remained which they could do for the Maui
king, which would abundantly repay him for all the aid he had ever given
to this young king. They would offer fleets of canoes filled with
warriors to aid him in his battles with the king of Hawaii. In this way
friendly relations and a state of peace would be maintained between the
islands of Oahu and Maui.

Kahekili was greatly disappointed by his failure to secure the ivory,
the gift of the gods, and the sacred lands with the all-powerful war
drums, but he covered his chagrin as best he could by accepting the
offer of warriors, for his spies assured him that his powerful
brother-in-law, the king of Hawaii,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

was preparing an immense army with which to conquer the whole of Maui.
He heard of the organisation of the two powerful bodies of young chiefs
known in Hawaiian history as "the regiments called *Alapa* and
*Pii-pii*." The Alapa regiment alone numbered about eight hundred of the
finest and bravest chiefs of the island of Hawaii.

He felt his inability to meet his Hawaiian enemies alone, therefore he
called for aid from Oahu. Then came the "Battle of the Sand-Hills" below
Wailuku and the defeat of the forces of the king of Hawaii. It was a
dearly purchased victory which he never could have won without the aid
of the Oahu warriors, and yet he was not profuse in thanks for the
assistance given. The failure to win the desired grant rankled in his
heart and he still nourished the purpose of securing a foothold on the
island of Oahu. The year after the Battle of the Sand-Hills, Kahekili
found an opportunity for making his next move.

Kahahana went from Oahu to Molokai to consecrate a temple. Oahu had
maintained sovereignty over Molokai for some time, therefore the
dedication of a heiau of any importance was in the hands of the king as
the person of highest and most sacred rank. On Molokai there was also a
large taro patch. This needed attention, and some time was to be devoted
to the oversight of the re-pairs called for.

Kahekili and his advisers thought this was an

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

excellent opportunity to renew influence over Kahahana. The two kings
met on Molokai and spent days in royal entertainments.

At the advice of his high priest, the Maui king craftily set to work to
undermine Kahahana's faith in the Oahu priesthood. While the kings
visited and feasted together, Kahekili, from time to time, introduced
remarks concerning the way he was treated in the matter of the ivory of
Oahu. At one time, apparently as an offset to the sacred lands which he
did not get, he asked for the large and fertile tract of land on Molokai
known as the lands of Halawa. This Kahahana readily gave to him as land
that had been conquered and won from its inhabitants, concerning which
there would be small dispute.

Then Kahekili insinuated that the high priest of Oahu, in refusing the
grant of the ivory and the sacred lands, had been very insincere. He
told Kahahana that the prophet, while pretending to be friendly to Oahu,
had at the same time offered the entire government of Oahu to himself.
Thus he began the distrust which was to lead Kahahana to ultimately
destroy this wise and loyal high priest. In the various conversations he
tried to impress the Oahu king with the belief that the prophet was
really a traitor instead of a friend. The king's utter lack of principle
and his knowledge of the character of the young king are shown in the
way in which he made Kahahana believe in

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

his personal friendship. He took pains, in his wily and apparently
open-hearted way, to let it be known that the only reason why he had not
become the king of Oahu as well as of Maui was because of his great
personal love for his young friend. He would not stand in the way of one
in whom he felt so much interest. But this personal kindness must not
blind the eyes of the young king to the fact that his high priest was
practically a traitor.

The young king returned to Oahu with great faith in his enemy and a
likewise great unbelief in his friends. He began a course of action
inspired by his Maui advisers which was thoroughly overbearing and
capricious and finally created dissension throughout his kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Alapa Regiment](hhl17)
