[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv08)  [Next](rsv10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### VI. ISLAM

Islam, the religion founded by the Prophet Mohammed in 612 A.D. in the
Arabian deserts, is also found in Vietnam and other parts of Southeast
Asia. It seems to have reached this area in two distinct waves. The
first incursion was during the heyday of Arabic development when
sea-faring Moslem traders carried both merchandise and their faith as
they traveled and traded along the coastal areas of the sea. Evidences
of their presence are still being discovered in Vietnam and elsewhere.
The second wave of Islam to enter the Southeast Asia area, including
Vietnam, was that created by the Indian Moslem merchants of Gujerat and
Bengal. These adherents of the fiery desert prophet of Allah, like their
Hindu fellow merchants, were skillful tradesmen and exponents of their
faith so that Islam became a part of the religious scene, and is still
interwoven in the lives of many Vietnamese.

The adherents of Islam in the Middle East blunted and stalled the drive
of the Crusaders to free the Holy Lands from the "infidel" Moslems;
therefore the Moslems of the Far East including Southeast Asia offered
tempting targets to the Portuguese of the 14th and 15th centuries. The
attempts to overwhelm the Moslem settlements and to destroy the Islamic
influenced trading areas undoubtedly hastened and encouraged the
amalgamation of the stern doctrines of Mohammed with the pervasive
religious forces in Vietnam and other areas of Southeast Asia. This
union of religious concepts and practices has so changed Islam among
some of its Vietnamese adherents that it is doubtful if a Moslem from
the Bible Lands would have much affinity with them.

To the western observer of the religious scene, it is quite obvious that
the Vietnamese variety of Islam is influenced by Animism, Hinduism,
Buddhism, Confucianism and other concepts or practices quite different
than those found at Mecca, Medina, Damascus or Cairo. The Islamic mosque
in Saigon is quite similar to those found in other areas of the world,
but most of the mosques found in Vietnam have Hindu-influenced
architecture, as illustrated by the Hindu-type "onion" bulb minarets
from which the Muezzin or temple crier might call the adherents to
worship and prayer.

Within Vietnam there seem to be few, if any, ethnic Chinese or
Vietnamese Moslem adherents. The faith within the country is made up
basically of those who come from Moslem countries as business men or
government employees, and human remnants of by-gone glory like some of
the Cham. But since the Cham are found in a number of locations within
Vietnam, even as they once controlled the entire coast of Vietnam
northward to Canton, China, awareness of Islamic presence may help to
provide understanding and a more accurate evaluation of the religious
dynamics of personality revealed in the complex culture of Vietnam.

Since the Cham are the people apparently most influenced by Islam in
Vietnam now (the same is true also of the Cham and Hinduism), extended
discussions of Islam in faith and practice among them is a part of the
Cham study in THE PEOPLE OF THE TRIBES OF SOUTH VIETNAM.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Buttinger, Joseph, <u>The Smaller Dragon: A Political History of
Vietnam</u>, New York, Praeger, 1958

Cady, John F., <u>Southeast Asia: Its Historical Development</u>, New
York, McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1964

Cressy, George B., <u>Asia's Lands and Peoples</u>, New York,
McGraw-Hill, 1951

Danielou, Jean, <u>Introduction to the Great Religions</u>, Notre Dame,
Indiana, Fides Publishers, Inc., 1964

DeBary, William (Editor), <u>Sources of the Indian Traditions,
Introduction to Oriental Civilizations</u>, (2 Vol.), New York, Columbia
University Press, 1964

Ferm, Vergiluis, <u>Encyclopedia of Religion</u>, Patterson, New Jersey,
Littlefield, Adams and Co., 1959

Hammer, Ellen, <u>Vietnam Yesterday and Today</u>, New York, Holt,
Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1966

Karnow, Stanley, and the Editors of Life, <u>Life World Library:
Southeast Asia</u>, New York, Time Incorporated, 1962

Noss, J. B., <u>Living Religions</u>, Philadelphia, United Church Press,
1962

<u>Vietnam, Past and Present</u>, Saigon, Government Printing:
Department National Education (n.d.)

<u>PERSONAL RESPONSE PROJECT FILES</u>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Roman Catholicism in South Vietnam](rsv10)
