[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv04)  [Next](rsv06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### II. VIETNAMESE TAOISM

(Pronounced "Dah-o-ism")

Introduced into Vietnam through Chinese cultural influence and
occupation, Taoism is "a way", "a road", "a law of life" which requires
that man adjust to nature in order to have happiness. Its influence is
one of the more powerful religious forces in Vietnam today.

Lao-Tze, founder of Taoism, lived about 600 B.C. in China and the
religion which he founded is just a little bit older than that founded
by Buddha of India or Confucius of China. In agreement with early
Chinese thought which preceded Lao-Tze, he taught that man needs to have
a relaxed and natural life which could be achieved only when in harmony
with nature. Such harmony would promote good will toward others, grant
personal integrity, encourage sincerity and simplicity. These qualities
undergird spontaneity to the degree that man would be in harmony with
nature.

Taoism ("Dah-o-ism"), therefore, is the natural mode of behavior; the
best way to acquire perfection in relation to the natural world which
surrounds man. Submission to the laws of nature is taught since this
encourages virtues such as gentleness, peacefulness, serenity and
resignation to "unchangeable fates".

Because harmony with nature is deemed essential, Taoism has encouraged
nature worship in its popular practice at least. The ritual of Taoism in
Vietnam today seems largely to consist of religio-magical features,
divining, fortune-telling, worship of the spirits of nature including
the earth, and use of the horoscope, etc., to ascertain the will of
nature insofar as the individual is concerned.

Many of the more basic beliefs of Taoism have been absorbed into other
religions found in Vietnam. They still mold and form cultural patterns
affecting almost all ethnic Vietnamese or Chinese living in Vietnam.
These Taoist concepts are to be observed in non-western medical
practices; in marital arrangements which necessitate consulting
horoscopes; consultation with those wise in reading the relationship of
the earth's elements, so that the proposed marriage will be happy,
prosperous and fruitful; in the choosing of auspicious dates; and in the
ceremonies of worship as they pertain to the Spring, the Fall, the
ploughing of the ground, the planting of seed, etc.

Like the Chinese peasants prior to Communist domination, many Vietnamese
tend to accept all three of the ways--Taoism, Confucianism and
Buddhism--without worry of conflict. Taoism is for adjustment to the
natural world, Confucianism is for the social world, while Buddhism is
utilized for harmony with the universe of which man is a part and for
preparing for future existences. The adoption of a new religion by the
ethnic Vietnamese does not necessarily mean the abandonment of an
earlier faith. Rather it is often a process of accommodation to include
all concepts to increase the surety for both the present and future
existences.

The principle divinities of Taoism are the Jade Emperor, the Holy Mother
(Lieu-Hanh), Lao-Tsu and Chu-Vi. The life of man is not granted that he
might find pleasure, but pain as he atones for past offenses of previous
existences and prepares for future lives in accord with the Cycle of
Existence. Because Taoism insists on harmony with and submission to
nature, its inherent drive is the repression of a willingness to exploit
nature, to take risks or to gamble for distant goals if success is not
obvious. To some extent, Taoism seems to discourage the willingness to
engage in combat with either nature or man. Like some aspects of
Buddhism, it seems to have overtones of pessimism and a negative
attitude toward attempts to change drastically the life patterns.

While having only a limited formal organization in Vietnam today, the
concepts of Taoism are in evidence in the daily life cycle of ethnic
Vietnamese, whether they be dwellers of the cities or peasants tilling
the rice-paddies. The cultural mold into which the Vietnamese are born
and in which they are reared has been developed through more than two
thousand years. While many people do not know just why certain customary
acts are performed, the necessity to see that these are fulfilled is a
constant pressure that few Vietnamese would be willing to ignore. The
American may have little understanding of such influences, but success
will be

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

present in Vietnamese/American relations only as awareness of such
factors promote consideration and patience.

Section XI, "Religion in Everyday Life" reveals many observable ways in
which Taoism is a current religious practice in Vietnam.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bynner, Whitter, <u>The Way of Life According to Laotzu</u>, New York,
John Day, 1944

Cadiere, Leopold, <u>Croyances et Pratiques Religieuses Des
Vietnamiens</u>, Saigon: Imprimerie Nouvelle D’Extreme Orient, 1958

Carus, Paul, <u>The Canon of Reason and Virtue,</u> LaSalle, Open Court
Publishing Company, (ND)

Cressey, George B., <u>Asia's Land and People</u>, New York,
McGraw-Hill, 1951

Le Van Ho, <u>Le Mere De Familie Annamite</u>, Paris: Les Editions
Domat-Montchrestien, 1932

Smith, Huston, <u>The Religions of Man</u>, New York, Harper and Row,
1958.

Thompson, Elizabeth, <u>Other Lands, Other Peoples</u>, Washington D.C.,
National Education Association, 1964

Waley, Arthur, <u>The Way and Its Power</u>, London: George Allen and
Unwin, 1934

Welch, Holmes, <u>The Parting of the Way: Lao Tzu and the Taoist
Movement</u>, Boston, Beacon Press, 1957

<u>PERSONAL RESPONSE PROJECT FILES</u>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Confucianism in Vietnam](rsv06.md)
