[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv18)  [Next](rsv20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Vietnamese Village Dinh, Market, School</u>

The Vietnamese village constitutes the dwelling place of most Vietnamese
and has several buildings or sites which Americans can best appreciate
by understanding the purpose and use of the buildings. These include the
<u>Dinh</u>, the school and the market places.

The <u>Dinh</u> is a combination of the temple and the community center
in many Vietnamese villages. It is within the Dinh that the housewives
offer prayers not said at home. It is here that they also offer food to
the guardian spirit called "<u>thanh hoang</u>" in Vietnamese. At such
times, the "thanh hoang" is asked for protection against the various
natural disasters and for his good will toward the individual worshipper
or the worshipper's family.

The "thanh hoang" can be a spirit (ghost) of someone who died a violent
death, an unnatural death such as murder, childbirth or failed to be
buried; or a supernatural or celestial spirit without human origin.
Though the villager may claim his faith as Buddhism, Confucianism, or
another of the ten or so faiths in Vietnam, the animistic belief of
"spirits" who can affect and control destiny is very strong.

Often the courtyard of the Dinh or adjoining temple has a lotus pond
with the large round green leaves floating on the water's surface. The
lovely flowers of the several varieties of lotus rising above the dirty
water, give color to the area. They remind the beholder that, as the
beautiful flower grows in such a humble environment, so good may come
from each regardless of surrounding conditions.

Should the village have a Buddhist temple or even a Taoist one, it will
normally be the most elaborate structure in the village. As the
foreigner listens in the quiet of the day, the sound of the monk's
almost monotonous prayers and sermon recitations, with or without
audience, will be broken from time to time with the
[rhythmic](errata.htm#29.md) beat of the <u>mo</u>, which is a wooden
instrument normally found on or near the altar, or the ringing sound of
the altar gong being struck with a small wooden mallet. If the
government does not have a school in the village, the chances are that
an elementary school will be located near the temple and taught by
someone of the religious organization of the community be it Buddhist,
Roman Catholic or Protestant, except among the tribespeople villages
where many have no formal schooling.

Schools in Vietnam normally teach their students by rote with very
limited supplies of books, pencils, paper, or the items which Americans
take for granted in this generation, but under conditions similar to
those experienced by Americans a hundred years or more ago. Often there
are not enough seats for the children; desks are very scare if present
at all; lighting is normally inadequate; yet, while the teacher and
student have all these and other similar problems, as well as the war
conditions, the need for knowledge and development of youthful minds
grows more pressing each day.

The village market place has many varieties of fresh vegetables, nuts of
all kinds, fresh fruits, bananas, oranges, grapefruit, lemon, tropical
fruits of all kinds, baskets of peanuts, trays of meat exposed to both
dust and flies, fish, tobacco, sugar and salt. These are intermixed with
stalls or crude spaces filled with items of clothing, cloth and small
hardware items, making a sight to be remembered. The entire market,
large or small, is often crowded with people who come to look, to buy or
to gossip. As typical throughout Vietnam, it is the women who are
merchants, and who seem to dominate the market place.

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

The important buildings of any Vietnamese farming or fishing village are
the Dinh and/or temple, the market place and the school. The conduct of
Americans both individually and collectively in these areas can be vital
to the success of the present assignment of the Navy/ Marine Team in
Vietnam. Be alert to the differences between Vietnam and your home; ask
questions in order to gain information, but ask them as you would desire
a visitor in the States to ask about something in your hometown. By so
doing you will establish friendships that could save your life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Women](rsv20.md)
