[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv16)  [Next](rsv18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### D. EXAMPLES OF RELIGION IN EVERYDAY LIFE

The following brief articles are included as a part of this study to
show the effect of religious concepts and beliefs in daily life and are
glimpses of everyday life among the Vietnamese.

<u>A Religiously Influenced Culture</u>

Most of the Vietnamese habits, customs, and traditions are rooted in,
and conditioned by, religious beliefs. Their culture was already
middle-aged when Jesus was born in the far off land of Judea. It was a
long time before any of the Vietnamese heard about that time-changing
event--with most of the Vietnamese still knowing nothing of the
religious facts that have so influenced American culture.

Vietnam has for centuries practiced the ingestion of both outside
peoples and influences--either voluntarily or involuntarily. These have
all influenced and modified her culture so that each concept has become,
in time, part of its own tradition and folklore. Indian cast her
influence largely through peaceful trade and religion. China has been
more direct through the centuries. Using war, conquest, and occupation
whenever possible. It is not difficult to understand why the Vietnamese,
North or South, have little love for their giant northern neighbor.

While traces of Indian culture are embedded in Vietnam, it is the impact
of Chinese culture, ideas, art, religion, etc., which is most seen and
realized in every phase of life in Vietnam. This is so evident that it
seems "The Vietnamese threw out the baby, but kept its bath-water" when
they expelled the Chinese about 1,000 A.D. Though the Chinese have been
back from time to time, it has always been without an invitation.

While Buddhism originated in India, its major impact in Vietnam came
through the Chinese with the many modifications created by the more
historic Chinese cultural patterns and beliefs. Nevertheless, it forms a
basic part of the Vietnamese scene, and a valid understanding of
Vietnamese life and thought cannot be gained without a keen awareness of
the part which religion has played and continues to play in so many
ways.

Into the "cooking pot" of Vietnam, the various ingredients of animism,
Ancestor Veneration or Worship, Taoism, Confucianism, Hinduism,
Islamism, Roman Catholicism, Protestantism, etc., have been tossed. To
season and spice the dish, secular culture concepts of various origins
have been added. This has bubbled and stewed through the centuries, so
that few of the basic religions or religious ideas will be found
identical to the original. Exception must be made for such religious
ingredients as Protestantism which has been added too recently, and for
the animism of the tribal people who have normally

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

stayed aloof from the whole "show" and have suffered with their
"fear-controlled religion".

The imported religious ideas have induced permanent changes in the
thought and behavior patterns of the people, and have become so deeply
woven into Vietnamese daily life that Westerners tend to disbelieve
their eyes, and fail to comprehend the resulting value systems. These
ideas mixed with animism and ancestor veneration from South China have
formulated the moral codes and standards. They have also established the
various rules and systems of government, and have either promoted or
hindered the growth of arts, crafts, industry and technological
developments.

Until very recently, and in many areas is still fact, the pagoda, the
wat, the shrine, the [communal](errata.htm#27.md) house, the mosque, have
been the focus of village life. Birth, marriage, festivals, death, lunar
occasions, etc., as well as health, posterity, travels, planting of
crops, house building, are all governed by religious beliefs and
ceremonies. The religious figures of the community are important
personages because of either individual belief or community pressure.
Social approval is essential to any Vietnamese. Many would rather die
than to be held in disfavor with family or community. This would be the
"sin" to many Vietnamese that creates guilt, rather than the concept
held by many Americans that all men are accountable to a supreme God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Vietnamese Village--Homes](rsv18.md)
