[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv27)  [Next](rsv29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Fragrant Incense of Aloes Wood</u>

Someone has remarked that Vietnam is characterized by two odors-that of
Nuoc-mam (fish sauce) and that of incense. The Vietnamese reaction is
that Nuoc-mam represents the material life whereas incense from the
places of worship symbolize the spiritual life of Vietnam.

The incense trees and cinnamon which grow in the forests of Vietnam have
long been known and utilized. The tribal people gather cinnamon bark and
trade these to the lowland Vietnamese for essential supplies. They also
gather the incense wood for a similar reason as the tribespeople do not
seem to use incense for worship as do the lowland worshippers.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Aloes wood-used as incense-belongs to the Thy-melaeceae family of trees.
The Chinese, French, Cambodians, Hebrews, Greeks, Malayans, Germans,
Portuguese, Cham and English speaking people all have their own words
for it. The walls and ceilings of many temples are much darkened by the
smoke of burning incense.

For a small fee, incense may be purchased and set to burning either
inside or outside the temple in the form of joss sticks. For about three
dollars, one can secure spiral formed incense that will burn continually
for three months or more.

In the ancient writing of the Egyptians, Greeks, Indians and Arabs aloes
is mentioned. The Arabs use it as medication for the heart and burn it
mixed with camphor in worship services. In India, aloes mixed with other
products is used to [anoint](errata.htm#35.md) and perfume the dead. An
additional aromatic product of the aloes wood is Ky-nam. Ky-nam is
composed of aloes wood full of resin-if chewed, it tastes bitter and is
gummy; when burned, its resin gives its own characteristic scent. Since
Ky-nam is black in color with white spots like the feathers of eagles,
it is sometimes called eagle-wood. It is also used as medicine against
colds, fevers and dysentery, but with the warnings that if used by
pregnant women it will cause miscarriage.

Normally, the aloes incense wood is of a brownish color and makes
excellent incense sticks which are often made up into small packages for
easy use. Similar to the cedar in the states, aloes is sometimes made
into furniture, but is very expensive by comparison. The Portuguese tell
of one piece of aloes wood four feet long and two feet thick valued at
54,000 English pounds (roughly $470,000) in the 17th century. An Italian
missionary in Vietnam about the same time says the King of Vietnam had a
piece of aloes wood weighing about 30 pounds in his office. If made into
wooden pillars, only the very rich could own such rarities. Used as
incense, the smoke is supposed to please either the spirits of the
departed dead or to curry the favor of the gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joss Sticks](rsv29.md)
