[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv26)  [Next](rsv28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Legend of Quan-Am</u>

Thi-Kinh (better known as Quan-Am), a very beautiful and talented young
maiden, was of a humble family yet she was sought in marriage by many of
the richest and most handsome of men. To the surprise of all she refused
them and married a poor unattractive peasant. While life was difficult,
Thi-Kinh shared the meanest chores with her husband and found happiness
in doing so.

During one summer [siesta](errata.htm#33)-time as her husband was asleep
on the hammock, she noticed a stray hair of his beard growing in the
wrong direction. Thinking to cut it off, she got a sharp knife and
approached her husband. But her touch and the feel of the blade caused
the man to jerk his head which wounded him. Frightened he began to call
for help and accused his wife of attempted murder.

Utterly dismayed that her husband would think thus, Thi-Kinh offered no
statement and her silence seemed to be an admission of guilt, so she was
cast out of her home as an exile. None took pity upon her. Her family
disowned her, her former suitors and the village women who never forgave
her beauty treated her badly. Finally weary of this, Thi-Kinh sought to
renounce the world and seek release in religion. She thus disguised
herself as a man and entered an order of Buddhist monks.

In spite of the simplicity of her religious clothing and "shaven head",
she still was a very attractive individual, and this was noted by the
devotees of the temple. A young girl fell in love with this "handsome
bonze". She plead with Thi-Kinh to forsake the religious order and
marry. Thi-Kinh cut her short by asking her to respect the holy vows.
The young woman reacted by having an affair with the first man who
sought her out, and when pregnant went to another village and gave birth
to a child. The new mother placed the babe in a basket and left it at
the gate of the temple after writing a note accusing Thi-Kinh of being
its father. While the prior was reading the note, with all the men
gathered about, the baby began to cry. With typically feminine reaction,
Thi-Kinh reached down and picked up the baby to quiet it. This gesture
seemed to confirm the charge, and she was expelled from the temple as
she had been from her home.

Pity for the child forced her to beg for herself and the baby. She thus
became a familiar sight as she walked about with the child in her arms
and a begging bowl in her hand. The day came when she could no longer
sustain herself, so she returned to the temple and knocked at the gate
of Buddha. She revealed her secret and begged pardon for her sins as
well as for forgiveness of those who had caused her misery. Then in
typical Vietnamese story fashion, she sank to the ground and died.

When her story was heard by the Emperor of China, he was deeply moved by
her abnegation and [chastity](errata.htm#34), so by royal decree she was
raised to the rank of divinity with the title of "Quan-Am Tong-Tu"-The
Compassionate Protectress of Children. Today the cult has spread
throughout the Far East.

Pictures of Thi-Kinh or Quan-Am are to be found rather widely in
Vietnam, and if one visits the old Vietnamese temples and looks under
smoke blackened rafters caused by incense burning and decades of dust
there Quan-Am sits with child in arms, an unchanging smile on a
beautiful serene face.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fragrant Incense of Aloes Wood](rsv28)
