[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv20)  [Next](rsv22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Marriage</u>

Marriage and death are perhaps the most sacred and solemn events among
most of the Vietnamese people, either lowlander or mountaineer. To the
lowland or ethnic Vietnamese, marriage is an affair of greater interest
and concern to the entire family than to the man and woman to be
married. It is arranged by the family with much care because to them the
essential purpose is the procreation of male offspring to perpetuate the
family and to assure a continuing ancestral worship.

The continuing cult of ancestral worship is one of the reasons that few
families want a mixture of racial blood lines: it is feared that proper
worship will not be maintained if such occurs. Marriages are arranged
after social factors, horoscope readings, etc., have been studied and
found acceptable. The ceremonial procedure of the marriage rite is in
three parts; (a) official request for engagement, (b) the engagement,
and (e) the marriage itself.

Among the non-Christian Vietnamese of the lowlands, the marriage
ceremony seems to consist of ceremonial presentations of the bridegroom
to the forebearers--living and dead--and family of the bride, with this
taking place in front of the family ancestral altar; and the bride
likewise presenting herself before the ancestral altar of the grooms
family and pledging to henceforth give allegiance to them.

This is followed by feasting and celebrations as marriage is an
important step in assuring the living family that veneration of
themselves as ancestors after death will be continued.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

While there seems to be some change of marriage customs in the cities
due to colonialization and the movies, the traditional customs are very
evident. A number of charming young ladies in their early twenties
affirmed that their future husbands would be chosen by their mothers;
avoiding making mother unhappy was more important than their own choice
of mates, as violation of the customs would create much sadness.

Among Christians, a distinctly Christian ceremony is utilized, but
cultural patterns not in conflict with Christian doctrines are firmly
adhered to among the better classes of society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Choosing Life's Partner](rsv22.md)
