[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv19)  [Next](rsv21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Women</u>

With the numerous cultures and societies in Vietnam, attitudes toward
women and their status fluctuate widely. The individual who seeks in a
few words to describe their life, place and influence in theory and fact
is undertaking an impossible task.

The farming or village class woman works at hard labor just as does the
man. Wearing black pajama bottoms and a short blouse topped by a conical
hat of palm leaf with or without its plastic cover she may be seen at
hard work everywhere, be it the rice field, the cane patch, the market
place or along the streets. Often she is the business-head of the family
and operates any financial endeavor which it undertakes. Such a business
may be a small store, a mobile sidewalk cafeteria, etc. She is not
normally a pedicab operator or a fisherman at sea, although she is often
a fishmonger or peddler. Among the Viet Cong she is known to be a crafty
and hardy warrior. Some Vietnamese government women have been similarly
acclaimed.

Confucius taught that the young woman is subject to paternal authority;
as a wife, subject to her husband; and as a widow, to her eldest son.
While this may be the theory and outward affectation, the fact is that
women play a vital role even though it is obscure. The man may be the
head of the house, but the skillful and perceptive wife understands
enough practical psychology to have her ideas followed most of the time.
Many Vietnamese legends attest to this.

When children are small and the husband dies, the widow becomes the head
of the household; she performs ancestral worship until the eldest son is
old enough to assume this function; she handles property etc. If,
however, she remarries, all of her authority over her children and of
her husband's property is lost.

The middle and upper class ethnic Vietnamese women wear the Ao Dai which
is a slenderizing formfitting outer garment that extends from its
choke-throat collar to below the knees with long sleeves and slit on
either side to the waist. It is worn over a pair of pajama-type bottoms
with shoes being either [sandals](errata.htm#30) or closed shoes as
desired. The lovely pastel color combinations and their light graceful
movements combined with well groomed hair and countenance make many
Vietnamese women quite attractive.

Their skillful ability to ride bicycles, motor scooters, etc., so
gracefully creates an amazement in most Westerners. In the cities many
women are becoming educated and capable of performing technical tasks
required in a changing society. Yet many of their attitudes are still
largely moulded by traditions hundreds of years old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Marriage](rsv21)
