[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv25)  [Next](rsv27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Rearing Vietnamese Children</u>

The number of children in a family and its economic status are unrelated
in Vietnamese thinking. There is a proverb which translates, "God
created the elephant and He created the grass", meaning that the size of
the family is not humanly regulated.

This may be related to the Confucian concept that the chief purpose of
marriage is to insure sufficient sons to perpetuate Ancestor Veneration.
One of the greatest worries to the Vietnamese is the possibility that
there will be no male descendents to [preserve](errata.htm#32.md) and honor
the family name.

Just inside many Vietnamese homes is a niche for the figure of Doai Cung
Thanh Mau who is regarded as the patron of Vietnamese mothers. There is
also a goddess of procreation and birth as well as one who is the patron
of "wet nurses". This latter goddess, whichever of her names is used, is
consulted to protect the baby once it is born.

Among the Vietnamese some spirits are feared because they might steal
the baby away. These spirits must be either avoided or appeased in some
manner.

Sometimes the sorcerer or the various goddesses of the Taoists,
Confucianists, or Buddhists are utilized. Even seeking the protection of
the "Christian" God until their children have passed the critical age is
not uncommon. While these customs vary depending upon geographical
location and economic class, they are still practiced in Vietnam.

Vietnamese women, while having many of the same behavior patterns of the
South Chinese, do not normally carry their babies on their backs, but in
their arms. One of their sayings on the subject is, "Carry a baby as you
would carry an egg and lift it as delicately as picking a lovely
flower".

This concern for children has an interesting taboo in that a baby is
never supposed to be carried across the threshold lest it should be
stunted; rather, the baby is handed to someone already across the
threshold and then taken back again after crossing. Because of the high
mortality rate of children, the common Vietnamese folk take great care
to guard their children while small from all possible types of evil
spirits. For instance, any deceased maiden aunt is given a special place
on the ancestor shelf during the time the child is small, for if her
spirit is not appeased it may carry the child away.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

Sometimes the sorcerer advises that her bones be reburied in a more
favorable place. Likewise the spirit of stillborn children is greatly
feared lest life be snatched away to give one of them life. Similarly, a
bad name might be given the baby to fool the spirits, or a boy might be
called by a girl's name for the same reason. In contrast to the American
custom of remarking how healthy or lovely a child is, the Vietnamese
fear to do this lest it excite an evil spirit who will then harm the
child. Many similar customs have also been found in European histories
of past centuries, but due to a more scientific understanding of
sickness, death and health, most Americans find these Vietnamese customs
"quaint".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Legend of Quan-Am](rsv27.md)
