[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv34)  [Next](rsv36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Ancestor Worship</u>

Non-Christian ancestor worship begins at the time of death. As soon as
death is a fact, the ethnic Vietnamese cover the corpse with a square
piece of red cloth. Often a bit of cloth is made into the shape of a
doll representing the body so that it might receive the spirit of the
dead one. Then the corpse is washed, clothed in best garments, and
placed on a bier in the casket. Mourning is announced with such details
being spelled out by law. Usually a complicated ceremonial rite is used
for burials. The grave is often dug according to geomancy.

From the day of death, there will be a lighted candle on the ancestor
altar with attempts to keep a flame there constantly; in addition food
is placed there for the spirit of the dead individual. Mourning for
members of the immediate family supposedly lasts for three years with
yearly ceremonies on the anniversary of their deaths. When a father
dies, his daughter may not marry for three years due to mourning
customs. Most Orientals regard the death anniversary more important than
birth dates, for who knows at birth what an individual will achieve or
become.

While there are differences of opinion, it seems that death among the
ethnic Vietnamese is believed to be part of the return to eternity. A
reincarnation in some form will be decided by the sum and value of the
life of the deceased as well as by the prayers said to one's spirit. On
death anniversary celebrations, the first day of the year, lunar
festival holidays, and all important family events such as birth and
marriage, worship at family ancestor altars is performed.

To the average family of ethnic Vietnamese the presence of the spirits
of their ancestors is vivid and is as much a part of reality as are the
living. No offense by word, deed or thought should be given; rather
honor must be rendered so that one's own moral and social standing is
improved. One authority has pointed out that to the Vietnamese "a
country is composed as much of the dead who laid its foundations as the
living who perpetuate it".

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

The [ancestral](errata.htm#41) veneration of Chinese culture is a link
uniting the dead and the living members of the family. The social virtue
of filial piety, as taught by Confucianism, is greatly esteemed and is a
cohesive element in binding the family and clan into a unit. The living
believe that such worship provides a channel of valuable services
between the living and the dead-careful observations reveal how deeply
filial piety affects the social, political and economic structures in
South Vietnam and demonstrate the necessity of understanding people as
human beings wherever found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancestor Worship--Worship of Nham-Dien](rsv36)
