<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2007)  [Next](j2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j155"></span>

### No. 155.

### GAGGA-JĀTAKA <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12).

\[15\] "*Gagga, live an hundred year*s," *etc*.--This story the Master
told when he was staying in the monastery made by King Pasenadi in front
of Jetavana; it was about a sneeze which he gave.

One day, we are told, as the Master sat discoursing with four persons
round him, he sneezed. "Long life to the Blessed One, long life t' the
Buddha!" the Brothers all cried aloud, and made a great to-do.

The noise interrupted the discourse. Then the Master said to the
Brethren: "Why, Brothers, if one cry 'Long life!' on hearing a sneeze,
does a man live or die any the more for that?" They answered, "No, no,
Sir." He went on, "You should not cry 'Long life' for a sneeze,
Brethren. Whosoever does so is guilty of sin."

It is said that at that time, when the Brethren sneezed, people used to
call out, "Long life to you, Sir!" But the Brethren had their scruples,
and made no answer. Everybody was annoyed, and asked, "Pray, why is it
that the priests about Buddha the Sakya prince make no answer, when they
sneeze, and somebody or other wishes them long life?"

All this was told to the Blessed One. He said: "Brethren, common folk
are superstitious. When you sneeze, and they say, 'Long life to you,
Sir!' I permit you to answer, 'The same to you'." Then the Brethren
asked him--"Sir, when did people begin to answer 'Long life' by 'The
same to you'?" Said the Master, "That was long, long ago;" and he told
them a tale of the olden time.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
came into the world as a brahmin's son of the kingdom of Kāsi; and his
father was a lawyer by calling. When the lad was sixteen years old or
so, his father gave a fine jewel into his charge, and they both

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

travelled through town after town, village after village, until they
came to Benares. There the man had a meal cooked in the gatekeeper's
house; and as he could find nowhere to put up, he asked where there was
lodging to be had for wayfarers who came too late? The people told him
that there was a building outside the city, but that it was haunted; but
however he might lodge there if he liked. Says the lad to his father,
"Have no fear of any goblin, father! I will subdue him, and bring him to
your feet." \[16\] So he persuaded his father, and they went to the
place together,

The father lay down upon a bench, and his son sat beside him, chafing
his feet.

Now the Goblin that haunted the place had received it for twelve years'
service of Vessavaṇa <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13), on these
terms: that if any man who entered it should sneeze, and when long life
was wished him, should answer, "Long life to you!" or "The same to
you!"--all except these the Goblin had a right to eat. The Goblin lived
upon the central rafter of the hut <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14).

He determined to make the father of the Bodhisatta sneeze. Accordingly,
by his magic power he raised a cloud of fine dust, which entered the
man's nostrils; and as he lay on the bench, he sneezed. The son did not
cry "Long life!" and down came the Goblin from his perch, ready to
devour his victim. But the Bodhisatta saw him descend, and then these
thoughts passed through his mind. "Doubtless it is he who made my father
sneeze. This must be a Goblin that eats all who do not say 'Long life to
you'." And addressing his father, he repeated the first verse as
follows:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Gagga, live an hundred years,--aye, and twenty
more, I pray!  
May no goblin eat you up; live an hundred years, I say!"</span>

</div>

The Goblin thought, "This one I cannot eat, because he said 'Long life
to you.' But I shall eat his father;" and he came close to the father.
But the man divined the truth of the matter--"This must be a Goblin,"
thought he, "who eats all who do not reply, 'Long life to you, too!'"
and so addressing his son, he repeated the second verse:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"You too live an hundred years,--aye, and twenty
more, I pray;  
Poison be the goblins' food; live an hundred years, I say!"</span>

</div>

\[17\] The Goblin hearing these words, turned away, thinking "Neither of
these is for me to eat." But the Bodhisatta put a question to him:
"Come, Goblin, how is .it you eat the people who enter this building?"

"I earned the right for twelve years' service of Vessavaṇa."

"What, are you allowed to eat everybody?"

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

"All except those who say 'The same to you' when another wishes them
long life."

"Goblin," said the lad, "you have done some wickedness in former lives,
which has caused you to be born now fierce, and cruel, and a bane to
others. If you do the same kind of thing now, you will pass from
darkness to darkness. Therefore from this time forth abstain from such
things as taking life." With these words he humbled the Goblin, scared
him with fear of hell, established him in the Five Precepts, and made
him as obedient as an errand-boy.

Next day, when the people came and saw the Goblin, and learnt how that
the Bodhisatta had subdued him, they went and told the king: "My lord,
some man has subdued the Goblin, and made him as obedient as an
errand-boy!" So the king sent for him, and raised him to be
Commander-in-Chief; while he heaped honours upon the father. Having made
the Goblin a tax-gatherer, and established him in the Bodhisatta's
precepts, after giving alms and doing good he departed to swell the
hosts of heaven.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this story, which he told to explain when the
custom first arose of answering 'Long life' by 'The same to you,' he
identified the Birth: "In those days, Ānanda was the king, Kassapa the
father, and I myself was the lad his son."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[11:1](j2008.htm#fr_12) The introductory story
is repeated in the Cullavagga, v. 33 (iii. 153 of Rhys Davids'
translation of Vinaya Texts in the *S. B. E.*).

<span id="fn_13"></span>[12:1](j2008.htm#fr_13) A monster with white
skin, three legs, and eight teeth, guardian of jewels and the precious
metals, and a kind of Indian Pluto.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[12:2](j2008.htm#fr_14) See Eggeling,
Çatap.-Brāhm. vol. 2, p. 3, *S. B. E.*, for the construction of the hut.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 156. Alīnacitta-Jātaka](j2009)

</div>
