<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2021)  [Next](j2023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j169"></span>

### No. 169.

### ARAKA-JĀTAKA.

"*The heart that boundless pity feels*," *etc*.--This story the Master
told at Jetavana, about the Scripture on Lovingkindness.

On one occasion the Master thus addressed the Brotherhood: "Brethren,
charity practised with all devotion of thought, \[61\] meditated upon,
increased, made a vehicle of progress, made your one object, practised,
well begun, may be expected to produce Eleven Blessings <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38), What are these eleven? Happy he sleeps
and happy he awakes; he sees no bad dreams; men love him; spirits guard
him; fire, poison, and sword come not near him; quickly he becomes
absorbed in mind; his look grows calm; he dies undismayed; without need
of further wisdom he goes to Brahma's heaven. Charity, Brethren,
practised with renunciation of one's wishes"--and so forth--"may be
expected to produce these Eleven Blessings. Praising the Charity which
holds these Eleven Blessings, Brethren, a Brother ought to show kindness
to all creatures, whether expressly commanded or not, he should be a
friend to the friendly, aye a friend to the unfriendly, and a friend to
the indifferent: thus to all without distinction, whether expressly
bidden or not, he should show Charity: he should show sympathy with joy
and sorrow and practise equanimity; he should do his work by means of
the Four Excellences. By so doing he will go to Brahma's heaven even
without Path or Fruit. Wise men of old by cultivating charity for seven
years, have dwelt in Brahma's heaven seven ages, each with its one
period to wax and one to wane <span id="fr_39"></span>[2](#fn_39)." And
he told them a story of the past.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Once upon a time, in a former age, the Bodhisatta was born in a
brahmin's family. When he grew up, he forsook his lusts and embraced the
religious life, and attained the Four Excellences. His name was Araka,
and he became a Teacher, and lived in Himalaya region, with a large body
of followers. Admonishing his band of sages, he said, "A recluse must
show Charity, sympathetic must he be both in joy and sorrow, and full of
equanimity; for this thought of charity attained by resolve prepares him
for Brahma's heaven." And explaining the blessing of charity, he
repeated these verses:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"The heart that boundless pity feels for all things that have birth,  
In heaven above, in realms below, and on this middle earth,

"Filled full of pity infinite, infinite charity,  
In such a heart nought narrow or confined can ever be."

</div>

\[62\] Thus did the Bodhisatta discourse to his pupils on the practice
of charity and its blessings. And without a moment's interruption of his
mystic trance, he was born in the heaven of Brahma, and for seven ages,
each with his time to wax and wane, he came no more to this world.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

After finishing this discourse, the Master identified the Birth: "The
band of sages of that time are now the Buddha's followers; and I myself
am he that was the Teacher Araka."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[42:1](j2022.htm#fr_38) The Eleven Blessings are
discussed in the *Question of Milinda*, iv. 4. 16 (trans. in the *S. B.
E.*, i. p. 279).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[42:2](j2022.htm#fr_39) See Childers, *Dict*. p.
185 *b*. The belief still lives. Two gentlemen who visited the Chief of
Chinese Lamaism and the High Priest of Buddhism in Pekin, in 1890,
talked with them over the decline of Buddhism in this age. Both admitted
it, the <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> Buddhist attributing it to want
of government support, while the Lama thought it was because this is a
waning period in religion; but as the waxing follows the waning he
looked forward to a revival. (*Baptist Missionary Herald*, 1890.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 170. Kakaṇṭaka-Jātaka](j2023)

</div>
