<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2049)  [Next](j2051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j197"></span>

### No. 197.

### MITTĀMITTA-JĀTAKA.

"*He smiles not*," *etc*.--This story the Master told whilst dwelling at
Sāvatthi, about a certain Brother.

This Brother took a piece of cloth, deposited by his teacher, feeling
confident that if he took it his teacher would not be angry. Then he
made a shoe-bag of it, and took his leave. When this teacher asked why
he took it, he replied he had felt confident, if he did, that his
teacher would not be angry. The teacher flew into a passion, \[131\] got
up and struck him a blow. "What confidence is there between you and me?"
he asked.

This fact became known among the Brotherhood. One day the brothers were
all together talking about it in the Hall of Truth. "Friend, young
Brother

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So-and-so felt so
confident of his teacher's friendship, that he took a piece of cloth,
and made it into a shoe-bag. Then the teacher asked him what confidence
there was between them, flew into a passion, jumped up, and gave him a
blow." The Master came in, and asked them what they were talking of as
they sat there together. They told him. Then he said, "This is not the
first time, Brothers, that this man has disappointed the confidence of
his fellow. He did the same before." And then he told an old-world tale.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
was born as a brahmin's son in the realm of Kāsi. When he came of age,
he renounced the world; he caused to grow in him the Supernatural
Faculties and the Attainments, and took up his abode in the region of
Himalaya with a band of disciples. One of this band of ascetics
disobeyed the voice of the Bodhisatta, and kept a young elephant which
had lost its dam. This creature by and by grew big, then killed its
master and made off into the forest. The ascetics did his obsequies; and
then, coming about the Bodhisatta, they put this question to him.

"Sir, how may we know whether one is a friend or an enemy?"

This the Bodhisatta declared to them in the following stanzas:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"He smiles not when he sees him, no welcome will he show,  
He will not turn his eyes that way, and answers him with No.

"These are the marks and tokens by which your foe you see:  
These if a wise man sees and hears he knows his enemy."

</div>

\[132\] In these words the Bodhisatta declared the marks of friend and
foe. Thereafter he cultivated the Excellences, and entered the heaven of
Brahma.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth:--"The
Brother in question was he who kept the pet elephant, his teacher was
the elephant, the Buddha's followers were then the band of hermits, and
I myself was their chief."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 198.](j2051)

</div>
