<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2060)  [Next](j2062) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j208"></span>

### No. 208.

### SUṀSUMĀRA-JĀTAKA <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96).

"*Rose-apple, jack fruit*," etc.--This story the Master told at
Jetavana, about Devadatta's attempts to murder him <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97). When he heard of these attempts, the
Master said, This is not the first time that Devadatta has tried to
murder me;

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

he did the same before, and yet could not so much as make me afraid."
Then he told this story.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once upon a time, while Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the Bodhisatta
came to life at the foot of Himalaya as a Monkey. He grew strong and
sturdy, big of frame, well-to-do, and lived by a curve of the river
Ganges in a forest haunt.

Now at that time there was a Crocodile dwelling in the Ganges. The
Crocodile's mate saw the great frame of the monkey, \[159\] and she
conceived a longing for his heart to eat. So she said to her lord: "Sir,
I desire to eat the heart of that great king of the monkeys!"

"Good wife," said the Crocodile, "I live in the water and he lives on
dry land: how can we catch him?"

"By hook or by crook," she replied, "caught he must be. If I don't get
him, I shall die."

"All right," answered the Crocodile, consoling her, "don't trouble
yourself. I have a plan; I will give you his heart to eat."

So when the Bodhisatta was sitting on the bank of the Ganges, after
taking a drink of water, the Crocodile drew near, and said:

"Sir Monkey, why do you live on had fruits in this old familiar place?
On the other side of the Ganges there is no end to the mango trees, and
labuja trees <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98), with fruit sweet as
honey! Is it not better to cross over and have all kinds of wild fruit
to eat?"

"Lord Crocodile," the Monkey made answer, "deep and wide is the Ganges:
how shall I get across?"

"If you will go, I will mount you on my back, and carry you over."

The Monkey trusted him, and agreed. "Come here, then," said the other,
"up on my back with you!" and up the monkey climbed. But when the
Crocodile had swum a little way, he plunged the Monkey under the water.

"Good friend, you are letting me sink!" cried the Monkey. "What is that
for?"

Said the Crocodile, "You think I'm carrying you out of pure good nature?
Not a bit of it! My wife has a longing for your heart, and I want to
give it her to eat"

"Friend," said the Monkey, "it is nice of you to tell me. Why, if our
heart were inside us when we go jumping among the tree-tops, it would be
all knocked to pieces'"

"Well, where do you keep it?" asked the other.

The Bodhisatta pointed out a fig-tree, with clusters of ripe fruit,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

standing not far off. "See," said he, "there are our hearts hanging on
yon fig-tree." \[160\]

"If you will show me your heart," said the Crocodile, "then I won't kill
you."

"Take me to the tree, then, and I will point it out to you hanging upon
it."

The Crocodile brought him to the place. The Monkey leapt off his back,
and climbing up the fig-tree sat upon it. "O silly Crocodile!" said he,
"you thought that there were creatures that kept their hearts in a
tree-top! You are a fool, and I have outwitted you! You may keep your
fruit to yourself. Your body is great, but you have no sense." And then
to explain this idea he uttered the following stanzas:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Rose-apple, jack-fruit, mangoes too across the water there I see;  
Enough of them, I want them not; my fig is good enough for me!

"Great is your body, verily, but how much smaller is your wit!  
Now go your ways, Sir Crocodile, for I have had the best of it."

</div>

The Crocodile, feeling as sad and miserable as if he had lost a thousand
pieces of money, went back sorrowing to the place where he lived.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this discourse, he identified the Birth:--"In
those days Devadatta was the Crocodile, the lady Ciñcā was his mate, and
I was the Monkey."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[110:1](j2061.htm#fr_96) Cf. *Markaṭa-jātaka*,
Mahāvastu ii. 208; *Cariyā-Piṭaka*, iii. 7; Morris, *Contemp. Rev.* vol.
39, quoting Griffis, *Japanese Fairy World*, p. 153. A monkey outwits a
crocodile in No. 57, above.

The following variant, from Russia (Moscow district) may be of interest.
It was given me by Mr I. Nestor Schnurmann, who heard it from his nurse
(about 1860).--Once upon a time, the King of the Fishes was wanting in
wisdom. His advisers told him that once he could get the heart of the
fox, he would become wise. So he sent a deputation, consisting of the
great magnates of the sea, whales and others. "Our king wants your
advice on some state affairs." The fox, flattered, consented. A whale
took him on his back. On the way the waves beat upon him; at last he
asked what they really wanted. They said, what their king really wanted
was to eat his heart, by which he hoped to become clever. He said, "Why
didn't you tell me that before? I would gladly sacrifice my life for
such a worthy object. But we foxes always leave our hearts at home. Take
me back and I'll fetch it. Otherwise I'm sure your king will be angry."
So they took him back. As soon as he got near the shore, he leaped on
land, and cried "Ah you fools! Have you ever heard of an animal not
carrying his heart with him?" and ran off. The fish had to return empty.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[110:2](j2061.htm#fr_97) These attempts of
Devadatta, and how they were foiled, are set forth in *Cullavagga*, VII.
iii. 6 foll., trans. in *S. B. E.*, Vinaya Texts, iii. 243 f.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[111:1](j2061.htm#fr_98) Artocarpus Lacucha
(*Childers*).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 209. Kakkara-Jātaka](j2062)

</div>
