<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](j2130)  [Next](j2132) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Jataka, Vol. II*, tr. by W.H.D. Rouse, \[1895\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_j278"></span>

### No. 278. <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_200)

### MAHISA-JĀTAKA.

\[385\] "Why do yore patiently," etc. This story the Master told at
Jetavana, about a certain impertinent monkey. At Sāvatthi, we are told,
was a tame monkey in a certain family; and it ran into the elephant's
stable, and perching on the back of a virtuous elephant, voided
excrement, and began to walk up and down. The elephant, being both
virtuous and patient, did nothing. But one day in this elephant's place
stood a wicked young one. The monkey thought it was the same, and
climbed upon its back. The elephant seized him in his trunk, and dashing
him to the ground, trod him to pieces. This became known in the meeting
of the Brotherhood; and one day they. all began to talk about it.
"Brother, have you heard how the impertinent monkey mistook a had
elephant for a good one, and climbed on his back, and how he lost his
life for it?" In came the Master, and asked, "Brethren, what are you
talking of as you sit here?" and when they told him, "This is not the
first time," said he, "that this impertinent monkey behaved so; he did
the same before:" and he told them an old-world tale.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once on a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Behaves, the Bodhisatta was
born in the Himalaya region as a Buffalo. He grew up strong and

big, and ranged the hills and mountains, peaks and caves, tortuous woods
a many.

Once, as he went, he saw a pleasant tree, and took his food, standing
under it.

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

Then an impertinent monkey came down out of the tree, and getting on his
back, voided excrement; then he took hold of one of the Buffalo's horns,
and swung down from it by his tail, disporting himself. The Bodhisatta,
being full of patience, kindliness, and mercy, took no notice at all of
his misconduct. This the monkey did again and again.

But one day, the spirit that belonged to that tree, standing upon the
tree-trunk, asked him, saying, \[386\] "My lord Buffalo, why do you put
up with the rudeness of this bad Monkey? Put a stop to him!" and
enlarging upon this theme he repeated the first two verses as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Why do you patiently endure each freak  
This mischievous and selfish ape may wreak?

"Crush underfoot, transfix him with your horn!  
Stop him or even children will show scorn."

</div>

The Bodhisatta, on hearing this, replied, "If, Tree-sprite, I cannot
endure this monkey's ill-treatment without abusing his birth, lineage,
and powers, how can my wish ever come to fulfilment? But the monkey will
do the same to any other, thinking him to be like me. And if he does it
to any fierce Buffalos, they will destroy him indeed. When some other
has killed him, I shall be delivered both from pain and from
blood-guiltiness." And saying this he repeated the third verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"If he treats others as he now treats me,  
They will destroy him; then I shall be free."</span>

</div>

A few days after, the Bodhisatta went elsewhither, and another Buffalo,
a savage beast, went and stood in his place. The wicked Monkey, \[387\]
thinking it to be the old one, climbed upon his back and did as before.
The Buffalo shook him off upon the ground, and drove his horn into the
Monkey's heart, and trampled him to mincemeat under his hoofs..

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

When the Master had ended this teaching, he declared the Truths, and
identified the Birth: "At that time the bad buffalo was he who now is
the bad elephant, the bad monkey was the same, but the virtuous noble
Buffalo was I myself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_200"></span>[262:1](j2131.htm#fr_201) *Jātaka Mālā*, no. 33
(Mahisa); *Cariyā-Piṭaka*, II. 5.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. 279. Satapatta-Jātaka](j2132)

</div>
