[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0820)  [Next](sbe0822) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

# INTRODUCTION TO SANATSU*G*ÂTÎYA.

THE Sanatsu*g*âtîya, is, like the Bhagavadgîtâ, one of the numerous
episodes of the Mahâbhârata <span id="fr_580"></span>[1](#fn_577). It is
true, that it, has never commanded anything like that unbounded
veneration which has always been paid in India to the Bhagavadgîtâ.
Still it is sometimes studied even in our days, and it has had the high
distinction of being commented on by the great leader of the modern
Vedântic school--*S*a<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya <span
id="fr_581"></span>[2](#fn_578). The Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra purports to be a
dialogue mainly between Sanatsu*g*âta on the one side and
Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra on the other. Sanatsu*g*âta, from whom it takes its
name, is said to be identical with Sanatkumâra, a name not unfamiliar to
students of our Upanishad literature. And Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra is the old
father of those Kauravas who formed one of the belligerent parties in
the bellum plusquam civile which is recorded in the Mahâbhârata. The
connexion of this particular episode with the main current of the
narrative of that epos is one of the loosest possible character--much
looser, for instance, than that of the Bhagavadgîtâ. As regards the
latter, it can fairly be contended that it is in accordance with
poetical justice for Ar*g*una to feel despondent and unwilling to engage
in battle, after actual sight of 'teachers, fathers, sons,' and all the
rest of them, arrayed in opposition to him; and that therefore it was
necessary for the poet to adduce some specific explanation as to how
Ar*g*una was ultimately enabled to get over such natural scruples. But
as regards the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, even such a contention as this can have

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

no place. For this is how the matter stands. In the course of the
negotiations for an amicable arrangement <span
id="fr_582"></span>[1](#fn_579) between the Pâ*nd*avas and the Kauravas,
Sañ*g*aya, on one occasion, came back to Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra with a
message from the Pândavas. When he saw Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra, however, he
said that he would deliver the message in the public assembly of the
Kauravas the next morning, and went away after pronouncing a severe
censure on Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra for his conduct. The suspense thus caused
was a source of much vexation to the old man, and so he sent for Vidura,
in order, as he expresses it, that Vidura might by his discourse assuage
the fire that was raging within him. Vidura accordingly appears, and
enters upon an elaborate prelection concerning matters spiritual, or,
perhaps, more accurately quasi-spiritual, and at the outset of the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya he is supposed to have reached a stage where, as being
born a *S*ûdra, he hesitates to proceed. After some discussion of this
point, between Vidura and Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra, it is determined to call in
the aid of Sanatsu*g*âta, to explain the spiritual topics which Vidura
felt a delicacy in dealing with; and Sanatsu*g*âta is accordingly
introduced on the scene in a way not unusual in our epic and purâ*n*ic
literature, viz. by Vidura engaging in some mystic process of
meditation, in response to which Sanatsu*g*âta appears. He is received
then with all due formalities, and after he has had some rest, as our
poem takes care to note, he is catechised by Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra; and with
one or two exceptions, all the verses which constitute the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya are Sanatsu*g*âta's answers to Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra's
questions <span id="fr_583"></span>[2](#fn_580).

This brief statement of the scheme of this part of the Mahâbhârata
shows, as already pointed out, that the connexion of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya
with the central story of that epic is very loose indeed; and that it
might have been entirely omitted without occasioning any æsthetical or
other defect. And therefore, although there is nothing positive

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

tending to prove the Sanatsu*g*âtîya to be a later addition to the
original epos, still the misgivings which are often entertained upon
such points may well, in this case, be stronger than in the case of the
Bhagavadgîtâ. The text, too, of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya is not preserved in
nearly so satisfactory a condition as that of the Gîtâ. I have had
before me, in settling my text, the editions of the Mahâbhârata
respectively printed and published at Bombay <span
id="fr_584"></span>[1](#fn_581), Calcutta, and Madras, and three MSS.,
one of which was most kindly and readily placed at my disposal by my
friend Professor Râmk*ri*sh*n*a Gopâ*l* Bhâ*nd*ârkar; the second by
another friend, Professor Âbâ*g*î Vish*n*u Kâthava*t*e; and the third
was a copy made for me at Sâgar in the Central Provinces, through the
good offices of a third friend, Mr. Vâman Mahâdeva Kolha*t*kar. The copy
lent me by Professor Bhândârkar comes from Pu*n*a, and that lent by
Professor Kâthava*t*e also from Pu*n*a. This last, as well as the Sâgar
copy, and the edition printed at Madras, contains the commentary of
Sa<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya. And the text I have adopted is that which is
indicated by the commentary as the text which its author had before him.
But the several copies of the commentary differ so, much from one
another, that it is still a matter of some doubt with me, whether I have
got accurately the text which *S*a<u>n</u>kara commented upon. For
instance, the Sâgar copy entirely omits chapter V, while the other
copies not only give the text of that chapter, but also a commentary
upon it which calls itself Sa<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya's commentary <span
id="fr_585"></span>[2](#fn_582). Again, take the stanzas which stand
within brackets at pp. [167](sbe0824.htm#page_167),
[168](sbe0824.htm#page_168) <span id="fr_586"></span>[3](#fn_583) of our
translation. There is in none of the copies we have, any commentary of
Sa<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya on them. And yet the stanzas exist in the text of
the Mahâbhârata as given in those copies which do contain
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary. The matter is evidently one for further
investigation. I have not, however, thought it absolutely

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

necessary to make such an investigation for the purposes of the present
translation. But to be on the safe side, I have retained in the
translation everything which is to be found in those copies of the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya which also contain *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary. As to
other stanzas--and there are some of this description--which other MSS.
or commentators vouch for, but of which no trace is to be found in the
MSS. containing *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary <span
id="fr_587"></span>[1](#fn_584), I have simply omitted them.

These facts show that, in the case of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, the materials
for a trustworthy historical account of the work are not of a very
satisfactory character. The materials for ascertaining its date and
position in Sanskrit literature are, indeed, so scanty, that poor as we
have seen the materials for the Bhagavadgîtâ to be, they must be called
superlatively rich as compared with those we have now to deal with. As
regards external evidence on the points now alluded to, the first and
almost the last fact falling under that head, is the fact of the work
being quoted from and commented upon by Sa<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya. In his
commentary on the *S*vetâ*s*vatara-upanishad <span
id="fr_588"></span>[2](#fn_585), *S*a<u>n</u>kara cites the passage
about the flamingo at [p. 189](sbe0826.htm#page_189), introducing it
with the words, 'And in the Sanatsu*g*âta also.' In the same <span
id="fr_589"></span>[3](#fn_586) commentary, some other passages from the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya are also quoted, but without naming the work except as a
Sm*ri*ti, and mixing up together verses from different parts of the
work.

This is really all the external evidence, that I am aware of, touching
the date of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya. There is, however, one other point,
which it is desirable to notice, though not, perhaps, so much because it
is of any very great value in itself, as because it may hereafter become
useful, should further research into the Mahâbhârata and other works
yield the requisite. information. There are, then, eight stanzas in the
thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh, thirty-ninth, and fortieth chapters of the
Udyoga Parvan of the Mahâbhârata (the Sanatsu*g*âtîya commencing at the
forty-first

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

chapter), seven of which are quoted in the Pañ*k*atantra <span
id="fr_590"></span>[1](#fn_587), and the eighth in the Mahâbhâshya <span
id="fr_591"></span>[2](#fn_588) of Patañ*g*ali. Of course, it almost
goes without saying, that neither the Pañ*k*atantra nor the Mahâbhâshya
mentions the source from which they derive the verses in question. But I
do not think it unallowable to make the provisional assumption, that
they were derived from the Mahâbhârata, so long as we cannot produce any
other, and more likely, source. It is true, that Professor Weber has, in
another connexion, impugned the cogency of this argument. He seems to
think, that the probability--in the case he was actually dealing
with--of the Râmâyana having borrowed from the Mahâbhâshya, is quite as
strong as the probability of the Mahâbhâshya having borrowed from the
Râmâya*n*a <span id="fr_592"></span>[3](#fn_589). And doubtless, he
would by parity of reason contend, in the case before us, that the
probabilities, as between the Mahâbhârata on the one hand, and the
Mahâbhâshya and the Pañ*k*atantra on the other, bear the same mutual
relation. I cannot accept this view. I am not now concerned to discuss
the merits of the conclusion in support of which Professor Weber has
advanced this argument <span id="fr_593"></span>[4](#fn_590). I am only
considering, how far it affects the question now before us. And as to
that question, I may say, that the Pañ*k*atantra expressly introduces
the stanzas now under consideration with some such expression as, 'For
it has been said,' indicating clearly that it was there quoting the
words of another. And so, too, does the Mahâbhâshya, where the passage
we refer to runs as follows: '(It is) laid down, (that there is) a sin
in one of tender age not rising to

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

receive (an elderly person), and (that there is) merit in rising to
receive. How? Thus, "The life-winds of a youth depart upwards, when an
elderly man approaches (him). By rising to receive (him), and
salutation, he obtains them again."' It appears to me, that the
indications of this being a quotation in the Bhâshya are very strong.
But apart from that, I do demur to the proposition, that the
probabilities are equal, of a work like the Mahâbhârata or Râmâyana
borrowing a verse from the Mahâbhâshya, and vice versa. It appears to me
perfectly plain, I own, that the probability of a grammatical work like
the Bhâshya borrowing a verse from a standard work like the Bhârata or
Râmâya*n*a for purposes of illustration is very much the stronger of the
two. And this, quite independently of any inquiry as to whether the
Bhâshya does or does not show other indications of acquaintance with the
Bhârata or the Râmâya*n*a.

If these arguments are correct, it seems to me that they carry us thus
far in our present investigation--namely, that we may now say, that we
have reason to believe some parts, at all events, of the thirty-sixth,
thirty-seventh, thirty-eighth, and fortieth chapters of the Udyoga
Parvan of the Mahâbhârata to have probably been in existence prior to
the sixth century A. C. <span id="fr_594"></span>[1](#fn_591); and that
some parts of the thirty-seventh chapter were probably extant in the
time of Patañgali, viz. the second century B. C. <span
id="fr_595"></span>[2](#fn_592) Now, internal evidence does not yield
any indications tending to show that the several chapters here referred
to must have been prior in time to the chapters composing the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya, which come so soon after them in the Mahâbhârata. On
the contrary, it is, not too much to maintain, that to a certain extent
the style and language of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya is, if anything, rather
indicative of its priority in time over the five chapters immediately
preceding it. And, therefore, so far as this argument goes, it enables
us--provisionally only, it must be remembered--to fix the second century
B.C. as a terminus ad quem for the date of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya.

This is all the external evidence available for a discussion

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

of the question--when the Sanatsu*g*âtîya was composed. We now turn to
the internal evidence. Standing by itself, internal evidence is not, in
my opinion, of much cogency in any case. Still in ascertaining, as best
we can, the history of our ancient literature, even this species of
evidence is not to be despised; it must only be used and received with
caution. Under this head, then, we may note first the persons who are
supposed to take part in the dialogue. Sanatsu*g*âta <span
id="fr_596"></span>[1](#fn_593)--or Sanatkumâra--as already pointed out,
is a name already familiar to the readers of one of our older
Upanishads--the *Kh*ândogya. Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra is not known in the
Upanishads, but he is an important personage in the epic literature. And
it is to be remarked, that his character as disclosed in the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya is not at all similar to that which has attached itself
to his name, alike in the later literature of our country, and in that
popular opinion which was probably formed by this later literature. In
the dialogue before us, he figures as an earnest inquirer after truth;
he is described as the 'talented king Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra;' and is
addressed by Sanatsu*g*âta as, 'O acute sir!' 'O learned person!' True
it is, that Nîlaka*nth*a in one place, as we have noticed in our note
there <span id="fr_597"></span>[2](#fn_594), endeavours to bring out the
later view of Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra's character <span
id="fr_598"></span>[3](#fn_595); but it seems to me that that endeavour,
based as it is on a forced and farfetched interpretation of a single
word in our poem, is an unsuccessful one. None of the questions, which
Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra puts to Sanatsu*g*âta in the course of their dialogue,
indicates the avaricious old man who wished to deprive his innocent
nephews of their just rights in the interests of his own wicked and
misguided sons. They rather indicate the bona fide student of spiritual
lore, and thus point to what is, perhaps, an earlier view of
Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra's character.

If we look next to the general style of this poem, we find that it has
none of that elaboration which marks what I

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

have called the age of Kâvyas and Nâ*t*akas. The remarks on this topic
in the Introduction to the Gîtâ apply pretty accurately to this work
also. We observe here the same paucity of long-drawn compounds, the same
absence of merely ornamental adjectives, the same absence of figures and
tropes <span id="fr_599"></span>[1](#fn_596); in one word, the same
directness and simplicity of style. Furthermore, there is a somewhat
greater want of finish about the syntax of our poem than there is even
in the Gîtâ. Such constructions as we find *inter alia* at chapter II,
stanza 2, or 25, or at chapter III, stanza 14, or chapter IV, stanza 12,
or in the early verses of the last chapter, indicate a period in the
history of the language, when probably the regulations of syntax were
not quite thoroughly established in practice.

If we turn to the metre of the poem, an analogous phenomenon strikes us
there. Similar irregularities in the collocation of long and short
syllables, similar superfluities and deficiencies of syllables, meet us
in the Sanatsu*g*âtîya and the Bhagavadgîtâ. And in the former work, as
in the latter, the irregularities are less observable in the
Anush*t*ubh <span id="fr_600"></span>[2](#fn_597) than in the other
metres used. Probably the explanation, apart from the great elasticity
of that metre, is that the Anush*t*ubh had been more used, and had in
consequence become comparatively more settled in its scheme even in
practical composition.

Looking now more particularly to the language of the work before us, we
find one word to be of most frequent occurrence, namely, the word vai,
which we have rendered 'verily.' It is not a common word in the later
literature, while in the Upanishad literature we meet with great
frequency, not merely vai, but the words, which I think are cognate with
it, vâ and vâva. The former word, indeed, appears to me to stand in some
passages of the Upanishads for vai by euphonic alterations. Thus in the
passage tva

m

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

vâ aham asmi bhagavo devate, aha*m* vai tvam asi, it is difficult not to
suppose that the vâ of the first part of the sentence is the same word
as the vai of the second part, only altered according to the rules of
Sandhi in Sanskrit.

A second point of similarity between the language of the Upanishads and
that of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya is to be found in the phrase, 'He who knows
this becomes immortal.' This sentence, or one of like signification, is,
as is well known, of common occurrence in the Upanishads and in the
Brâhma*n*as. In the Bhagavadgîtâ, the verses towards the end, which come
after K*ri*sh*n*a's summing-up of his instruction, seem to be of a
somewhat analogous, though in some respects different, nature. And in
the Purâ*n*as we meet sometimes with elaborate passages extolling the
merits of a particular rite, or a particular pilgrimage, and so forth.
This form of the Phala*s*ruti, as it is called, appears to have been
developed in process of time from the minute germ existing in the
Brâhma*n*as and the Upanishads. In the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, however, we are
almost at the beginning of those developments; indeed, the form before
us is identically the same as that which we see in the works where it is
first met with. It is a short sentence, which, though complete in
itself, still appears merely at the end of another passage, and almost
as a part of such other passage.

There is one other point of a kindred nature which it may be well to
notice here. As in the Gîtâ, so in the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, we meet with a
considerable number of words used in senses not familiar in the later
literature. They are collected in the Index of Sanskrit words in this
volume; but a few remarks on some of them will not, it is thought, be
entirely out of place here. The word mârga <span
id="fr_601"></span>[1](#fn_598)--in the sense of 'worldly life'--is
rather remarkable. *S*a<u>n</u>kara renders it by 'the path of
sa*m*sâra' or worldly life, And he quotes as a parallel the passage from
the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad which speaks of returning to the 'path.'
There, however, *S*a<u>n</u>kara explains it to mean the 'path by which

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the self returns to worldly life,' namely, from space to the wind and so
forth into vegetables, and food, ultimately appearing as a fœtus.
Another remarkable word is 'varga,' which occurs twice in the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya. *S*a<u>n</u>kara and Nîlaka*nth*a differ in their
explanations of it, and Nîlaka*nth*a indeed gives two different meanings
to the word in the two passages where it occurs. We may also refer here
specially to utsa, *ri*tvi*g*, and matvâ. In Boehtlingk and Roth's
Lexicon the only passages cited under 'utsa' are from Vedic works,
except two respectively from Su*s*ruta and the Da*s*akumâra*k*arita. One
passage, however, there cited, viz. Vish*n*o*h* pade parame madhva
utsa*h*, is plainly the original of the passage we are now considering.
As to ritvig in the sense it bears here, we see, I think, what was the
earlier signification of that word before it settled down into the
somewhat technical meaning in which it is now familiar. And matvâ in the
sense of 'meditating upon' is to be found in the Upanishads, but not, I
think, in any work of the classical literature. These words, therefore,
seem to indicate that the Sanatsu*g*âtîya was composed at a stage in the
development of the Sanskrit language which is a good deal earlier than
the stage which we see completely reached in the classical literature.

Coming now to the matter of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, it appears to me, that
we there see indications pointing in a general way to the same
conclusion as that which we have here arrived at. There is, in the first
place, a looseness and want of rigid system in the mode of handling the
subject, similar to that which we have already observed upon as
characterising the Bhagavadgîtâ. There is no obvious bond of connexion
joining together the various subjects discussed, nor are those subjects
themselves treated after any very scientific or rigorous method. Again,
if the fourth chapter is a genuine part of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, we have
an elaborate repetition, in one part, of what has been said in another
part of the work, with only a few variations in words, and perhaps fewer
still in signification. As, however, I am not at present prepared to
stand finally by the genuineness of that chapter I do not consider it
desirable to further labour this argument

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

than to point out, that similar repetitions, on a smaller scale,
perhaps, are not uncommon in our older literature <span
id="fr_602"></span>[1](#fn_599).

Coming now to the manner in which the Vedas are spoken of in the work
before us, there are, we find, one or two noteworthy circumstances
proper to be considered here. In the first place, we have the reference
to the four Vedas together with Âkhyânas as the fifth Veda. This is in
conformity with the old tradition recorded in the various works to which
we have referred in our note on the passage. The mention of the
Atharva-veda, which is implied in this passage, and expressly contained
in another, might be regarded as some mark of a modern age. But without
dwelling upon the fact, that the Atharva-veda, though probably, modern
as compared with the other Vedas, is still old enough to date some
centuries before the Christian era <span
id="fr_603"></span>[2](#fn_600), it must suffice to draw attention here
to the fact that the *Kh*ândogya-upanishad mentions that Veda, and it is
not here argued that the Sanatsu*g*âtîya is older than the
*Kh*ândogya-upanishad. We have next to consider the reference to the
Sâman hymns as 'vimala,' or pure. The point involved in this reference
has been already sufficiently discussed in the Introduction to the
Gîtâ <span id="fr_604"></span>[3](#fn_601); and it is not necessary here
to say more than that, of the two classes of works we have there made,
the Sanatsu*g*âtîya appears from the passage under discussion to rank
itself with. the class which is prior in date.

The estimate of the value of the Vedas which is implied in the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya appears to coincide very nearly with that which we have
shown to be the estimate implied in the Bhagavadgîtâ. The Vedas are not
here cast aside as useless any more than they are in the Bhagavadgîtâ.
For, I do not think the word An*ri*kas which occurs in one passage of
the work can be regarded really as referring to those who entirely
reject the Vedic revelation. Without going as far as that, the
Sanatsu*g*âtîya seems certainly to join the Bhagavadgîtâ in its protest
against those men of extreme views, who could see nothing beyond the
rites and ceremonies

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

taught in the Vedas. A study of the Vedas is, indeed, insisted on in
sundry passages of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya. But it is equally maintained,
that the performance of the ceremonies laid down in the Vedas is not the
true means of final emancipation. It is maintained, that action done
with any desire is a cause of bondage to worldly life; that the gods
themselves are ordinary creatures who have reached a certain high
position owing to the practice of the duties of Brahma*k*ârins, but that
they are not only not superior to, but are really under the control of,
the man who has acquired the true knowledge of the universal self. On
all these points, we have opinions expressed in the Sanatsu*g*âtîya,
which conclusively establish an identity of doctrine as between the
Upanishads and the Bhagavadgîtâ <span id="fr_605"></span>[1](#fn_602) on
the one hand, and the Sanatsu*g*âtîya on the other. Lastly, we have an
explicit statement, that the mere study of Vedic texts avails nothing,
and that sin is not to be got rid of by one who merely 'studies the
*Rik* and the Ya*g*us texts, and the Sâma-veda.' It is not necessary to
repeat here the chronological deductions which may be based upon this
relation between the Sanatsu*g*âtîya and the Vedas. We have already
argued in the Introduction to the Bhagavadgîtâ, that such a relation
points to a period of Indian religious history prior to the great
movement of Gautama Buddha <span id="fr_606"></span>[2](#fn_603).

There is, however, this difference, perhaps, to be noted between the
Gîtâ and the Sanatsu*g*âtîya-namely, that the latter work seems to
afford more certain indications of the recognition, at the date of its
composition, of a *G*ñânakâ*nd*a as distinguished from a Karmakâ*nd*a in
the Vedas, than, we have seen, are contained in the Bhagavadgîtâ <span
id="fr_607"></span>[3](#fn_604). The passage, for instance, which speaks
of the *Kh*andas as referring 'of themselves' to the Brahman, and the
passage which refers to an understanding of the Brahman by means of the
Vedas, according to the principle of the moon and the branch--these seem
rather to point to a portion of the Vedas which was regarded as giving
instruction in true

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

knowledge, as distinguished from merely laying down various sacrifices
and ceremonials for special purposes. In fact, in one passage we have
the germ of the whole Vedântic theory as afterwards settled. For there
we are told, that sacrifices and penances are laid down as the
preliminary steps towards the acquisition of true knowledge. By those
sacrifices one is purified of one's sins, and then acquires a. knowledge
of the supreme self as described in the Vedas--which, I apprehend, must
mean the Upanishads.

There is but one other point on which we need say anything further. And
that is connected with the definition of a Brâhma*n*a. That definition
appears to me, to point to an earlier stage in religious progress than
is indicated in Âpastamba and Manu. The true Brâhma*n*a is he who is
attached to the Brahman. Perhaps, this marks some little advance beyond
the more general doctrine of the Gîtâ, but it is still very far short of
the petrified doctrine, if I may so call it, of the later law-givers.
The Brâhma*n*a has not yet degenerated into the mere receiver of fees
and presents, but is still in possession of the truth.

We thus see, that the external and internal evidence bearing upon the
question of the position of the Sanatsu*g*âtîya in Sanskrit literature,
seems to point to nearly the same period and place for it as for the
Bhagavadgîtâ. It is plain enough, that the evidence under both heads is
extremely scanty and meagre. But such as it is, it appears to us to
justify a provisional conclusion, that the Sanatsu*g*âtîya dates from a
period prior to the rise of Buddhism, and forms part of that same
movement in the religious history of ancient India of which the Gîtâ is
another embodiment. More than this, we are not at present in a position
to assert. To this extent, the evidence enables us, I think, to go. And
we accordingly hold, that unless other and further evidence requires a
reversal of this judgment, the Sanatsu*g*âtîya may be treated as a work
nearly contemporary with the Bhagavadgîtâ, and occupying generally the
same point of view.

One word, finally, about the translation. As stated already, the text
adopted is that which appears to have

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

been before *S*a<u>n</u>karâ*k*ârya. And the translation follows mainly
his interpretations in his commentary. Sometimes we have followed
Nîlaka*nth*a, whose commentary has been consulted as well as a very
incorrect copy of another commentary by one Sarva*g*ña Nârâya*n*a,
contained in the MS. from Puna lent me by Professor Bhâ*nd*ârkar. In
some places even the commentators have failed to clear up obscurities,
and there we have given the best translation we could suggest,
indicating the difficulties. There has been an endeavour made here, as
in the case of the Bhagavadgîtâ, to keep the translation as close and
faithful to the text as the exigencies of the English language
permitted. 'The exegetical notes are mostly taken from the commentaries,
even where the name of the commentator is not specified; while the
references to parallel passages have been collected, mostly by myself,
in the same way as in the case of the Bhagavadgîtâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_577"></span>[135:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_580) Mahâbhârata, Udyoga
Parvan, Adhyâya 41-46.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[135:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_581) Mâdhavâ*k*ârya, in
speaking of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's works, describes him as having commented
on the Sanatsu*g*âtîya, which is 'far from evil (persons)'
\[asatsudûra*m*\]. *S*a<u>n</u>kara-vi*g*aya, chapter VI, stanza 62.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[136:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_582) See [p.
3](sbe0802.htm#page_3) supra.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[136:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_583) After this dialogue
is over, the dawn breaks, and Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra and the Kaurava princes
meet in general assembly.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[137:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_584) This contains
Nîlaka*nth*a's commentary, but his text avowedly includes the text of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara, and verses and readings contained in more modern
copies.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[137:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_585) The commentary on
the sixth chapter, however, takes up the thread from the end of the
fourth chapter.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[137:3](sbe0821.htm#fr_586) See [p.
182](sbe0825.htm#page_182), where one of the lines recurs.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[138:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_587) See note , [p.
137](#page_137).

<span id="fn_585"></span>[138:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_588) [p.
283](sbe0838.htm#page_283).

<span id="fn_586"></span>[138:3](sbe0821.htm#fr_589) p. 252. See, too,
*S*ârîraka Bhâshya, p. 828.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[139:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_590) Cf. Kosegarten's
Pañ*k*atantra, p. 28 (I ,28, Bombay S. C. ed.), with Udyoga Parvan,
chap. XL, st. 7 (Bombay ed.); Pañ*k*atantra, pp. 112 and 209 (II, 10;
IV, 5, Bombay ed.), with Udyoga Parvan, chap. XXXVIII, 9; p. 35 (I, 37,
Bombay ed.) with chap. XXXVI, st. 34; p. 140 (II, 40, Bombay ed.) with
chap. XXXVII, st. 15; p. 160 (III, 62, Bombay ed.) with chap. XXXVII,
st. 17, 18; p. 106 (II, 2, Bombay ed.) with chap. XXXVI, st. 59.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[139:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_591) Udyoga Parvan,
chap. XXXVIII, st. 1, and Mahâbhâshya VI, 1-4, p. 35 (Banâras ed.).

<span id="fn_589"></span>[139:3](sbe0821.htm#fr_592) See Indian
Antiquary IV. 247. The parallel from Mâdhava which Professor Weber
adduces is quite inconclusive, and as far as it goes appears to me to
militate against the Professor's own view.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[139:4](sbe0821.htm#fr_593) I may, however,
admit at once, that I ought not to have expressed myself as strongly as
I did in the note which Professor Weber criticises.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[140:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_594) See [p.
29](sbe0802.htm#page_29) supra.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[140:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_595) See [p.
32](sbe0802.htm#page_32) supra.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[141:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_596) See Hall's
Sâ<u>n</u>khyasâra, preface, pp. 14, 15.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[141:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_597) P. [p.
151](sbe0822.htm#page_151), note .

<span id="fn_595"></span>[141:3](sbe0821.htm#fr_598) Nîlaka*nth*a
himself, however, treats Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra's question later on as
showing that he had attained indifference to worldly concerns. That
question does not occur in *S*a<u>n</u>kara's text, but is given at [p.
158](sbe0823.htm#page_158) infra.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[142:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_599) The five similes
which occur, and which are nearly all that occur, in the poem, are the
very primitive ones--of the hunter, of water on grass, the tiger of
straw, death eating men like a tiger, dogs eating what is vomited, a
branch of a tree and the moon, and birds and their nests.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[142:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_600) Cf. as to this the
N*ri*si*m*ha Tâpinî, p. 105.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[143:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_601) I give no
references here, as they can be found in the Index of Sanskrit words at
the end of this volume.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[145:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_602) See [p.
181](sbe0825.htm#page_181), note infra.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[145:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_603) P. [p.
19](sbe0802.htm#page_19) supra.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[145:3](sbe0821.htm#fr_604) Pp.
[19](sbe0802.htm#page_19), [20](sbe0802.htm#page_20).

<span id="fn_602"></span>[146:1](sbe0821.htm#fr_605) Cf. [p.
16](sbe0802.htm#page_16) supra.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[146:2](sbe0821.htm#fr_606) Cf. pp.
[25](sbe0802.htm#page_25), [26](sbe0802.htm#page_26).

<span id="fn_604"></span>[146:3](sbe0821.htm#fr_607) [p.
17](sbe0802.htm#page_17).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](sbe0822)
