[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0861)  [Next](sbe0863) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

# CHAPTER XXXV.

Brahman said:

Well then, I will declare to you what you ask of me, O best (of men)!
Learn what a preceptor told a pupil who went to him. Hearing it all,
deliberate on it properly. Non-destruction of all creatures, that is
deemed to be the greatest duty <span id="fr_1961"></span>[1](#fn_1953).
This is the highest seat <span id="fr_1962"></span>[2](#fn_1954), free
from vexation and holy in character. The ancients who perceived the
established (truth) call knowledge the highest happiness. Therefore by
pure knowledge one is released from all sins. And those who are
constantly engaged in destruction, and who are infidels <span
id="fr_1963"></span>[3](#fn_1955) in their conduct, and who entertain
avarice and delusion, go verily to hell. Those who without sloth perform
actions with expectations, rejoice in this world, being born again and
again. But those wise and talented men, who perform actions with faith,
free from any connexion with expectations, perceive correctly <span
id="fr_1964"></span>[4](#fn_1956). Now I will proceed to, state how the
association and dissociation of Kshetra*g*ña and nature (take place).
Learn that, O best (of men)! The relation here is said to be that
between the object and subject <span id="fr_1965"></span>[5](#fn_1957).
The subject

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

is always the being, and nature is stated to be the object. It has been
explained in the above mode, as (having the relation) of the gnat and
the udumbara <span id="fr_1966"></span>[1](#fn_1958). Nature which is
non-intelligent knows nothing, though it is the object of
enjoyment <span id="fr_1967"></span>[2](#fn_1959). Who enjoys and what
is enjoyed <span id="fr_1968"></span>[3](#fn_1960) is learnt from the
*S*âstras. Nature is said always to abound in the pairs of opposites,
and to be constituted of the qualities; the Kshetra*g*ña is free from
the pairs of opposites, devoid of parts, and in essence free from the
qualities. He abides in everything alike <span
id="fr_1969"></span>[4](#fn_1961), and is connected with (all)
knowledge <span id="fr_1970"></span>[5](#fn_1962); and he always enjoys
nature as a lotus-leaf (enjoys) water. Even brought into contact with
all qualities, a learned man remains untainted <span
id="fr_1971"></span>[6](#fn_1963). There is no doubt that the being is
unattached just like the unsteady drop of water placed upon a
lotus-leaf <span id="fr_1972"></span>[7](#fn_1964). It is established
that nature is the property <span id="fr_1973"></span>[8](#fn_1965) of
the being. And the relation of the two is like that of matter and the
maker <span id="fr_1974"></span>[9](#fn_1966). As one goes into (a) dark
(place) taking a light (with him), so those who wish for the supreme go
with the light of nature <span id="fr_1975"></span>[10](#fn_1967). While
there is oil

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

and wick <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1](#fn_1968), the light shines; but
the flame is extinguished when the oil and wick are exhausted. Thus
nature is perceived <span id="fr_1977"></span>[2](#fn_1969); the being
is laid down (as being) unperceived. Understand this, O Brâhma*n*as!
Well now, I will tell you something more. One who has a bad
understanding does not acquire knowledge even with a thousand
(admonitions). And one who is possessed of knowledge enhances (his)
happiness even with a fourth share <span
id="fr_1978"></span>[3](#fn_1970). Thus should one understand the
accomplishment of piety by (apt) means. For the talented man who knows
(these) means, attains supreme happiness <span
id="fr_1979"></span>[4](#fn_1971). As a man travelling along some way
without provisions for the journey, travels with great discomfort, and
may even be destroyed on the way, so should one understand, that by
action <span id="fr_1980"></span>[5](#fn_1972) the fruit is or is not
produced. For a man to see within (his) self <span
id="fr_1981"></span>[6](#fn_1973) what is agreeable and what is
disagreeable to him is good. And as one who is devoid of a perception of
the truth rashly travels on foot by a long way unseen before <span
id="fr_1982"></span>[7](#fn_1974), while (another) goes by the same

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

way in a carriage <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1](#fn_1975) drawn by
horses, and going swiftly, such is the progress of the men of
understanding. Having climbed up a mountain one should not look at the
surface of the earth <span id="fr_1984"></span>[2](#fn_1976). One sees a
man travelling in a chariot, and void of intelligence, afflicted by
reason of the chariot. As far as there is a carriage-path, he goes in
the carriage; where the carriage-path stops, a learned man goes on
abandoning the carriage. So travels the talented man, who understands
the procedure respecting (knowledge of the) truth and devotion <span
id="fr_1985"></span>[3](#fn_1977), and who knows about the qualities,
comprehending the gradations <span id="fr_1986"></span>[4](#fn_1978) one
above the other. As one who without a boat dives into the ocean with his
arms only, through delusion, undoubtedly wishes for destruction; while a
wise man likewise knowing distinctions <span
id="fr_1987"></span>[5](#fn_1979) and having a boat with good oars, goes
in the water without fatigue, and soon crosses the reservoir, and having
crossed (it) goes to the other shore, throwing

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

aside the boat, and devoid of (the thought that this or that is) mine.
This has been already explained by the parallel of the carriage and
pedestrian. One who has come by delusion through affection, adheres to
that like a fisherman to his boat, being overcome by (the thought that
this or that is) mine. It is not possible to move on land after
embarking in a boat. And likewise one cannot move in water after
entering a carriage. Thus there are various actions in regard to
different objects <span id="fr_1988"></span>[1](#fn_1980). And as action
is performed in this world, so does it result to them <span
id="fr_1989"></span>[2](#fn_1981). That which sages by their
understanding meditate upon, which is void of any smell whatever, void
of taste, and void of colour, touch, or sound, that is called the
Pradhâna <span id="fr_1990"></span>[3](#fn_1982). Now that Pradhâna is
unperceived; a development of the unperceived is the Mahat; and a
development of the Pradhâna (when it is) become Mahat is egoism. From
egoism is produced the development, namely, the great elements; and of
the elements respectively, objects of sense are verily stated to be the
development <span id="fr_1991"></span>[4](#fn_1983). The unperceived is
of the nature of seed <span id="fr_1992"></span>[5](#fn_1984), and also
productive in its essence. And we have heard

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

that the great self is of the nature of seed and a product. Egoism is of
the nature of seed and a product also again and again. And the five
great elements are verily of the nature of seed and products. The
objects of the five elements are of the nature of seed <span
id="fr_1993"></span>[1](#fn_1985), but they do not yield products. Learn
about their properties. Now space has one quality, air is said to have
two qualities; it is said that light has three qualities; and water,
too, is of four qualities; and earth, abounding with movables and
immovables, the divine source of all entities, full of examples of
agreeable and disagreeable (things), should be understood to be of five
qualities <span id="fr_1994"></span>[2](#fn_1986). Sound, touch, colour
likewise, taste, and smell as the fifth--these, O best of the
twice-born! should be understood to be the five qualities of earth.
Smell always belongs to the earth <span
id="fr_1995"></span>[3](#fn_1987); and smell is stated to be (of)
numerous descriptions. I will state at length the numerous qualities of
smell <span id="fr_1996"></span>[4](#fn_1988). Smell is agreeable or
disagreeable, sweet, sour, and bitter likewise, diffusive and compact
also, soft, and rough, and clear also, <span
id="fr_1997"></span>[5](#fn_1989)--thus should

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

smell, which belongs to the earth, be understood to be of ten
descriptions. Sound, touch, and colour likewise, and taste, are stated
to be the qualities of water. I will now give (some) information about
taste. Taste is stated to be of numerous descriptions. Sweet <span
id="fr_1998"></span>[1](#fn_1990), sour, bitter, sharp, astringent, and
saltish likewise-thus are the forms of taste, which is a development of
water, said to be of six descriptions. Sound, touch, and likewise
colour; thus is light said to have three qualities. The quality of light
is colour, and colour is stated to be of numerous descriptions. White,
black, red likewise, green, yellow, and grey likewise, short long,
narrow <span id="fr_1999"></span>[2](#fn_1991), broad, square, and
circular-thus is the colour of light said to be of twelve forms. It
should be understood <span id="fr_2000"></span>[3](#fn_1992) by aged
Brâhma*n*as, who speak the truth, and are conversant with piety. Sound
and touch also should be understood; air is said to have (these) two
qualities. And touch is the quality of air, and touch is stated to be of
numerous descriptions. Rough, cold and hot likewise, tender and clear
also, hard, glutinous, smooth, slippery, hurtful, and soft <span
id="fr_2001"></span>[4](#fn_1993)--thus the quality of air is properly
said by Brâhma*n*as who have reached perfection, who are conversant with
piety and perceive the truth, to be of twelve descriptions. Now space
has one quality,

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

and that is stated to be sound only. I will speak at length of the
numerous qualities of sound. Sha*dg*a, *Ri*shabha, together with
Gândhâra, Madhyama, and likewise Pañ*k*ama, and beyond. these should be
understood to be Nishâda and Dhaivata likewise <span
id="fr_2002"></span>[1](sbe0863.htm#fn_1994); agreeable and disagreeable
sound also, compact, and of (many) ingredients <span
id="fr_2003"></span>[2](sbe0863.htm#fn_1995). Thus sound, which is
produced in space, should be understood to be of ten descriptions. Space
is the highest element <span
id="fr_2004"></span>[3](sbe0863.htm#fn_1996), egoism is above that;
above egoism is understanding, and above that understanding is the
self <span id="fr_2005"></span>[4](sbe0863.htm#fn_1997); above that is
the unperceived, and above the unperceived is the being. One who knows
which is superior and inferior among entities, and who knows the proper
procedure in all actions, and who identifies himself with every
being <span id="fr_2006"></span>[5](sbe0863.htm#fn_1998), repairs to the
imperishable self.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[378:1](sbe0862.htm#fr_1961) See [p.
291](sbe0840.htm#page_291) supra, and note  [3](sbe0840.htm#fn_1407)
there.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[378:2](sbe0862.htm#fr_1962) So literally; the
sense is--that which one is to aim at.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[378:3](sbe0862.htm#fr_1963) The original is
nâstika, the contrary of that 'âstikya,' which at Gîtâ, [p.
126](sbe0820.htm#page_126), we have rendered by 'belief (in a future
world),' following *S*rîdhara. Râmânu*g*a, whose commentary came to hand
too late for any other than a very occasional use in the translation of
the Gîtâ, renders it by 'belief in the truth of the teaching of the
Vedas'.

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[378:4](sbe0862.htm#fr_1964) I. e. learn the
truth.

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[378:5](sbe0862.htm#fr_1965) I use the terms
subject and object here in the philosophical sense explained by Sir W.
Hamilton, viz. the thinking agent and the object of thought
respectively. And cf. also the passage referred to in note
 [3](#fn_1960) on [p. 379](#page_379) infra.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[379:1](sbe0862.htm#fr_1966) [p.
374](sbe0860.htm#page_374) supra. The relation is one of close
connexion, coupled with some identity of nature (because, says
Nîlaka*nth*a, an entirely extraneous thing could not get into the inside
of the fruit, and the gnat's body therefore must have come from the
fruit itself), but still the elements are distinct.

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[379:2](sbe0862.htm#fr_1967) See [p.
371](sbe0859.htm#page_371), supra, note  [4](sbe0859.htm#fn_1915).

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[379:3](sbe0862.htm#fr_1968) Cf. Maitrî, p.
109.

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[379:4](sbe0862.htm#fr_1969) Cf. Gîtâ, pp.
[105](sbe0815.htm#page_105), [106](sbe0815.htm#page_106).

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[379:5](sbe0862.htm#fr_1970) Knowledge of the
Kshetra*g*ña forms part of all real knowledge. Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra's
reading and interpretation are different. He says, 'As he is seen coming
to light everywhere alike, so,' &c.

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[379:6](sbe0862.htm#fr_1971) Cf. Gîtâ, pp.
[55](sbe0805.htm#page_55)-[110](sbe0816.htm#page_110).

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[379:7](sbe0862.htm#fr_1972) Again the common
simile.

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[379:8](sbe0862.htm#fr_1973) The original is
dravya, rendered 'matter' in the next sentence. Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra
paraphrases it by 'upakarana,' paraphernalia.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[379:9](sbe0862.htm#fr_1974) So the original,
the sense is not clear. But see *S*vetâ*s*vatara, p. 368.

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[379:10](sbe0862.htm#fr_1975) Knowledge,
which, says Nîlaka*nth*a, is a manifestation of nature. Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra
says the knowledge of the truth which the <span id="page_380">p.
380</span> self acquires is by means of nature. Cf. Sânkhya-kârikâ 56,
and comment.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[380:1](sbe0862.htm#fr_1976) So Nîlaka*nth*a.
Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra does not take gu*n*a here to mean 'wick.'

<span id="fn_1969"></span>[380:2](sbe0862.htm#fr_1977) I. e., I presume,
in its manifestations; it is perceived for some time and then vanishes.
Cf. Sâ<u>n</u>khya-kârikâ 59-61; the Purusha is not 'perceived' in this
sense.

<span id="fn_1970"></span>[380:3](sbe0862.htm#fr_1978) Viz. of
admonition, Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra.

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[380:4](sbe0862.htm#fr_1979) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
70](sbe0808.htm#page_70), where the same phrase occurs.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[380:5](sbe0862.htm#fr_1980) The fruit of this
is uncertain; knowledge which is in one's self is the thing to be worked
for.

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[380:6](sbe0862.htm#fr_1981) I. e. the mind,
Nîlaka*nth*a. The meaning is, he should not care for external pleasure
and pain. Cf. Gîtâ, inter alia, [p. 50](sbe0804.htm#page_50).

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[380:7](sbe0862.htm#fr_1982) This seems to be
so left imperfect in the original. The construction seems to be this:
the progress of the latter is as great as that of one who drives in a
chariot as compared with that of one who goes on foot with much
suffering. Cf. the construction on next page.

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[381:1](sbe0862.htm#fr_1983) I. e. the
Sâstras, says Nîlaka*nth*a. Cf. Gîtâ, [p. 117](sbe0818.htm#page_117).

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[381:2](sbe0862.htm#fr_1984) When one has
arrived at knowledge,--the highest seat, says Nîlaka*nth*a,--one need
not perform the dictates of the Sâstras, which are only preliminary to
the acquisition of knowledge. Cf. Gîtâ, pp. [48](sbe0804.htm#page_48),
[73](sbe0808.htm#page_73). Cf. as to this figure of the chariot and the
next one about the boat, B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 695.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[381:3](sbe0862.htm#fr_1985) I adopt
Ar*g*una's rendering of the original here, viz. Yoga. The meaning, on
that rendering, is the same as it is in the Gîtâ.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[381:4](sbe0862.htm#fr_1986) According to
Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra, action with desire, action without desire, and lastly,
knowledge. According to Nîlaka*nth*a, action laid down in the *S*âstras,
then Yoga, and then the condition of Ha*m*sa, Paramaha*m*sa, &c.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[381:5](sbe0862.htm#fr_1987) Literally, one
knowing divisions. I presume the meaning is distinctions between various
things as to which suits which, and so forth. The boat, says
Nîlaka*nth*a, is a preceptor, and even a preceptor is not to be sought
for after a man has achieved Yoga; hence the text proceeds to speak
further on of casting aside the boat. Wishes for destruction = is sure
to meet destruction.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[382:1](sbe0862.htm#fr_1988) I. e.
appertaining to the various orders of householders, &c., Nîlaka*nth*a.
But I am not aware of any authority for this sense of vishaya.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[382:2](sbe0862.htm#fr_1989) I. e. those who
perform them.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[382:3](sbe0862.htm#fr_1990) Nîlaka*nth*a
says, 'Having stated above the means of knowledge, he now states the
proper object of knowledge.'

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[382:4](sbe0862.htm#fr_1991) See [p.
332](sbe0852.htm#page_332) supra. The original for development is
gu*n*a, literally quality.

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[382:5](sbe0862.htm#fr_1992) The meaning of
this passage seems to be identical with that of Sâ<u>n</u>khya-kârikâ 3.
Productive (Prasavâtmakam) is probably to be explained as Prasavadharmi
is at Sâ<u>n</u>khya-kârikâ II (see commentary of Vâ*k*aspati, pp. 59,
60), viz. always undergoing development. The great elements are of
course the tanmâtras.

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[383:1](sbe0862.htm#fr_1993) This is not
clear, unless 'product' above means productive, and seed means a
product, it being a product of the a<u>n</u>kura or sprout. Nîlaka*nth*a
says, 'seed = cause; product = effect. The unperceived is an effect, and
so the contrary doctrine of the Sâ<u>n</u>khya is here shown to be
wrong. The objects are causes, as their enjoyment causes an impression.'

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[383:2](sbe0862.htm#fr_1994) See pp.
[285](sbe0839.htm#page_285), [286](sbe0839.htm#page_286) supra.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[383:3](sbe0862.htm#fr_1995) That is to say,
smell is the special property of the earth only, the other qualities are
common to it with the other elements. The word in the original is guna
or quality everywhere.

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[383:4](sbe0862.htm#fr_1996) See *S*ânti
Parvan (Moksha Dharma), chap. 184, st. 27.

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[383:5](sbe0862.htm#fr_1997) Bitter,
Nîlaka*nth*a exemplifies by the smell of the chili, apparently
interpreting ka*t*vi, as it may be interpreted, to mean sharp; diffusive
= overcoming all other smells, like Asafoetida; compact = made up of
many smells, Nîlaka*nth*a adds, that soft is like that of <span
id="page_384">p. 384</span> liquid ghee, rough of the oil of mustard,
and clear as of cooked rice. The *S*ânti Parvan passage omits 'sour.'

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[384:1](sbe0862.htm#fr_1998) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
118](sbe0819.htm#page_118).

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[384:2](sbe0862.htm#fr_1999) Literally, lean
and fat. These are rather unusual qualities to attribute to colour. The
*S*ânti Parvan passage gives more.

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[384:3](sbe0862.htm#fr_2000) Sic. Does it mean
'it is understood?' Cf. Pâ*n*ini III, 3, 113.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[384:4](sbe0862.htm#fr_2001) Tender = like the
touch of a son, &c.; clear = like that of an excellent cloth,
Nîlaka*nth*a; glutinous = like that of oil, smooth = like that of a gem;
slippery = not really smooth, but appearing to be such, like that of
saliva (?), Ar*g*una Mi*s*ra. The enumeration of these in the *S*ânti
Parvan loc. cit. is again different.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](sbe0863)
