[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0824)  [Next](sbe0826) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV.

Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra said.

O Sanatsu*g*âta! since you have spoken these words of highest
significance, relating to the Brahman, and of numerous forms <span
id="fr_820"></span>[4](#fn_815), give me that advice which is excellent,
and difficult to obtain in the

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

midst of these created objects <span id="fr_821"></span>[1](#fn_816).
Such is my request, O youth!

Sanatsu*g*âta said:

This Brahman, O king! about which you question me with such
perseverance, is not to be attained by anybody who is in a hurry. When
the mind is absorbed in the understanding <span
id="fr_822"></span>[2](#fn_817), then can that knowledge, which must be
deeply pondered over, be attained by living the life of a
Brahma*k*ârin <span id="fr_823"></span>[3](#fn_818). For you are
speaking of that primordial knowledge <span
id="fr_824"></span>[4](#fn_819), which consists in the truth; which is
obtained by the good by living the life of Brahma*k*ârins <span
id="fr_825"></span>[5](#fn_820); which being obtained, men cast off this
mortal world; and which knowledge, verily, is to be invariably (found)
in those who have been brought up under preceptors <span
id="fr_826"></span>[6](#fn_821).

Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra said

Since that knowledge is capable of being truly acquired by living the
life of a Brahma*k*ârin, therefore tell me, O Brâhma*n*a! of what
description the life of a Brahma*k*ârin is <span
id="fr_827"></span>[7](#fn_822).

Sanatsu*g*âta said:

Those who entering (as it were) the womb <span
id="fr_828"></span>[8](#fn_823) of a

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

preceptor, and becoming (as it were) a fœtus, practise the life of
Brahma*k*ârins, become even in this world authors of Sâstras <span
id="fr_829"></span>[1](#fn_824), and they repair to the highest
truth <span id="fr_830"></span>[2](#fn_825) after casting off (this)
body. They subjugate desires here in this world, practising forbearance
in pursuit of the Brahmic state <span id="fr_831"></span>[3](#fn_826);
and with courage, they even here remove the self out of the body <span
id="fr_832"></span>[4](#fn_827), like the soft fibres from the Muñ*g*a.
Father and mother, O descendant of Bharata! only form the body. But the
birth <span id="fr_833"></span>[5](#fn_828) obtained from the preceptor,
that verily is true <span id="fr_834"></span>[6](#fn_829), and likewise
immortal. He perfects <span id="fr_835"></span>[7](#fn_830) (one),
giving (one) immortality. Recognising what he has done (for one), one
should not injure him. The disciple should always make obeisance to the
preceptor <span id="fr_836"></span>[8](#fn_831); and, free from
heedlessness, should always desire sacred instruction. When the pure man
obtains knowledge by this same course of discipleship <span
id="fr_837"></span>[9](#fn_832), that is the first quarter of his life
as a Brahma*k*ârin. As (is) his conduct

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

always towards his preceptor, so likewise should he behave towards the
preceptor's wife, and so likewise should he act towards the preceptor's
son--(that) is said to be the second quarter. What one, recognising what
the preceptor has done for one, and understanding the matter <span
id="fr_838"></span>[1](#fn_833) (taught), feels with a delighted heart
regarding the preceptor--believing that one has been brought into
existence <span id="fr_839"></span>[2](#fn_834) by him--that is the
third quarter of life as a Brahma*k*ârin. One should do what is
agreeable to the preceptor, by means of one's life and riches, and in
deed, thought, and word <span id="fr_840"></span>[3](#fn_835)--that is
said to be the fourth quarter. (A disciple) obtains a quarter by
time <span id="fr_841"></span>[4](#fn_836), so likewise a quarter by
associating with the preceptor, he also obtains a quarter by means of
his own energy; and then he attains to a quarter by means of the
Sâstras. The life as a Brahma*k*ârin of that man, whose beauty <span
id="fr_842"></span>[5](#fn_837) consists in the twelve beginning with
knowledge, and whose limbs are the other (qualifications mentioned), and
who has

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

strength <span id="fr_843"></span>[1](#fn_838), bears fruit, they say,
by association with a preceptor, in (the shape of) contact with that
entity--the Brahman. Whatever wealth may come to man who lives in this
way, he should even pay that over to the preceptor. He would thus be
adopting the conduct of the good which is of many merits; and the same
conduct is (to be adopted) towards the preceptor's son. Living thus, he
prospers greatly <span id="fr_844"></span>[2](#fn_839) on all sides in
this world; he obtains sons and position; the quarters <span
id="fr_845"></span>[3](#fn_840) and sub-quarters shower (benefits <span
id="fr_846"></span>[4](#fn_841)) on him, and men pass their lives as
Brahma*k*ârins under him. By this life as a Brahma*k*ârin, the
divinities obtained their divinity. And the sages, too, became great by
living the life of Brahma*k*ârins. By this same (means), too, the
Apsarasas, together with the Gandharvas, achieved for themselves
beautiful forms. And by this life as a Brahma*k*ârin, the sun
illuminates (the universe). That man of knowledge, O king! who
practising penance, may by penance pierce through or tear off his body,
crosses beyond childhood <span id="fr_847"></span>[5](#fn_842) by means
of this (life as a Brahma*k*ârin), and at the time of the termination
(of life) obstructs death <span id="fr_848"></span>[6](#fn_843). Those
who understand this (life as a Brahma*k*ârin) attain to a

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

condition like that of those who as (for what they want) from the
wish-giving stone <span id="fr_849"></span>[1](#fn_844), when they
obtain the thing desired. By performing action, O Kshatriya! people
conquer (for themselves only) perishable worlds <span
id="fr_850"></span>[2](#fn_845). (But) the man of understanding attains
by knowledge to the everlasting glory--for there is no other way to
it <span id="fr_851"></span>[3](#fn_846).

Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra said:

Where a Brâhma*n*a possessed of knowledge, perceives it, does it appear
as white <span id="fr_852"></span>[4](#fn_847), as red, or again as
black, or again as grey or tawny? What is the colour of that immortal,
indestructible goal?

Sanatsu*g*âta said:

It appears not as white, as red, nor again as black, nor again as grey,
nor tawny <span id="fr_853"></span>[5](#fn_848). It dwells not on earth,
nor in the sky; nor does it bear a body in this ocean <span
id="fr_854"></span>[6](#fn_849) (-like world). It is not in the stars,
nor does it dwell in the lightning; nor is its form <span
id="fr_855"></span>[7](#fn_850) to be seen in the clouds, nor even in
the air, nor in the deities; it is not to be seen in the moon, nor in
the sun. It is not to be seen in *Rik* texts, nor in

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

Ya*g*us texts; nor yet in the Atharvan texts, nor in the pure Sâman
texts; nor yet, O king, in the Rathantara or B*ri*hadratha <span
id="fr_856"></span>[1](#fn_851) hymns. It is seen in the self of a man
of high vows <span id="fr_857"></span>[2](#fn_852). It is invincible,
beyond darkness <span id="fr_858"></span>[3](#fn_853), it comes forth
from within <span id="fr_859"></span>[4](#fn_854) at the time of
destruction. Its form is minuter than the minutest (things), its form is
larger even than the mountains <span id="fr_860"></span>[5](#fn_855).
That is the support <span id="fr_861"></span>[6](#fn_856) (of the
universe); that is immortal; (that is) all things perceptible <span
id="fr_862"></span>[7](#fn_857). That is the Brahman, that is
glory <span id="fr_863"></span>[8](#fn_858). From that all entities were
produced <span id="fr_864"></span>[9](#fn_859), in that they are
dissolved. All this shines forth as dwelling in it in the form of
light <span id="fr_865"></span>[10](#fn_860). And it is perceived by
means of knowledge <span id="fr_866"></span>[11](#fn_861) by one who
understands the self; on it depends this whole universe. Those who
understand this become immortal.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

CHAPTER V. <span id="fr_867"></span>[1](#fn_862)

Grief and wrath, and avarice, desire, delusion, laziness, want of
forgiveness, vanity, craving, friendship <span
id="fr_868"></span>[2](#fn_863), censoriousness, and reviling
others--these twelve great enormities are destructive of a man's life.
These, O king of kings! attend on each and every man. Beset by these, a
man, deluded in his understanding, acts sinfully. A man full of
attachments, merciless, harsh (of speech), talkative, cherishing wrath
in his heart, and boastful--these are the men of cruel qualities; (such)
persons, even obtaining wealth, do not always enjoy (it) <span
id="fr_869"></span>[3](#fn_864).

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

One whose thoughts are fixed on enjoyments, who is partial <span
id="fr_870"></span>[1](#fn_865), proud <span
id="fr_871"></span>[2](#fn_866), boastful when he makes a gift, miserly,
and devoid of power <span id="fr_872"></span>[3](#fn_867), who esteems
the group (of the senses), and who hates (his) wife--thus have been
stated the seven (classes of) cruel persons of sinful dispositions.
Piety, and truthfulness, and penance, and self-restraint, freedom from
animosity, modesty, endurance, freedom from censoriousness, liberality,
sacred learning, courage, forgiveness--these are the twelve great
observances of a Brâhma*n*a. Whoever does not swerve from these twelve
may govern this whole world. And one who is possessed of three, two, or
even one, of these, must be understood to have nothing of his own <span
id="fr_873"></span>[4](#fn_868). Self-restraint, abandonment, freedom
from delusion, on these immortality depends <span
id="fr_874"></span>[5](#fn_869). These are possessed by those talented
Brâhma*n*as to whom the Brahman is the principal <span
id="fr_875"></span>[6](#fn_870) (thing). A Brâhma*n*a's speaking ill of
others, whether true or false, is not commended.

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The men who act thus have their places in hell.
Frenzy has eighteen defects--as already described here--hatred of men,
factiousness <span id="fr_876"></span>[1](#fn_871), censoriousness,
untruthful speech, lust, wrath, wand of self-control <span
id="fr_877"></span>[2](#fn_872), speaking ill of others, backbiting,
mismanagement in business <span id="fr_878"></span>[3](#fn_873),
quarrelsomeness, animosity, troubling living creatures, want of
forgiveness, delusion, flippancy, loss of reason <span
id="fr_879"></span>[4](#fn_874), censoriousness <span
id="fr_880"></span>[5](#fn_875); therefore a wise man should not be
subject to frenzy, for it is always censured. Six characteristics should
be understood as (belonging) to friendship--that one should rejoice at
(anything) agreeable, and feel grieved at (anything) disagreeable; that
with a pure heart one, when asked by a deserving (man), should give to
him who asks what can <span id="fr_881"></span>[6](#fn_876) certainly be
given, (though it) may be beneficial to oneself, and even though it
ought not to be asked, (namely) ones favourites, sons, wealth, and one's
own wife; that one should not dwell there where one has bestowed (all
one's) wealth, through a desire (to get a return for one's liberality);
that one should enjoy (the

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

fruit of one's <span id="fr_882"></span>[1](#fn_877) own) toils (only);
and that one should forego one's own profit <span
id="fr_883"></span>[2](#fn_878). Such a man, possessed of wealth, and
possessed of merits, is a liberal man of the quality of goodness <span
id="fr_884"></span>[3](#fn_879); such a one diverts the five elements
from the five <span id="fr_885"></span>[4](#fn_880) (senses). This <span
id="fr_886"></span>[5](#fn_881) pure penance, acquired out of
desire <span id="fr_887"></span>[6](#fn_882) by those who are. fallen
off from the truth, even though developed, leads upwards <span
id="fr_888"></span>[7](#fn_883); since sacrifices are performed owing to
a misapprehension of the truth <span id="fr_889"></span>[8](#fn_884).
(The

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

sacrifices) of some are by the mind, of others by speech, and also by
deed. The man void of fancies takes precedence over the man perfected by
fancies,--especially among Brâhma*n*as <span
id="fr_890"></span>[1](#fn_885). And hear this further from me. One
should teach this great and glorious <span
id="fr_891"></span>[2](#fn_886) (doctrine); (other doctrines) the wise
call mere arrangements of words. On this, concentration of mind <span
id="fr_892"></span>[3](#fn_887), all this <span
id="fr_893"></span>[4](#fn_888) depends. Those who know this become
immortal. Not by meritorious action only, O king! does one conquer the
truth <span id="fr_894"></span>[5](#fn_889). One may offer offerings, or
sacrifice. By that the child(-like man) does not cross beyond death;
nor, O king! does he obtain happiness in his last moments <span
id="fr_895"></span>[6](#fn_890). One should practise devotion quietly,
and should not be active even in the mind <span
id="fr_896"></span>[7](#fn_891); and then one should avoid delight and
wrath (resulting) from praise and censure <span
id="fr_897"></span>[8](#fn_892). I say to you, O learned person! that
adhering to this <span id="fr_898"></span>[9](#fn_893), one attains the
Brahman and perceives it, O Kshatriya! by a course (of study) of the
Vedas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_812"></span>[174:1](sbe0824.htm#fr_817) This again is not
clear, and the discrepancies of the MSS. make it more perplexing. The
meaning, I take to be, that a man may perceive all material things, such
as the worlds, Bhûr, &c. (as the commentators put it), but to be really
omniscient, you must have knowledge of the truth--the Brahman. See Sabhâ
Parvan, chapter V, stanza 7. And see, too, B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 613.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[174:2](sbe0824.htm#fr_818) P. [p.
167](sbe0824.htm#page_167) supra.

<span id="fn_814"></span>[174:3](sbe0824.htm#fr_819) Hearing the
Vedântas--Upanishads,' &c,, says *S*a<u>n</u>kara. See note supra, [p.
173](sbe0824.htm#page_173).

<span id="fn_815"></span>[174:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_820) Does this mean
referring to many aspects of the Brahman? *S*a<u>n</u>kara merely says
nânârûpâ. Nîlaka*nth*a takes it differently, and as meaning that in
which everything is elucidated; 'relating to the Brahman' Nîlaka*nth*a
takes to mean 'leading to the Brahman,' or 'instrument for attaining to
the Brahman.'

<span id="fn_816"></span>[175:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_821) In this material
world, the highest knowledge is not to be got. Cf. Ka*th*a, p. 96.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[175:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_822) I. e. withdrawn
from objects and fixed on the self only. Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
79](sbe0810.htm#page_79), and Maitrî, p. 179, where, however, we have
h*ri*d for buddhi.

<span id="fn_818"></span>[175:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_823) Viro*k*ana and
Indra do so according to the *Kh*ândogya, p. 570 See also Mu*nd*aka, p.
311.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[175:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_824) The object of which
is the primal Brahman.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[175:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_825) Cf. *Kh*ândogya, p.
534; and Gîtâ, pp. [78](sbe0810.htm#page_78), [79](sbe0810.htm#page_79),
and the passage from the Ka*th*a there cited.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[175:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_826) *Kh*ândogya, pp.
264-459.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[175:7](sbe0825.htm#fr_827) See *Kh*ândogya, p.
553 seq.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[175:8](sbe0825.htm#fr_828) I. e. attending
closely upon him; fœtus = pupil.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[176:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_829) Learned, men of
knowledge, *S*a<u>n</u>kara.

<span id="fn_825"></span>[176:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_830) The supreme, 'which
is described as 'truth, knowledge,' &c. In our ancient works the truth
often means the real.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[176:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_831) The state of being
absorbed in the Brahman. Cf. Gîtâ, [p. 52](sbe0804.htm#page_52).

<span id="fn_827"></span>[176:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_832) Cf. Ka*th*a, p.
158.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[176:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_833) *S*a<u>n</u>kara
cites Âpastamba (p. 11) in support of this, and Pra*s*na-upanishad, p.
256. The consciousness of being one with the Brahman is a new birth.
See, too, Mu*nd*aka, p. 282.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[176:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_834) That birth is not
merely delusive, and does not result in death.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[176:7](sbe0825.htm#fr_835) Immortality or
final emancipation is not to be achieved without knowledge, which can
only be got from a preceptor. And one is not perfect without that
immortality; one is limited by the conditions of human existence. See
Nirukta (Roth's ed.), p. 41.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[176:8](sbe0825.htm#fr_836) *S*a<u>n</u>kara
compares *S*vetâ*s*vatara, p. 374. The necessity of having a Guru is
often insisted on even in the Upanishads. Cf. Mu*nd*aka, p. 282;
*Kh*ândogya, p. 264.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[176:9](sbe0825.htm#fr_837) Stated at the
beginning of this speech, *S*a<u>n</u>kara.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[177:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_838) The meaning of the
Vedic texts, &c., *S*a<u>n</u>kara in one copy; the highest aim of man,
according to another copy.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[177:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_839) See note on [p.
176](#page_176).

<span id="fn_835"></span>[177:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_840) I keep the order of
the original, though I do not translate quite literally; 'thought and
word' should be literally mind and speech.' See, on the collocation,
Gîtâ, [p. 123](sbe0820.htm#page_123) inter alia.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[177:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_841) Time = maturity of
understanding which comes by time; energy = intellectual power;
*S*âstras = consultation about *S*âstras with
fellow-students--*S*a<u>n</u>kara, who adds that the order is not
material as stated, and quotes a stanza which may be thus rendered, 'The
pupil receives a quarter from the preceptor, a quarter by his own
talent; he receives a quarter by time; and a quarter through
fellow-Brahma*k*ârins.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[177:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_842) The body being
disregarded, these qualities are attributed to the self in this way. For
the twelve, see [p. 167](sbe0824.htm#page_167); the others are
abandonment, truthfulness, &c., [p. 169](sbe0824.htm#page_169).

<span id="fn_838"></span>[178:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_843) To observe the
duties referred to, *S*a<u>n</u>kara. But see, too, [p.
167](sbe0824.htm#page_167), note .

<span id="fn_839"></span>[178:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_844) Obtains wealth,
learning, and greatness,' says a commentator. For similar benefits, cf.
*Kh*ândogya, p. 122.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[178:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_845) Cf. *Kh*ândogya, p.
132.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[178:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_846) 'Wealth,' says
Nîlaka*nth*a, as well as another commentator.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[178:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_847) Ignorance; cf. note
at [p. 154](sbe0823.htm#page_154) supra. Nîlaka*nth*a reads 'reaches'
instead of 'crosses beyond,' and interprets 'bâlya' to mean 'freedom
from affection, aversion,' &c. Cf. B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 605. As to the
divinity of divinities, cf. Taitt. Âra*n*. p. 886.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[178:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_848) Nîlaka*nth*a reads
'vanquishes death.' The meaning is, he reaches final emancipation. Cf.
[p. 154](sbe0823.htm#page_154) supra.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[179:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_849) Called
*K*intâma*n*i. The effect of Brahma*k*arya is that those who practise it
can get what they desire.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[179:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_850) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
76](sbe0809.htm#page_76); *Kh*ândogya, p. 538; Mu*nd*aka, p. 279.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[179:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_851) Cf.
*S*vetâ*s*vatara, p. 327.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[179:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_852) Cf.
B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 877.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[179:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_853) Cf. Ka*th*a, p.
119; and Mu*nd*aka, p. 267. As to its not dwelling in earth, sky, &c.,
*S*a<u>n</u>kara refers to *Kh*ândogya, p. 518, as implying that.

<span id="fn_849"></span>[179:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_854) Literally, 'it
bears no water in the ocean.' 'Water' is said by the commentators to
mean the five elements of which the body is composed. See Manu I, 5, and
*Kh*ândogya, p. 330. In the *S*vetâ*s*vatara it signifies mind (See p.
388). For ocean meaning world, or sa*m*sâra; cf. Aitareya-upanishad, p.
182.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[179:7](sbe0825.htm#fr_855) Here I do not
render rûpa by colour, as before.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[180:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_856) See Muir, Sanskrit
Texts, vol. i, p. 16; Tâ*nd*ya-brâhma*n*a, p. 838; Gîtâ, [p.
90](sbe0812.htm#page_90); and Kaushîtaki, p. 21. B*ri*hadratha =
Brihat-sâman (?).

<span id="fn_852"></span>[180:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_857) The twelve great
vows--knowledge, &c., mentioned above, see [p.
167](sbe0824.htm#page_167). Nîlaka*nth*a takes Mahâvrata to refer to the
sacrifice of that name. It is described in the Aitareya Âra*n*yaka.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[180:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_858) See Gîtâ, [p.
78](sbe0810.htm#page_78), note .

<span id="fn_854"></span>[180:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_859) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
82](sbe0811.htm#page_82), and Îsopanishad, p. 12.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[180:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_860) See Gîtâ, [p.
78](sbe0810.htm#page_78), note .

<span id="fn_856"></span>[180:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_861) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
113](sbe0817.htm#page_113); Ka*th*a p. 99.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[180:7](sbe0825.htm#fr_862) So Nîlaka*nth*a.
The original word ordinarily means 'worlds.'

<span id="fn_858"></span>[180:8](sbe0825.htm#fr_863) Cf.
*S*vetâ*s*vatara, p. 347.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[180:9](sbe0825.htm#fr_864) Cf. the famous
passage in the Taittirîya, p. 123: and also Mu*nd*aka, p. 289.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[180:10](sbe0825.htm#fr_865) The explanations
of the commentators are not quite clear as to the word ahnâ, 'in the
form of light.' Probably the meaning is: The universe depends on the
Brahman, and is, as it were, the light of the Brahman. *S*a<u>n</u>kara
compares the passages referred to at Gîtâ, [p.
112](sbe0817.htm#page_112), note .

<span id="fn_861"></span>[180:11](sbe0825.htm#fr_866) 'Not by means of
action,' says *S*a<u>n</u>kara.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[181:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_867) The whole of this
chapter is wanting in one of our copies of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's
commentary. In the copy published in the Mahâbhârata (Madras edition)
there is, however, this passage: 'Wrath &c. have been already explained,
still there are some differences here and there, and those only are now
explained.' The chapter is for the most part a repetition of what we
have already had. For such repetitions cf. B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, pp.
317-1016; 444-930. The same copy of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary gives
this general statement of the object of this and the next chapter: 'The
course of study of the science of the Brahman, in which knowledge is the
principal thing, and concentration of mind &c. are subsidiary, has been.
described. Now is described the course of study in which concentration
of mind is principal, and knowledge subsidiary. The first mode consists
in understanding the meaning of the word "you" by means of concentration
of mind, and then identifying it with the Brahman by means of a study of
the Upanishads; the second, in first intellectually understanding the
identity of the individual self and Brahman, by such study of the
Upanishads, and then realising the identity to consciousness by
contemplation, &c. In both modes the fruit is the same, and the means
are the same; and to show this, the merits and defects already stated
are here again declared.' This explanation is verbatim the same in
Nîlaka*nth*a's commentary.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[181:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_868) The original is
'pity,' which is explained to mean 'friendship' by *S*a<u>n</u>kara and
Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[181:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_869) 'Owing to there
being in it no enjoyment for the self,' says one <span id="page_182">p.
182</span> copy of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary. Another reading, which
is in the Madras edition and in Nîlaka*nth*a, may be rendered, 'even
obtaining benefits, they do not respect one (from whom they obtain
them).'

<span id="fn_865"></span>[182:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_870) The commentary says
the meaning is the same as that of the expression used in the
corresponding place before, viz. one who prospers by injuring others.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[182:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_871) One copy of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary takes this to mean one who thinks the
not-self to be the self. I adopt the other meaning, however, as
agreeing, with that of atimânî, which is the reading of some copies
instead of abhimânî.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[182:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_872) Nîlaka*nth*a reads
durbala and does not explain it. See [p. 167](sbe0824.htm#page_167).

<span id="fn_868"></span>[182:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_873) One commentator
says this means that he should not be supposed to have incurred the
demerit of having any attachment to this world. Nîlaka*nth*a says, he
gives up everything in the pursuit of even one of these observances.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[182:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_874) See [p.
168](sbe0824.htm#page_168).

<span id="fn_870"></span>[182:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_875) I. e. the goal to
be reached. The commentary takes Brahman to mean the Vedas, and the
whole, phrase to mean those who devote themselves to the performance of
actions stated in the Vedas.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[183:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_876) One copy of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary says this means 'obstructing other
people's acts of piety,' &c.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[183:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_877) One copy of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary says this means 'being given up to
intoxicating drinks,' &c.; another copy says, doing another's bidding
without thought.'

<span id="fn_873"></span>[183:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_878) One copy says this
means 'inattention to any work undertaken.,' another renders the
original by 'destruction of property, i.e. squandering it on dancers,'
&c.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[183:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_879) I. e.
discrimination between right and wrong.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[183:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_880) This seems to be
some error, for censoriousness' has occurred before. But neither the
texts nor the commentaries give any help to correct the error. Perhaps
the latter is to be distinguished as referring to the habit, and the
former only to sporadic acts, of censoriousness. These qualities, I
presume, constitute frenzy; they are not the 'defects.'

<span id="fn_876"></span>[183:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_881) I. e. where the
power to give exists.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[184:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_882) Not a friend's.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[184:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_883) For a friend.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[184:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_884) See Gîtâ, [p.
120](sbe0819.htm#page_120).

<span id="fn_880"></span>[184:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_885) The commentators
take this to mean objects of sense, and they interpret 'elements' before
to mean senses.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[184:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_886) 'Viz. the turning
away of the senses from their objects,' says one copy of
*S*a<u>n</u>kara.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[184:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_887) Scil. to enjoy the
higher enjoyments of superior worlds.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[184:7](sbe0825.htm#fr_888) I. e. to the higher
worlds; it does not lead to emancipation here.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[184:8](sbe0825.htm#fr_889) Cf. Mu*nd*aka, p.
277. I must own that I do not quite understand this passage, nor its
explanation as given in the commentaries. I do not quite see what the
penance here mentioned has to do with sacrifice, and yet the
commentators seem to take the words 'since sacrifices,' &c., with what
precedes them, not with what follows. Taking them,. however, with what
follows, it is difficult to explain the word 'since.' As far as I can
understand the passage I take the sense of it to be as follows: The
author having said that penance performed out of a particular motive
does not lead to final emancipation, he then proceeds to point out that
all 'action' or 'sacrifice' is due to an imperfect understanding of the
truth (cf. [p. 171](sbe0824.htm#page_171) supra), being mostly due to
some particular motive. Then he goes on to show the different classes of
sacrifice, and finally points out that he who is free from desires as
superior to one who is actuated by desires. The original for
'misapprehension' is avabodha, which commonly means 'apprehension,' but
*S*a<u>n</u>kara finally makes it mean moha or 'delusion.' The original
for truth is rendered by Nîlaka*nth*a to mean 'fancies.' Nîlaka*nth*a
says that the sacrifice by the mind is the highest; that by speech, viz.
Brahmaya*g*ña, *G*apa, &c., is middling; and that by deed, viz. with
clarified butter and other offerings, of the lowest class. 'Perfected by
fancies' = one whose fancies are always fulfilled 'through a knowledge,'
says Nîlaka*nth*a, 'of the Brahma as possessing qualities.'

<span id="fn_885"></span>[185:1](sbe0825.htm#fr_890) This also is far
from clear. Should it be, 'and a Brâhma*n*a more especially?' This might
be taken as referring to one who knows the Brahman as devoid of
qualities, as Nîlaka*nth*a does take it. But his construction is not
quite clear.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[185:2](sbe0825.htm#fr_891) As serviceable in
attaining to 'the glory,' the Brahman; see [p. 180](#page_180).

<span id="fn_887"></span>[185:3](sbe0825.htm#fr_892) See note at [p.
181](#page_181). As to 'arrangements of words,' cf. Maitrî, p. 179.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[185:4](sbe0825.htm#fr_893) 'Everything,' says
one copy of *S*a<u>n</u>kara's commentary; 'all that is good and
desirable,' says another.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[185:5](sbe0825.htm#fr_894) Cf. inter alia,
Mu*nd*aka, pp. 281-314.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[185:6](sbe0825.htm#fr_895) For he has got to
undergo migration from one life to another as the result of the action.
Cf. B*ri*hadâra*n*yaka, p. 856; Mu*nd*aka. p. 278.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[185:7](sbe0825.htm#fr_896) Cf. Gîtâ, [p.
70](sbe0808.htm#page_70).

<span id="fn_892"></span>[185:8](sbe0825.htm#fr_897) Ibid. pp.
[101](sbe0814.htm#page_101)-[110](sbe0816.htm#page_110).

<span id="fn_893"></span>[185:9](sbe0825.htm#fr_898) I. e. the yoga or
concentration of mind here described. This stanza, like many others in
this chapter, occurs in chapter III with slight variations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](sbe0826)
