[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0812)  [Next](sbe0814) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

# CHAPTER XI.

Ar*g*una said:

In consequence of the excellent and mysterious words concerning the
relation of the supreme and individual soul,, which you have spoken for
my welfare, this delusion of mine is gone away. O you whose eyes are
like lotus leaves! I have heard from you at large about the production
and dissolution of things, and also about your inexhaustible greatness.
O highest lord! what you have said about yourself is so. I wish, O best
of beings! to see your divine form. If, O lord! you think that it is
possible for me to look upon it, then, O lord of the possessors of
mystic power <span id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_387)! show your
inexhaustible form to me.

The Deity said:

In hundreds and in thousands see my forms, O son of P*ri*thâ! various,
divine, and of various colours and shapes. See the Âdityas, Vasus,
Rudras, the two A*s*vins, and Maruts likewise. And O descendant of
Bharata! see wonders, in numbers, unseen before. Within my body, O
Gu*d*âkesa! see to-day the whole universe, including (everything)
movable and immovable, (all) in one, and whatever else you wish to see.
But you will not be able to see me with merely, this eye of yours. I
give you an eye divine. (Now) see my divine power.

Sañ*g*aya said

Having spoken thus, O king! Hari, the great

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

lord of the possessors of mystic power, then showed to the son of
P*ri*thâ. his supreme divine form, having many mouths and eyes, having
(within it) many wonderful sights, having many celestial ornaments,
having many celestial weapons held erect, wearing celestial flowers and
vestments, having an anointment of celestial perfumes, full of every
wonder, the infinite deity with faces in all directions <span
id="fr_389"></span>[1](#fn_388). If in the heavens, the lustre of a
thousand suns burst forth all at once, that would be like the lustre of
that mighty one. There the son of Pâ*nd*u then observed in the body of
the god of gods the whole universe (all) in one, and divided into
numerous <span id="fr_390"></span>[2](#fn_389) (divisions). Then
Dhanañ*g*aya filled with amazement, and with hair standing on end, bowed
his head before the god, and spoke with joined hands.

Ar*g*una said:

O god! I see within your body the gods, as also all the groups of
various beings; and the lord Brahman seated on (his) lotus seat, and all
the sages and celestial snakes. I see you, who are of countless forms,
possessed of many arms, stomachs, mouths, and eyes on all sides. And, O
lord of the universe! O you of all forms! I do not see your end or
middle or beginning. I see you bearing a coronet and a mace and a
discus--a mass of glory, brilliant on all sides, difficult to look at,
having on

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

all sides the effulgence of a blazing fire or sun, and indefinable. You
are indestructible, the supreme one to be known. You are the highest
support <span id="fr_391"></span>[1](#fn_390) of this universe. You are
the inexhaustible protector of everlasting piety. I believe you to be
the eternal being. I see you void of beginning, middle, end--of infinite
power, of unnumbered arms, having the sun and moon for eyes, having a
mouth like a blazing fire, and heating the universe with your radiance.
For this space between heaven and earth and all the quarters are
pervaded by you alone. Looking at this wonderful and terrible form of
yours, O high-souled one! the three worlds are affrighted. For here
these groups of gods are entering into you. Some being afraid are
praying with joined hands, and the groups of great sages and Siddhas are
saying 'Welfare <span id="fr_392"></span>[2](#fn_391)!' and praising you
with abundant (hymns) of praise. The Rudras, and Âdityas, the Vasus, the
Sâdhyas, the Vi*s*vas, the two A*s*vins, the Maruts, and the Ushmapas,
and the groups of Gandharvas, Yakshas, demons, and Siddhas are all
looking at you amazed. Seeing your mighty form, with many mouths and
eyes, with many arms, thighs, and feet, with many stomachs, and fearful
with many jaws, all people, and I likewise, are much alarmed, O you of
mighty arms! Seeing you, O Vish*n*u! touching the skies, radiant,
possessed of many hues, with a gaping mouth, and with large blazing
eyes, I am much alarmed in my inmost self, and feel no courage, no
tranquillity.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And seeing your mouths terrible by the jaws, and
resembling the fire of destruction, I cannot recognise the (various)
directions, I feel no comfort. Be gracious, O lord of gods! who
pervadest the universe. And all these sons of Dh*ri*tarâsh*t*ra,
together with all the bands of kings, and Bhîshma and Dro*n*a, and this
charioteer's son <span id="fr_393"></span>[1](#fn_392) likewise,
together with our principal warriors also, are rapidly entering your
mouths, fearful and horrific <span id="fr_394"></span>[2](#fn_393) by
(reason of your) jaws. And some with their heads smashed are seen (to
be) stuck in the spaces between the teeth. As the many rapid currents of
a river's waters run towards the sea alone, so do these heroes of the
human world enter your mouths blazing all round. As butterflies, with
increased velocity, enter a blazing fire to their destruction, so too do
these people enter your mouths with increased velocity (only) to their
destruction. Swallowing all these people, you are licking them over and
over again from all sides, with your blazing mouths. Your fierce
splendours, O Vish*n*u! filling the whole universe with (their)
effulgence, are heating it. Tell me who you are in this fierce form.
Salutations be to thee, O chief of the gods! Be gracious. I wish to know
you, the primeval, one, for I do not understand your actions.

The Deity said:

I am death, the destroyer of the worlds, fully developed, and I am now
active about the overthrow

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

of the worlds. Even without you, the warriors standing in the adverse
hosts, shall all cease to be. Therefore, be up, obtain glory, and
vanquishing (your) foes, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. All these have been
already killed by me. Be only the instrument, O Savyasâ*k*in <span
id="fr_395"></span>[1](#fn_394)! Dro*n*a, and Bhîshma, and *G*ayadratha,
and Kar*n*a, and likewise other valiant warriors also, whom I have
killed, do you kill. Be not alarmed. Do fight. And in the battle you
will conquer your foes.

Sañ*g*aya said:

Hearing these words of Kesava, the wearer of the coronet <span
id="fr_396"></span>[2](#fn_395), trembling, and with joined hands, bowed
down; and sorely afraid, and with throat choked up, he again spoke to
K*ri*sh*n*a after saluting him.

Ar*g*una said:

It is quite proper, O H*ri*shîke*s*a! that the universe is delighted and
charmed by your renown, that the demons run away affrighted in all
directions, and that all the assemblages of Siddhas bow down,(to you).
And why, O high-souled one! should they not bow down to you (who are)
greater than Brahman, and first cause? O infinite lord of gods! O you
pervading the universe! you are the indestructible, that which is, that
which is not, and what is beyond them <span
id="fr_397"></span>[3](#fn_396). You are the primal

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

god, the ancient being, you are the highest support of this
universe <span id="fr_398"></span>[1](#fn_397). You are that which has
knowledge, that which is the object of knowledge, you are the highest
goal. By you is this universe pervaded., O you of infinite forms! You
are the wind, Yama, fire, Varu*n*a, the moon, you Pra*g*âpati, and the
great grandsire <span id="fr_399"></span>[2](#fn_398). Obeisance be to
thee a thousand times, and again and again obeisance to thee! In front
and from behind obeisance to thee! Obeisance be to thee from all sides,
O you who are all! You are of infinite power, of unmeasured glory; you
pervade all, and therefore you are all! Whatever I have said
contemptuously,--for instance, 'O K*ri*sh*n*a!' 'O Yâdava!' 'O
friend!'--thinking you to be (my) friend, and not knowing your greatness
(as shown in) this (universal form), or through friendliness, or
incautiously; and whatever disrespect I have shown you for purposes of
merriment, on (occasions of) play, sleep, dinner, or sitting (together),
whether alone or in the presence (of friends),--for all that, O
undegraded one! I ask pardon of you who are indefinable <span
id="fr_400"></span>[3](#fn_399). You are the father of the world-movable
and immovable,--you its great and venerable master; there is none equal
to you, whence can there be one greater, O you whose power is
unparalleled in all the three worlds? Therefore I bow and prostrate
myself, and would propitiate you, the praiseworthy lord. Be pleased,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O god! to pardon (my guilt) as a father (that of
his) son, a friend (that of his) friend, or a husband (that of his)
beloved. I am delighted at seeing what I had never seen before, and my
heart is also alarmed by fear. Show me that same form, O god! Be
gracious, O lord of gods! O you pervading the universe! I wish to see
you bearing the coronet and the mace, with the discus in hand, just the
same (as before) <span id="fr_401"></span>[1](#fn_400). O you of
thousand arms! O you of all forms! assume that same four-handed form.

The Deity said:

O Ar*g*una! being pleased (with you), I have by my own mystic power
shown you this supreme form, full of glory, universal, infinite,
primeval, and which has not been seen before by any one else but you, O
you hero among the Kauravas! I cannot be seen in this form by any one
but you, (even) by (the help of) the study of the Vedas, or of <span
id="fr_402"></span>[2](#fn_401) sacrifices, nor by gifts, nor by
actions, nor by fierce penances. Be not alarmed, be not perplexed, at
seeing this form of mine, fearful like this. Free from fear and with
delighted heart, see now again that same form of mine.

Sañ*g*aya said:

Having thus spoken to Ar*g*una, Vâsudeva again showed his own form, and
the high-souled one becoming again of a mild form, comforted him who had
been affrighted.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Ar*g*una said:

O *G*anardana! seeing this mild, human form of yours, I am new in my
right mind, and have come to my normal state.

The Deity said:

Even the gods are always desiring to see this form of mine, which it is
difficult to get a sight of, and which you have seen. I cannot be seen,
as you have seen me, by (means of) the Vedas, not by penance, not by
gift, nor yet by sacrifice. But, O Ar*g*una! by devotion to me
exclusively, I can in this form be truly known, seen, and
assimilated <span id="fr_403"></span>[1](sbe0814.htm#fn_402) with, O
terror of your foes! He who performs acts for (propitiating) me, to whom
I am the highest (object), who is my devotee, who is free from
attachment, and who has no enmity towards any being, he, O son of
Pâ*nd*u! comes to me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_387"></span>[92:1](sbe0813.htm#fr_388) Madhusûdana takes
power to mean capacity of becoming small or great, of obtaining what is
wanted, &c.; the so-called eight Bhûtis.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[93:1](sbe0813.htm#fr_389) Cf. [p.
90](sbe0812.htm#page_90) supra. *S*a<u>n</u>kara explains it as meaning
'pervading everything.' The expression occurs in the
N*ri*simha-tâpinî-upanishad, p. 50, where it is said, 'as, without
organs, it sees, hears, goes, takes from all sides and pervades
everything, therefore it has faces on all sides.'

<span id="fn_389"></span>[93:2](sbe0813.htm#fr_390) Gods, manes, men,
and so forth.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[94:1](sbe0813.htm#fr_391) The words are the
same as at [p. 97](#page_97) infra, where see the note.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[94:2](sbe0813.htm#fr_392) Seeing signs of some
great cataclysm, they say, 'May it be well with the universe,' and then
proceed to pray to you.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[95:1](sbe0813.htm#fr_393) I. e. Kar*n*a, who
was really the eldest brother of the Pâ*nd*avas, but having been
immediately on birth abandoned by Kuntî, was brought up by a charioteer.
Kar*n*a was told of his, true origin by Bhîshma on his deathbed, and
advised to join the Pâ*nd*avas, but he declined.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[95:2](sbe0813.htm#fr_394) By reason of the
ruggedness and distortion of face.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[96:1](sbe0813.htm#fr_395) Ar*g*una, as he
could shoot with his left hand as well as the right.--*S*rîdhara.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[96:2](sbe0813.htm#fr_396) Ar*g*una, who had
this coronet given him by Indra.--Madhusûdana.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[96:3](sbe0813.htm#fr_397) The commentators
interpret this to mean the perceptible, the unperceived, and the higher
principle. Cf. [p. 84](sbe0811.htm#page_84) supra, and also pp.
[103](sbe0815.htm#page_103), [113](sbe0817.htm#page_113) infra and notes
there.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[97:1](sbe0813.htm#fr_398) See [p.
94](#page_94) supra. Here the commentators say the words mean 'that in
which the universe is placed at deluge-time.'

<span id="fn_398"></span>[97:2](sbe0813.htm#fr_399) Professor Tiele
mentions great-grandfather as a name for the Creator among Kaffirs
(History of Religion, p. 18). Cf. [p. 83](sbe0811.htm#page_83) supra.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[97:3](sbe0813.htm#fr_400) I. e. of whom it is
impossible to ascertain whether he is such or such. Cf. [p.
94](#page_94) supra.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[98:1](sbe0813.htm#fr_401) This is the ordinary
form of K*ri*sh*n*a.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[98:2](sbe0813.htm#fr_402) This is the original
construction. One suspects that sacrifices and study of the Vedas are
meant. Cf. the speech of K*ri*sh*n*a on the next page.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](sbe0814)
