[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0819)  [Next](sbe0821) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVIII.

Ar*g*una said:

O you of mighty arms! O H*ri*shîke*s*a! O destroyer of Ke*s*in! I wish
to know the truth about renunciation and abandonment distinctly.

The Deity said:

By renunciation the sages understand the rejection of actions done with
desires. The wise call the abandonment of the fruit of all actions (by
the name) abandonment. Some wise men say, that action should be
abandoned as being full of evil; and others, that the actions of
sacrifice, gift, and penance

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

should not be abandoned. As to that abandonment, O best of the
descendants of Bharata! listen to my decision; for abandonment, O
bravest of men! is described (to be) threefold. The actions of
sacrifice, gift, and penance should not be abandoned; they must needs be
performed; for sacrifices, gifts, and penances are means of
sanctification to the wise. But even these actions, O son of P*ri*thâ!
should be performed, abandoning attachment and fruit; such is my
excellent and decided opinion. The renunciation of prescribed action is
not proper. Its abandonment through delusion <span
id="fr_526"></span>[1](#fn_523) is described as of the quality of
darkness. When a man abandons action, merely as being troublesome,
through fear of bodily affliction, he does not obtain the fruit <span
id="fr_527"></span>[2](#fn_524) of abandonment by making (such)
passionate abandonment. When prescribed action is performed, O Ar*g*una!
abandoning attachment and fruit also, merely because it ought to be
performed, that is deemed (to be) a good abandonment. He who is
possessed of abandonment <span id="fr_528"></span>[3](#fn_525), being
full of goodness, and talented, and having, his doubts destroyed, is not
averse from unpleasant actions, is not attached to pleasant <span
id="fr_529"></span>[4](#fn_526) (ones). Since no embodied (being) can
abandon actions without exception <span id="fr_530"></span>[5](#fn_527),
he is said to be possessed of abandonment, who abandons the fruit of
action. The threefold fruit of action, agreeable, disagreeable, and
mixed, accrues after death to those who are not possessed of
abandonment, but never to

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

renouncers <span id="fr_531"></span>[1](#fn_528). Learn from me, O you
of mighty arms! these five causes of the completion of all actions,
declared in the Sâ<u>n</u>khya system <span
id="fr_532"></span>[2](#fn_529). The substratum, the agent likewise, the
various sorts of organs, and the various and distinct movements, and
with these the deities, too, as the fifth. Whatever action, just or
otherwise, a man performs with his body, speech, and mind, these five
are its causes. That being so, the undiscerning man, who being of an
unrefined understanding, sees the agent in the immaculate self, sees not
(rightly) <span id="fr_533"></span>[3](#fn_530). He who has no feeling
of egoism <span id="fr_534"></span>[4](#fn_531), and whose mind is not
tainted, even though he kills (all) these people, kills not, is not
fettered, <span id="fr_535"></span>[5](#fn_532) (by the action).
Knowledge <span id="fr_536"></span>[6](#fn_533), the object of
knowledge, the knower--threefold is the prompting to action. The
instrument, the action, the agent, thus in brief is action threefold.
Knowledge and action and agent

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

are declared in the enumeration of qualities <span
id="fr_537"></span>[1](#fn_534) (to be) of three classes only, according
to the difference of qualities. Hear about these also as they really
are. Know that knowledge to be good, by which (a man) sees one entity,
inexhaustible, and not different in all things (apparently)
different <span id="fr_538"></span>[2](#fn_535) (from one another). Know
that knowledge to be passionate, which is (based) on distinctions <span
id="fr_539"></span>[3](#fn_536) (between different entities), which sees
in all things various entities of different kinds. And that is described
as dark, which clings to one created (thing) only as everything, which
is devoid of reason, devoid of real principle, and insignificant <span
id="fr_540"></span>[4](#fn_537). That action is called good, which is
prescribed, which is devoid of attachment, which is not done from
(motives of) affection or aversion, (and which is done) by one not
wishing for the fruit. That is described as passionate, which
(occasions) much trouble, is performed by one who wishes for objects of
desire, or one who is full of egotism <span
id="fr_541"></span>[5](#fn_538). The action is called dark, which is
commenced through delusion, without regard to consequences, loss,
injury, or strength <span id="fr_542"></span>[6](#fn_539). That agent is
called good, who has cast off attachment, who is free from egotistic
talk, who is possessed of courage and energy, and unaffected by success
or ill-success. That agent is called passionate, who is full of
affections <span id="fr_543"></span>[7](#fn_540),

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

who wishes for the fruit of actions, who is covetous, cruel, and impure,
and feels joy and sorrow. That agent is called dark, who is without
application <span id="fr_544"></span>[1](#fn_541), void of discernment,
headstrong, crafty, malicious, lazy, melancholy, and slow. Now hear, O
Dhanañ*g*aya! the threefold division of intelligence <span
id="fr_545"></span>[2](#fn_542) and courage, according to qualities,
which I am about to declare exhaustively and distinctly. That
intelligence, O son of P*ri*thâ! is good which understands action and
inaction <span id="fr_546"></span>[3](#fn_543), what ought to be done
and what ought not to be done, danger and the absence of danger,
emancipation and bondage. That intelligence, O son of P*ri*thâ! is
passionate, by which one imperfectly understands piety and impiety, what
ought to be done and also what ought not to be done. That intelligence,
O son of P*ri*thâ! is dark, which shrouded by darkness, understands
impiety (to be) piety, and all things incorrectly. That courage, O son
of P*ri*thâ! is good courage, which is unswerving <span
id="fr_547"></span>[4](#fn_544), and by which one controls the
operations of the mind, breath, and senses, through abstraction. But, O
Ar*g*una! that courage is passionate, by which one adheres to piety,
lust, and wealth <span id="fr_548"></span>[5](#fn_545), and through
attachment <span id="fr_549"></span>[6](#fn_546) wishes,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O son of P*ri*thâ! for the fruit, That courage
is dark, O son of P*ri*thâ! by which an undiscerning man does not give
up sleep, fear, sorrow, despondency, and folly. Now, O chief of the
descendants of Bharata! bear from me about the three sorts of happiness.
That happiness is called good, in which one is pleased after
repetition <span id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_547) (of enjoyment), and
reaches the close of all misery, which is like poison first and
comparable to nectar in the long run, and which is produced from a clear
knowledge of the self <span id="fr_551"></span>[2](#fn_548). That
happiness is called passionate, which (flows) from contact between the
senses and their objects, and which is at first comparable to nectar and
in the long run like poison. That happiness is described as dark, which
arises from sleep, laziness, heedlessness, which deludes the self, both
at first and in its consequences. There is no entity either on earth or
in heaven among the gods, which is free from these three qualities born
of nature. The duties of Brâhma*n*as, Kshatriyas, and Vai*s*yas, and of
*S*ûdras, too, O terror of your foes! are distinguished according to the
qualities born of nature <span id="fr_552"></span>[3](#fn_549).
Tranquillity <span id="fr_553"></span>[4](#fn_550), restraint of the
senses, penance, purity, forgiveness, straightforwardness, also
knowledge, experience, and belief (in a future world), this is the
natural duty of Brâhma*n*as. Valour, glory, Courage,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

dexterity <span id="fr_554"></span>[1](#fn_551), not slinking away from
battle, gifts, exercise of lordly power <span
id="fr_555"></span>[2](#fn_552), this is the natural duty of Kshatriyas.
Agriculture, tending cattle, trade, (this) is the natural duty of
Vai*s*yas, And the natural duty of *S*ûdras, too, consists in service.
(Every) man intent on his own respective duties obtains perfection <span
id="fr_556"></span>[3](#fn_553). Listen, now, how one intent on one's
own duty obtains perfection. Worshipping, by (the performance of) his
own duty, him from whom all things proceed, and by whom all this is
permeated, a man obtains perfection. One's duty, though defective, is
better than another's duty well performed <span
id="fr_557"></span>[4](#fn_554). Performing the duty prescribed by
nature, one does not incur sin. O son of Kuntî! one should not abandon a
natural duty though tainted with evil; for all actions are enveloped by
evil, as fire by smoke <span id="fr_558"></span>[5](#fn_555). One who is
self-restrained, whose understanding is unattached everywhere, from whom
affections have departed, obtains the supreme perfection of freedom from
action <span id="fr_559"></span>[6](#fn_556) by renunciation. Learn from
me, only in brief, O son of Kuntî! how one who has obtained perfection
attains the Brahman, which is the highest culmination of knowledge. A
man possessed of a pure understanding, controlling his self by courage,
discarding sound and other objects of sense, casting off affection

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

and aversion; who frequents clean places, who eats little, whose speech,
body, and mind are restrained, who is always intent on meditation and
mental abstraction <span id="fr_560"></span>[1](#fn_557), and has
recourse to unconcern, who abandoning egoism <span
id="fr_561"></span>[2](#fn_558), stubbornness, arrogance, desire, anger,
and (all) belongings, has no (thought that this or that is) mine, and
who is tranquil, becomes fit for assimilation with the Brahman. Thus
reaching the Brahman <span id="fr_562"></span>[3](#fn_559), and with a
tranquil self, he grieves not, wishes not; but being alike to all
beings, obtains the highest devotion to me. By (that) devotion he truly
understands who I am and how great. And then understanding me truly, he
forthwith enters into my (essence). Even performing all actions, always
depending on me, he, through my favour, obtains the imperishable and
eternal seat. Dedicating in thought <span
id="fr_563"></span>[4](#fn_560) all actions to me, be constantly given
up to me, (placing) your thoughts on me, through recourse to mental
abstraction. (Placing) your thoughts on me, you will cross over all
difficulties by my favour. But if you will not listen through
egotism <span id="fr_564"></span>[5](#fn_561), you will be ruined. If
entertaining egotism, you think that you may not fight, vain, indeed, is
that resolution of yours. Nature <span id="fr_565"></span>[6](#fn_562)
will constrain you. That, O son of Kuntî! which through delusion you do
not wish to do, you will do involuntarily,

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

tied down by your own duty, flowing from your nature. The lord, O
Ar*g*una! is seated in the region of the heart <span
id="fr_566"></span>[1](#fn_563) of all beings, turning round all beings
(as though) mounted on a machine, by his delusion. With him, O
descendant of Bharata! seek shelter in every way <span
id="fr_567"></span>[2](#fn_564); by his favour you will obtain the
highest tranquillity, the eternal seat. Thus have I declared to you the
knowledge more mysterious than any mystery. Ponder over it thoroughly,
and then act as you like. Once more, listen to my excellent words-most
mysterious of all. Strongly I like you, therefore I will declare what is
for your welfare. On me (place) your mind, become my devotee, sacrifice
to me, reverence me, you will certainly come to me. I declare to you
truly, you are dear to me. Forsaking all duties <span
id="fr_568"></span>[3](#fn_565), come to me as (your) sole refuge. I
will release you from all sins. Be not grieved. This <span
id="fr_569"></span>[4](#fn_566) you should never declare to one who
performs no penance <span id="fr_570"></span>[5](#fn_567), who is not a
devotee <span id="fr_571"></span>[6](#fn_568), nor to one who does not
wait on (some preceptor) <span id="fr_572"></span>[7](#fn_569), nor yet
to one who calumniates me. He who, with the highest devotion <span
id="fr_573"></span>[8](#fn_570) to me, will proclaim this supreme
mystery among my devotees, will come to me, freed from (all) doubt. No
one

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

amongst men is superior to him in doing what is dear to me. And there
will never be another on earth dearer to me than he. And he who will
study this holy dialogue of ours, will, such is my opinion, have offered
to me the sacrifice of knowledge <span id="fr_574"></span>[1](#fn_571).
And the man, also, who with faith and without carping will listen (to
this), will be freed (from sin), and attain to the holy regions of those
who perform pious acts <span id="fr_575"></span>[2](#fn_572). Have you
listened to this, O son of P*ri*thâ! with a mind (fixed) on (this) one
point only? Has your delusion (caused) by ignorance been destroyed, O
Dhanañ*g*aya?

Ar*g*una said:

Destroyed is my delusion; by your favour, O undegraded one! I (now)
recollect <span id="fr_576"></span>[3](#fn_573) myself. I stand freed
from doubts <span id="fr_577"></span>[4](#fn_574). I will do your
bidding.

Sañ*g*aya said:

Thus did I hear this dialogue between Vâsudeva and the high-minded son
of P*ri*thâ, (a dialogue) wonderful and causing the hair to stand on
end. By the favour of Vyâsa, I heard this highest mystery, (this)
devotion <span id="fr_578"></span>[5](#fn_575), from K*ri*sh*n*a
himself, the lord of the possessors of mystic power, who proclaimed it
in person. O king! remembering and (again) remembering this wonderful
and holy dialogue of Ke*s*ava and Ar*g*una, I rejoice over and over
again. And remembering and (again) remembering that

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

excessively wonderful form of Hari also, great is my amazement, O king!
and I rejoice over and over again. Wherever (is) K*ri*sh*n*a, the lord
of the possessors of mystic power, wherever (is the (great) archer, the
son of Prithâ, there in my opinion (are) fortune, victory,
prosperity <span id="fr_579"></span>[1](#fn_576), and eternal justice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_520"></span>[121:1](sbe0819.htm#fr_523) I. e. either the
Brahman itself, or sacrifice, penance, and gift.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[121:2](sbe0819.htm#fr_524) Cf. Sutta Nipâta,
p. 69.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[121:3](sbe0819.htm#fr_525) The meaning of this
whole passage seems to be that these three words, which designate the
Brahman, have distinct uses, as specified. 'Om,' says Nîlaka*nth*a, is
employed whether the action is done with any special desire or not.
Those who study the Brahman there means 'study the Vedas.' 'Tad' is
employed in case of actions without desires only. 'Sat' is employed,
according to *S*a<u>n</u>kara, in case of existence, such as the birth
of a first son; I goodness,' the reclamation of a bad man; 'auspicious
acts,' marriage, &c. The intelligent use of these terms as here
specified is said to cure any defects in the actions, the various
classes of which are mentioned before.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[122:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_526) Without delusion no
such abandonment will occur.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[122:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_527) Namely, final
emancipation, by means of purity of heart.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[122:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_528) I. e. who has the
frame of mind necessary for a good abandonment.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[122:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_529) Such as bathing at
midday in summer.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[122:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_530) Cf. [p.
53](sbe0805.htm#page_53) supra.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[123:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_531) The original is
sannyâsi, but *S*rîdhara is probably right in taking it to mean one who
has command of 'abandonment.' *S*a<u>n</u>kara and Madhusûdana, however,
take the word in its ordinary sense of 'ascetic.' What follows explains,
says *S*rîdhara, why 'the fruit does not accrue to renouncers.'

<span id="fn_529"></span>[123:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_532) *S*a<u>n</u>kara
and Madhusûdana say this means Vedânta-*s*âstra. *S*rîdhara suggests
also the alternative Sâ<u>n</u>khya-sâstra. Substratum =the body, in
which desire, aversion, &c. are manifested; agent = one who egoistically
thinks himself the doer of actions; organs = senses of perception,
action, &c.; movements = of the vital breaths in the body; deities = the
deities which preside over the eye and other senses (as to this cf.
Aitareya-upanishad, p. 45; Pra*s*na, pp. 216, 217; Mu*nd*aka, p. 314;
Aitareya-âra*n*yaka. pp. 88-270: and Max Müller's Hibbert Lectures, p.
204, note).

<span id="fn_530"></span>[123:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_533) Cf. [p.
106](sbe0815.htm#page_106).

<span id="fn_531"></span>[123:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_534) Egoism = the
feeling that he is the doer of the action; taint = the feeling that the
fruit of the action must accrue to him.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[123:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_535) Cf. [p.
45](sbe0804.htm#page_45), and Dhammapada, stanza 294.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[123:6](sbe0820.htm#fr_536) Knowledge, i.e.
that something is a means to what is desired; object is the means; the
knower is he who has this knowledge. When these-co-exist we have action.
The instrument = senses, &c.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[124:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_537) The system of
Kapila.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[124:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_538) Cf. [p.
104](sbe0815.htm#page_104).

<span id="fn_536"></span>[124:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_539) Cf.
Ka*th*opanishad, p. 129.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[124:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_540) Reason = argument
in support; real principle = truth, view of things as they are;
insignificant, i. e. in comprehensiveness.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[124:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_541) I. e. 'pride of
learning,' &c., *S*a<u>n</u>kara; 'egoism,' Râmânuga.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[124:6](sbe0820.htm#fr_542) Consequences = good
or evil resulting; loss = of wealth or strength; injury = to others;
strength = one's own capacity.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[124:7](sbe0820.htm#fr_543) I. e. 'for
children,' &c., according to *S*rîdhara; 'for the action,' according to
others.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[125:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_544) I. e. attention to
work; melancholy = always desponding and wanting in energy.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[125:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_545) The nature of the
faculty of understanding; and courage is the firmness of that faculty.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[125:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_546) See [p.
115](sbe0818.htm#page_115). *S*a<u>n</u>kara takes these to mean the
'paths' of action and knowledge, and Nîlaka*nth*a takes the next
expression to mean that which is constant and that which is not
constant--nitya, anitya.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[125:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_547) Always co-existing
with mental abstraction and supporting it.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[125:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_548) Three of the aims
of mankind, the highest being final emancipation. In the view of the
Gîtâ, piety, leading only to heaven, is of doubtful benefit.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[125:6](sbe0820.htm#fr_549) I. e. to the action
for attaining them, in the belief that one is <span id="page_126">p.
126</span> the doer of it; the 'fruit' scil. of the action performed
with an eye to the three things named.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[126:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_550) Not at once, as in
the case of sensuous pleasures.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[126:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_551) Cf. [p.
51](sbe0804.htm#page_51). The original has also been rendered by
'tranquillity of one's own mind.'

<span id="fn_549"></span>[126:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_552) Cf. [p.
59](sbe0806.htm#page_59).

<span id="fn_550"></span>[126:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_553) I. e. resulting
from control of the mind, purity here is both external and internal. And
see [p. 119](sbe0819.htm#page_119).

<span id="fn_551"></span>[127:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_554) I. e. in battle,
Nîlaka*nth*a seems to say. *S*a<u>n</u>kara says it means ready resource
whenever occasion arises.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[127:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_555) I. e. 'power to
restrain people from going astray.' Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[127:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_556) Eligibility for the
path of knowledge.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[127:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_557) Cf. [p.
56](sbe0805.htm#page_56).

<span id="fn_555"></span>[127:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_558) Cf. [p.
121](sbe0819.htm#page_121); the evil appears to be the quality of
'fettering' the soul.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[127:6](sbe0820.htm#fr_559) *S*rîdhara compares
[p. 65](sbe0807.htm#page_65) (V. 13) and distinguishes this from [p.
64](sbe0807.htm#page_64) (V, 8 seq.) *S*a<u>n</u>kara says the
perfection here spoken of is emancipation, and it is obtained by true
knowledge.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[128:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_560) Abstraction is
concentrated and exclusive meditation, *S*a<u>n</u>kara. The other
commentators take dhyânayoga as meditation simply,--as treated of in
chapter VI, says Nîlaka*nth*a.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[128:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_561) See [p.
52](sbe0804.htm#page_52).

<span id="fn_559"></span>[128:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_562) I. e. comprehending
his identity with the Brahman.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[128:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_563) Cf. [p.
55](sbe0805.htm#page_55).

<span id="fn_561"></span>[128:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_564) Pride of learning
and cleverness, or of piety. See [p. 124](#page_124), note .

<span id="fn_562"></span>[128:6](sbe0820.htm#fr_565) The nature of a
Kshatriya, *S*a<u>n</u>kara.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[129:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_566)
*S*vetâ*s*vatara-upanishad, pp. 333-345; Ka*th*opanishad, p. 157.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[129:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_567) Cf. [p.
114](sbe0817.htm#page_114); by thought, word, and deed.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[129:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_568) Of caste or order,
such as Agnihotra and so forth.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[129:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_569) All that has been
taught in the Gîtâ.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[129:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_570) *S*rîdhara renders
this to mean, 'who performs no pious acts.'

<span id="fn_568"></span>[129:6](sbe0820.htm#fr_571) I. e. of God and a
preceptor. Cf. last stanza of *S*vetâ*s*vataropanishad.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[129:7](sbe0820.htm#fr_572) Cf. [p.
62](sbe0806.htm#page_62). *S*a<u>n</u>kara says all these elements must
co-exist to give eligibility.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[129:8](sbe0820.htm#fr_573) I. e. belief that
in disseminating it, he is serving me. Cf. Ka*th*opanishad, p. 120.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[130:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_574) Which is the best
of sacrifices; see [p. 62](sbe0806.htm#page_62).

<span id="fn_572"></span>[130:2](sbe0820.htm#fr_575) Cf. [p.
72](sbe0808.htm#page_72).

<span id="fn_573"></span>[130:3](sbe0820.htm#fr_576) I. e. understand my
real essence, what I am, &c.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[130:4](sbe0820.htm#fr_577) As to whether the
battle was right or not.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[130:5](sbe0820.htm#fr_578) The work is so
called, as it refers to devotion.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[131:1](sbe0820.htm#fr_579) Prosperity is the
greater development of fortune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction to Sanatsu*g*âtîya](sbe0821)
