[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe0807)  [Next](sbe0809) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

The Deity said:

He who, regardless of the fruit of actions, performs the actions which
ought to be performed, is the devotee and renouncer; not he who discards
the (sacred) fires <span id="fr_235"></span>[3](#fn_234), nor he who
performs no acts. Know, O son of Pâ*nd*u! that what is called
renunciation is devotion; for nobody becomes a devotee who has not
renounced (all) fancies <span id="fr_236"></span>[4](#fn_235). To the
sage who wishes to rise to devotion, action is said to be a means, and
to him, when he has risen to devotion, tranquillity <span
id="fr_237"></span>[5](#fn_236) is said to be a means. When one does not
attach oneself to objects of sense, nor to action, renouncing all
fancies, then is one said to have risen to devotion. (A man) should
elevate his self by his self <span id="fr_238"></span>[6](#fn_237); he
should not debase his self, for even (a man's) own self is his

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

friend, (a man's) own self is also his enemy <span
id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_238). To him who has subjugated his self by
his self <span id="fr_240"></span>[2](#fn_239), his self is a friend;
but to him who has not restrained his self, his own self behaves
inimically, like an enemy. The self of one who has subjugated his self
and is tranquil, is absolutely concentrated (on itself), in the midst of
cold and heat, pleasure and pain, as well as honour and dishonour. The
devotee whose self is contented with knowledge and experience <span
id="fr_241"></span>[3](#fn_240), who is unmoved <span
id="fr_242"></span>[4](#fn_241), who has restrained his senses, and to
whom a sod, a stone, and gold are alike, is said to be devoted. And he
is esteemed highest, who thinks alike <span
id="fr_243"></span>[5](#fn_242) about well-wishers, friends, and
enemies, and those who are indifferent, and those who take part with
both sides, and those who are objects of hatred, and relatives, as well
as about the good and the sinful. A devotee should constantly devote his
self to abstraction, remaining in a secret place <span
id="fr_244"></span>[6](#fn_243), alone, with his mind and self <span
id="fr_245"></span>[7](#fn_244) restrained, without expectations, and
without belongings. Fixing his seat firmly in a clean <span
id="fr_246"></span>[8](#fn_245) place, not too high nor too low, and
covered over with a sheet of cloth, a deerskin, and (blades of) Ku*s*a
(grass),--and there seated on (that) seat, fixing his mind exclusively
on one point, with the workings of the mind and senses

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

restrained, he should practice devotion for purity of self. Holding his
body, head, and neck even and unmoved, (remaining) steady, looking at
the tip of his own nose <span id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_246), and not
looking about in (all) directions, with a tranquil self, devoid of fear,
and adhering to the rules of Brahma*k*ârins <span
id="fr_248"></span>[2](#fn_247), he should restrain his mind, and
(concentrate it) on me, and sit down engaged in devotion, regarding me
as his final goal. Thus constantly devoting his self to abstraction, a
devotee whose mind is restrained, attains that tranquillity which
culminates in final emancipation, and assimilation with me. Devotion is
not his, O Ar*g*una! who eats too much, nor his who cats not at all; not
his who is addicted to too much sleep, nor his who is (ever) awake. That
devotion which destroys (all) misery is his, who takes due food and
exercise <span id="fr_249"></span>[3](#fn_248), who toils duly in all
works, and who sleeps and awakes (in) due (time) <span
id="fr_250"></span>[4](#fn_249). When (a man's) mind well restrained
becomes steady upon the self alone, then he being indifferent to all
objects of desire, is said to be devoted. As a light standing in a
windless (place) flickers not, that is declared to be the parallel for a
devotee, whose mind is restrained, and who devotes his self to
abstraction. That (mental condition), in which the mind restrained by
practice of abstraction, ceases to work; in which too, one seeing the
self by the self <span id="fr_251"></span>[5](#fn_250), is pleased in

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

the self; in which one experiences that infinite happiness which
transcends the senses, and which can be grasped by the understanding
only; and adhering to which, one never swerves from the truth; acquiring
which, one thinks no other acquisition higher than it; and adhering to
which, one is not shaken off even by great misery; that should be
understood to be called devotion in which there is a severance of all
connexion with pain. That devotion should be practised with steadiness
and with an undesponding heart. Abandoning, without exception, all
desires <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_251), which are produced from
fancies, and restraining the whole group of the senses on all sides by
the mind only <span id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_252), one should by slow
steps become quiescent <span id="fr_254"></span>[3](#fn_253), with a
firm resolve coupled with courage <span id="fr_255"></span>[4](#fn_254);
and fixing his mind upon the self, should think of nothing. Wherever the
active and unsteady mind breaks forth <span
id="fr_256"></span>[5](#fn_255), there one should ever restrain it, and
fix it steadily on the self alone. The highest happiness comes to such a
devotee, whose mind is fully tranquil, in whom the quality of passion
has been suppressed, who is free from sin, and who is become (one with)
the Brahman. Thus constantly devoting his self to abstraction, a
devotee, freed from sin, easily obtains that supreme happiness--contact
with the Brahman <span id="fr_257"></span>[6](#fn_256). He who has
devoted his self to abstraction, by devotion, looking alike on
everything, sees the self abiding in all beings, and all beings in

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the self <span id="fr_258"></span>[1](#fn_257). To him who sees me in
everything, and everything in me, I am never lost, and he is not lost to
me <span id="fr_259"></span>[2](#fn_258). The devotee who worships me
abiding in all beings, holding that all is one <span
id="fr_260"></span>[3](#fn_259), lives in me, however he may be
living <span id="fr_261"></span>[4](#fn_260). That devotee, O Ar*g*una!
is deemed to be the best, who looks alike on pleasure or pain, whatever
it may be, in all (creatures), comparing. all with his own (pleasure or
pain) <span id="fr_262"></span>[5](#fn_261).

Ar*g*una said:

I cannot see, O destroyer of Madhu! (how) the sustained existence (is to
be secured) of this devotion by means of equanimity which you have
declared-in consequence of fickleness. For, O K*ri*sh*n*a! the mind is
fickle, boisterous <span id="fr_263"></span>[6](#fn_262) strong, and
obstinate; and I think that to restrain it is as difficult as (to
restrain) the wind.

The Deity said:

Doubtless, O you of mighty arms! the mind is difficult to restrain, and
fickle <span id="fr_264"></span>[7](#fn_263). Still, O son of Kuntî! it
may be restrained by constant practice and by indifference (to worldly
objects). It is my belief, that devotion is hard to obtain for one who
does not restrain his self. But by one who is self-restrained

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and assiduous, it can be obtained through (proper) expedients.

Ar*g*una said:

What is the end of him, O K*ri*sh*n*a! who does not attain the
consummation of his devotion, being not assiduous <span
id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_264), and having a mind shaken off from
devotion, (though) full of faith? Does he, fallen from both
(paths) <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_265), go to ruin like a broken
cloud, being, O you of mighty arms! without support, and deluded on the
path (leading) to the Brahman? Be pleased, O K*ri*sh*n*a! to entirely
destroy this doubt of mine, for none else than you can destroy this
doubt.

The Deity said:

O son of P*ri*thâ! neither in this world nor the next, is ruin for him;
for, O dear friend! none who performs good (deeds) comes to an evil end.
He who is fallen from devotion attains the worlds of those who perform
meritorious acts, dwells (there) for many a year, and is afterwards born
into a family of holy and illustrious <span
id="fr_267"></span>[3](#fn_266) men. Or he is even born into a family of
talented devotees; for such a birth as that in this world is more
difficult to obtain. There he comes into contact with the knowledge
which belonged to him in his former body, and then again, O descendant
of Kuru! he works for perfection <span id="fr_268"></span>[4](#fn_267).
For even though reluctant <span id="fr_269"></span>[5](#fn_268), he is
led away by the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

self-same former practice, and although he only wishes to learn
devotion, he rises above the (fruits of action laid down in the) divine
word. But the devotee working with great efforts <span
id="fr_270"></span>[1](sbe0809.htm#fn_269), and cleared of his sins,
attains perfection after many births, and then reaches the supreme goal.
The devotee is esteemed higher than the performers of penances, higher
even than the men of knowledge, and the devotee is higher than the men
of action; therefore, O Ar*g*una! become a devotee. And even among all
devotees, he who, being full of faith, worships me, with his inmost self
intent on me, is esteemed by me to be the most devoted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_232"></span>[67:1](sbe0807.htm#fr_233) Cf. infra, [p.
18](sbe0802.htm#page_18).

<span id="fn_233"></span>[67:2](sbe0807.htm#fr_234) p. 57 and
Ka*th*opanishad, p. 157.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[67:3](sbe0808.htm#fr_235) Which are required
for ordinary religious rites.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[67:4](sbe0808.htm#fr_236) Which are the cause
of desires; see supra, [p. 50](sbe0804.htm#page_50).

<span id="fn_236"></span>[67:5](sbe0808.htm#fr_237) Abandonment of
distracting actions; means scil. to perfect knowledge, says *S*rîdhara.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[67:6](sbe0808.htm#fr_238) I. e. by means of a
mind possessed of true discrimination.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[68:1](sbe0808.htm#fr_239) Self is here
explained as mind, the unsteadiness of which prevents the acquisition of
devotion, [p. 71](#page_71)

<span id="fn_239"></span>[68:2](sbe0808.htm#fr_240) This means
restraining senses by mind. See Maitrî-upanishad, p. 180.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[68:3](sbe0808.htm#fr_241) Supra, [p.
57](sbe0805.htm#page_57).

<span id="fn_241"></span>[68:4](sbe0808.htm#fr_242) By any of the
vexations of the world.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[68:5](sbe0808.htm#fr_243) I. e. is free from
affection or aversion towards them.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[68:6](sbe0808.htm#fr_244) 'Release from
society' is insisted on at Sutta Nipâta, p. 55.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[68:7](sbe0808.htm#fr_245) Self is here
explained as senses; in the previous clause as mind.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[68:8](sbe0808.htm#fr_246) This requisite is
prescribed by many authorities. Cf. *Kh*ândogya-upanishad, p. 626;
Maitrî, p. 156) *S*vetâ*s*vatara, pp. 318-319 and Â*s*valâyana
(G*ri*hya-sûtra) III, 2, 2, for Vedic study too.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[69:1](sbe0808.htm#fr_247) Cf. Kumârasambhava,
Canto III, 47. This is done in order to prevent the sight from
rambling--a total closing of the eyes being objectionable as leading to
sleep.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[69:2](sbe0808.htm#fr_248) See these in
Âpastamba (p. 7 in this series); and cf. Sutta Nipâta, pp. 159, 160; and
Müller's Hibbert Lectures, p. 158.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[69:3](sbe0808.htm#fr_249) Cf. Sutta Nipâta,
pp. 28, 95.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[69:4](sbe0808.htm#fr_250) Buddhism shows
similar injunctions. Cf. Sutta Nipâta, pp. 21, 28, 95; and Dhammapada,
stanza. 8.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[69:5](sbe0808.htm#fr_251) Sees the highest
principle by a mind purified by abstraction.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[70:1](sbe0808.htm#fr_252) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
62.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[70:2](sbe0808.htm#fr_253) Cf. supra, [p.
53](sbe0805.htm#page_53).

<span id="fn_253"></span>[70:3](sbe0808.htm#fr_254) I. e. cease to think
of objects of sense. Cf. supra, [p. 69](#page_69).

<span id="fn_254"></span>[70:4](sbe0808.htm#fr_255) I. e. an
undespairing and firm resolution that devotion will be achieved
ultimately.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[70:5](sbe0808.htm#fr_256) Cf. Sutta Nipâta, p.
106.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[70:6](sbe0808.htm#fr_257) Assimilation with
the Brahman.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[71:1](sbe0808.htm#fr_258) Realises the
essential unity of everything.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[71:2](sbe0808.htm#fr_259) He has access to me,
and I am kind to him.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[71:3](sbe0808.htm#fr_260) Cf. Îsopanishad, p.
13.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[71:4](sbe0808.htm#fr_261) 'Even abandoning all
action,' says *S*rîdhara; and cf. infra, [p. 105](sbe0815.htm#page_105).

<span id="fn_261"></span>[71:5](sbe0808.htm#fr_262) Who believes that
pleasure and pain are as much liked or disliked by others as by himself,
and puts himself in fact in the place of others.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[71:6](sbe0808.htm#fr_263) Troublesome to the
body, senses, &c.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[71:7](sbe0808.htm#fr_264) Cf. Dhammapada,
stanza 33 seq.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[72:1](sbe0808.htm#fr_265) Cf. [p.
73](#page_73) infra.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[72:2](sbe0808.htm#fr_266) The path to heaven,
and that to final emancipation.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[72:3](sbe0808.htm#fr_267) Kings or emperors,'
says Madhusûdana.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[72:4](sbe0808.htm#fr_268) I. e. final
emancipation.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[72:5](sbe0808.htm#fr_269) 'As Ar*g*una
himself,' says Madhusûdana, 'receives instruction in knowledge, though
he comes to the battle-field without any such object; hence it was said
before, "nothing is here abortive."' See [p. 47](sbe0804.htm#page_47).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](sbe0809)
