[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eci05)  [Next](eci07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians*, by A. L. Kroeber, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### POTTERY.

Of next greatest frequency after basketry and stone implements among the
Cahuilla of today, are objects of pottery, though they are seldom if
ever manufactured now. Native pottery is of interest in California
because until a few years ago it was believed not to occur. Its
distribution is restricted. It is of greatest importance among the Yuman
tribes living on the Colorado, who are without basketry of their own. It
is made also by the Diegueño and by the interrelated Luiseño, Agua
Caliente, and Cahuilla Indians. The Gabrielino and the tribes beyond,
such as the Chumash, did not make pottery. No undoubted pieces have been
found in the numerous archaeological explorations of the Santa Barbara
islands. Whether the Serrano had pottery, and if so which of their
divisions, is unknown. It was made to some extent by the Chemehuevi and
probably other closely related Paiute tribes in the part of California
bordering on the Mohave habitat and on southernmost Nevada. As compared
with the pottery-making Mohave, these Paiute-Chemehuevi tribes

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

are basket makers; but under Mohave influence they seem also to have
practiced the manufacture of pottery somewhat. Several vessels obtained
from the Chemehuevi at Twenty-nine Palms and Cabezon are in the
University collections. North of Tehachapi pottery has been found in
only one region, the southern Sierra Nevada, where both Yokuts and Mono
made it to some extent. This pottery is small, dark gray or brownish,
unpainted and unornamented, and quite rude. Whether the art is a
recently acquired one among these Indians is not known. No
archaeological investigations that might throw evidence on the question
have been carried on in this mountain region, nor does the nature of the
country offer any great temptations for so doing. This Yokuts and Mono
pottery is quite different from that of Southern California in
appearance and shapes. It appears to be used for little but cooking. The
Yokuts and Mono seem to have lacked the ability of constructing large
well-made vessels such as are found in Southern California, or not to
have felt the need of making them. Whether the principal pottery-making
area in the southern part of the state was connected with the subsidiary
one in the Sierra Nevada by an intervening area in which pottery was
used, is doubtful. If there was such a territorial connection, it must
have been by tribes of Ute-Chemehuevi affiliation or of Serrano
affinity.

All the pottery of Southern California is of one type. It is a light,
thin, rather brittle red ware. On the Colorado river it is almost always
ornamented, among the basket making tribes more often unornamented. The
painting is in only one color, a red somewhat darker than the surface.
Among the Mohave this color is produced by painting the unfired pot with
yellow ochre, which burns red. Among the Cahuilla a red stone,
apparently an oxide of iron, was said to be used for the same purpose.

Only three ornamented pieces of pottery were seen among the Cahuilla.
One of these was a broken discarded dish, another a jar in the
possession of the Chemehuevi at Cabezon, and the third, a black-painted
jar which will be described below. The designs on the two red-painted
pieces are identical with typical Mohave painting. Mohave pottery
designs consist most frequently of patterns of parallel lines, either
straight, zigzag, or

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

forking; of rhombi or crossed or branching lines with or without
adjacent dots; and of angles and triangles with the corners filled in.
Realistic drawings, round lines, or separate geometrical figures of any
elaborateness, are not attempted. There is very little resemblance to
any past or present pottery of the Pueblo region.

The black-painted jar from San Gorgonio pass ([Pl.
10](eci12.htm#img_pl10)) is unique not only in the color of its
ornamentation, but in its pattern, which differs thoroughly from designs
of the Mohave type. It is more finely executed with narrow lines, the
ornamental handling of which is reminiscent of the ancient Pueblo style.
The star shape of the pattern suggests the basket ornamentation of the
Cahuilla.

Like the pottery of the Mohave, that of the Cahuilla was made by coiling
together narrow cylinders or ropes of clay, which were then patted
between a smooth rounded stone and a wooden paddle. The degree to which
the art is now in abeyance may be judged from the fact that neither of
these implements was seen. As Dr. Barrows has noticed, the vessel is not
kept away from the fire in burning, so that it is often blackened in
spots. The same is true of Mohave and Luiseño pottery. In recent times
the Cahuilla have used dung for firing their pottery. Before the
introduction of domestic animals they employed the wood of certain
shrubs. Among the Mohave the making and baking of pottery, which takes
place before an open wood fire, may still be seen.

There are four principal forms of Cahuilla pottery: a small-mouthed jar
for water and perhaps for the storage of seeds; a somewhat wider-mouthed
jar; a cooking pot, of which the mouth is approximately of the same
diameter as the body of the vessel; and an open bowl or dish of perhaps
half as great a depth as diameter. ([Pl. 9](eci12.htm#img_pl09), upper
figures and lower left.) These forms are made with comparatively little
variation except in size, and are identical with Mohave types, even to
the binding of the bowl or dish with a strip of mesquite fibre just
below the rim to insure greater strength. The only divergent forms that
have been seen are a vessel with incurved mouth ([Pl.
9](eci12.htm#img_pl09), lower right), thus being intermediate in form
between the open dish and the jar; and one or two small roughly-made
dishes of a dull dark red

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

color with a flat bottom. Of these one was obtained at Banning, the
other from one of the Indio reservations. It is not certain that either
of these two forms represents anything more than a sporadic aberrance.

To judge from a smaller number of specimens that have been seen, the
pottery of the Luiseño and Diegueño is identical with that of the
Cahuilla. While the forms of vessels made by all these Mission tribes
are found also among the Mohave, the Mohave manufacture other types
which do not occur among the Mission Indians, at least at the present
day. Such are an asymmetrical small-mouthed jar having the shape of a
swimming duck and called "duck jar;" a pottery spoon; and flat round or
oval dishes nearly as shallow as one of our plates, though of a gently
flaring curvature.

As compared with the practical identity of the Colorado river and the
Mission region pottery in all other respects, the almost regular absence
of painting from the Mission ware, and its customary presence on Mohave
vessels, is of special significance. It is another instance of the want
of the symbolic and pictorial tendency that is so strangely undeveloped
among all California Indians.

As pottery is more important to the Yuman tribes of the Colorado river
than to the Cahuilla and coast Indians, and as these latter are basket
makers, it may be presumed that its use was earlier among the former, as
their closer proximity to the Southwestern culture-area would also
render probable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Implements of Wood and Fibre](eci07)
