[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](eci04)  [Next](eci06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians*, by A. L. Kroeber, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### STONE IMPLEMENTS.

Of next greatest abundance after basketry, among the Indians of the
present day, are articles of stone, especially the metate and the
mortar, and the corresponding mano or muller and pestle. These are still
in frequent use. The metate is nothing but a flat stone, oval or
somewhat rectangular in shape. It is made of granitic or metamorphic
rock, not of a sandstone slab. It is very slightly hollowed. Some pieces
show hollowing only in that part of their area which is actually rubbed
in use. Occasionally a large lava metate on three legs, of the familiar
Mexican type, is seen. These are always declared to have been obtained
from Mexicans. A considerable number of such pieces must have been
brought into California from Mexico. One has been obtained among the
Yokuts north of Fresno river, and a fragment from the Emeryville
Shellmound near Berkeley is in the University collections. It is curious
that these heavy implements of the stone age should have been brought
over a thousand miles by a civilized people in colonizing a new
territory.

The rubber or mull stone is of much more varied shape than the metate.
Sometimes it is oval in outline, thin and flat. Other pieces of the same
length are narrower and twice as thick. Still others are much longer, of
equal breadth and thickness, and well squared, so that they present the
shape of a short length of dressed timber. Still others are natural
shaped stones or boulders, the bottom of which has been rubbed flat.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

The mortar shows more variations than the metate. The deep wooden mortar
of the desert, and the stone mortar with basketry rim of San Gorgonio
pass, have been mentioned. The wooden mortar is specially adapted for
the mesquite bean. It is made from a section of tree two feet or more
long. The greater part of this log is sunk in the ground. The projecting
portion presents the appearance of being a stump cut from a tree in
situ. The mortar hole is quite deep, in some cases as much as a foot or
more. A correspondingly long pestle is necessitated. This is about two
feet in length, fairly well shaped, and quite slender. A similar wooden
mesquite mortar is used by the Mohave, though block, cavity, and pestle
are shorter than among the Cahuilla.

The stone mortar with basketry rim ([Pl. 15](eci12.htm#img_pl15).md) is
used in the region where mesquite is unimportant or wanting. The block
or boulder of stone is large compared with the size of the rather
shallow cavity. The pestle used with this mortar ([Pl.
8](eci12.htm#img_pl08), left.md) is naturally much shorter than the pestle
accompanying the deep mortar of the desert ([Pl. 8](eci12.htm#img_pl08.md),
right) . It is also much more rudely shaped. In most cases it appears to
be only a convenient cobble or boulder, one end of which has been
dressed to fit the surface of the mortar cavity.

This rude type of pestle, practically unshaped except at the pounding
end, or sometimes flattened on one side, is found also in the Sierra
Nevada and perhaps in other parts of the state. Among the Yokuts and
Miwok this is the only form of pestle for ordinary purposes.
Cylindrically shaped pestles occur only in small sizes, for use with
small portable stone mortars for crushing tobacco, medicine, or meat.
Associated with the rough pestle among the Yokuts and Miwok, is the
bedrock mortar, consisting of a hole in an exposed surface of granite.
Most frequently a number of these holes, varying in depth, are found
close together. Such assemblages, which have been a number of times
described and illustrated, <span id="fr_19"></span>[17](#fn_18.md) are a
conspicuous feature of past and present native life in the Sierra
region. The basket mortar is unknown among these tribes, but is used by
all the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indians of the
Coast Range north of San Francisco—both those of the Central type of
culture, such as the Pomo, and those of northwestern California. The
basket mortar is used also in the northeastern part of the state. It is
also found in the Chumash or Santa Barbara region, both mainland and
island, as is evidenced by numerous stone mortars and slabs showing
remains of asphalt at the rim and by an occasional piece preserved with
the basketry still attached. In this region, however, the bowl-shaped
mortar without basketry rim appears to have been used side by side with
the composite form, for many of the mortars found are of such irregular
shape at the top that a basket could never have been fastened to them.
The basket set on a slab or shallow mortar, and the bedrock mortar,
divide almost the whole of California between them, at least as regards
the Indians of historic times and the present. This fact brings up the
question of the origin and purpose of the portable stone mortars which
are found in all sizes, in and on the ground, in all parts of the state.
The Indians not only do not use these, but on being questioned
frequently declare that they would not know how to, as the manipulations
required in pounding acorns or seeds in these mortars would be quite
different from those employed in the basket-rim or bedrock mortar. It
can only be concluded that the ordinary bowl-shaped mortar found in such
abundance all over California, belongs to a former period, and has in
recent generations or centuries been generally replaced by the other
forms described. The only region in California where the author has seen
round or somewhat deep stone mortars in use is in San Diego county,
where they are occasionally met with among the half-civilized Luiseño
and Diegueño.

Next to the metate and muller, and mortar and pestle, the stone
implement today most frequently encountered among the Cahuilla, though
it is but little used, is the arrow-straightener. This consists of a
rectangular or oval block of stone somewhat raised toward the middle,
where a transverse groove divides its upper surface. It is in this
groove that the arrow is placed to be straightened. The inner surface of
the groove often shows high polish. Some arrow-straighteners show a low
longitudinal ridge extending at right angles from one or both sides of
the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

groove. According to the explanation obtained from an old man who still
used his straighteners, this ridge serves to bend cane arrows at their
joints, the joint being placed directly upon the ridge after the stone
has been heated. Other stones show this longitudinal ridge only in
rudimentary form, so low that it is doubtful whether it could have
served any actual use. In still other pieces the ridge has entirely
disappeared except for two narrow grooves or scratches that mark its
place and can have had little other purpose than ornamentation or the
following of custom. Occasionally also other scratched designs appear in
the place of the ridge. The stone from which the arrow straightener is
made is soft, usually soapstone or micaceous rock. Granite or similar
stone does not appear to be used. The Cahuilla form of
arrow-straightener is found among the other Mission Indians and among
the Yokuts of central California. Like the rude pestle, the technique of
basketry, and the carrying net with its companion the cap, it is
therefore another link in the chain of technological similarities of
culture between the San Joaquin valley and Southern California.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[52:17](eci05.htm#fr_19.md) Holmes, Anthropological
Studies in California, Rep. U. S. Nat. Mus. for 1900, 178, pl. 29, and
Handbook of American Indians, Bull. 30 Bur. Am. Ethn., I, 944.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pottery](eci06.md)
