[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](eci09)  [Next](eci11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians*, by A. L. Kroeber, \[1908\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SOCIAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE.

Practically no information is available as to the social and religious
life of the Cahuilla, but the information obtained in answer to a few
inquiries goes to show their close affiliation with the other Mission
tribes rather than with the agricultural Yuman tribes to the east. There
is no evidence of any totemic clan system as among the Mohave. The chief
or "captain" seems to be such principally through the possession of
property. He is always regarded as the richest individual in the
community. At ceremonies and gatherings he supplies food for the
assemblage. This dependence of social rank on wealth is a typically
Californian trait. The Luiseño follow the same practice. The Mohave
chieftainship, so far as not influenced by hereditary succession, is
dependent on valor.

The mythical origin of the Cahuilla is said to have been in the north,
in which account they agree with the Luiseño. The large low-flying
meteor, dakush, is distinguished from ordinary shooting stars, ngamngam,
and is said to live in San Jacinto mountain, a belief which agrees with
those of both Luiseño and Diegueño. The eagle "is the general of the
Indians," volunteered a Cahuilla, by which no doubt he meant to express
a mythological and ceremonial importance of the bird parallel to that
which it has among other tribes of Southern California.

The most important ceremony of the Cahuilla seems to have been the
annual tribal mourning gathering, hemnukuwin. This was in addition to
singing immediately after a death. Jimsonweed or toloache, kiksawal,
which plays so important a part in the initiation ceremonies of the
Luiseño, Yokuts, and other tribes, was customarily used for religious
purposes. It was not learned definitely that it was expected to be drunk
by every boy or young man of the tribe, but such seems to have been the
case. It was thought that the objects or events seen in the visions
caused by the drink would come true. It was especially believed that the
use of the jimson-weed would bring riches, no doubt in connection with
the general idea that it conferred power and the attainment

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

of desire. It was also used as a medicine, especially in ease of broken
bones. The Yokuts also employed it extensively for this purpose. It
appears to have been efficacious in such cases by rendering the sufferer
unconscious or insensible of pain for a number of days, in which time
the healing took place. It is said by the Cahuilla that the amount of
extract of the root that is drunk must be judged by a man experienced in
its use, and that a number of deaths have resulted from the taking of
excessive quantities.

The position of the medicine man or hechicero among the Cahuilla
apparently corresponds very nearly to that of the medicine-man among the
other Mission tribes and the Yokuts. This is especially brought out by
the fact that he is the principal person who dances. The Mohave
medicine-man acts as important a part as his colleague in these tribes,
but as a causer and curer of disease, and not as the initiator of public
ceremonies.

The ceremonial drinking of jimson-weed is known as pem-pa-wvan kiksawal.
A girls’ puberty ceremony, the "roasting of girls" of the Mission
tribes, seems to have been practiced. It was called pem-iwvlu-niwom.

Altogether, as one compares the culture of the Cahuilla with that of
other tribes of California, it is seen that the several striking
resemblances that they bear to the Mohave and Yuma are due to proximity,
or to the similarity of the two natural environments. In so far as these
causes are not operative, the Cahuilla partake of the culture common to
the tribes of the coast and inland of Southern California, in other
words, the Mission Indians. Many resemblances with the Yokuts are also
noticeable. These are of course not confined to the Cahuilla, but are
common to all the Mission Indians. Such similarities are not restricted
to the material side of life, but are conspicuous in the general social
and religious organization. On the side of mythology, however, the
Yokuts resemble the northern Californians, and the Mission Indians the
tribes of the Southwest. <span id="fr_27"></span>[25](#fn_26) The
physical type of the Yokuts, or at least their southern tribes, has also
been shown to be nearly identical with that of the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mission
Indians, <span id="fr_28"></span>[26](#fn_27) though the possible
historical significance of this resemblance is weakened by the
similarity of both types to the Mohave-Yuma physical form. All in all,
the Yokuts form part of the great Central culture group of California,
and the Cahuilla belong to the ethnographic province of Southern
California, just as their respective habitats form part of distinct
physiographic areas. The instances of resemblances between the two
groups are however so numerous, that it is evident that there must have
been considerable cultural interinfluence between the whole body of
Southern California tribes on one side of the Tehachapi mountains, and
the Indians of Central California on the other side.

   <span class="small">*May 14, 1907*.</span>

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[66:25](eci10.htm#fr_27) Present series, IV,
167, 1907; Journ. Am. Folk-Lore, XIX, 309, 1906.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[67:26](eci10.htm#fr_28) Boas, Proc. Am. Ass.
Adv. Science, XLIV, 261, 1896.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Catalogue Numbers of Specimens Shown in Plates](eci11)
