[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos02)  [Next](kos04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE

From Lansdowne MSS. 1203, ' 7'he Veritable Clavicles of Solomon,
translated from the Hebrew into the Latin language by the Rabbi
Abognazar.' <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

EVERY one knoweth in the present day that from time immemorial Solomon
possessed knowledge inspired by the wise teachings of an angel, to which
he appeared so submissive and obedient, that in addition to the gift of
wisdom, which he demanded, he obtained with profusion all the other
virtues; which happened in order that knowledge worthy of eternal
preservation might not be buried with his body. Being, so to speak, near
his end, he left to his son Roboam a Testament which should contain all
(the Wisdom) he had possessed prior to his death. The Rabbins, who were
careful to cultivate (the same knowledge) after him, called this
Testament the Clavicle or Key of Solomon, which they caused to be
engraved on (pieces of) the bark of trees, while the Pentacles were
inscribed in Hebrew letters on plates of copper, so that they might be
carefully preserved in the Temple which that wise king had caused to be
built.

This Testament was in ancient time translated from the Hebrew into the
Latin language by Rabbi Abognazar, who transported it with him into the
town of Arles in Provence, where by a notable piece of good fortune the
ancient Hebrew Clavicle, that is to say this precious translation of it,
fell into the hands of the Archbishop of Arles, after the destruction of
the Jews in that city; who, from the Latin, translated it into the
vulgar tongue, in the same terms which here follow, without having
either changed or augmented the original translation from the Hebrew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](kos03.htm#fr_0) I fancy this Must be a
corruption of 'Aben Ezra.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction (from Add. MSS. 10862)](kos04)
