[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos07)  [Next](kos09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

## CHAPTER III

## CONCERNING THE ARTS

IF thou wishest to succeed, it is necessary to make the following
Experiments and Arts in the appropriate Days and Hours, with the
requisite solemnities and ceremonies contained and laid down in the
following Chapters.

Experiments, then, are of two kinds; the first is to make trial of what,
as I have said, can be easily performed without a Circle, and in this
case it is not necessary to observe anything but what thou wilt find in
the proper Chapters. The second can in no way be brought to perfection
without the Circle; and in order to accomplish this perfectly it is
necessary to take note of all the preparations which the Master of the
Art and his Disciples must undertake before constructing <span
id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) the Circle.

Before commencing operations both the Master and his Disciples must
abstain with great and thorough continence during the space of nine days
from sensual pleasures and from vain and foolish conversation; as
plainly appeareth in the Second Book, Chapter 4. Six of these nine days
having expired, he must recite frequently the Prayer and Confession as
will be told him; and on the Seventh Day, the Master being alone, let
him enter into a secret place, let him take off his clothes, and bathe
himself from head to foot in consecrated and exorcised Water, saying
devoutly and humbly the prayer, 'O Lord Adonai,' etc., as it is written
in the Second Book, Chapter 2.

The Prayer being finished, let the Master quit the water, and put upon
his flesh raiment of white linen clean and unsoiled; and then let him go
with his Disciples unto a secret place and command them to strip
themselves naked; and they having taken off their clothes, let him take
exorcised water and pour it upon their heads so that it flows down to
their feet and bathes them completely; and while pouring this water upon
them let the Master say:--'Be ye regenerate, renewed, washed, and pure,'
etc., as in Book II., Chapter 3.

Which <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12) being done, the Disciples must
clothe themselves, putting

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

upon their flesh, like their Master, raiment of white linen clean and
unsoiled; and the three last days the Master and his Disciples should
fast, observing the solemnities and prayers marked in Book II., Chapter
2.

Note that the three last days should be calm weather, without wind, and
without clouds rushing hither and thither over the face of the sky. On
the last day let the Master go with his Disciples unto a secret fountain
of running water, or unto a flowing stream, and there let each of them,
taking off his clothes, wash himself with due solemnity, as is rehearsed
in Book II. And when they are clean and pure, let each put upon him
garments of white linen, pure, and clean, using the prayers and
ceremonies described in Book II. After which let the Master alone say
the confession. The which being finished, the Master in sign of
penitence will Kiss <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) the Disciples on
the forehead, and each of them will Kiss the other. Afterwards let the
Master extend his hands over the Disciples, and in sign of absolution
absolve and bless them; which being done he will distribute to each of
his Disciples the Instruments necessary for Magical Art, which he is to
carry into the Circle.

The First Disciple will bear the Censer, the Perfumes and the Spices the
Second Disciple will bear the Book, Papers, Pens, Ink, and any stinking
or impure materials; the Third will carry the Knife and the Sickle of
Magical Art, the Lantern, and the Candles; the Fourth, the Psalms, and
the rest of the Instruments; the Fifth, the Crucible or Chafing-dish,
and the Charcoal or Fuel; but it is necessary for the Master himself to
carry in his hand the Staff, and the Wand or Rod. The things necessary
being thus disposed, the Master will go with his Disciples unto the
assigned place, where they have proposed to construct the Circle for the
Magical Arts and experiments; repeating on the way the prayers and
orations which thou wilt find in Book II.

When the Master shall have arrived at the place appointed, together with
his Disciples, he having lighted the flame of the fire, and having
exorcised it afresh as is laid down in the Second Book, shall light the
Candle and place it in the Lantern, which one of the Disciples is to
hold ever in his hand to light the Master at his work. Now the Master of
the Art, every time that he shall have occasion for some particular
purpose to speak with the Spirits, must endeavour to form certain
Circles which shall differ somewhat, and shall have some particular
reference to the particular experiment under consideration. Now, in
order to succeed in forming such a Circle concerning Magical Art, for
the greater assurance and efficacy thou shalt construct it in the
following manner:--

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

### THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE CIRCLE.

Take thou the Knife, the Sickle, or the Sword of Magical Art consecrated
after the manner and order which we shall deliver unto thee in the
Second Book. With this Knife or with the Sickle of Art thou shalt
describe, beyond the inner Circle which thou shalt have already formed,
a Second Circle, encompassing the other at the distance of one foot
therefrom and having the same centre. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) Within this space of a foot in breadth
between the first and the second circumferential <span
id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15) line, thou shalt trace towards the Four
Quarters of the Earth, <span id="fr_16"></span>[3](#fn_16) the Sacred
and Venerable Symbols of the holy Letter Tau <span
id="fr_17"></span>[4](#fn_17). And between the first and the second
Circle, <span id="fr_18"></span>[5](#fn_18) which thou shalt thyself
have drawn with the Instrument of Magical Art, thou shalt make four
hexagonal pentacles, <span id="fr_19"></span>[6](#fn_19) and between
these thou shalt write four terrible and tremendous Names of God,
viz.:--

Between the East and the South the Supreme Name IHVH, Tetragrammaton;--

Between the South and the West the Essential Tetragrammatic Name AHIH,
Eheieh;--

Between the West and the North the Name of Power ALIVN, Elion;--

And between the North and the East the Great Name ALH, Eloah;--

Which Names are of supreme importance in the list of the
Sephiroth, <span id="fr_20"></span>[7](#fn_20) and their Sovereign
Equivalents.

Furthermore, thou shalt circumscribe about these Circles two Squares,
the Angles of which shall be turned towards the Four Quarters of the
Earth; and the space between the Lines of the Outer and Inner Square
shall be half-a-foot. The extreme Angles of the Outer Square shall be
made the Centres of four Circles, the measure or diameter of which shall
be one foot. All these are to be drawn with the Knife or consecrated
Instrument of Art. And within these Four Circles

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

thou must write these four Names of God the Most Holy One, in this
order:--

At <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) the East, AL, El;

At the West, IH, Yah;

At the South, AGLA, Agla;

And at the North ADNI, Adonaï.

Between the two Squares the Name Tetragrammaton is to be written in the
same way as is shown in the plate. (See [Figure
2](kos00.htm#img_kos01).)

While constructing the Circle, the Master should recite the following
Psalms:--Psalm ii.; Psalm liv.; Psalm cxiii.; Psalm lxvii.; Psalm
xlvii.; Psalm lxviii.

Or he may as well recite them before tracing the Circle.

The which being finished, and the fumigations being performed, as is
described in the chapter on Fumigations in the Second Book, the Master
should reassemble his Disciples, encourage them, reassure them, fortify
them, and conduct them into the parts of the Circle of Art, where he
must place them in the four quarters of the earth, encourage them, and
exhort them to fear nothing, and to keep in the places assigned to them.
Also, the Disciple who is placed towards the East should have a pen,
ink, paper, silk, and white cotton, all clean and suitable for the work.
Furthermore, each of the Companions should have a new Sword drawn in his
hand (besides the consecrated Magical Sword of Art), and he should keep
his hand resting upon the hilt thereof, and he should on no pretext quit
the place assigned to him, nor move therefrom.

After this the Master should quit the Circle, light the fuel in the
earthen pots, and place upon them the Censers, in the Four Quarters of
the Earth; and he should have in his hand the consecrated taper of wax,
and he should light it and place it in a hidden and secret place
prepared for it. Let him after this re-enter and close the Circle.

The Master should afresh exhort his Disciples, and explain to them all
that they have to do and to observe; the which commands they should
promise and vow to execute.

Let the Master then repeat this Prayer:--

### PRAYER.

When we enter herein with all humility, let God the Almighty One enter
into this Circle, by the entrance of an eternal happiness, of a Divine
prosperity, of a perfect joy, of an abundant charity, and of an eternal
salutation. Let all the demons fly from this place, especially those who
are opposed unto this work, and let the Angels of Peace assist and
protect

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

this Circle, from which let discord and strife fly and depart. Magnify
and extend upon us, O Lord, Thy most Holy Name, and bless our
conversation and our assembly. Sanctify, O Lord our God, our humble
entry herein, Thou the Blessed and Holy One of the Eternal Ages! Amen.

After this, let the Master say upon his knees, as follows:--

### PRAYER.

O Lord God, All Powerful and All Merciful, Thou Who desirest not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and
live; give and grant unto us Thy grace, by blessing and consecrating
this earth and this circle, which is here marked out with the most
powerful and holy names of God. And thee, I conjure, O Earth, by the
Most Holy Name of ASHER EHEIEH entering within this Circle, composed and
made with mine hand. And may God, even ADONAI, bless this place with all
the virtues of Heaven, so that no obscene or unclean spirit may have the
power to enter into this Circle, or to annoy any person who is therein;
through the Lord God ADONAI, Who liveth eternally unto the Ages of the
Ages. Amen.

I beseech Thee, O Lord God, the All Powerful and the All Merciful, that
Thou wilt deign to bless this Circle, and all this place, and all those
who are therein, and that Thou wilt grant unto us, who serve Thee, and
rehearse nothing but the wonders of Thy law, a good Angel for our
Guardian; remove from us every adverse power; preserve us from evil and
from trouble; grant, O Lord, that we may rest in this place in all
safety, through Thee, O Lord, Who livest and reignest unto the Ages of
the Ages. Amen.

Let the Master now arise and place upon his head a Crown made of paper
(or any other appropriate substance), on the which there must be written
(with the Colours and other necessary things which we shall describe
hereafter), these four Names AGLA, AGLAI, AGLATA, AGLATAI. The which
Names are to be placed in the front, behind, and on either side of the
head.

Furthermore, the Master ought to have with him in the Circle those
Pentacles or Medals which are necessary to his purpose, which are
described hereinafter, and which should be constructed according to the
rules given in the Chapter on Pentacles. They should be described on
virgin paper with a pen; and ink, blood, or colours, prepared according
to the manner which we shall hereafter show in the Chapters on these
subjects. It win be sufficient to take only those Pentacles which are
actually required, they should be sewed to the front of the linen robe,
on the chest, with the consecrated needle of the Art, and with a thread
which has been woven by a young girl.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

After this, let the Master turn himself towards the Eastern Quarter
(unless directed to the contrary, or unless he should be wishing to call
Spirits which belong to another quarter of the Universe), and pronounce
with a loud voice the Conjuration contained in this Chapter. And if the
Spirits be disobedient and do not then make their appearance, he must
arise and take the exorcised Knife of Art wherewith he hath constructed
the Circle, and raise it towards the sky as if he wished to beat or
strike the Air, and conjure the Spirits. Let him then lay his right hand
and the Knife upon the Pentacles or Medals, constructed of, and
described upon virgin paper, which are fastened to or sewn upon his
breast, and let him repeat the following Conjuration upon his knees:--

### CONJURATION.

O Lord, hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto Thee. O Lord God
Almighty, Who has reigned before the beginning of the Ages, and Who by
Thine Infinite Wisdom hast created the heavens, the earth, and the sea,
and all that in them is, all that is visible, and all that is invisible
by a single word; I praise Thee, I bless Thee, I adore Thee, I glorify
Thee, and I pray Thee now at the present time to be merciful unto me, a
miserable sinner, for I am the work of Thine hands. Save me, and direct
me by Thy Holy Name, Thou to Whom nothing is difficult, nothing is
impossible; and deliver me from the night of mine ignorance, and enable
me to go forth therefrom. Enlighten me with a spark of Thine Infinite
Wisdom. Take away from my senses the desire of covetousness, and the
iniquity of mine idle words. Give unto me, Thy servant, a wise
understanding) penetrating and subtle heart, to acquire and comprehend
all Sciences and Arts; give unto me capacity to hear, and strength of
memory to retain them, so that I may be able to accomplish my desires,
and understand and learn all difficult and desirable Sciences; and also
that I may be able to comprehend the hidden secrets of the Holy
Writings. Give me the virtue to conceive them, so that I may be able to
bring forth and pronounce my words with patience and humility, for the
instruction of others, as Thou hast ordered me.

O God, the Father, All Powerful and All Merciful, Who hast created all
things, Who knowest and conceivest them universally, and to Whom nothing
is hidden, nothing is impossible; I entreat Thy Grace for me and for Thy
servants, because Thou seest and knowest well that we perform not this
work to tempt Thy Strength and Thy Power as if in doubt thereof, but
rather that we may know and understand the truth of all hidden things. I
beseech Thee to have the kindness to be favourable unto us; by Thy
Splendour, Thy Magnificence, and Thy Holiness, and by Thy Holy,
Terrible, and Ineffable Name IAH, at which the whole world doth

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

tremble, and by the Fear with which all creatures obey Thee. Grant, O
Lord, that we may become responsive unto Thy Grace, so that through it
we may have a full confidence in and knowledge of Thee, and that the
Spirits may discover themselves here in our presence, and that those
which are gentle and peaceable may come unto us, so that they may be
obedient unto Thy commands, through Thee, O Most Holy ADONAI, Whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and Whose Empire endureth unto the
Ages of the Ages. Amen.

After having said all these words devoutly, let the Master arise, and
place his hands upon the Pentacles, and let one of the Companions hold
the Book open before the Master, who, raising his eyes to heaven, and
turning unto the Four Quarters of the Universe, shall say:--

O Lord, be Thou unto me a Tower of Strength against the appearance and
assaults of the Evil Spirits.

After this, turning towards the Four Quarters of the Universe, he shall
say the following words:--

These be the Symbols and the Names of the Creator, which can bring
Terror and Fear unto you. Obey me then, by the power of these Holy
Names, and by these Mysterious Symbols of the Secret of Secrets.

The which being said and done, thou shalt see them draw near and
approach from all parts. But if they be hindered, detained, or occupied
in some way, and so that they cannot come, or if they are unwilling to
come, then, the Suffumigations and Censings being performed anew, and
(the Disciples) having anew, by especial order, touched their Swords,
and the Master having encouraged his Disciples, he shall reform the
Circle with the Knife of Art, and, raising the said Knife towards the
Sky, he shall as it were strike the air therewith. After this he shall
lay his hand upon the Pentacles, and having bent his knees before the
Most High, he shall repeat with humility the following Confession; the
which his Disciples shall also do, and they shall recite it in a low and
humble voice, so that they can scarcely be heard. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[15:1](kos08.htm#fr_11) Sloane MSS. 3091 says,
'before they come to the Circle.'

<span id="fn_12"></span>[15:2](kos08.htm#fr_12) This paragraph is
omitted in Lansdowne MSS. 1202.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[16:1](kos08.htm#fr_13) Note the 'holy kiss ' in
the New Testament. 'Greet ye one another with a holy kiss.'

<span id="fn_14"></span>[17:1](kos08.htm#fr_14) *i.e.* two Circles
enclosed between three circumferential lines.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[17:2](kos08.htm#fr_15) *i.e.* within the first
Circle.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17:3](kos08.htm#fr_16) *i.e.* the four Cardinal
points of the compass.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[17:4](kos08.htm#fr_17) The letter Tau
represents the Cross, and in 10862 Add. MSS. in the drawing of the
Circle, the Hebrew letter is replaced by the Cross; in 1307 Sloane MSS.
by the T or Tau-Cross.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[17:5](kos08.htm#fr_18) *i.e.* in the Outer
Circle, bounded by the second and third circumferential lines.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[17:6](kos08.htm#fr_19) 10862 Add. NISS. is the
only copy which uses the word hexagonal, but the others show four
hexagrams in the drawing; in the drawing, however, 10862 gives the
hexagrams formed by various differing interlacements of two triangles,
as shown in [Figure 2](kos00.htm#img_kos01).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[17:7](kos08.htm#fr_20) The Sephiroth are the
ten Qabalistical Emanations of the Deity. The Sovereign Equivalents are
the Divine Names referred thereto. See my 'Kabbalah Unveiled.'

<span id="fn_21"></span>[18:1](kos08.htm#fr_21) The MSS. vary as to the
point whereat each Name is to be placed, but I think the above will be
found to answer.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[21:1](kos08.htm#fr_22) So as not to interfere
with the direction of the Will-currents of the Master.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Confession To Be Made By the Exorcist](kos09)
