[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos09)  [Next](kos11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

## CHAPTER V

## PRAYERS AND CONJURATIONS

### PRAYER.

O LORD God, Holy Father, Almighty and Merciful One, Who hast created all
things, Who knowest all things and can do all things, from Whom nothing
is hidden, to Whom nothing is impossible; Thou Who knowest that we
perform not these ceremonies to tempt Thy power, but that we may
penetrate into the knowledge of hidden things; we pray Thee by Thy
Sacred Mercy to cause and to permit that we may arrive at this
understanding of secret things, of whatever nature they may be, by Thine
aid, O Most Holy ADONAI, Whose Kingdom and Power shall have no end unto
the Ages of the Ages. Amen.

The Prayer being finished, let the Exorcist lay his hand upon the
Pentacles, while one of the Disciples shall hold open before him the
Book wherein are written the prayers and conjurations proper for
conquering, subduing, and reproving the Spirits. Then the Master,
turning towards each Quarter of the Earth, and raising his eyes to
Heaven, shall say:

O Lord, be Thou unto me a strong tower of refuge, from the sight and
assaults of the Evil Spirits.

After which let him turn again towards the Four Quarters of the Earth,
and towards each let him utter the following words:

Behold the Symbols and Names of the Creator, which give unto ye for ever
Terror and Fear. Obey then, by the virtue of these Holy Names, and by
these Mysteries of Mysteries.

After this he shall see the Spirits come from every side. But in case
they are occupied in some other place, or that they cannot come, or that
they are unwilling to come: then let him commence afresh to invoke them
after the following manner, and let the Exorcist be assured that even
were they bound with chains of iron, and with fire, they could not
refrain from coming to accomplish his will.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

### THE CONJURATION.  <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)

O ye Spirits, ye I conjure by the Power, Wisdom, and Virtue of the
Spirit of God, by the uncreate Divine Knowledge, by the vast Mercy of
God, by the Strength of God, by the Greatness of God, by the Unity of
God; and by the Holy Name of God EHEIEH, which is the root, trunk,
source, and origin of all the other Divine Names, whence they all draw
their life and their virtue, which Adam having invoked, he acquired the
knowledge of all created things.

I conjure ye by the Indivisible Name IOD, which marketh and expresseth
the Simplicity and the Unity of the Nature Divine, which Abel having
invoked, he deserved <span id="fr_24"></span>[2](#fn_24) to escape from
the hands of Cain his brother.

I conjure ye by the Name TETRAGRAMMATON ELOHIM, which expresseth and
signifieth the Grandeur of so lofty a Majesty, that Noah having
pronounced it, saved himself, and protected himself with his whole
household from the Waters of the Deluge.

I conjure ye by the Name of God EL Strong and Wonderful, which denoteth
the Mercy and Goodness of His Majesty Divine, which Abraham having
invoked, he was found worthy to come forth from the Ur of the Chaldeans.

I conjure ye by the most powerful Name of ELOHIM GIBOR, which showeth
forth the Strength of God, of a God All Powerful, Who punisheth the
crimes of the wicked, Who seeketh out and chastiseth the iniquities of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation;
which Isaac having invoked, he was found worthy to escape from the Sword
of Abraham his father.

I conjure ye and I exorcise ye by the most holy Name of ELOAH VA-DAATH,
which Jacob invoked when in great trouble, and was found worthy to bear
the Name of Israel, which signifieth Vanquisher of God and he was
delivered from the fury of Esau his brother.

I conjure ye by the most potent Name of EL  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[3](#fn_25) ADONAI TZABAOTH, which is the God of
Armies, ruling in the Heavens, which Joseph invoked, and was found
worthy to escape from the hands of his Brethren.

I conjure ye by the most potent name of ELOHIM TZABAOTH, which
expresscth piety, mercy, splendour, and knowledge of God, which Moses

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

invoked, and he was found worthy to deliver the People Israel from
Egypt, and from the servitude of Pharaoh.

I conjure ye by the most potent Name of SHADDAI, which signifieth doing
good unto all; which Moses invoked, and having struck the Sea, it
divided into two parts in the midst, on the right hand and on the left.
I conjure ye by the most holy Name of EL <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26) CHAT, which is that of the Living God,
through the virtue of which alliance with us, and redemption for us have
been made; which Moses invoked and all the waters returned to their
prior state and enveloped the Egyptians, so that not one of them escaped
to carry the news into the Land of Mizraim.

Lastly, I conjure ye all, ye rebellious Spirits, by the most holy Name
of God ADONAI MELEKH, which Joshua invoked, and stayed the course of the
Sun in his presence, through the virtue of Methratton, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27) its principal Image; and by the troops of
Angels who cease not to cry day and night, QADOSCH, QADOSCH, QADOSCH,
ADONAI ELOHIM TZABAOTH (that is, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
Heaven and Earth are full of Thy Glory); and by the Ten Angels who
preside over the Ten Sephiroth, by whom God communicateth and extendeth
His influence over lower things, which are KETHER, CHOKMAH, BINAH,
GEDULAH, GEBURAH, TIPHERETH, NETZACH, HOD, YESOD, and MALKUTH.

I conjure ye anew, O Spirits, by all the Names of God, and by all His
marvellous work; by the heavens; by the earth; by the sea; by the depth
of the Abyss, and by that firmament which the very Spirit of God hath
moved; by the sun and by the stars; by the waters and by the seas, and
all which they contain; by the winds, the whirlwinds, and the tempests;
by the virtue of all herbs, plants, and stones; by all which is in the
heavens, upon the earth, and in all the Abysses of the Shades.

I conjure ye anew, and I powerfully urge ye, O Demons, in whatsoever
part of the world ye may be, so that ye shall be unable to remain in
air, fire, water, earth, or in any part of the universe, or in any
pleasant place which may attract ye; but that ye come promptly to
accomplish our desire, and all things that we demand from your
obedience.

I conjure ye anew by the two Tables of the Law, by the five books of
Moses, by the Seven Burning Lamps on the Candlestick of Gold before the
face of the Throne of the Majesty of God, and by the Holy of Holies
wherein the KOHEN HA-GADUL was alone permitted to enter, that is to say,
the High-Priest.

I conjure ye by Him Who hath made the heavens and the earth, and Who
hath measured those heavens in the hollow of His hand, and enclosed

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the earth with three of His fingers, Who is seated upon the Kerubim and
upon the Seraphim; and by the Kerubim, which is called the Kerub, which
God constituted and placed to guard the Tree of Life, armed with a
flaming sword, after that Man had been driven out of Paradise.

I conjure ye anew, Apostates from God, by Him Who alone hath performed
great wonders; by the Heavenly Jerusalem; and by the Most Holy Name of
God in Four Letters, and by Him Who enlighteneth all things and shineth
upon all things by his Venerable and Ineffable Name, EHEIEH ASHER
EHEIEH; that ye come immediately to execute our desire, whatever it may
be.

I conjure ye, and I command ye absolutely, O Demons, in whatsoever part
of the Universe ye may be, by the virtue of all these Holy Names:--

ADONAI, <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28) YAH, HOA, EL, ELOHA,
ELOHINU, ELOHIM, EHEIEH, MARON, KAPHU, ESCH, INNON, AVEN, AGLA, HAZOR,
EMETH, YAII, ARARITHA, YOVA, HA-KABIR, MESSIACH, IONAH, MAL-KA, EREL,
KUZU, MATZPATZ, EL SHADDAI; and by all the Holy Names of God which have
been written with blood in the sign of an eternal alliance.

I conjure ye anew by these other Names of God, Most Holy and unknown, by
the virtue of which Names ye tremble every day:--BARUC, <span
id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29) BACURABON, PATACEL, ALCHEEGHEL, AQUACHAI,
HOMORION, EHEIEH, ABBATON, CHEVON, CEBON, OYZROYMAS, CHAI, EHEIEH,
ALBAMACHI, ORTAGU, NALE, ABELECH (or HELECH), YEZE (or SECHEZZE); that
ye come quickly and without any delay into our presence from every
quarter and every climate of the world wherein ye may be, to execute all
that we shall command ye in the Great Name of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[26:1](kos10.htm#fr_23) There is an Invocation
bearing the title of 'The Qabalistical Invocation of Solomon,' given by
Eliphas Lévi, which differs in many points from the one given above,
though resembling it in some particulars. Lévi's is more evidently
constructed on the plan indicated in the 'Siphra Dtzenioutha,' C. III.;
Annotation §5, sub §8, 9; while the one above more follows that laid
down, ibid. §5, sub §3. I see no reason to suppose that Lévi's is
unauthentic. It will be noted by the Qabalistical reader, that the above
Conjuration rehearses the Divine Names attached to the Ten Sephiroth.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[26:2](kos10.htm#fr_24) In the French, 'merita
d'échapper.'

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26:3](kos10.htm#fr_25) More usually the Name
YETRAGAMMATON TZABAOTR is attributed to the Seventh Sephira.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27:1](kos10.htm#fr_26) Both this Name and
'Shaddai' are attributed to the Ninth Sephira, and I have therefore put
the two invocations in the same paragraph.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[27:2](kos10.htm#fr_27) The Archangel, who is
called also the Prince of Countenances.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[28:1](kos10.htm#fr_28) I have made these Names
as correct as possible; as in all the original MSS. the Hebrew is much
mutilated. These names are some of them ordinary titles of God; others
Magical and Qabalistical names compounded from the initials of
sentences, etc.; and other permutations of other names.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[28:2](kos10.htm#fr_29) I give these Names as
they stand, they do not all appear to be Hebrew; some of them suggest
the style of the barbarous names in the Græco-Egyptian Magical Papyri.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Stronger And More Potent Conjuration](kos11)
