[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos18)  [Next](kos20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

## CHAPTER XIV <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md)

### HOW TO RENDER THYSELF MASTER OF A TREASURE POSSESSED BY THE SPIRITS

THE Earth being inhabited, as I have before said unto thee, by a great
number of Celestial Beings and Spirits, who by their subtilty and
prevision know the places wherein treasures are hidden, and seeing that
it often happeneth that those men who undertake a search for these said
treasures are molested and sometimes put to death by the aforesaid
Spirits, which are called Gnomes; which, however, is not done through
the Avarice of these said Gnomes, a Spirit being incapable of possessing
anything, having no material senses wherewith to bring it into use, but
because these Spirits, who are enemies of the passions, are equally so
of Avarice, unto which men are so much inclined; and foreseeing the evil
ends for which these treasures will be employed have some interest and
aim in maintaining the earth in its condition of price and value, seeing
that they are its inhabitants, and when they slightly disturb the
workers in such kind of treasures, it is a warning which they give them
to cease from the work, and if it happen that the greedy importunity of
the aforesaid workers oblige them to continue, notwithstanding the
aforesaid warnings, the Spirits, irritated by their despising the same,
frequently put the workmen to death. But know, O my Son, that from the
time that thou shalt have the good fortune to be familiar with such
kinds of Spirits, and that thou shalt be able by means of what I have
taught thee to make them submit unto thine orders, they will be happy to
give thee, and to make thee partaker in that which they uselessly
possess, provided that thine object and end shall be to make a good use
thereof.

### THE MANNER OF PERFORMING THE OPERATION.

On a Sunday before sunrise, between the 10th of July and the 20th of
August, when the moon is in the Sign of the Lion, thou shalt go unto

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the place where thou shalt know either by interrogation of the
Intelligences, or otherwise, that there is a treasure; there thou shalt
describe a Circle of sufficient size with the Sword of Magical Art
wherein to open up the earth, as the nature of the ground will allow;
thrice during the day shalt thou cense it with the incense proper for
the day, after which being clothed in the raiment proper for the
Operation thou shalt suspend in some way by a machine immediately above
the opening a lamp, whose oil should be mingled with the fat of a man
who has died in the month of July, and the wick being made from the
cloth wherein he has been buried. Having kindled this with fresh fire,
thou shalt fortify the workmen with a girdle of the skin of a goat newly
slain, whereon shall be written with the blood of the dead man from whom
thou shalt have taken the fat these words and characters (*see [Figure
10](kos25.htm#img_kos02)*.md); and thou shalt set them to work in safety,
warning them not to be at all disturbed at the Spectres which they will
see, but to work away boldly. In case they cannot finish the work in a
single day, every time they shall have to leave it thou shalt cause them
to put a covering of wood over the opening, and above the covering about
six inches of earth; and thus shalt thou continue unto the end, being
all the time present in the raiment of the Art, and with the Magic
Sword, during the operation. After which thou shalt repeat this prayer

### PRAYER.

ADONAI, ELOHIM, EL, EHEIEH ASHER EHEIEH, Prince of Princes, Existence of
Existences, have mercy upon me, and cast Thine eyes upon Thy Servant
(N.), who invokes Thee most devoutedly, and supplicates Thee by Thy Holy
and tremendous Name Tetragrammaton to be propitious, and to order Thine
Angels and Spirits to come and take up their abode in this place; O ye
Angels and Spirits of the Stars, O all ye Angels and Elementary Spirits,
O all ye Spirits present before the Face of God, I the Minister and
faithful Servant of the Most High conjure ye, let God Himself, the
Existence of Existences, conjure ye to come and be present at this
Operation, I, the Servant of God, most humbly entreat ye. Amen.

Having then caused the workmen to fill in the hole, thou shalt license
the Spirits to depart, thanking them for the favour they have shown unto
thee, and saying:--

### THE LICENSE TO DEPART.

O ye good and happy Spirits, we thank ye for the benefits which we have
just received from your liberal bounty; depart ye in peace to govern the
Element which God hath destined for your habitation. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[57:1](kos19.htm#fr_67.md) This is also taken from
1203 Lansdowne MSS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Of the Experiment of Seeking Favour And Love](kos20.md)
