[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos11)  [Next](kos13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

## CHAPTER VII

### AN EXTREMELY POWERFUL CONJURATION

BEHOLD us again prepared to conjure ye by the Names and Symbols of God,
wherewith we are fortified, and by the virtue of the Highest One. We
command ye and potently ordain ye by the most strong and powerful Names
of God, Who is worthy of all praise, admiration, honour, glory,
veneration, and fear, that ye delay not longer, but that ye appear
before us without any tumult or disturbance, but, on the contrary, with
great respect and courtesy, in a beautiful and human form.

If they then appear, let them see the Pentacles, and say:

Obey ye, Obey ye, behold the Symbols and Names of the Creator; be ye
gentle and peaceable, and obey in all things that we shall command ye.

They will then immediately talk with thee, as a friend speaketh unto a
friend. Ask of them all that thou desirest, with constancy, firmness,
and assurance, and they will obey thee.

But if they appear not yet, let not the Master on that account lose his
courage, for there is nothing in the world stronger and of greater force
to overawe the Spirits than constancy. Let him, however, re-examine and
reform the Circle, and let him take up a little dust of the earth, which
he shall cast towards the Four Quarters of the Universe; and having
placed his Knife upon the ground, let him say on his knees, turning
towards the direction of the North:

In the Name of ADONAI ELOHIM TZABAOTH SHADDAI, Lord God of Armies
Almighty, may we successfully perform the works of our hands, and may
the Lord be present with us in our heart and in our lips.

These words having been said kneeling upon the earth, let the Master
shortly after arise and open his arms wide as if wishing to embrace the
air, and say:

### CONJURATION.

By the Holy Names of God written in this Book, and by the other Holy and
Ineffable Names which are written in the Book of Life, we

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

conjure ye to come unto us promptly and without any delay, wherefore
tarry not, but appear in a beautiful and agreeable form and figure, by
these Holy Names: ADONAI, TZABAOTH, EL, ELOHI, ELOHIM, SHADDAI; and by
EHEIEH, YOD HE VAU HE,which is the Great Name of God TETRAGRAMMATON
written with Four Letters, ANAPHODITON, and Ineffable; by the God of
those Virtues and Potencies, Who dwelleth in the Heavens, Who rideth
upon the Kerubim, Who moveth upon the Wings of the Wind, He Whose Power
is in Heaven and in Earth, Who spake and it was done, Who commanded and
the whole Universe was created; and by the Holy Names and in the Holy
Names, IAH, IAH, IAH, ADONAI TZABAOTH; and by all the Names of God, the
Living, and the True, I reiterate the Conjuration, and I conjure ye
afresh ye Evil and rebellious Spirits, abiding in the Abysses of
Darkness.

I conjure, I address, and I exorcise ye, that ye may approach unto and
come before the Throne of God, the Living and the True, and before the
Tribunal of the judgment of His Majesty, and before the Holy Angels of
God to hear the sentence of your condemnation.

Come ye then by the Name and in the Name Of SHADDAI, which is that of
God Almighty, strong, powerful, admirable, exalted, pure, clean,
glorified, virtuous, great, just, terrible, and holy; and by the Name
and in the Name of EL, IAH, IAH, IAH, Who hath formed and created the
world by the Breath of His Mouth, Who supporteth it by His Power, Who
ruleth and governeth it by His Wisdom, and Who hath cast ye for your
pride into the Land of Darkness and into the Shadow of Death.

Therefore, by the Name of the Living God, Who hath formed the heavens
above, and hath laid the foundations of the earth beneath, we command ye
that, immediately and without any delay, ye come unto us from all
places, valleys, mountains, hills, fields, seas, rivers, fountains,
ponds, brooks, caverns, grottos, cities, towns, villages, markets,
fairs, habitations, baths, courtyards, gardens, vineyards, plantations,
reservoirs, cisterns, and from every corner of the terrestrial earth
where ye may happen to be in your assemblies, so that ye may execute and
accomplish our demands with all mildness and courtesy; by that Ineffable
Name which Moses heard and invoked, which he received from God from the
midst of the Burning Bush, we conjure ye to obey our commands, and to
come unto us promptly with all gentleness of manner.

Again we command ye with vehemence, and we exorcise ye with constancy,
that ye and all your comrades come unto us in an agreeable and gracious
manner like the breeze, to accomplish successively our various commands
and desires. Come ye, then, by the virtue of these Names by the which we
exorcise ye; ANAI, ÆCHHAD, TRANSIN, EMETH, CHAIA, IONA, PROFA, TITACHE,
BEN ANI, BRIAH, THEIT; all which names are

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

written in Heaven in the characters of Malachim, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) that is to say, the tongue of the Angels.

We then, by the just judgment of God, by the Ineffable and Admirable
Virtue of God, just, living, and true, we call ye with power, we force
and exorcise ye by and in the admirable Name which was written on the
Tables of Stone which God gave upon Mount Sinai; and by and in the
wonderful Name which Aaron the High Priest bare written upon his breast,
by which also God created the World, the which name is AXINETON; and by
the Living God Who is One throughout the Ages, whose dwelling is in the
Ineffable Light, Whose Name is Wisdom, and Whose Spirit is Life, before
Whom goeth forth Fire and Flame, Who hath from that Fire formed the
firmament, the Stars and the Sun; and Who with that Fire will burn ye
all for ever, as also all who shall contravene the Words of His Will.

Come ye, then, without delay, without noise, and without rage, before
us, without any deformity or hideousness, to execute all our will; come
ye from all places wherein ye are, from all mountains, valleys, streams,
rivers, brooks, ponds, places, baths, synagogues; for God, strong and
powerful, will chase ye and constrain ye, being glorious over all
things; He will compel ye, both ye and the Prince of Darkness. Come ye,
come ye, Angels of Darkness; come hither before this Circle without
fear, terror, or deformity, to execute our commands, and be ye ready
both to achieve and to complete all that we shall command ye.

Come ye, then, by the Crown of the Chief of your Emperors, and by the
Sceptres of your power, and of SID, the Great Demon, your Master; by the
Names and in the Names of the Holy Angels who have been created to be
above you, long before the constitution of the world; and by the Names
of the two Princes of the Universe, whose Names are IONIEL and SEFONIEL;
by the rod of Moses, by the staff of Jacob; by the ring and seal of
David, wherein are written the Names of Sovereign God; and by the Names
of the Angels by which Solomon has linked and bound ye; and by the
sacred bonds by which ANAEL hath environed and hath conquered the
Spirit; and by the Name of the Angel who ruleth potently over the rest,
and by the praise of all creatures who cry incessantly unto God, Who
spake, and immediately all things, even the Ages, were made and formed;
and by the Name HA-QADOSCH BERAKHA, which signifieth the Holy and
Blessed One; and by the Ten Choirs of the Holy Angels, CHAIOTH
HA-QADESH, AUPHANIM, ARALIM, CHASHMALIM, SERAPHIM, MALACHIM, ELOHIM,
BENI ELOHIM, KERUBIM, and ISHIM; and by and

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

in the Sacred name of Twelve Letters of which each Letter is the Name of
an Angel, and the letters of the Name are ALEPH, <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) BETH, BETH, NUN, VAU, RESH, VAU, CHETH,
HE, QOPH, DALETH, SHIN.

By these Names therefore, and by all the other Holy Names, we conjure ye
and we exorcise ye by the Angel ZECHIEL; by the Angel DUCHIEL; by the
Angel DONACHIEL and by the Great Angel METATRON, Who is the Prince of
the Angels, and introduceth the Souls before the Face of God; and by the
Angel SANGARIEL, by whom the portals of Heaven are guarded; and by the
Angel KERUB, who was made the Guardian of the Terrestrial Paradise, with
a Sword of Flame, after the expulsion of Adam our forefather; and by the
Angel MICHAEL by whom ye were hurled down from the Height of the THRONE
into the Depth of the Lake and of the Abyss, the same Name meaning, 'Who
is like God upon Earth'; and by the Angel ANIEL; and by the Angel
OPHIEL; and by the Angel BEDALIEL; wherefore, by these and by all the
other Holy Names of the Angels, we powerfully conjure and exorcise ye,
that ye come from all parts of the world immediately, and without any
delay, to perform our will and demands, obeying us quickly and
courteously, and that ye come by the Name and in the Name of ALEPH,
DALETH, NUN, IOD, for we exorcise ye anew by the application of these
Letters, by whose power burning fire is quenched, and the whole Universe
trembleth.

We constrain ye yet again by the Seal of the Sun which is the Word of
God; and by the Seal of the Moon and of the Stars we bind ye; and by the
other Animals and Creatures which are in Heaven, by whose wings Heaven
cleanseth itself, we force and attract ye imperiously to execute our
will without failure. And we conjure, oblige, and terribly exorcise ye,
that ye draw near unto us without delay and without fear, as far as is
possible unto ye, here before this Circle, as supplicants gently and
with discretion, to accomplish our will in all and through all. If ye
come promptly and voluntarily, ye shall inhale our perfumes, and our
suffumigations of pleasant odour, which will be both agreeable and
delightful unto ye. Furthermore ye will see the Symbol of your Creator,
and the Names of his Holy Angels, and we shall afterwards dismiss ye,
and send ye hence with thanks. But if, on the contrary, ye come not
quickly, and ye show yourselves self-opinionated, rebellious, and
contumacious, we shall conjure ye again, and exorcise ye ceaselessly,
and will repeat all the aforesaid words and Holy Names of God and of the
Holy Angels; by the which Names we shall harass you, and if that be not
sufficient we will add thereunto

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

yet greater and more powerful ones, and we will thereunto again add
other Names which ye have not yet heard from us, which are those of an
Almighty God, and which will make ye tremble and quake with fear, both
ye and your princes; by the which Names we conjure both you and them
also, and we shall not desist from our work until the accomplishment of
our will. But if perchance ye yet shall harden yourselves, and show
yourselves self-opinionated, disobedient, rebellious, refractory, and
contumacious, and if ye yet resist our powerful conjurations, we shall
pronounce against you this warrant of arrest in the Name of God
Almighty, and this definite sentence that ye shall fall into dangerous
disease and leprosy; and that in sign of the Divine Vengeance ye shall
all perish by a terrifying and horrible death, and that a fire shall
consume and devour you on every side, and utterly crush you; and that by
the Power of God, a flame shall go forth from His Mouth which shall burn
ye up and reduce ye unto nothing in Hell. Wherefore delay ye not to
come, for we shall not cease from these powerful conjurations until ye
shall be- obliged to appear against your will.

Thus then, therefore, we anew conjure and exorcise ye by and in the Holy
Name Of ON, which is interpreted and called God; by the Name and in the
Name of EHEIEH, which is the true Name of God, 'I am He Who is'; by and
in the Ineffable Name of Four Letters YOD HE VAU HE, the Knowledge and
understanding of which is hidden even from the Angels; by the Name and
in the Name of EL, which signifieth and denoteth the powerful and
consuming fire which issueth from His Countenance, and which shall be
your ruin and destruction; and by the Light of the Angels which is
kindled and taken ineffably from that flame of Divine ardour.

By these then, and by other Most Holy Names which we pronounce against
you from the bottom of our hearts, do we force and constrain ye, if ye
be yet rebellious and disobedient. We conjure ye powerfully and strongly
exorcise ye, that ye come unto us with joy and quickness, without fraud
or deceit, in truth and not in error.

Come ye then, come ye, behold the Signs and the Names of your Creator,
behold the Holy Pentacles by the virtue of which the Earth is moved, the
trees thereof and the Abysses tremble. Come ye; come ye; come ye.

These things being thus done and performed, ye shall see the Spirits
come from all sides in great haste with their Princes and Superiors; the
Spirits of the First Order, like Soldiers, armed with spears, shields,
and corslets; those of the Second Order like Barons, Princes, Dukes,
Captains, and Generals of Armies. For the Third and last Order their
King will appear, before whom go many players on instruments of

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

music, accompanied by beautiful and melodious voices which sing in
chorus.

Then the Exorcist, or Master of the Art, at the arrival of the King,
whom he shall see crowned with a Diadem, should uncover the Holy
Pentacles and Medals which he weareth upon his breast covered with a
cloth of silk or of fine twined linen, and show them unto him, saying:--

Behold the Signs and Holy Names by and before whose power every knee
should bow, of all that is in Heaven, upon Earth, or in Hell. Humble ye
yourselves, therefore, under the Mighty hand of God.

Then will the King bow the knee before thee, and will say, 'What dost
thou wish, and wherefore hast thou caused us to come hither from the
Infernal Abodes?'

Then shall the Exorcist, or Master of Magical Art, with an assured air
and a grave and imperious voice, order and command him to be tranquil,
to keep the rest of his attendants peaceable, and to impose silence upon
them.

Let him, also, renew his fumigations, and offer large quantities of
Incense, which he should at once place upon the fire, in order to
appease the Spirits as he hath promised them. He should then cover the
Pentacles, and he will see wonderful things, which it is impossible to
relate, touching worldly matters and all sciences.

This being finished, let the Master uncover the Pentacles, and demand
all that he shall wish from the King of the Spirits, and if there are
one or two Spirits only, it will be the same; and having obtained all
his desire, he shall thus license them to depart:--

### THE LICENSE TO DEPART.

In the Name of ADONAI, the Eternal and Everlasting One, let each of you
return unto his place; be there peace between us and you, and be ye
ready to come when ye are called.

After this he should recite the first chapter of Genesis, '*Berashith
Bara Elohim*, In the beginning, etc.'

This being done, let them all in order quit the Circle, one after the
other, the Master first. Furthermore let them bathe their faces with the
exorcised water, as will be hereafter told, and then let them take their
ordinary raiment and go about their business.

Take notice and observe carefully that this last conjuration is of so
great importance and efficacy, that even if the Spirits were bound with
chains of iron and fire, or shut up in some strong place, or retained by
an oath, they could not even then delay to come. But supposing that they
were being conjured in some other place or part of the Universe by some
other Exorcist or Master of the Art, by the same conjuration; the Master

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

should add to his conjuration that they should at least send him some
Messengers, or some individual to declare unto him where they are, how
employed, and the reason why they cannot come and obey him.

But if (which is almost impossible) they be even yet self-opinionated
and disobedient, and unwilling to obey; in this case their names should
be written on virgin paper, which he should soil and fill with mud,
dust, or clay. Then he shall kindle a fire with dry rue, upon which he
shall put powdered assafœtida, and other things of evil odour; after
which let him put the aforesaid names, written on parchment or-virgin
paper, upon the fire, saying:--

### THE CONJURATION OF THE FIRE.

I conjure thee, O Creature of Fire, by Him who removeth the Earth, and
maketh it tremble, that thou burn and torment these Spirits, so that
they may feel it intensely, and that they may be burned eternally by
thee.

This being said, thou shalt cast the aforesaid paper into the fire,
saying:--

### THE CURSE.

Be ye accursed, damned, and eternally reproved; and be ye tormented

with perpetual pain, so that ye may find no repose by night nor by day,
nor for a single moment of time, if ye obey not immediately the command
of Him Who maketh the Universe to tremble; by these Names, and in virtue
of these Names, the which being named and invoked all creatures obey and
tremble with fear and terror, these Names which can turn aside

lightning and thunder; and which will utterly make you to perish,
destroy, and banish you. These Names then are Aleph, Beth, Gimel,
Daleth, He, Vau, Zayin, Cheth, Teth, Yod, Kaph, Lamed, Mem, Nun, Samekh,
Ayin, Pe, Tzaddi, Qoph, Resh, Shin, Tau. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)

By these secret Names, therefore, and by these signs which are full of
Mysteries, we curse ye, and in virtue of the power of the Three
Principles, Aleph, <span id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_50) Mem, Shin, we
deprive ye of all office and dignity which ye may have enjoyed up till
now; and by their virtue and power we relegate you into a lake of
sulphur and of flame, and unto the deepest depths of the Abyss, that ye
may burn therein eternally for ever.

Then will they assuredly come without any delay, and in great haste,
crying: ' O Our Lord and Prince, deliver us out of this suffering.'

All this time thou shouldest have near thee ready an exorcised pen,

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

paper, and ink, as will be described hereinafter. Write their Names
afresh, and kindle fresh fire, whereon thou shalt put gum benjamin,
olybdanum, and storax to make therewith a fumigation; with these odours
thou shalt afresh perfume the aforesaid paper with the Names; but thou
shouldest have these names ready prepared beforehand. Then show them the
Holy Pentacles, and ask of them what thou wilt, and thou shalt obtain
it; and having gained thy purpose, send away the Spirits, saying:--

### THE LICENSE TO DEPART.

By the virtue of these Pentacles, and because ye have been obedient, and
have obeyed the commandments of the Creator, feel and inhale this
grateful odour, and afterwards depart ye unto your abodes and retreats;
be there peace between us and you; be ye ever ready to come when ye
shall be cited and called; and may the blessing of God, as far as ye are
capable of receiving it, be upon you, provided ye be obedient and prompt
to come unto us without solemn rites and observances on our part.

Thou shouldest further make a Book of virgin paper, and therein write
the foregoing conjurations, and constrain the Demons to swear upon the
same Book that they will come whenever they be called, and present
themselves before thee, whenever thou shalt wish to consult them.
Afterwards thou canst cover this Book with sacred Sigils on a plate of
silver, and therein write or engrave the Holy Pentacles. Thou mayest
open this Book either on Sundays or on Thursdays, rather at night than
by day, and the Spirits will come.

Regarding the expression 'night,' understand the night following, and
not the night preceding the aforesaid days. And remember that by day
(the Demons) are ashamed, for they are Animals of Darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[38:1](kos12.htm#fr_47) The Mystic Alphabet
known as the 'Writing of Malachim' is formed from the positions of the
Stars in the heavens, by drawing imaginary lines from one star to
another so as to obtain the shapes of the characters of this Alphabet.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[39:1](kos12.htm#fr_48) Which Letters I have,
with much care, corrected, for in the MSS. the letters are jumbled
together in hopeless confusion, *Seym* is written for *Shin*, *Res* for
*Beth*, etc. The Name is *Ab*, *Ben*, *Ve Ruach Ha-Qadesch*, Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, There are two other Names of Twelve Letters
frequently employed, HQDVSh BRVK HVA, Holy and Blessed be He; and ADNI
HMLK NAMN, The Lord, the faithful King; besides other forms.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[42:1](kos12.htm#fr_49) Which are the Names of
the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, to each of which a special mystic
meaning and power is attached, besides its ordinary application.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[42:2](kos12.htm#fr_50) The Literal Symbols of
Air, Water, and Fire; which are called by the Sepher Yetzirah the Three
Mother Letters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Concerning the Medals Or Pentacles, And the Manner
of Constructing Them](kos13)
