[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos17)  [Next](kos19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

## CHAPTER XIII <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

### HOW TO MAKE THE MAGIC CARPET PROPER FOR INTERROGATING THE INTELLIGENCES, SO AS TO OBTAIN AN ANSWER REGARDING WHATSOEVER MATTER ONE MAY WISH TO LEARN

MAKE a Carpet of white and new wool, and when the Moon shall be at her
full, in the Sign of Capricorn and in the hour of the Sun, thou shalt go
into the country away from any habitation of man, in a place free from
all impurity, and shalt spread out thy Carpet so that one of its points
shall be towards the east, and another towards the west, and having made
a Circle without it and enclosing it, thou shalt remain within upon the
point towards the east, and holding thy wand in the air for every
operation, thou shalt call upon MICHAEL, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65.md) towards the north upon RAPHAEL, towards
the west upon GABRIEL, and towards the south upon MURIEL. After this
thou shalt return unto the point of the East and devoutly invoke the
Great Name AGLA, and take this point of the Carpet in thy left hand;
turning then towards the North thou shalt do the same, and so continuing
to the other points of the Carpet, thou shalt raise them so that they
touch not the ground, and holding them up thus, and turning anew towards
the East thou shalt say with great veneration the following Prayer:--

### PRAYER.

AGLA, AGLA, AGLA, AGLA; O God Almighty Who art the Life of the Universe
and Who rulest over the four divisions of its vast form by the strength
and virtue of the Four Letters of Thy Holy Name Tetragrammaton, YOD, HE,
VAU, HE, bless in Thy Name this covering which I hold as Thou hast
blessed the Mantle of Elijah in the hands of Elisha, so that being
covered by Thy Wings, nothing may be able to injure me, even as it

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

is said:--'He shall hide thee under His Wings and beneath His feathers
shall thou trust, His truth shall be thy shield and buckler.'

After this thou shalt fold it up, saying these words
following:--RECABUSTIRA, CABUSTIRA, BUSTIRA, TIRA, RA, A; and shall keep
it carefully to serve thee at need.

When thou shalt be desirous to make thine interrogations, choose the
night of full or of new moon, and from midnight until daybreak. Thou
shalt transport thyself unto the appointed spot if it be for the purpose
of discovering a treasure; if not, any place will serve provided it be
clean and pure. Having had the precaution on the preceding evening to
write upon a slip of virgin parchment coloured azure-blue, with a pen
made from the feather of a dove, this Character and Name (*see [Figure
9](kos25.htm#img_kos02)*.md); taking thy carpet, thou shalt cover thy head
and body therewith, and taking the censer, with new fire therein, thou
shalt place it in or upon the proper place, and cast thereon some
incense. Then shalt thou prostrate thyself upon the ground, with thy
face towards the earth, before the incense beginneth to fume, keeping
the fire of the same beneath the carpet, holding thy wand upright,
against which to rest thy chin; thou shalt hold with thy right hand the
aforesaid strip of parchment against thy forehead, and thou shalt say
the following words:--

VEGALE, HAMICATA, UMSA, TERATA, YEH, DAH, MA, BAXASOXA, UN, HORAH,
HIMESERE; <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md) O God the Vast One send
unto me the Inspiration of Thy Light, make me to discover the secret
thing which I ask of Thee, whatsoever such or such a thing may be, make
me to search it out by the aid of Thy holy ministers RAZIEL, TZAPHNIEL,
MATMONIEL; Lo, Thou hast desired truth in the young, and in the hidden
thing shalt Thou make me know wisdom. RECABUSTIRA, CABUSTIRA, BUSTIRA,
TIRA, RA, A, KARKAHITA, KAHITA, HITA, TA.

And thou shalt hear distinctly the answer which thou shalt have sought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[55:1](kos18.htm#fr_64.md) This Chapter is also
taken from 1203 Lansdowne MSS.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[55:2](kos18.htm#fr_65.md) I have usually found
Michael attributed to the South; Raphael to the East; Gabriel to the
West; and Auriel to the North. Likewise I think the operator should turn
following the course of the Sun, and not contrariwise as in the text.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[56:1](kos18.htm#fr_66.md) These are probably
corrupted Hebrew words derived from the prayer itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. How To Render Thyself Master of A Treasure Possessed
By the Spirits](kos19.md)
