[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos19)  [Next](kos21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

## CHAPTER XV

### OF THE EXPERIMENT OF SEEKING FAVOUR AND LOVE <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68)

IF thou wishest to perform the Experiment of seeking favour and love,
observe in what manner the Experiment is to be carried out, and if it be
dependent upon the day and the hour, perform it in the day and the hour
required, as thou wilt find it in the Chapter concerning the hours; and
if the Experiment be one that requireth writing, thou shalt write as it
is said in the Chapter concerning the same; and if it be with penal
bonds, pacts, and fumigations, then thou shalt cense with a fit perfume
as is said in the Chapter concerning suffumigations; and if it be
necessary to sprinkle it with water and hyssop, then let it be as in the
Chapter concerning the same; similarly if such Experiment require
characters, names, or the like, let such names be written as the Chapter
concerning the writing of characters, and place the same in a clean
place as hath been said. Then thou shalt repeat over it the following
Oration:--

### THE ORATION.

O ADONAI, most Holy, Most Righteous, and most Mighty God, Who hast made
all things through Thy Mercy and Righteousness wherewith Thou art
filled, grant unto us that we may be found worthy that this Experiment
may be found consecrated and perfect, so that the Light may issue from
Thy Most Holy Seat, O ADONAI, which may obtain for us favour and love.
Amen.

This being said, thou shalt place it in clean silk, and bury it for a
day and a night at the junction of four cross-roads; and whensoever thou
wishest to obtain any grace or favour from any, take it, having first
properly consecrated it according to the rule, and place it in thy right
hand, and seek thou what thou wilt it shall not be denied thee. But if
thou doest not the Experiment carefully and rightly, assuredly thou
shalt not succeed in any manner.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

For obtaining grace and love write down the following words

SATOR, <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) AREPO, TENET, OPERA, ROTAS,
IAH, IAH, IAH, ENAM, IAH, IAH, IAH, KETHER, CHOKMAH, BINAH, GEDULAH,
GEBURAH, TIPHERETH, NETZACH, HOD, YESOD, MALKUTH, ABRAHAM, ISAAC, JACOB,
SHADRACH, MESHACH, ABEDNEGO, be ye all present in my aid and for
whatsoever I shall desire to obtain.

Which words being properly written as above, thou shalt also find thy
desire brought to pass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[59:1](kos20.htm#fr_68) This Chapter is taken
from 10862 Add. MSS.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[60:1](kos20.htm#fr_69) This Incantation is also
given in 1307 Sloane MSS., page 76.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. How Operations of Mockery, Invisibility, And Deceit
Should Be Prepared](kos21)
