[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos22)  [Next](kos24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

## CHAPTER XVIII

### CONCERNING THE HOLY PENTACLES OR MEDALS

THE Medals or Pentacles, which we make for the purpose of striking
terror into the Spirits and reducing them to obedience, have besides
this wonderful and excellent virtue. If thou invokest the Spirits by
virtue of these Pentacles, they will obey thee without repugnance, and
having considered them they will be struck with astonishment, and will
fear them, and thou shalt see them so surprised by fear and terror, that
none of them will be sufficiently bold to wish to oppose thy will. They
are also of great virtue and efficacy against all perils of Earth, of
Air, of Water, and of Fire, against poison which hath been drunk,
against all kinds of infirmities and necessities, against binding,
sortilege, and sorcery, against all terror and fear, and wheresoever
thou shalt find thyself, if armed with them, thou shalt be in safety all
the days of thy life.

Through them do we acquire grace and good-will from man and woman, fire
is extinguished, water is stayed, and all Creatures fear at the sight of
the Names which are therein, and obey through that fear.

These Pentacles are usually made of the metal the most suitable to the
nature of the Planet; and then there is no occasion to observe the rule
of particular colours. They should be engraved with the instrument of
Art in the days and hours proper to the Planet.

Saturn ruleth over Lead; Jupiter over Tin; Mars over Iron; the Sun over
Gold; Venus over Copper; Mercury over the mixture of Metals; and the
Moon over Silver.

They may also be made with exorcised virgin paper, writing thereon with
the colours adopted for each Planet, referring to the rules already laid
down in the proper Chapters, and according to the Planet with which the
Pentacle is in sympathy.

Wherefore unto Saturn the colour of Black is appropriated; Jupiter
ruleth over Celestial Blue; Mars over Red; the Sun over Gold, or the
colour of Yellow or Citron; Venus over Green; Mercury over Mixed
Colours; the Moon over Silver, or the colour of Argentine Earth.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

The Matter of which the Pentacle is constructed should be Virgin, never
having been used for any other purpose; or if it be metal it should be
purified by fire.

As regards the size of the Pentacles it is arbitrary, so long as they
are made according to the rules, and with the requisite solemnities, as
hath been ordained.

The <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71.md) virtues of the Holy Pentacles
are no less advantageous unto thee than the knowledge of the secrets
which I have already given unto thee; and thou shouldest take particular
care if thou makest them upon virgin parchment to use the proper
colours; and if thou engravest them upon metal, to do so in the manner
taught thee; and so shalt thou have the satisfaction of seeing them
produce the promised effect. But seeing that this Science is not a
Science of argument and open reasoning, but that, on the contrary, it is
entirely mysterious and occult, we should not argue and deliberate over
these matters, and it is sufficient to believe firmly to enable us to
bring into operation that which hath already been taught.

When thou shalt construct these Pentacles and Characters, it is
necessary never to forget the Incense, nor to employ anything beyond
that of which mention is made.

It is necessary, above all things, to be attentive to the operation, and
never to forget or omit those things which contribute to the success
which the Pentacles and Experiments promise, having ever in thy mind no
other intention than the Glory of God, the accomplishment of thy
desires, and loving-kindness towards thy neighbour.

Furthermore, my beloved Son, I order thee not to bury this Science, but
to make thy friends partakers in the same, subject however to the strict
command never to profane the things which are Divine, for if thou doest
this, far from rendering thee a friend of the Spirits, it will but be
the means of bringing thee unto destruction.

But never must thou lavish these things among the ignorant, for that
would be as blameable as to cast precious gems before swine; on the
contrary, from one Sage the secret knowledge should pass unto another
Sage, for in this manner shall the Treasure of Treasures never descend
into oblivion.

Adore <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72.md) and revere the Most Holy Names
of God which are found in these Pentacles and Characters, for without
this never shalt thou be able to come to the end of any enterprise, nor
to accomplish the Mystery of Mysteries.

Above all things, remember that to perform any of these operations

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

thou must be pure in body and in mind, and without blemish, and on not
any of the preparations.

This Key, full of Mysteries, hath been revealed unto me by an Angel.

Accursed be he who undertaketh our Art without having the qualities
requisite to thoroughly understand our Key, accursed be he who invoke
the Name of God in vain, for such an one prepareth for himself the
punishments which await the unbelievers, for God shall abandon them a
relegate them unto the depths of Hell amongst the impure Spirits.

For God is great and Immutable, He hath been for ever, and He shall
remain even unto the end of the Ages.

ACCURSED BE HE WHO TAKETH THENAME OFGOD IN VAIN! ACCURSED BE HE WHO
USETH THIS KNOWLEDGE UNTO AN EVIL END, BE HE ACCURSED IN THIS WORLD AND
IN THE WORLD TO COME. AMEN. BE HE ACCURSED THE NAME WHICH HE HATH
BLASPHEMED!

THE END OF THE FIRST BOOK

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[64:1](kos23.htm#fr_71.md) This and the four
following paragraphs are from 1203 Lansdowne MSS.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[64:2](kos23.htm#fr_72.md) The rest of the Chapter
is from 1202 Lansdowne MSS., except the last sentence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Order of the Pentacles](kos24.md)
