[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos36)  [Next](kos38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

## CHAPTER I

### AT WHAT HOUR AFTER THE PREPARATION OF ALL THINGS NECESSARY, WE SHOULD BRING THE EXERCISE OF THE ART TO PERFECTION

THE Days and Hours have already been treated of, in general, in the
First Book. It is now necessary to notice in particular at what hour
accomplishment and perfection should be given to the Arts, all things
necessary having been previously prepared.

Should it then happen that thou hast undertaken any secret operation for
conversing with or conjuring Spirits, in which the day and the hour are
not marked, thou shalt put it in execution on the days and hours of
Mercury, at the sixteenth or twenty-third hour, but it will be still
better at the eighth, which is the third <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) of the same night, which is called and
means before the morning, for then thou shalt be able to put in practice
all the Arts and Operations which should be performed, according as it
shall please thee by day or by night, provided that they have been
prepared at the hours suitable to them, as hath been already said. But
when neither hour nor time of operation or invocation is specified, it
is then much better to perform these experiments at night, seeing that
it is more easy to the Spirits to appear in the peaceful silence of
night than during the day. And thou shouldest inviolably observe, that
wishing to invoke the Spirits, either by day or by night, it is
necessary that it should be done in a place hidden, removed, secret,
convenient, and proper for such Art, where no man frequenteth or
inhabiteth, as we shall relate more fully in its place.

If then thou shouldest operate touching anything which hath been stolen,
in whatever way it be performed and whatever way it may have been
prepared, it is necessary to practise it on the days and hours of the
Moon, being if possible in her increase, and from the first unto the
eighth hour of the day.

But if it be by night, then it should be at the fifth or at the third

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

hour; but it is better by day than by the night, for the light
justifieth them, and maketh them much more fit for publication.

But if the Operations be regarding Invisibility, they should be put in
practice at the first, second, and third hour of Mars by day. But if by
night, until the third hour.

If they be Operations of seeking love, grace, or favour, they should be
performed until the eighth hour of the same day, commencing with the
first hour of the Sun; and from the first hour of Venus unto the first
hour of the same day of Venus.

As for Operations of destruction and desolation, we should practise and
put them into execution on the day of Saturn at the first hour, or
rather at the eighth or fifteenth of the day; and from the first until
the eighth hour of the night.

Experiments of games, raillery, deceit, illusion, and invisibility,
ought to be done at the first hour of Venus, and at the eighth hour of
the day but by night at the third and at the seventh.

At all times of practising and putting into execution Magical Arts, the
Moon should be increasing in light, and in an equal number of degrees
with the Sun; and it is much better from the first quarter to the
Opposition, and the Moon should be in a fiery Sign, and notably in that
of the Ram or of the Lion.

Therefore, to execute these Experiments in any manner whatsoever, it
should be done when the Moon is clear, and when she is increasing in
light.

In order to put in execution those of Invisibility after everything is
properly prepared, the Moon should be in the Sign of the Fishes, in the
hours proper and fitting, and she should be increasing in light.

For experiments of seeking love and favour, in whatever way it may be
desired, they will succeed, provided that they have been prepared at the
proper hours, and that the Moon be increasing in light and in the Sign
of the Twins.

So exact a preparation of days and hours is not necessary for those who
are adepts in the Art, but it is extremely necessary for apprentices and
beginners, seeing that those who have been little or not at all
instructed herein, and who only begin to apply themselves to this Art,
do not have as much faith in the experiments as those who are adepts
therein, and who have practised them. But as regards beginners, they
should always have the days and hours well disposed and appropriate unto
the Art. And the Wise should only observe the precepts of the Art which
are necessary, and in observing the other solemnities necessary they
will operate with a perfect assurance.

It is, nevertheless, necessary to take care that when thou shalt have

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

prepared any experiment thyself for the days and hours ordained, that it
should be performed in clear, serene, mild, and pleasant weather,
without any great tempest or agitation of the air, which should not be
troubled by winds. For when thou shalt have conjured any Spirits in any
art or experiment, they will not come when the air is troubled or
agitated by winds, seeing that Spirits have neither flesh nor bones, and
are created of different substances.

Some are created from Water.

Others from Wind, unto which they are like.

Some from Earth.

Some from Clouds.

Others from Solar Vapours.

Others from the keenness and strength of Fire; and when they are invoked
or summoned, they come always with great noise, and with the terrible
nature of fire.

When the Spirits which are created of Water are invoked, they come with
great rains, thunder, hail, lightning, thunder-bolts, and the like.

When the Spirits which are created of Clouds are invoked, they come with
great deformity, in a horrible form, to strike fear into the Invocator,
and with an exceeding great noise.

Others <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) which are formed from Wind
appear like thereunto and with exceeding swift motion, and whensoever
those which are created from Beauty <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76)
appear, they will show themselves in a fair and agreeable form;
moreover, whensoever thou shalt call the Spirits created from Air, they
will come with a kind of gentle breeze.

When the Spirits which are created from the Vapours of the Sun are
invoked, they come under a very beautiful and excellent form, but filled
with pride, vanity, and conceit. They are clever, whence it comes that
these last are all specified by Solomon in his book of ornament, or of
beauty. They show great ostentation and vainglory in their dress, and
they rejoice in many ornaments; they boast of possessing mundane beauty,
and all sorts of ornaments and decorations. Thou shalt only invoke them
in serene, mild, and pleasant weather.

The Spirits <span id="fr_77"></span>[3](#fn_77) which are created of
Fire reside in the cast, those created of Wind in the south.

Note then that it will be much better to perform the experiments or
operations in the direction of the east, putting everything necessary in
practice towards that point.

But for all other operations or extraordinary experiments, and for

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

those of love, they will be much more efficacious directed towards the
north.

Take heed further, that every time that thou performest any experiment,
to reduce it unto perfection with the requisite solemnities, thou shalt
recommence the former experiment if interrupted therein, without the
preparation of hours or other solemnities:

If by chance it should happen that having performed an experiment with
due observance of days, hours, and requisite solemnities, thou shalt
find it unsuccessful, it must be in some manner false, ill-arranged and
defective, and thou must assuredly have failed in some matter; for if
thou doest ill in one single point, these experiments or these Arts will
not be verified.

Thus upon this Chapter dependeth this whole Key of Arts, Experiments,
and Operations, and although every solemnity be rightly observed, no
experiment will be verified, unless thou canst penetrate the meaning of
this Chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[80:1](kos37.htm#fr_74) In 10862 Add. MSS. it
says 'the second.'

<span id="fn_75"></span>[82:1](kos37.htm#fr_75) This paragraph is only
found in 10862 Add. MSS.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[82:2](kos37.htm#fr_76) The Name of the Sixth
Qabalistical Sephira or Emanation from the Deity, which is called
Tiphereth, or Beauty.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[82:3](kos37.htm#fr_77) I have usually found it
said exactly *vice versâ*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. In What Manner the Master of the Art Should Keep,
Rule, And Govern Himself](kos38)
