[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos29)  [Next](kos31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PLATE VII.

<span id="img_kos07"></span> ![](img/kos07.jpg)  
PLATE VII.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Figure 30.--The Sixth Pentacle of Mars.--It hath so great virtue that
being armed therewith, if thou art attacked by any one, thou shalt
neither be injured nor wounded when thou fightest with him, and his own
weapons shall turn against him.

Editor's Note.--Around the eight points of the radii of the Pentacle are
the words 'Elohim qeber, Elohim hath covered (or protected),' written in
the Secret Alphabet of Malachim, or the writing of the Angels. The
versicle is from Psalm xxxvii. 15:--'Their sword shall enter into their
own heart, and their bow shall be broken.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Figure 31.--The Seventh and last Pentacle of Mars.--Write thou this upon
virgin parchment or paper with the blood of a bat, in the day and hour
of Mars; and uncover it within the Circle, invoking the Demons whose
Names are therein written; and thou shalt immediately see hail and
tempest.

Editor's Note.--In the centre of the Pentacle are the Divine Names, El
and Yiai, which have the same numerical value when written in Hebrew.
The Letters in Hebrew, and in the Secret Alphabet called the Celestial,
compose the Names of Spirits. Round the Pentacle is:--'He gave them hail
for rain, and flaming fire in their land. He smote their vines also, and
their fig-trees.'--Psalm cv. 32, 33.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

### THE SUN.

Figure 32.--The First Pentacle of the Sun.--The Countenance of Shaddaï
the Almighty, at Whose aspect all creatures obey, and the Angelic
Spirits do reverence on bended knees.

Editor's Note.--This singular Pentacle contains the head of the great
Angel Methraton or Metatron, the vice-gerent and representative of
Shaddaï, who is called the Prince of Countenances, and the right-hand
masculine Cherub of the Ark, as Sandalphon is the left and feminine. On

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

either side is the Name 'El Shaddaï.' Around is written in Latin:'Behold
His face and form by Whom all things were made, and Whom all creatures
obey.'

Figure 33.--The Second Pentacle of the Sun.--This Pentacle, and the
preceding and following, belong to the nature of the Sun. They serve to
repress the pride and arrogance of the Solar Spirits, which are
altogether proud and arrogant by their nature.

Editor's Note.--Mystical characters of the Sun and the Names of the
Angels:--Shemeshiel, Paimoniah, Rekhodiah, and Malkhiel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate VIII](kos31.md)
