[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos38)  [Next](kos40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

## CHAPTER III

### HOW THE COMPANIONS OR DISCIPLES OF THE MASTER OF THE ART OUGHT TO REGULATE AND GOVERN THEMSELVES

WHEN the Master of the Art wisheth to put in practice any Operation or
Experiment, especially one of importance, he should first consider of
what Companions he should avail himself. This is the reason why in every
Operation whose Experience should be carried out in the Circle, it is
well to have three Companions. And if he cannot have Companions, he
should at least have with him a faithful and attached dog. But if it be
absolutely necessary for him to have Companions, these Companions should
be obligated and bound by oath to do all that the Master shall order and
prescribe them, and they should study, observe, and carefully retain,
and be attentive unto all which they shall hear. For those who shall act
otherwise shall suffer and endure many pains and labours, and run into
many dangers, which the Spirits will cause and procure for them, and for
this cause sometimes they shall even die.

The Disciples then, being well and thoroughly instructed, and fortified
with a wise and understanding heart, the Master shall take exorcised
water, and he shall enter with his Disciples into a secret place
purified and clean, where he must strip them entirely naked; after this,
let him pour exorcised water upon their heads, which he should cause to
flow from the crown of their head unto the sole of their feet, so as to
bathe them entirely therewith; and while bathing them thus, he should
say:--

Be ye regenerate, cleansed, and purified, in the Name of the Ineffable,
Great, and Eternal God, from all your iniquities, and may the virtue of
the Most High descend upon you and abide with you always, so that ye may
have the power and strength to accomplish the desires of your heart.
Amen.

After this let the Disciples robe themselves as the Master hath done,
and fast like him for three days, repeating the same prayer; let them
act like him, and in the work let them implicitly follow and obey him in
all things.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

But if the Master of the Art wisheth to have a dog for his Companion, he
must bathe him thoroughly with the exorcised water in the same manner as
the Disciples, and let him perfume him with the odours and incense of
Art, and let him repeat the following Conjuration over him:--

I conjure thee, O thou Creature, being a Dog, by Him Who hath created
thee, I bathe and I perfume thee in the Name of the Most High, Most
Powerful, and Eternal God, so that thou mayest be my true Companion in
this operation, and that thou mayest be also my faithful friend in
whatsoever operation I may hereafter perform.

But if he wisheth to have for his companion a little boy or girl, which
will be still better, he must ordain them as he hath ordained the dog;
and he must pare and cut the nails of their hands and of their feet,
saying:--

I conjure thee, O thou Creature, being a young girl (or boy), by the
Most High God, the Father of all Creatures, by the Father ADONAI ELOHIM,
and by the Father ELION, that thou shalt have neither will nor power to
hide from me anything, nor yet to keep back from me the truth in all
which I shall demand of thee, and that thou be obedient and faithful
unto me. Amen.

Let him purify, cleanse, and wash this young child anew, with the Water
of Art, saying:--

Be thou regenerate, cleansed, and purified, so that the Spirits may
neither harm thee nor abide in thee. Amen.

Then perfume the child with odours as above.

When the Companions shall be thus ordained and disposed, the Master
shall be able to operate in surety together with them, every time that
it shall please him; and he shall perform his operation happily, and
shall attain his end.

But for the safety both of soul and of body, the Master and the
Companions should have the Pentacles before their breasts, consecrated,
and covered with a silken veil, and perfumed with the proper
fumigations. By the which being assured and encouraged, they may enter
into the matter without fear or terror, and they shall be exempt and
free from all perils and dangers, provided that they obey the commands
of the Master and do all that he ordain them. If they shall act thus,
all things shall go according unto their desires.

All being thus arranged, the Master should take heed that His Disciples
are perfectly instructed in those things which they have to perform.

These Companions or Disciples should be three in number, without
including the Master. They may also be of the number of five, of seven,
or of nine; but so that they ever implicitly obey the orders of their
Master; for thus only shall all things come to a successful issue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Concerning the Fasting, Care, And Things To Be
Observed](kos40)
