[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos37)  [Next](kos39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

## CHAPTER II

### IN WHAT MANNER THE MASTER OF THE ART SHOULD KEEP, RULE, AND GOVERN HIMSELF

HE who wisheth to apply himself unto so great and so difficult a Science
should have his mind free from all business, and from all extraneous
ideas of whatever nature they may be.

He should then thoroughly examine the Art or Operation which he should
undertake, and write it regularly out on paper, particularly set aside
for that purpose, with the appropriate conjurations and exorcisms. If
there be anything to mark or write down, it should be performed in the
manner specified regarding the paper, ink, and pen. He should also
observe at what day and at what hour this Experiment should be
undertaken, and what things are necessary to prepare for it, what should
be added, and what can be dispensed with.

The which matters being prepared, it is necessary for thee to search out
and arrange some fitting place wherein the Magical Art and its
Experiments can be put in practice. All these things being thus arranged
and disposed, let the Master of the Art go into a proper and fitting
place, or into his Cabinet or Secret Chamber if it be convenient for the
purpose, and he can there dispose and set in order the whole operation;
or he can use any other convenient secret place for the purpose,
provided that no one knoweth where it is, and that no man can see him
when there.

After this he must strip himself entirely naked, and let him have a bath
ready prepared, wherein is water exorcised, after the manner which we
shall describe, so that he may bathe and purify himself therein from the
crown of his head unto the sole of his foot, saying:--

O Lord ADONAI, Who hast formed me Thine unworthy servant in Thine Image
and resemblance of vile and of abject earth; deign to bless and to
sanctify this Water, so that it may be for the health and purification
of my sotd, and of my body, so that no foolishness or deceitfulness may
therein in any way have place.

O Most Powerful and Ineffable God, Who madest Thy people pass

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

dryshod through the Red Sea when they came up out of the Land of Egypt,
grant unto me grace that I may be purified and regenerated from all my
past sins by this Water, that so no uncleanness may appear upon me in
Thy Presence.

After this thou shalt entirely immerse thyself in the Water, and thou
shalt dry thyself with a towel of clean white linen, and then thou shalt
put upon thy flesh the garments of pure white linen whereof we shall
speak hereafter.

Hereafter, for three days at least, thou shalt abstain from all idle,
vain, and impure reasonings, and from every kind of impurity and sin, as
will be shown in the Chapter of fast and of vigil. Each day shalt thou
recite the following prayer, at least once in the morning, twice about
noon, thrice in the afternoon, four times in the evening, and five times
before lying down to sleep; this shalt thou do on the three ensuing
days:--

### THE PRAYER.

HERACHIO, ASAC, ASACRO, BEDRIMULAEL, TILATH, ARABONAS, IERAHLEM,
IDEODOC, ARCHARZEL, ZOPHIEL, BLAUTEL, BARACATA, EDONIEL, ELOHIM, EMAGRO,
ABRAGATEH, SAMOEL, GEBURAHEL, CADATO, ERA, ELOHI, ACHSAH, EBMISHA,
IMACHEDEL, DANIEL, DAMA, ELAMOS, IZACHEL, BAEL, SEGON, GEMON, DEMAS.

O Lord God, Who art seated upon the Heavens, and Who regardest the
Abysses beneath, grant unto me Thy Grace I beseech Thee, so that what I
conceive in my mind I may accomplish in my work, through Thee, O God,
the Sovereign Ruler of all, Who livest and reignest unto the Ages of the
Ages. Amen.

These three days having passed, thou must have all things in readiness,
as hath been said, and after this a day appointed and set apart. It will
be necessary for thee to wait for the hour in which thou shouldest
commence the Operation; but when once it shall be commenced at this
hour, thou shalt be able to continue it unto the end, seeing that it
deriveth its force and virtue from its beginning, which extendeth to and
spreadeth over the succeeding hours, so that the Master of the Art will
be enabled to complete his work so as to arrive at the desired result.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](kos39.md)
