[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos42)  [Next](kos44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER VII

### OF PLACES WHEREIN WE MAY CONVENIENTLY EXECUTE THE EXPERIMENTS AND OPERATIONS OF THE ART

THE places best fitted for exercising and accomplishing Magical Arts and
Operations are those which are concealed, removed, and separated from
the habitations of men. Wherefore desolate and uninhabited regions are
most appropriate, such as the borders of lakes, forests, dark and
obscure places, old and deserted houses, whither rarely and scarce ever
men do come, mountains, caves, caverns, grottos, gardens, orchards; but
best. of all are cross-roads, and where four roads meet, during the
depth and silence of night. But if thou canst not conveniently go unto
any of these places, thy house, and even thine own chamber, or, indeed,
any place, provided it hath been purified and consecrated with the
necessary ceremonies, will be found fit and convenient for the
convocation and assembling of the Spirits.

These Arts or Operations should be carried out at the prescribed time,
but if there be no time specially appointed it will be always better to
perform them at night, which is the most fit and proper time for the
Operations of Necromancy; this is also a symbol that it is just and
right to hide them from the sight of the foolish, the ignorant, and the
profane.

But when thou shalt have selected a place fitting, thou mayest perform
thine experiments by day or by night. It should be spacious, clear, and
bounded on all sides by hedges, shrubs, trees, or walls. Thou shalt
thyself cleanse it thoroughly and render it neat and pure, and while
doing this thou shalt recite Psalms ii.; lxvii.; and liv.

After this thou shalt perfume it with the odours and suffumigations of
the Art, and shalt sprinkle it with the water and the hyssop; and after
this thou mayest in this place make all the necessary preparations for
an operation.

But when, later on, thou shalt go unto th4 place, to complete and
accomplish the operation, thou shalt repeat on the way thither the
following Prayer in a low and distinct voice:--

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

### THE PRAYER.

ZAZAII, ZAMAII, PUIDAMON Most Powerful, SEDON Most Strong, EL, YOD HE
VAU HE, IAH, AGLA, assist me an unworthy sinner who have had the
boldness to pronounce these Holy Names which no man should name and
invoke save in very great danger. Therefore have I recourse unto these
Most Holy Names, being in great peril both of soul and of body. Pardon
me if I have sinned in any manner, for I trust in Thy protection alone,
especially on this journey.

Let the Master as he goeth sprinkle the path with the water and hyssop
of the Art, while each of his Disciples shall repeat in a low voice the
Prayer which we have enjoined for the days of fasting and preparation.

Furthermore, let the Master appoint his Disciples to carry the things
necessary for the Art.

The first shall bear the Censer, the Fire, and the Incense.

The Second; the Book, the Paper, the Pens, the Ink, and the various
Perfumes.

The Third; the Knife, and the Sickle.

The Master; the Staff, and the Wand.

But if there be more Disciples present, the Master shall distribute the
things for each to carry, according to their number.

When they shall have arrived at the place, and all things being disposed
in their proper order, the Master shall take the Knife or other
convenient consecrated Magical implement of Steel, wherewith to form the
Circle of Art which he intends to construct. This being done, he must
perfume it, and sprinkle it with water; and having warned and exhorted
his Disciples, he shall work thus:--

First let him have a trumpet made of new wood, on the one side of which
shall be written in Hebrew with the pen and ink of the Art these Names
of God, ELOHIM GIBOR, ELOHIM TZABAOTH (*see [Figure
59](kos44.htm#img_kos13)*.md); and on the other side these characters (*see
[Figure 60](kos44.htm#img_kos13)*.md).

Having entered into the Circle to perform the Experiment, he should
sound this Trumpet towards the four quarters of the Universe, first
towards the East, then towards the South, then towards the West, and
lastly towards the North. Then let him say:--

Hear ye, and be ye ready, in whatever part of the Universe ye may be, to
obey the Voice of God the Mighty One, and the Names of the Creator. We
let you know by this signal and sound that ye will be convoked hither,
wherefore hold ye yourselves in readiness to obey our commands.

This being done let the Master complete his work, renew the Circle, and
make the incensements and fumigations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Of the Knife, Sword, Sickle, Poniard, Dagger,
Lance, Wand, Staff, And Other Instruments of Magical Art](kos44.md)
