[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos48)  [Next](kos50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

## CHAPTER XIII

### CONCERNING <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) THE PRECEPTS OF THE ART

HE who hath attained the rank or degree of Exorcist, which we are
usually accustomed to call Magus or Master according to grade,
whensoever he desireth to undertake any operation, for the nine days
immediately preceding the commencement of the work, should put aside
from him all uncleanness, and prepare himself in secret during these
days, and prepare all the things necessary, and in the space of these
days all these should be made, consecrated, and exorcised.

The which being duly completed, let him go on the day and hour of the
commencement of the work, unto the place set apart for the same, as hath
been said, in the place concerning the formation of the Circle. Let him
instruct his Disciples on no cause whatsoever to move from their
assigned places. And the Magus should exhort them with a bold and
confident voice as follows:--

### THE EXHORTATION OF THE COMPANIONS.

Fear ye not, my beloved Companions, seeing that we draw near unto the
desired end; therefore, all things being rightly done and the
Conjurations and Exorcisms diligently performed, ye shall behold Kings
of Kings, and Emperors of Emperors, and other Kings, Princes, and
Majesties with them, and a great crowd of followers, together with all
sorts of musical instruments, yet nothing should either the Magus or his
Disciples fear.

And then let the Magus say:--

I exhort you by these Holy Names of God, ELOHIM, ADONAI, AGLA, that none
of you now presume to move or cross over from your appointed stations.

This being said, let the Magus and his Disciples uncover the Holy
Pentacles and show them towards each quarter, and they being shown in
each place, there shall be noises and rushings.

Then shall the Emperor of (the Spirits) say unto you:--From the

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

time of the Great Addus until now, there hath not been an Exorciser who
could behold my person, and unless those things <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) which ye have showed unto us had been
made, ye would not now have seen me. But seeing that ye have powerfully
called us, as I believe, by the rites derived from Solomon, and which
but few of your comrades, or Exorcisers, possess, also they compel us
against our will, and I therefore say unto thee that we wish to be
obedient in all matters.

Then shall the Magus place the petitions of himself and his companions,
which should be written down clearly on virgin card, or paper, beyond
the Circle towards the King or Prince of the Spirits, and he will
receive it and take counsel with his Chiefs. After this he will return
the Card, saying:--That which thou desirest is accomplished, be thy will
performed, and all thy demands fulfilled.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[106:1](kos49.htm#fr_82) This Chapter is only
given in 10862 Add. MSS.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[107:1](kos49.htm#fr_83) The Pentacles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Of the Pen, Ink, And Colours](kos50)
