[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos40)  [Next](kos42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

## CHAPTER V

### CONCERNING THE BATHS, AND HOW THEY ARE TO BE ARRANGED

THE Bath is necessary for all Magical and Necromantic Arts; wherefore,
if thou wishest to perform any experiment or operation, having arranged
all things necessary thereunto according to the proper days and hours,
thou shalt go unto a river or running stream, or thou shalt have warm
water ready in some large vessel or tub in thy secret cabinet, and while
disrobing thyself of thy raiment thou shalt repeat the following
Psalms:--Psalms xiv. or Iiii.; xxvii.; liv.; lxxxi.; cv.

And when the Master shall be entirely disrobed let him enter into the
water or into the Bath, and let him say:--

### THE EXORCISM OF THE WATER.

I exorcise thee, O Creature of Water, by Him Who hath created thee and
gathered thee together into one place so that the dry land appeared,
that thou uncover all the deceits of the Enemy, and that thou cast out
from thee all the impurities and uncleannesses of the Spirits of the
World of Phantasm, so they may harm me not, through the virtue of God
Almighty Who liveth and reigneth unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen.

Then shalt thou begin to wash thyself thoroughly in the Bath, saying:--

MERTALIA, MUSALIA, DOPHALIA, ONEMALIA, ZITANSEIA, GOLDAPHAIRA,
DEDULSAIRA, GHEVIALAIRA, GHEMINAIRA, GEGROPHEIRA, CEDAHI, GILTHAR,
GODIEB, EZOIIL, MUSIL, GRASSIL, TAMEN, PUERI, GODU, HUZNOTH, ASTACHOTH,
TZABAOTH, ADONAI, AGLA, ON, EL, TETRAGRAMMATON, SHEMA, ARESION,
ANAPHAXETON, SEGILATON, PRIMEUMATON.

All the which Names thou shalt repeat twice or thrice, until thou art
completely washed and clean, and when thou are perfectly pure thou shalt
quit the Bath, and sprinkle thyself with exorcised water, in the manner
described later on, and thou shalt say:--

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Purge me, O Lord, with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I
shall be whiter than snow.

Whilst again clothing thyself, thou shalt recite the following Psalms:
Psalms cii.; li.; iv.; xxx.; cxix., *Mem*, v. 97; cxiv.; cxxvi.; cxxxix.

After which thou shalt recite the following Prayer:--

### PRAYER.

EL Strong and Wonderful, I bless Thee, I adore Thee, I glorify Thee, I
invoke Thee, I render Thee thanks from this Bath, so that this Water may
be able to cast from me all impurity and concupiscence of heart, through
Thee, O Holy ADONAI; and may I accomplish all things through Thee Who
livest and reignest unto the Ages of the Ages. Amen.

After this take the Salt and bless it in this manner:--

### THE BENEDICTION OF THE SALT.

The Blessing of the Father Almighty be upon this Creature of Salt, and
let all malignity and hindrance be cast forth hence from, and let all
good enter herein, for without Thee man cannot live, wherefore I bless
thee and invoke thee, that thou mayest aid me.

Then thou shalt recite over the Salt Psalm ciii.

Then taking the grains of the exorcised Salt thou shalt cast them into
the aforesaid Bath; and thou shalt again disrobe thyself, pronouncing
the following words:--

IMANEL, ARNAMON, IMATO, MEMEON, RECTACON, MUOBOII, PALTELLON, DECAION,
YAMENTON, YARON, TATONON, VAPHORON, GARDON, EXISTON, ZAGVERON, MOMERTON,
ZARMESITON, TILEION, TIXMION.

After this thou shalt enter a second time into the Bath and recite
Psalms civ. and lxxxi.

Then thou shalt quit the Bath and clothe thyself as before in linen
garments clean and white, and over them thou shalt put the garments, of
which we shall speak in the proper Chapter, and thus clothed thou shalt
go to finish thy work.

The Disciples should wash themselves in like manner, and with like
solemnities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Of the Garments And Shoes of the Art](kos42)
