[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos47)  [Next](kos49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

## CHAPTER XII

### OF THE LIGHT, AND OF THE FIRE

IT hath been ever the custom among all nations to use fire and light in
sacred things. For this reason the Master of the Art should also employ
them in sacred rites, and besides those for reading the Conjurations by,
and for the incense, in all operations Lights are necessary in the
Circle.

For this reason he should make candles of virgin wax in the day and hour
of Mercury; the wicks should have been made by a young girl; and the
Candles should be made when the moon is in her increase, of the weight
of half a pound each, and on them thou shalt engrave these characters
with the Dagger, or the Burin of Art. (*See [Figure
84](kos44.htm#img_kos14)*.)

After this thou shalt repeat over the Candles, Psalms cli.; ciii.;
cvii., and shalt say:--

O Lord God, Who governest all things by Thine Almighty Power, give unto
me, a poor sinner, understanding and knowledge to do only that which is
agreeable unto Thee; grant unto me to fear, adore, love, praise, and
give thanks unto Thee with true and sincere faith and perfect charity.
Grant, O Lord, before I die, and descend into the realms beneath, and
before the fiery flame shall devour me, that Thy Grace may not leave me,
O Lord of my Soul. Amen.

After this thou shalt add:--

I exorcise thee, O Creature of wax, by Him Who alone hath created all
things by His Word, and by the virtue of Him Who is pure truth, that
thou cast out from thee every Phantasm, Perversion, and Deceit of the
Enemy, and may the Virtue and Power of God enter into thee, so that thou
mayest give us light, and chase far from us all fear or terror.

After this thou shalt sprinkle them with the Water of the Art, and
incense them with the usual perfumes.

And when thou shalt wish to kindle them thou shalt say:--

I exorcise thee, O Creature of Fire, in the Name of the Sovereign and
Eternal Lord, by His Ineffable Name, which is YOD, HE, VAU, HE; by the
Name IAH; and by the Name of Power EL; that thou mayest

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

enlighten the heart of all the Spirits which we shall call unto this
Circle, so that they may appear before us without fraud and deceit
through Him Who hath created all things.

Then thou shalt take a square Lantern, with panes of Crystal glass, and
thou shalt fit therein the Candle lighted, to read by, to form the
Circle, or any other purpose for which thou shalt require it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Concerning the Precepts of the Art](kos49)
