[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](kos44)  [Next](kos46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

## CHAPTER IX

### OF <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) THE FORMATION OF THE CIRCLE

HAVING chosen a place for preparing and constructing the Circle, and all
things necessary being prepared for the perfection of the Operations,
take thou the Sickle or Scimitar of Art and stick it into the centre of
the place where the Circle is to be made; then take a cord of nine feet
in length, fasten one end thereof unto the Sickle and with the other end
trace out the circumference of the Circle, which may be marked either
with the Sword or with the Knife with the Black hilt. Then within the
Circle mark out four regions, namely, towards the East, West, South, and
North, wherein place Symbols; and beyond the limits of this Circle
describe with the Consecrated Knife or Sword another Circle, but leaving
an open space therein towards the North whereby thou mayest enter and
depart beyond the Circle of Art. Beyond this again thou shalt describe
another Circle at a foot distance with the aforesaid Instrument, yet
ever leaving therein an open space for entrance and egress corresponding
to the open space already left in the other. Beyond this again make
another Circle at another foot distance, and beyond these two Circles,
which are beyond the Circle of Art yet upon the same Centre, thou shalt
describe Pentagrams with the Symbols and Names of the Creator therein so
that they may surround the Circle already described. Without these
Circles shalt thou circumscribe a Square, and beyond that another
Square, so that the Angles of the former may touch the centres of the
sides of the latter, and that the Angles of the latter may stretch
towards the four quarters of the Universe, East, West, North, and South;
and at the four Angles of each square, and touching them, thou shalt
describe lesser Circles wherein let there be placed standing censers
with lighted charcoal and sweet odours.

These things being done, let the Magus of Art <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_81) assemble his Disciples, exhort, confirm,
and cheer them; lead them into the Circle of Art and station them
therein towards the Four Quarters of the Universe, exhort

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

them to fear nothing, and to abide in their assigned places.
Furthermore, let each of the Companions have a Sword besides the Sword
of the Art, which he must hold naked in his hand. Then let the Magus
quit the Circle, and Kindle the Censers, and place thereon exorcised
Incense, as is said in the Chapter of Fumigations; and let him have the
Censer in his hand and kindle it, and then place it in the part
prepared. Let him now enter within the Circle and carefully close the
openings left in the same, and let him again warn his Disciples, and
take the Trumpet of Art prepared as is said in the Chapter concerning
the same, and let him incense the Circle towards the Four Quarters of
the Universe.

After this let the Magus commence his Incantations, having placed the
Sickle, Sword, or other Implement of Art upright in the ground at his
feet. Having sounded the trumpet as before taught let him invoke the
Spirits, and if need be conjure them, as is said in the First Book, and
having attained his desired effect, let him license them to depart.

Here followeth the Form of the Circle (*see [Figure
81](kos44.htm#img_kos14)*), wherein whosoever entereth he shall be at
safety as within a fortified Castle, and nothing shall be able to harm
him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[99:1](kos45.htm#fr_80) This Chapter is only
given in 10862 Add. MSS.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[99:2](kos45.htm#fr_81) 'Maghus' in MS., not
'Magister.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Concerning Incense, Suffumigations, Perfumes, Odours,
And Similar Things Which Are Used In Magical Arts](kos46)
