[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim12)  [Next](siim14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### VI. THE RETURN TO THE ESSENCE.

The gist of Jílí's philosophy, as I understand it, is the notion of One
Being, which is One Thought, going forth from itself in all the forms of
the universe, knowing itself as Nature and yet, amidst the multiformity
of Nature, reasserting its unity in Man—in Man whom self-knowledge has
enlightened and made perfect, so that ceasing to know himself as an
individual he sinks into his Divine element, like a wave into the sea.
This language, apart from its inadequacy, conveys a wrong impression by
translating in terms of time and space what does not belong to these
categories. All interpretations of ideal and mystical experience are
more or less fictitious.

The word commonly used to denote the self-manifestation of God in His
essence, attributes, and names is *tajallí*, which implies that
something hidden before is now clearly seen, as the splendour of the sun
emerging from eclipse or the beauty of a bride when she unveils. The
Divine *tajallí*, in respect of the person to whom it is made, may be
called an illumination, for it is the light whereby the mystic's heart
has vision of God. Accordingly, the ontological descent from the
Absolute and the mystical ascent or return to the Absolute are really
the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

same process looked at from different points of view <span
id="fr_393"></span>[1](#fn_391.md). The self-revelation of God necessarily
involves the manifestation of His nature by those who possess an inborn
capacity for realising it in themselves. Jílí divides the ascending
movement of this consciousness into four stages—the Illumination of the
Actions, the Illumination of the Names, the Illumination of the
Attributes, and the Illumination of the Essence—which correspond in
reverse order to the devolution of Pure Being from its primal simplicity
to the manifestation of its effects in the sensible world.

(*a*) The Illumination of the Divine actions <span
id="fr_394"></span>[2](#fn_392.md).

<span class="small">To one thus illumined it becomes plain that human
agency is naught, that he has no power or will of his own, and that all
things are done by the power of God who moves them and brings them to
rest. Sometimes the Divine will is made known to him before the act:
consequently, he may disobey the command of God in order to comply with
His will; in which case his disobedience is essentially obedience and
lies between him and God, though "it remains for us to exact from him
the penalty which God has imposed in the Koran and the Sunna upon those
who break His commandment <span id="fr_395"></span>[3](#fn_393.md)."</span>

(*b*) The Illumination of the Divine names <span
id="fr_396"></span>[4](#fn_394.md).

<span class="small">The mystic to whom God reveals Himself in one of His
Names vanishes (from consciousness of individuality) under the radiance
of the Name; and if you invoke God by that Name, the man will answer
you, because the Name is applicable to him.…If God reveal Himself in His
Name Allah, the man will disappear and God will call to him, saying,
"Lo, I am Allah"; and if you cry "O Allah!" the man will answer you with
the words "At thy service (*labbayka*)!" <span
id="fr_397"></span>[5](#fn_395.md) Then, if he mount higher <span
id="fr_398"></span>[6](#fn_396.md) and God strengthen</span>

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="small">him and let him abide in consciousness after his
passing-away (*faná*), God will answer any one who calls the man, so
that if you say, for instance, "O Muḥammad!" God will respond to you,
saying, "At thy service!" <span id="fr_399"></span>[1](#fn_397.md) In
proportion as he is strengthened to ascend, God will reveal Himself to
him in His subordinate Names, *viz*., the Merciful (*al-Raḥmán*), the
Lord (*al-Rabb*), the King (*al-Malik*), the Omniscient (*al-‘Alím*),
the Omnipotent (*al-Qádir*), etc. The self-revelation of God in each of
these Names is superior to His self-revelation in the Name preceding it,
because as regards the Illumination of the Names analysis is superior to
synthesis, and the manifestation of each lower Name is an analysis of
the synthesis which is manifested by the one immediately above
it.</span>

As regards illuminations of the Essence, it is otherwise; here the more
general is above the more particular: *al-Raḥmán* is superior to
*al-Rabb*, and *Allah* to either. Finally, all the Divine Names seek to
apply themselves to the illumined man, even as the name seeks the object
named, and then he sings:

One calls Her by Her name and I answer him, and when I am called (by my
own name) ’tis Laylá (the Beloved) that answers for me.  
That is because we are the spirit of One, though we dwell by turns in
two bodies—a marvellous thing!  
Like a single person with two names: thou canst not miss by whichever
name thou callest him.

Jílí only speaks of what he himself has experienced, since every Name is
revealed in different ways to different individuals. From his account of
these illuminations I take a passage which exhibits his characteristic
blend of logic and mysticism:

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="small">The way to the illumination of the Name *al-Qadím*
(the Eternal) is through a Divine revelation whereby it is shown to any
one that he existed in the knowledge of God before the Creation,
inasmuch as he existed in God's knowledge through the existence of that
knowledge, and that knowledge existed through the existence of God: the
existence of God is eternal and the knowledge is eternal and the object
of knowledge is inseparable from the knowledge and is also eternal,
inasmuch as knowledge is not knowledge unless it has an object which
gives to the subject the name of Knower. The eternity of existent beings
in the knowledge of God necessarily follows from this induction, and the
(illumined) man returns to God in respect of His Name, the Eternal. At
the moment when the Divine eternity is revealed to him from his essence,
his temporality vanishes and he remains eternal through God, having
passed away from (consciousness of) his temporality <span
id="fr_400"></span>[1](#fn_398.md).</span>

(*c*) The Illumination of the Divine Attributes <span
id="fr_401"></span>[2](#fn_399.md).

<span class="small">When God desires to reveal Himself to a man by means
of any Name or Attribute, He causes the man to pass away (*faná*) and
makes him naught and deprives him of his (individual) existence; and
when the human light is extinguished and the creaturely spirit passes
away, God puts in the man's body, without incarnation (*ḥulúl*), a
spiritual substance, which is of God's essence and is neither separate
from God nor joined to the man, in exchange for what He deprived him of;
which substance is named the Holy Spirit (*rúḥu ’l-quds*) <span
id="fr_402"></span>[3](#fn_400.md). And when God puts instead of the man a
spirit of His own essence, the revelation is made to that spirit. God is
never revealed except to Himself, but we call that Divine spirit "a man"
in respect of its being instead of the man. In reality there is neither
"slave" nor "Lord," since these are correlated terms. When the "slave"
is annulled, the "Lord" is necessarily annulled, and nothing remains but
God alone.</span>

Mystics receive these illuminations in proportion to their capacities,
the abundance of their knowledge, and the strength of their resolution.
Taking each of the seven chief attributes in turn, the author describes
the effects of the illumination on himself or on others, and the
different forms which it may

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

assume. Concerning Life and Knowledge something has been said
above <span id="fr_403"></span>[1](#fn_401.md). Those endowed with Hearing
hear the language of angels, animals, plants, and minerals <span
id="fr_404"></span>[2](#fn_402.md). As for the *mukallamún*, who receive
the illumination of Speech, the Word (*kalám*) comes to them sometimes
audibly and from a certain direction, sometimes from no direction and
not through the ear, sometimes as an inner light having a definite
shape; and in oneness with God they realise that all existent beings are
their Word and that their words are without end <span
id="fr_405"></span>[3](#fn_403.md). According to Jílí, the illumination of
Power is marked in its initial stages by a phenomenon characteristic of
prophetic inspiration—the ringing of a bell (*ṣalṣalatu ’l-jaras*),
which is produced, as he quaintly writes, by "the dashing of realities
one against another in order that men's hearts may not dare to enter the
presence of Divine Majesty <span id="fr_406"></span>[4](#fn_404.md)." "In
this illumination," he says, "I heard the ringing of bells. My frame
dissolved and my trace vanished and my name was rased out. By reason of
the violence of what I experienced I became like a worn-out garment
which hangs on a high tree, and the fierce blast carries it away piece
by piece. I beheld naught but lightnings and thunders, and clouds
raining lights, and seas surging with fire <span
id="fr_407"></span>[5](#fn_405.md)."

(*d*) The Illumination of the Divine essence.

<span class="small">While every illumination of a Name or Attribute
reveals the Essence in a particular relation, the Illumination of the
absolute Essence is not identical with any or all of these
illuminations. Jílí refers the difference to the Divine substance,
which, as we have seen, God " puts instead of the man' so that the
subject and object of illumination are really one. This substance may be
either attributal (*ṣifátí*) or essential (*dhátí*). Only in the latter
case does "the man" become the God-man. Such a one is</span>

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="small">the Perfect Unit (*al fardu ’l-kámil*) and the
Microcosmic Pole (*al-ghawthu ’l-jámi‘*) on whom the whole order of
existence revolves; to him genuflexion and prostration in prayer are
due, and by means of him God keeps the universe in being. He is denoted
by the terms *al-Mahdí* and *al-Khátam* (the Seal) <span
id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_406), and he is the Vicegerent (*khalífa*.md)
indicated in the story of Adam <span id="fr_409"></span>[2](#fn_407.md).
The essences of all things that exist are drawn to obey his command, as
iron is drawn to the magnet. He subdues the sensible world by his might
and does what he will by his power. Nothing is barred from him, for when
the Divine substance is in this *walí* as a simple essence,
unconditioned by any degree appertaining to the Creator or to the
creature, he bestows on every degree of existent things its *ḥaqq*,
*i.e.* what it requires and is capable of receiving, and nothing can
hinder him from doing so. That which hinders the Essence is merely its
limitation by a degree or name or quality; but the simple Essence has
nothing to hinder it: therefore with it all things are actual, not
potential, while in other essences things are sometimes potential and
sometimes actual.</span>

It would seem, then, that the Illumination of the Absolute is given to
the Heavenly Man (Mohammed) alone and transmitted through him to the
Perfect Men who are his representatives on earth <span
id="fr_410"></span>[3](#fn_408.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_391"></span>[126:1](siim13.htm#fr_393.md) Cf. K I. 94, penult.
"The Wise Koran (*al-Qur’ánu ’l-ḥakím*) is the descent (*tanazzul*) of
the Divine individualisations (*ḥaqá’iq*) by means of the gradual ascent
of man towards perfect knowledge of them in the Essence, according to
the requirement of Divine Wisdom.… He that is moulded after the Divine
nature ascends in it and gains, step by step, such knowledge thereof as
is revealed to him in a Divinely determined order."

<span id="fn_392"></span>[126:2](siim13.htm#fr_394.md) K I. 47, penult.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[126:3](siim13.htm#fr_395.md) Cf. [p.
54](siim05.htm#page_54) and [p. 120](siim11.htm#page_120.md).

<span id="fn_394"></span>[126:4](siim13.htm#fr_396.md) K I. 50, 10.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[126:5](siim13.htm#fr_397.md) *I.e.*, he is the
unconscious centre of manifestation, *maẓhar*, of the Name Allah. Cf.
the passage (K I. 22, 20 foll.) translated on [p.
93](siim08.htm#page_93.md).

<span id="fn_396"></span>[126:6](siim13.htm#fr_398.md) *I.e.*, from the
plane of *Wáḥidiyya* (unity in plurality) to the plane of *Aḥadiyya*
(abstract unity), together with *Wáḥidiyya* and the degrees below <span
id="page_127">p. 127</span> it, or in other words, from *faná* (the
naughting of all that is not God) to *baqá* (union with the Divine
consciousness).

<span id="fn_397"></span>[127:1](siim13.htm#fr_399.md) Cf. K. n. 23, i
foll.: "Then, when he becomes cleansed from the defilement of not-being
and ascends to knowledge of the being of the Necessary (Absolute), and
when God purifies him from the foulness of temporality by the
manifestation of eternity, he becomes a mirror for the Name Allah, and
in that moment he and the Name are like two opposite mirrors, each of
which exists in the other. And in this vision it is God Himself that
answers those who invoke him (the mystic); his anger is the cause of
God's anger, and his satisfaction is the cause of God's satisfaction."

<span id="fn_398"></span>[128:1](siim13.htm#fr_400.md) K I. 52, 14 foll.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[128:2](siim13.htm#fr_401.md) K I. 53, 7.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[128:3](siim13.htm#fr_402.md) This doctrine of
substitution was taught by many Christian mystics in the Middle Ages.
Cf. Inge, *Christian Mysticism*, p. 364.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[129:1](siim13.htm#fr_403.md) See [p.
101](siim10.htm#page_101.md).

<span id="fn_402"></span>[129:2](siim13.htm#fr_404.md) K I. 55, 3.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[129:3](siim13.htm#fr_405.md) K I. 55, 8.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[129:4](siim13.htm#fr_406.md) K I. 90, penult. The
Prophet declared that when inspiration descended upon him it was often
like the ringing of a bell. Cf. Prof. D. B. Macdonald, *The religious
attitude and life in Islam*, p. 46.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[129:5](siim13.htm#fr_407.md) K I. 57, 9. A
similar description occurs in the thirty-second chapter, "On the ringing
of the bell." See K I. 91, 3 foll.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[130:1](siim13.htm#fr_408.md) The Perfect Man is
the First and the Last: in his outward form he is the last of the
Prophets and in his inward essence the last of the Saints, yet he is the
source of all prophecy and all saintship (*Fuṣúṣ*, 34 foll.).

<span id="fn_407"></span>[130:2](siim13.htm#fr_409.md) Koran, 2, 28.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[130:3](siim13.htm#fr_410.md) Cf. *Fuṣúṣ*, 34.
Therefore, while God is the essential being (*‘ayn*) of all things, none
of them is the *‘ayn* of God except the Logos or Heavenly Man.
Contemplation of the Perfect Man serves instead of contemplation of God
(M 12 *a*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Religion, Revelation and Prophecy](siim14.md)
