[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim04)  [Next](siim06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

#### II.

In describing Abú Sa‘íd's mystical doctrines and their relation to the
historical development of Ṣúfisim, European scholars have hitherto
relied almost exclusively on the quatrains which he is said to have
composed and of which more than six hundred have been published <span
id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130.md). As I have shown above ([p.
4](siim04.htm#page_4), note [3](siim04.htm#fn_8).md), it is doubtful
whether Abú Sa‘íd is the author of any of these poems, and we may be
sure that in the main they are not his work and were never even quoted
by him. To repeat what has been already said, they form a miscellaneous
anthology drawn from a great number of poets who flourished at different
periods, and consequently they reflect the typical ideas of Persian
mysticism as a whole.

Abú Sa‘íd helped to bring its peculiar diction and symbolism into vogue,
by quoting Ṣúfí poetry in his sermons and allowing it to be chanted in
the *samá‘*, but we may hesitate to accept the view that he invented
this style (which occurs, full-blown, in the odes of his contemporary,
Bábá Kúhí of Shíráz) or was the first to embody it in quatrains.

The mysticism which his sayings and sermons unfold has neither the
precision of a treatise nor the coherence of a system. It is
experimental, not doctrinal or philosophical. It does not concern itself
with abstract speculations, but sets forth in simple and untechnical
language such principles and maxims as bear directly on the religious
life and are the fruit of dearly-bought experience. As we read, we seem
to hear the voice of the teacher addressing his disciples and expounding
for their benefit the truths that had been revealed to him. Abú Sa‘íd
borrows much from his predecessors, sometimes mentioning them by name,
but often appropriating

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

their wisdom without a word of acknowledgement <span
id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131.md). Amongst Moslems, this kind of
plagiarism is considered respectable, even when the culprit is not a
saint.

The sayings of Abú Sa‘íd include several definitions of Ṣúfisim, which
it will be convenient to translate before going further.

1\. To lay aside what thou hast in thy head, to give what thou hast in
thy hand, and not to recoil from whatsoever befalls thee <span
id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132.md).

2\. Ṣúfisim is two things: to look in one direction and to live in one
way <span id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_133.md).

3\. Ṣúfisim is a name attached to its object; when it reaches its
ultimate perfection, it is God (*i.e.* the end of Ṣúfisim is that, for
the Ṣúfí, nothing should exist except God) <span
id="fr_134"></span>[4](#fn_134.md).

4\. It is glory in wretchedness and riches in poverty and lordship in
servitude and satiety in hunger and clothedness in nakedness and freedom
in slavery and life in death and sweetness in bitterness <span
id="fr_135"></span>[5](#fn_135.md).

5\. The Ṣúfí is he who is pleased with all that God does, in order that
God may be pleased with all that he does <span
id="fr_136"></span>[6](#fn_136.md).

6\. Ṣúfisim is patience under God's commanding and forbidding, and
acquiescence and resignation in the events determined by divine
providence <span id="fr_137"></span>[7](#fn_137.md).

7\. Ṣúfisim is the will of the Creator concerning His creatures when no
creature exists <span id="fr_138"></span>[8](#fn_138.md).

8\. To be a Ṣúfí is to cease from taking trouble (*takalluf*); and there
is no greater trouble for thee than thine own self (*tu’i-yi tu*), for
when thou art occupied with thyself, thou remainest away from God <span
id="fr_139"></span>[9](#fn_139.md).

9\. He said, "Even this Ṣúfisim is polytheism (*shirk*)." "Why,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">O Shaykh?" they asked. He answered, "Because Ṣúfisim
consists in guarding the soul from what is other than God; and there is
nothing other than God <span id="fr_140"></span>[1](#fn_140.md).</span>

The quietism and pantheistic self-abandonment, on which these
definitions lay so much stress, forms only the negative side of Abú
Sa‘íd's mystical teaching. His doctrine of *faná*, the passing-away from
self, is supplemented by an equally characteristic positive element, of
which I shall have more to say presently. Both aspects are indicated in
the following maxim: "A man ought to be occupied with two things:—he
ought to put away all that keeps him apart from God, and bring comfort
to dervishes <span id="fr_141"></span>[2](#fn_141.md)."

Innumerable are the ways to God <span id="fr_142"></span>[3](#fn_142.md),
yet the Way is but a single step: "take one step out of thyself, that
thou mayst arrive at God <span id="fr_143"></span>[4](#fn_143.md)." To pass
away from self (*faná*) is to realise that self does not exist, and that
nothing exists except God (*tawḥíd*). The Tradition, "He who knows
himself knows his Lord," signifies that he who knows himself as
not-being (*‘adam*) knows God as Real Being (*wujúd*) <span
id="fr_144"></span>[5](#fn_144.md). This knowledge cannot be obtained
through the intellect, since the Eternal and Uncreated is inaccessible
to that which is created <span id="fr_145"></span>[6](#fn_145.md); it
cannot be learned, but is given by divine illumination. The organ which
receives it is the "heart" (*qalb* or *dil*), a spiritual faculty, not
the heart of flesh and blood. In a remarkable passage Abú Sa‘íd refers
to a divine principle, which he calls *sirr Allah*, *i.e.* the
conscience or consciousness of God, and describes it as something which
God communicates to the "heart."

Answering the question, "What is sincerity (*ikhláṣ*)?" he said:

<span class="small">The Prophet has said that *ikhláṣ* is a divine
*sirr* in man's heart and soul, which *sirr* is the object of His pure
contemplation and is replenished by God's pure contemplation thereof.
Whosoever declares God to be One, his belief in the divine Unity depends
on that *sirr*.</span>

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

Being asked to define it, he continued as follows:

<span class="small">That *sirr* is a substance of God's grace
(*laṭífa*)—for He is gracious (*laṭíf*) unto His servants (Koran, 42,
18)—and it is produced by the bounty and mercy of God, not by the
acquisition and action of man. At first, He produces a need and longing
and sorrow in man's heart; then He contemplates that need and sorrow,
and in His bounty and mercy deposits in that heart a spiritual substance
(*laṭífa*) which is hidden from the knowledge of angel and prophet. That
substance is called *sirr Allah*, and that is *ikhláṣ* <span
id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_146.md).…That pure *sirr* is the Beloved of
Unitarians. It is immortal and does not become naught, since it subsists
in God's contemplation of it. It belongs to the Creator: the creatures
have no part therein, and in the body it is a loan. Whoever possesses it
is "living" (*ḥayy*), and whoever lacks it is "animal" (*ḥayawán*).
There is a great difference between the "living" and the "animal" <span
id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_147.md).</span>

Students of medieval Christian mysticism will find many analogies to
this *sirr Allah*, *e.g.* the "synteresis" of Gerson and Eckhart's
"spark" or "ground of the soul."

I will now translate some of Abú Sa‘íd's discourses and sayings on the
Way to God through self-negation.

He was asked, "When shall a man be freed from his wants?"

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">"When God shall free him," he replied; "this is not
effected by a man's exertion, but by the grace and help of God. First of
all, He brings forth in him the desire to attain this goal. Then He
opens to him the gate of repentance (*tawba*). Then He throws him into
self-mortification (*mujáhada*), so that he continues to strive and, for
a while, to pride himself upon his efforts, thinking that he is
advancing or achieving something; but afterwards he falls into despair
and feels no joy. Then he knows that his work is not pure, but tainted,
he repents of the acts of devotion which he had thought to be his own,
and perceives that they were done by God's grace and help, and that he
was guilty of polytheism (*shirk*) in attributing them to his own
exertion. When this becomes manifest, a feeling of joy enters his heart.
Then God opens to him the gate of certainty (*yaqín*), so that for a
time he takes anything from any one and accepts contumely and endures
abasement, and knows for certain</span>

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="small">by Whom it is brought to pass, and doubt concerning
this is removed from his heart. Then God opens to him the gate of love
(*maḥabba*), and here too egoism shows itself for a time and he is
exposed to blame (*maláma*), which means that in his love of God he
meets fearlessly whatever may befall him and recks not of reproach; but
still he thinks 'I love' and finds no rest until he perceives that it is
God who loves him and keeps him in the state of loving, and that this is
the result of divine love and grace, not of his own endeavour. Then God
opens to him the gate of unity (*tawḥíd*) and causes him to know that
all action depends on God Almighty. Hereupon he perceives that all is
He, and all is by Him, and all is His; that He has laid this
self-conceit upon His creatures in order to prove them, and that He in
His omnipotence ordains that they shall hold this false belief, because
omnipotence is His attribute, so that when they regard His attributes
they shall know that He is the Lord. What formerly was hearsay now
becomes known to him intuitively as he contemplates the works of God.
Then he entirely recognises that he has not the right to say 'I' or
'mine.' At this stage he beholds his helplessness; desires fall away
from him and he becomes free and calm. He wishes that which God wishes:
his own wishes are gone, he is emancipated from his wants, and has
gained peace and joy in both worlds.…First, action is necessary, then
knowledge, in order that thou mayst know that thou knowest naught and
art no one. This is not easy to know. It is a thing that cannot be
rightly learned by instruction, nor sewn on with needle nor tied on with
thread. It is the gift of God <span
id="fr_148"></span>[1](#fn_148.md)."</span>

The heart's vision is what matters, not the tongue's speech. Thou wilt
never escape from thy self (*nafs*) until thou slay it. To say "There is
no god but Allah" is not enough. Most of those who make the verbal
profession of faith are polytheists at heart, and polytheism is the one
unpardonable sin. Thy whole body is full of doubt and polytheism. Thou
must cast them out in order to be at peace. Until thou deny thy self
thou wilt never believe in God. Thy self, which is keeping thee far from
God and saying, "So-and-so has treated thee ill," "such and such a one
has done well by thee," points the way to creatureliness; and all this
is polytheism. Nothing depends on the creatures, all depends on the
Creator. This thou must know and say, and having said it thou must stand

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

firm. To stand firm (*istiqáma*) means that when thou hast said "One,"
thou must never again say "Two." Creator and creature are "Two."…Do not
double like a fox, that ye may suddenly start up in some other place:
that is not right faith. Say "Allah!" and stand firm there. Standing
firm is this, that when thou hast said "God" thou shouldst no more speak
or think of created things, so that it is just as though they were
not.…Love that One who does not cease to be when thou ceasest, in order
that thou mayst be such a being that thou never wilt cease to be <span
id="fr_149"></span>[1](#fn_149.md)!

<span class="small">So long as any one regards his purity and devotion,
he says "Thou and I," but when he considers exclusively the bounty and
mercy of God, he says "Thou! Thou!" and then his worship <span
id="fr_150"></span>[2](#fn_150.md) becomes a reality <span
id="fr_151"></span>[3](#fn_151.md).</span>

He was asked, "What is evil and what is the worst evil?" He replied,
"Evil is 'thou'; and the worst evil is 'thou,' when thou knowest it
not <span id="fr_152"></span>[4](#fn_152.md)."

Abú Sa‘íd's belief that he had escaped from the prison of individuality
was constantly asserting itself. Once he attended a party of mourners
(*tá‘ziya*), where the visitors, as they arrived, were announced by a
servant (*mu‘arrif*) who with a loud voice enumerated their titles of
honour (*alqáb*). When Abú Sa‘íd appeared, the *mu‘arrif* inquired how
he should announce him. "Go," said he, "and tell them to make way for
Nobody, the son of Nobody <span id="fr_153"></span>[5](#fn_153.md)." In
speaking of himself, he never used the pronouns "I" or "we," but
invariably referred to himself as "they" (*íshán*). The author of the
*Asráru ’l-tawḥíd* apologises for having restored the customary form of
speech, pointing out that if he had retained "they" in such cases, the
meaning of the text would have been confused and unintelligible to
most <span id="fr_154"></span>[6](#fn_154.md).

While the attainment of selflessness is independent of

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

human initiative, the mystic participates, to some extent, in the
process by which it is attained. A power not his own draws him on
towards the goal, but this divine attraction (*kashish*) demands, on his
part, an inward striving (*kúshish*), without which there can be no
vision (*bínish*) <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155.md). Like many
Súfís, Abú Sa‘íd admits freewill in practice but denies it in theory. As
a spiritual director, he could not teach what, as a pantheist, he was
bound to believe—that the only real agent is God. Speaking from the
standpoint of the religious law, he used often to say: "O God! whatever
comes from me to Thee I beseech Thee to forgive, and whatever comes from
Thee to me, Thine is the praise <span id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_156.md)!"
On the other hand, he says that had there been no sinners, God's mercy
would have been wasted <span id="fr_157"></span>[3](#fn_157.md); and that
Adam would not have been visited with the tribulation of sin unless
forgiveness were the dearest of all things to God <span
id="fr_158"></span>[4](#fn_158.md). In the following passage he suggests
that although sin is an act of disobedience to the divine commandment
(*amr*), it is none the less determined by the divine will (*iráda*).

<span class="small">On the Day of Resurrection Iblís (Satan) will be
brought to judgment with all the devils, and he will be charged with
having led multitudes of people astray. He will confess that he called
on them to follow him, but will plead that they need not have done so.
Then God will say, "Let that pass! Now worship Adam, in order that thou
mayst be saved." The devils will implore him to obey and thereby deliver
himself and them from torment, but Iblís will answer, weeping, "Had it
depended on my will, I would have worshipped Adam at the time when I was
first bidden. God commands me to worship him, but does not will it. Had
He willed it, I should have worshipped him then <span
id="fr_159"></span>[5](#fn_159.md)."</span>

It is significant that Abú Sa‘íd lets Iblís have the last word, whereas
Ḥalláj, who was faced with the same dilemma, insisted that the saint
must fulfil the divine command (*amr*) at whatever cost of suffering to
himself.

The "inward striving" after selflessness is identical with

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

the state which Abú Sa‘íd calls "want" (*niyáz*). There is no way nearer
to God than this <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160.md). It is described
as a living and luminous fire placed by God in the breasts of His
servants in order that their "self" (*nafs*) maybe burned; and when it
has been burned, the fire of "want" becomes the fire of "longing"
(*shawq*) which never dies, neither in this world nor in the next, and
is only increased by vision <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_161.md).

Complete negation of individuality involves complete affirmation of the
real and universal Self—a fact which is expressed by Súfís in the
formula, "Abiding after passing-away" (*al-baqá ba‘d al faná*). The
perfect mystic abides in God, and yet (as Ruysbroeck says) "he goes out
towards created things in a spirit of love towards all things, in the
virtues and in works of righteousness <span
id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_162.md)." He is not an ecstatic devotee lost in
contemplation of the Oneness, nor a saintly recluse shunning all
commerce with mankind, but a philanthropist who in all his words and
actions exhibits and diffuses amongst those around him the divine life
with which he has been made one. "The true saint," said Abú Sa‘íd, "goes
in and out amongst the people and eats and sleeps with them and buys and
sells in the market and marries and takes part in social intercourse,
and never forgets God for a single moment <span
id="fr_163"></span>[4](#fn_163.md)." His ideal of charity and brotherhood
was a noble one, however he may have abused it. He declared that there
is no better and easier means of attaining to God than by bringing joy
to the heart of a Moslem <span id="fr_164"></span>[5](#fn_164.md), and
quoted with approval the saying of Abú ‘Abbás Bashshár, "When a disciple
performs an act of kindness to a dervish, it is better for him than a
hundred genuflexions; and if he gives him a mouthful of food, it is
better for him than a whole night spent in prayer <span
id="fr_165"></span>[6](#fn_165.md)." His purse was always open, and he
never quarrelled with any one <span id="fr_166"></span>[7](#fn_166.md),
because he regarded all creatures with the eye of the Creator, not with
the eye of the creatures <span id="fr_167"></span>[8](#fn_167.md). When his
followers wished to chastise a bigot who had cursed

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

him, he restrained them, saying, "God forbid! He is not cursing me, but
he thinks that my belief is false and that his own belief is true:
therefore he is cursing that false belief for God's sake <span
id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168.md)." He seldom preached on Koranic texts
describing the pains of Hell, and in his last years, when reciting the
Koran, he passed over all the "verses of torment" (*áyát-i ‘adháb*). "O
God!" he cried, "inasmuch as men and stones have the same value in Thy
sight, feed the flames of Hell with stones and do not burn these
miserable wretches <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_169.md)!" Although Abú
Sa‘íd's charity embraced all created beings, he makes a clear
distinction between the Ṣúfís and the rest of his fellow-men. The Ṣúfís
are God's elect and are united by a spiritual affinity which is more
binding than any ties of blood.

<span class="small">Four thousand years before God created these bodies,
He created the souls and kept them beside Himself and shed a light upon
them. He knew what quantity of light each soul received and He was
showing favour to each in proportion to its illumination. The souls
remained all that time in the light until they became fully nourished.
Those who in this world live in joy and agreement with one another must
have been akin to one another in yonder place. Here they love one
another and are called the friends of God, and they are brethren who
love one another for God's sake. These souls know each other by the
smell, like horses. Though one be in the East and the other in the West,
yet they feel joy and comfort in each other's talk, and one who lives in
a later generation than the other is instructed and consoled by the
words of his friend <span id="fr_170"></span>[3](#fn_170.md).</span>

Abú Sa‘íd said:

<span class="small">Whoever goes with me in this Way is my kinsman, even
though he be many degrees removed from me, and whoever does not back me
in this matter is nobody to me, even though he be one of my nearest
relatives <span id="fr_171"></span>[4](#fn_171.md).</span>

To many Christians the description of Abú Sa‘íd as a Moslem saint will
seem doubly paradoxical. The Mohammedan notion of saintship, which is
founded on ecstasy <span id="fr_172"></span>[5](#fn_172.md),

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

justifies the noun; but we may still wonder that the adjective should be
applied to a man who on one occasion cried out in a transport of
enthusiasm, "There is nothing inside this coat except Allah <span
id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_173.md)!" I need not discuss here the causes
which gradually brought about such a revolution that, as Professor D. B.
Macdonald says, "the devout life within the Muslim church led to a more
complete pantheism than ever did the Christian trinity <span
id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_174.md)." At any rate, the question whether Abú
Sa‘íd was a Moslem cannot be decided against him on this count, unless
we are prepared to excommunicate most of the saints, some of the
profoundest theologians, and wellnigh all the earnestly religious
thinkers of Islam. This was recognised by his orthodox opponents, who
ignored his theosophical doctrines and attacked him as an innovator in
matters connected with the religious law. Within reasonable limits, he
might believe and say what he liked, they would take notice only of his
overt acts. The following pages, which set forth his attitude towards
positive religion, will prove to every impartial reader that in their
treatment of heretics the medieval Christian divines had much to learn
from their Moslem contemporaries. Upon toleration also *ex Oriente lux*.

<span class="small">At the time of Abú Sa‘íd's residence in Níshápúr
Shaykh Bú ‘Abdallah Bákú was in the convent of Shaykh Abú ‘Abú
*al-Raḥmán* al-Sulamí, of which he became the director after the death
of Abú ‘Abú *al-Raḥmán*. (Bákú is a village in the district of Shirwán.)
This Bú ‘Abdallah Bákú used frequently to talk with Shaykh Abú Sa‘íd in
a controversial spirit and ask him questions about the Ṣúfí Path. One
day he came to him and said, "O Shaykh! we see you doing some things
that our Elders never did." "What are these things?" Abú Sa‘íd inquired.
"One of them," said he, "is this, that you let the young men sit beside
the old and put the juniors on a level with their seniors in all affairs
and make no difference between them; secondly, you permit the young men
to dance and sing; and thirdly, when a dervish throws off his gaberdine
(in ecstasy), you sometimes direct that it should be</span>

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="small">given back to him, saying that the dervish has the
best right to his own gaberdine. This has never been the practice of our
Elders." "Is there anything else?" said Abú Sa‘íd. "No," he replied. Abú
Sa‘íd said, "As regards the juniors and seniors, none of them is a
junior in my opinion. When a man has once entered on the Path of
Ṣúfisim, although he may be young, his seniors ought to consider that
possibly he will receive in a single day what they have not received in
seventy years. None who holds this belief will look upon any person as a
junior. Then, as to the young men's dancing in the *samá‘*, the souls of
young men are not yet purged of lust: indeed it may be the prevailing
element; and lust takes possession of all the limbs. Now, if a young
dervish claps his hands, the lust of his hands will be dissipated, and
if he tosses his feet, the lust of his feet will be lessened. When by
this means the lust fails in their limbs, they can preserve themselves
from great sins, but when all lusts are united (which God forfend!),
they will sin mortally. It is better that the fire of their lust should
be dissipated in the *samá‘* than in something else. As regards the
gaberdine which a dervish throws off, its disposal rests with the whole
company of dervishes and engages their attention. If they have no other
garment at hand, they clothe him again in his own gaberdine, and thereby
relieve their minds from the burden of thinking about it. That dervish
has not taken back his own gaberdine, but the company of dervishes have
given him their gaberdine and have thus freed their minds from thought
of him. Therefore he is protected by the spiritual concentration
(*himma*) of the whole company. This gaberdine is not the same one which
he threw away." Bú ‘Abdallah Bákú said, "Had I never seen the Shaykh, I
should never have seen a real Ṣúfí <span
id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175.md)."</span>

This interesting passage represents Abú Sa‘íd as having departed in
certain respects from the ancient Ṣúfistic tradition. His innovations,
by destroying the influence and authority of the more experienced
dervishes, would naturally tend to relax discipline. Early Ṣúfí writers,
*e.g.* Sarráj, Qushayrí, and Hujwírí, do not agree with him in thinking
that the practice of *samá‘* is beneficial to the young; on the
contrary, they urge the necessity of taking care lest novices should be
demoralised

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

by it. According to the same writers, the doctrines of Ṣúfisim are
contained in, and derived from, the Koran and the Traditions, of which
the true meaning has been mystically revealed to the Ṣúfís alone. This
theory concedes all that Moslems claim as to the unique authority of the
Koran and reduces the difference between Moslem and Súfí to a question
of interpretation. Abú Sa‘íd, however, found the source of his doctrine
in a larger revelation than the Word which was given to the Prophet.

The author of the *Asrár* says:

My grandfather, Shaykhu ’l-Islám Abú Sa‘íd, relates that one day, whilst
Abú Sa‘íd was preaching in Níshápúr, a learned theologian who was
present thought to himself that such doctrine is not to be found in the
seven sevenths (*i.e.* the whole) of the Koran. Abú Sa‘íd immediately
turned towards him and said, "Doctor, thy thought is not hidden from me.
The doctrine that I preach is contained in the eighth seventh of the
Koran." "What is that?" the theologian inquired. Abú Sa‘íd answered:
"The seven sevenths are, *O Apostle, deliver the message that hath been
sent down to thee* (Kor. 5, 71), and the eighth seventh is, *He revealed
unto His servant that which He revealed* (Kor. 53, pp). Ye imagine that
the Word of God is of fixed quantity and extent. Nay, the infinite Word
of God that was sent down to Mohammed is the whole seven sevenths of the
Koran; but that which He causes to come into the hearts of His servants
does not admit of being numbered and limited, nor does it ever cease.
Every moment there comes a messenger from Him to the hearts of His
servants, as the Prophet declared, saying, 'Beware of the clairvoyance
(*firása*) of the true believer, for verily he sees by the light of
God."' Then Abú Sa‘íd quoted the verse:

Thou art my soul's joy, known by vision, not by hearsay.  
Of what use is hearsay to one who hath vision?

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In a Tradition (he
went on) it is stated that the Guarded Tablet (*lawḥ-i maḥfúẓ*) <span
id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_176.md) is so broad that a fleet Arab horse
would not be able to cross it in four years, and the writing thereon is
finer than a hair. Of all the writing which covers it only a single line
has been

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

<span class="small">communicated to God's creatures. That little keeps
them in perplexity until the Resurrection. As for the rest, no one knows
anything about it <span id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_177.md).</span>

Here Abú Sa‘íd sets aside the partial, finite, and temporal revelation
on which Islam is built, and appeals to the universal, infinite, and
everlasting revelation which the Ṣúfís find in their hearts. As a rule,
even the boldest Mohammedan mystics shrink from uttering such a
challenge. So long as the inner light is regarded only as an interpreter
of the written revelation, the supremacy of the latter is nominally
maintained, though in fact almost any doctrine can be foisted upon it:
this is a very different thing from claiming that the inner light
transcends the Prophetic Law and possesses full authority to make laws
for itself. Abú Sa‘íd does not say that the partial and universal
revelations are in conflict with each other: he does not repudiate the
Koran, but he denies that it is the final and absolute standard of
divine truth. He often quotes Koranic verses in support of his
theosophical views. Only when the Book fails him need he confound his
critics by alleging a secret communication which he has received from
the Author.

The foregoing anecdote prepares us for mysticism of an advanced and
antinomian type. Not that Abú Sa‘íd acted in logical accordance with his
beliefs. With one exception, which will be noted presently, he omitted
no religious observance that a good Moslem is required to perform. But
while he thus shielded himself under the law, he showed in word and deed
how little he valued any external ceremony or traditional dogma.

<span class="small">There was at Qá’in a venerable Imám, whose name was
Khwája Muḥammad Qá’iní. When Abú Sa‘íd arrived at Qá’in, Khwája Muḥammad
spent most of his time in waiting upon him, and he used to attend all
the parties to which Abú Sa‘íd was invited. On one of these occasions,
during the *samá‘* which followed the feast, Abú Sa‘íd and all the
company had fallen into transports of ecstasy. The muezzin gave the call
to noonday</span>

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="small">prayers, but Abú Sa‘íd remained in the same rapture
and the dervishes continued to dance and shout. "Prayers! Prayers!"
cried the Imám Muḥammad Qá'iní." We are *at* prayers," said Abú Sa‘íd;
whereupon the Imám left them in order to take part in the
prayer-service. When Abú Sa‘íd came out of his trance, he said, "Between
its rising and setting the sun does not shine upon a more venerable and
learned man than this"—meaning Muḥammad Qá’iní—"but his knowledge of
Ṣúfisim is not so much as the tip of a hair <span
id="fr_178"></span>[1](#fn_178.md)."</span>

Although it would be wrong to use this story as evidence of Abú Sa‘íd's
habitual practice, we may at least affirm that in his eyes the essence
of prayer was not the formal act, but the "passing away from self" which
is completely attained in ecstasy. "Endeavour," he said, "to have a
mystical experience (*wárid*), not a devotional exercise (*wird*) <span
id="fr_179"></span>[2](#fn_179.md)." One day he said to a dervish, who in
order to show the utmost respect stood before him in the attitude of
prayer, "This is a very respectful posture, but thy not-being would be
still better <span id="fr_180"></span>[3](#fn_180.md)."

He never made the pilgrimage to Mecca, which every Moslem is bound to
make at least once. Many Ṣúfís who would have gladly dispensed with this
semi-pagan rite allegorised it and attached a mystical significance to
each of the various ceremonies <span id="fr_181"></span>[4](#fn_181.md);
but they saved their orthodoxy at the expense of their principles. Abú
Sa‘íd had no such reputation to keep up. His refusal to perform the Ḥajj
is not so surprising as the contemptuous language in which he refers to
one of the five main pillars of Islam.

<span class="small">Abú Sa‘íd was asked, "Who has been thy Pír? for
every Pír has had a Pír to instruct him; and how is it that thy neck is
too big for thy shirt-collar, while other Pírs have emaciated themselves
by austerities? And why hast thou not performed the Pilgrimage, as they
have done?" He replied, "Who has been my Pír? *This* (doctrine that I
teach) *is part of what my Lord hath* </span>

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="small">*taught me* (Kor. 12, 37). How is it that my neck is
too big for my shirt-collar? I marvel how there is room for my neck in
the seven heavens and earths after all that God hath bestowed upon me.
Why have I not performed the Pilgrimage? It is no great matter that thou
shouldst tread under thy feet a thousand miles of ground in order to
visit a stone house. The true man of God sits where he is, and the *Bayt
al-Ma‘múr* <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_182.md) comes several times in
a day and night to visit him and perform the circumambulation above his
head. Look and see!" All who were present looked and saw it <span
id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_183.md).</span>

The mystic's pilgrimage takes place within himself <span
id="fr_184"></span>[3](#fn_184.md). "If God sets the way to Mecca before
any one, that person has been cast out of the Way to the Truth <span
id="fr_185"></span>[4](#fn_185.md)." Not content with encouraging his
disciples to neglect the Ḥajj, Abú Sa‘íd used to send those who thought
of performing it to visit the tomb of Abú ’l-Faḍl Ḥasan at Sarakhs,
bidding them circumambulate it seven times and consider that their
purpose was accomplished <span id="fr_186"></span>[5](#fn_186.md). One sees
what a menace to Mohammedan institutions the cult of the saints had
already become.

The saint lost in contemplation of God knows no religion, and it is
often his fate to be classed with the freethinkers (*zanádiqa*), who,
from the Moslem point of view, are wholly irreligious, though some of
them acknowledge the moral law. Abú Sa‘íd said, "Whoever saw me in my
first state became a *ṣiddíq*, and whoever saw me in my last state
became a *zindáq* <span id="fr_187"></span>[6](#fn_187.md)," meaning that
those who accused him of being a freethinker thereby made themselves
guilty of the very thing which they imputed to him. I will translate the
biographer's commentary on this saying.

<span class="small">His first state was self-mortification and
asceticism, and since most men look at the surface and regard the
outward form, they saw the austerity of his life and how painfully he
advanced on the Way to God, and their sincere belief (*ṣidq*) in this
Way was increased and they attained to the degree of the Sincere
(*ṣiddíqán*). His last state was contemplation, a state in which the
fruit of self-mortification</span>

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="small">is gathered and the complete unveiling (*kashf*)
comes to pass; accordingly, eminent mystics have said that states of
contemplation are the heritage of acts of self-mortification
(*al-musháhadát mawáríthu ’l-mujáhadát*). Those who saw him in this
state, which is necessarily one of enjoyment and happiness, and were
ignorant of his former state denied that which was true (*ḥaqq*); and
whoever denies the Truth (*Ḥaqq*) is a freethinker (*zindíq*). There are
many analogies to this in the sensible world. For example, when a man
seeks to win the favour of a king and to become his companion and
intimate friend, before attaining to that rank he must suffer all sorts
of tribulation and patiently endure injuries and insults from high and
low, and submit with cheerfulness to maltreatment and abuse, giving fair
words in return for foul; and when he has been honoured with the king's
approval and has been admitted to his presence, he must serve him
assiduously and hazard his life in order that the king may place
confidence in him. But after he has gained the king's confidence and
intimacy, all this hard and perilous service belongs to the past. Now
all is grace and bounty and favour; everywhere he meets with new
pleasures and delights; and he has no duty but to wait upon the king
always, from whose palace he cannot be absent a single moment by day or
night, in order that he may be at hand whenever the king desires to tell
him a secret or to honour him with a place by his side <span
id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188.md).</span>

Asceticism and positive religion are thus relegated to the lower planes
of the mystical life. The Ṣúfí needs them and must hold fast to them
while he is serving his spiritual apprenticeship and also during the
middle stage which is marked by longer or shorter intervals of
illumination; but in his "last state," when the unveiling is completed,
he has no further use for ascetic practices and religious forms, for he
lives in permanent communion with God Himself. This leads directly to
antinomianism, though in theory the saint is above the law rather than
against it. One who sees the reality within cannot judge by appearances.
Being told that a disciple of his was lying blind-drunk on a certain
road, Abú Sa‘íd said, "Thank God that he has fallen on the way, not

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

off the Way <span id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189.md)." Some one asked him,
"Are the men of God in the mosque?" "They are in the tavern too," he
replied <span id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_190.md).

His pantheistic vision blotted out the Mohammedan afterworld with its
whole system of rewards and punishments. "Whoever knows God without
mediation worships Him without recompense <span
id="fr_191"></span>[3](#fn_191.md)." There is no Hell but selfhood, no
Paradise but selflessness: "Hell is where thou art and Paradise where
thou art not <span id="fr_192"></span>[4](#fn_192.md)." He quoted the
Tradition, "My people shall be split into more than seventy sects, of
which a single one shall be saved, while the others shall be in the
Fire," and added, "that is to say, in the fire of their own selves <span
id="fr_193"></span>[5](#fn_193.md)."

As I have already remarked, Abú Sa‘íd speaks with two voices: now as a
theosophist, now as a Moslem. Hence the same terms bear their ordinary
religious meaning in one passage and are explained mystically in
another, while the purest pantheism runs side by side with popular
theology. To our minds it seems absurd to suppose that he believed in
both; yet probably he did, at least so far as to have no difficulty in
accepting the Mohammedan scheme when it suited him. For example, he
preaches the doctrine of the intercession of saints, in which (though
the Koran does not support it) Paradise, Hell, the Day of Judgment,
etc., are what the Koran says they are. A few of his sayings on this
subject may be quoted here, especially as it is closely connected with
his miracles and legend which will be discussed in the following pages.

The man who is being carried off to Hell will see a light from afar. He
will ask what it is and will be told that it is the light of such and
such a Pír. He will say, "In our world I used to love him." The wind
will bear his words to the ears of that Pír, who will plead for him in
the divine presence, and God will release the sinner on account of the
intercession of that holy man <span id="fr_194"></span>[6](#fn_194.md).

Whoever has seen me and has done good work for my family and disciples
will be under the shadow of my intercession hereafter <span
id="fr_195"></span>[7](#fn_195.md).

I have prayed God to forgive my neighbours on the left, on the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

right, in front, and behind, and He has forgiven them for my sake." Then
he said, "My neighbours are Balkh and Merv and Níshápúr and Herat. I am
not speaking of those who live here (Mayhana) <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196.md)."

"I need not say a word on behalf of those around me. If any one has
mounted an ass and passed by the end of this street, or has passed my
house or will pass it, or if the light of my candle falls on him, the
least thing that God will do with him is that He will have mercy upon
him <span id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_197.md)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_130"></span>[48:1](siim05.htm#fr_130.md) 92 by H. Ethé in
Sitzungsberichte der königl. bayer. Akademie der Wissenschaften,
philosophisch-philologische Classe (1875), pp. 145-168 and (1878), pp.
38-70; 400 by Mawlaví ‘Abdu ’l-Walí in the *Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal*, vol. v, No. 11 (December, 1909) and vol. vii, No. 10
(November, 1911); and 112 by H. D. Graves Law in the same journal
(according to an offprint given to me by the author in 1913, which
refers to ‘Abdu ’l-Walí's work as "comparatively recent"; but I cannot
find the article in the volumes issued in 1912 and 1913. It is entitled
"Some new quatrains of Abú Sa‘íd ibn Abi ’l-Khair").

<span id="fn_131"></span>[49:1](siim05.htm#fr_131.md) One of his sayings,
which is given both in Arabic and Persian and is ascribed to "a certain
sage," reveals the source (hitherto, I believe, unidentified) of Sir
William Jones's lines *To an Infant newly born*:

"On parent's knees, a naked new-born child,  
 Weeping thou sat’st while all around tree smiled;  
 So live, that sinking in thy long last sleep,  
 Calm thou mayst smile, while all around thee weep."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The original is in
prose and runs as follows: "Thou wast born weeping, whilst thy folk
smiled. Endeavour to die smiling, whilst thy folk weep" (A 317, 14).

<span id="fn_132"></span>[49:2](siim05.htm#fr_132.md) A 373, 7.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[49:3](siim05.htm#fr_133.md) A 373, 16.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[49:4](siim05.htm#fr_134.md) A 375, 11.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[49:5](siim05.htm#fr_135.md) A 380, 2.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[49:6](siim05.htm#fr_136.md) A 381, 5.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[49:7](siim05.htm#fr_137.md) A 383, 1.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[49:8](siim05.htm#fr_138.md) A 386, 4.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[49:9](siim05.htm#fr_139.md) A 389, 16.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[50:1](siim05.htm#fr_140.md) A 319, 8.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[50:2](siim05.htm#fr_141.md) A 380, 6.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[50:3](siim05.htm#fr_142.md) A 380, 9.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[50:4](siim05.htm#fr_143.md) A 74, 13.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[50:5](siim05.htm#fr_144.md) A 402, 3.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[50:6](siim05.htm#fr_145.md) A 397, 8.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[51:1](siim05.htm#fr_146.md) A 383, 15.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[51:2](siim05.htm#fr_147.md) A 385, 3.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[52:1](siim05.htm#fr_148.md) A 376, 11.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[53:1](siim05.htm#fr_149.md) A 371, 5 (abridged in
translation).

<span id="fn_150"></span>[53:2](siim05.htm#fr_150.md) *Bandagí* (Arabic
*‘ubúdiyya*) is properly man's relation as a slave to his Lord. Cf. R.
Hartmann, *Al-Kuschairîs Darstellung des Ṣûfîtums*, p. 5 foll.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[53:3](siim05.htm#fr_151.md) A 410, 16.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[53:4](siim05.htm#fr_152.md) A 403, 3.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[53:5](siim05.htm#fr_153.md) A 348, 3.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[53:6](siim05.htm#fr_154.md) A 12, 7. Probably for
the same reason, Abú Sa‘íd discarded the imperative, using the
impersonal form instead (A 68, 12). He always said, "It is necessary to
do so-and-so" (*chunín báyad kard*), not "Do so-and-so" (*chunín
bikun*).

<span id="fn_155"></span>[54:1](siim05.htm#fr_155.md) A 387, 9.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[54:2](siim05.htm#fr_156.md) A 408, 14.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[54:3](siim05.htm#fr_157.md) A 398, 10.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[54:4](siim05.htm#fr_158.md) A 401, 17.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[54:5](siim05.htm#fr_159.md) A 332, 14. For a full
discussion of the doctrine of *amr* and *iráda* see Massignon's edition
of the *Kitáb al-Ṭawásín*, p. 145 foll.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[55:1](siim05.htm#fr_160.md) A 328, 10.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[55:2](siim05.htm#fr_161.md) A 388, 10.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[55:3](siim05.htm#fr_162.md) Cf. my *Mystics of
Islam*, p. 162 foll.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[55:4](siim05.htm#fr_163.md) A 259, 5.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[55:5](siim05.htm#fr_164.md) A 380, 11.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[55:6](siim05.htm#fr_165.md) A 329, 12.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[55:7](siim05.htm#fr_166.md) A 306, 17; 220, 3.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[55:8](siim05.htm#fr_167.md) A 382, 9.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[56:1](siim05.htm#fr_168.md) A 120, 2.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[56:2](siim05.htm#fr_169.md) A 261, 1; 359, 15.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[56:3](siim05.htm#fr_170.md) A 399, 14.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[56:4](siim05.htm#fr_171.md) A 391, 12.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[56:5](siim05.htm#fr_172.md) See The *Mystics of
Islam*, p. 120 foll.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[57:1](siim05.htm#fr_173.md) H 6, 5. A 262, 5.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[57:2](siim05.htm#fr_174.md) *The religious
attitude and life in Islam*, p. 39.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[58:1](siim05.htm#fr_175.md) A 269, 2.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[59:1](siim05.htm#fr_176.md) Mohammedans believe
that everything that shall happen till the Last Day is inscribed on a
Tablet under the Throne of God.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[60:1](siim05.htm#fr_177.md) H 49, 22. A 132, 3.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[61:1](siim05.htm#fr_178.md) A 293, 12.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[61:2](siim05.htm#fr_179.md) A 403, 15.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[61:3](siim05.htm#fr_180.md) A 375, 13.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[61:4](siim05.htm#fr_181.md) Cf. *Kashf al-Maḥjúb*
(translation), p. 327 fol.; *Kitáb al-Luma‘*, 172, 3 foll. The
allegorical interpretation of the Pilgrimage seems to have been borrowed
by the Ṣúfís from the Ismá‘ílís. See Professor Browne's *Literary
History of Persia*, vol. II, p. 241 foll.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[62:1](siim05.htm#fr_182.md) The celestial
archetype of the Ka‘ba. See E. J. W. Gibb, *History of Ottoman Poetry*,
vol. I, p. 37.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[62:2](siim05.htm#fr_183.md) A 347. 7.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[62:3](siim05.htm#fr_184.md) A 360, 11.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[62:4](siim05.htm#fr_185.md) A 374, 15.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[62:5](siim05.htm#fr_186.md) H 15, 12.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[62:6](siim05.htm#fr_187.md) A 41, 19.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[63:1](siim05.htm#fr_188.md) A 42, 1.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[64:1](siim05.htm#fr_189.md) H 76, 7.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[64:2](siim05.htm#fr_190.md) A 373, 4.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[64:3](siim05.htm#fr_191.md) A 406, 1.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[64:4](siim05.htm#fr_192.md) A 266, 16; 375, 16.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[64:5](siim05.htm#fr_193.md) A 392, 16.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[64:6](siim05.htm#fr_194.md) A 380, 16.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[64:7](siim05.htm#fr_195.md) A 428, 4.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[65:1](siim05.htm#fr_196.md) A 418, 6.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[65:2](siim05.htm#fr_197.md) A 418, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III](siim06.md)
