[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim23)  [Next](siim25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(500 <span id="fr_816"></span>[500](#fn_814)) Therefore ’tis upon me the
heavens turn, and marvel thou at their *Quṭb* (Pole) which encompasses
them, howbeit the Pole is a central point.

(501 <span id="fr_817"></span>[501](#fn_815)) And there was no *Quṭb*
before me, whom I should succeed after having passed three grades (of
sanctity), although the *Awtád* rise to the rank of *Quṭb* from the rank
of *Badal*.

(502 <span id="fr_818"></span>[502](#fn_816)) Do not overstep my
straight line, and seize the best opportunity, for in the angles there
are hidden things.

The poet now describes some of his strange experiences in love. The
first of these is a state which the commentator calls "the greatest
absence from self" (*al-ghaybiyyatu ’l-kubrá*).

\(506\) Through Her I became oblivious of myself, so that I thought
myself another and did not seek the path that leads to thinking myself
existent.

\(507\) And my being oblivious (of myself) in Her, caused me to lose my
reason, so that I did not return to myself or follow any desire of mine
in consequence of my thinking (that I existed).

\(508\) And I became distraught for Her, engrossed with Her; and
whomsoever She renders distraught through being taken up with Her, him
She makes forgetful of himself.

\(509\) And I was so preoccupied with Her as to forget the preoccupation
that made me forget myself: had I died for Her, I should not have been
aware of my departure (from the world).

\*     \*     \*     \*     \*     \*

\(512\) And I was seeking Her from myself, though She was ever beside
me. I marvelled how She was hidden from me by myself.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

\(513\) And I ceased not from going with Her to and fro in myself (in
search of Her), because my senses were intoxicated by the wine of Her
beauties,

(514 <span id="fr_819"></span>[514](#fn_817)) Travelling from the
knowledge of certainty to the intuition thereof; then journeying to the
fact thereof, where the Truth is.

\(521\) (So was I seeking Her within me) until there rose from me to
mine eye a gleam, and the splendour of my daybreak shone forth and my
darkness vanished.

(522 <span id="fr_820"></span>[522](#fn_818)) Here I reached a point
from which the intellect recoils before gaining it, where from myself I
was being joined and united to myself.

(523 <span id="fr_821"></span>[523](#fn_819)) And when I attained unto
myself, I beamed with joy because of a certainty that saved me from
saddling for my journey;

(524 <span id="fr_822"></span>[524](#fn_820)) And since I was seeking
myself from myself, I directed myself to myself, and my soul showed the
way to me by means of me.

(525 <span id="fr_823"></span>[525](#fn_821)) And when I removed the
curtains of the shroud of sense which the mysteries of mine own
ordainment had let down,

\(526\) I lifted my soul's curtain by unveiling her, and ’twas she that
granted my request (that the veil should be removed).

(527 <span id="fr_824"></span>[527](#fn_822)) And I was that which
cleansed the mirror of my essence

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

from the rust of my attributes, and the rays that surrounded it were
from myself;

\(528\) And I caused myself to behold myself, inasmuch as in my
beholding there existed none other than myself who might decree the
intrusion (of duality).

(529 <span id="fr_825"></span>[529](#fn_823)) And when I uttered my
name, that which uttered it caused me to hear it, though (in truth)
’twas my soul that listened and pronounced my name while sensation was
banished.

(530 <span id="fr_826"></span>[530](#fn_824)) And I embraced myself, but
not through contact of my limbs with my ribs: nay, I embraced my very
essence.

(531 <span id="fr_827"></span>[531](#fn_825)) And I let myself smell my
own perfume, while the perfume of my breath made fragrant the scents of
bruised spices.

(532 <span id="fr_828"></span>[532](#fn_826)) And the whole of me was
transcending the dualism of sensation, howbeit my transcendence was in
myself, since I had unified my essence.

Human thought distinguishes the essence of God from His attributes,
names, and actions, but in the mystic's vision of Oneness all is
essentialised and every partial relation identified with the Whole.

\(533\) To praise my attributes because of me (my essence) enables my
praiser to glorify me (for what I am essentially), but to praise me (my
essence) because of my attributes is to blame me (my essence).

(534 <span id="fr_829"></span>[534](#fn_827)) Therefore he that beholds
my attributes in my companion (my body) and beholds me (my essence) by
means of them will never alight at my abode—for I veil myself (with my
attributes).

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

\(535\) And to call to mind my Names through me (my essence) is a waking
vision (a revelation of the Truth), but to call me (my essence) to mind
through them is the (false) dream of one that slumbers in the night.

(536 <span id="fr_830"></span>[536](#fn_828)) Likewise, he that knows me
(my essence) through my actions knows me not, whereas he that knows them
through me is a knower of the Truth.

(537 <span id="fr_831"></span>[537](#fn_829)) Receive, then, the
knowledge of the principal attributes, which are attached to outward
abodes (visible organs), from a soul well acquainted therewith,

(538 <span id="fr_832"></span>[538](#fn_830)) And (receive) the
understanding of the Names of the Essence, which are made manifest
through them (the attributes) but (themselves) reside in the inward
(invisible) worlds, from a spirit that gives an indication thereof (by
means of symbols).

(539 <span id="fr_833"></span>[539](#fn_831)) The manifestation
metaphorically of my attributes (*e.g.* sight and hearing) from the
names of my bodily organs (*e.g.* the visual and auditory
faculties)—names by which my soul was named because of my judgment (that
in reality they belong to the soul, not to the body)

\(540\) Consists of a knowledge (latent in the soul)—marks traced on the
veils of forms (bodily organs) and throwing light on what is beyond
sense-perception in the soul.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

(541 <span id="fr_834"></span>[541](#fn_832)) And the manifestation
actually of the names of my essence from the attributes of my inward
being, for the sake of mysteries whereby the spirit was gladdened,

\(542\) Consists of hints concerning treasures (of knowledge)—hints
revealing the significations of a mystical doctrine and encompassed by
the arcana of that which is hidden in the depths of the heart.

(543 <span id="fr_835"></span>[543](#fn_833)) And their effects in all
that exists, together with the knowledge of them—and created things are
not independent of the effects produced by them (the Names and
Attributes)

\(544\) Are (shown by) the existence of praise that is gained (by God)
for strength of dominion, and by the beholding of thanks that are
gathered in return for universal favours.

(545 <span id="fr_836"></span>[545](#fn_834)) They (the effects of the
Names and Attributes) are theatres of manifestation for me: I appeared
in them, although I was not hidden from myself before my epiphany (in
them).

(546 <span id="fr_837"></span>[546](#fn_835)) For speech—and the whole
of me is a tongue that tells of me—and sight—and the whole of me is an
eye in me for regarding me

\(547\) And hearing—and the whole of me is ears (*asmu‘*) listening to
the proclamation of (my) bounty—(and power)—and the whole of me is a
hand strong to repel destruction,

\(548\) (All these faculties) are a means of manifestation for

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Attributes which
established (the presence in the soul of) what transcends the (outward)
vesture (the body) and for Essential Names which spread abroad that
which sensation related (to the soul).

In language so figurative as to be almost untranslatable the poet
describes (*vv*. 549-574) the Divine Names according to (1) their
characteristic qualities; (2) the benefits which accrue from them to
body and soul; and (3) their respective spheres of influence, *viz*.,
the visible world (*‘álamu ’l-shaháda*), the invisible world (*‘álamu
’l-ghayb*), the world of dominion (*‘álamu ’l-malakút*), and the world
of almightiness (*‘álamu ’l-jabarút*) <span
id="fr_838"></span>[1](#fn_839). Here again he rises to the plane of
undifferentiated unity (*jam‘*), where plurality (*tafriqa*) has
disappeared. This phase, however, is momentary. As we have seen, in the
highest mystical experience plurality returns under the form of unity:
the One does not exclude the Many, but comprehends them in its own
nature, so that every part is the essence of the whole.

(575 <span id="fr_839"></span>[575](#fn_836)) The whole of me performs
that (devotion) which is required by the Path, while keeping the way of
that (unity) which was required by my Truth.

(576 <span id="fr_840"></span>[576](#fn_837)) And when, no longer
separating, I joined the rift, and the fissures caused by the difference
of the attributes were closed,

(577 <span id="fr_841"></span>[577](#fn_838)) And nothing that leads to
estrangement was left between me and a firm trust in the intimacy of my
love,

\(578\) I knew for sure that we (lover and Beloved) are really One, and
the sobriety of union restored the notion of separation,

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

\(579\) And my whole was a tongue to speak, an eye to see, an ear to
hear, and a hand to seize.

All particular attributes being thus dissolved in the universality of
the Essence, the "unified" mystic can say that his eye speaks, his
tongue sees, his hand listens, etc., and that his sense of smell speaks,
sees, hears, and takes, or conversely, that his tongue, eye, ear, and
hand are endowed with the sense of smell; and can declare that all his
faculties are exercised simultaneously by every atom of his body (*vv*.
580-88).

\(589\) Therefore I read all the knowledge of the wise in a single word,
and show unto myself all created beings in a single look;

\(590\) And I hear the voices of them that pray and all their languages
in a time less than the duration of a gleam;

\(591\) And ere mine eye winks, I bring before me what was hard to
convey on account of its distance;

\(592\) And with one inhalation I smell the perfumes of all gardens and
the fragrance of what (herbs) soever touch the skirts of the winds;

\(593\) And I survey all regions (of the earth) in a flash of thought
and traverse the seven tiers of Heaven in one step.

The next passage indicates the origin and nature of these extraordinary
powers which the poet claims not only for himself but for all prophets
from Adam to Mohammed and for the Moslem saints in general. It is
perhaps unnecessary to add that where he uses the words "I" and "my" he
assumes the character of the universal Spirit.

\(594\) The bodies of those in whom remains no remnant (of self) because
of my union (with them) are like the spirits: they are encompassed (with
my union) and made light (subtle);

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

(595 <span id="fr_842"></span>[595](#fn_840)) And whosoever is sovereign
or munificent or mighty in onset only finds his way (to these qualities)
through my aiding him with a particle (of my union).

(596 <span id="fr_843"></span>[596](#fn_841)) He walked not on the water
nor flew in the air nor plunged in the flames but in virtue of my
volition,

\(597\) And I am the source whence he whom I aided with a particle (of
my union) became changed in a moment from all his (normal) being,

\(598\) And whence he that with his whole being followed my union
recited the Koran, from beginning to end, a thousand times in an hour or
less.

\(599\) And had a breath of my grace been bestowed on a dead man, his
soul would have been given back to him and caused to return.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_814"></span>[246:500](siim24.htm#fr_816) (500) Real Being
is the axis on which the phenomenal universe revolves as well as the
circumference within which all particulars are contained.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[246:501](siim24.htm#fr_817) (501) The
explanation of this verse will be found on [p. 194](siim17.htm#page_194)
*supra*.

<span id="fn_816"></span>[246:502](siim24.htm#fr_818) (502) "My straight
line," *i.e.* the mystical path by which I arrived at this supreme
perfection. The poet adds that the doctrine taught in the *Tá’iyya*
should be prized by Ṣúfís: in its obscure expressions they will discover
the mysteries of the Truth.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[247:514](siim24.htm#fr_819) (514) Certainty
(al-*yaqín*) denotes real faith in the Unseen. The three stages or
categories mentioned in this verse are variously defined by Ṣúfí
writers. According to Káshání, a man who has the knowledge of certainty
(*‘ilmu ’l-yaqín*) knows that the object of his search is within him; in
the second stage (*‘aynu ’l-yaqín*) he sees this intuitively with the
eye of mystical contemplation; in the last stage (*ḥaqqu ’l-yaqín*) the
illusion of subject and object disappears and he reaches absolute unity
(*ittiḥád*).

<span id="fn_818"></span>[247:522](siim24.htm#fr_820) (522) Thought,
which involves duality, cannot apprehend "the fact of certainty" (*ḥaqqu
’l-yaqín*), *i.e.* the pure Oneness allegorically depicted in the
following passage.

<span id="fn_819"></span>[247:523](siim24.htm#fr_821) (523) When the
mystic realises the fact of *ittiḥád*, he has arrived at his journey's
end.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[247:524](siim24.htm#fr_822) (524) *I.e.* I was
the seeker, the guide, and the object sought.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[247:525](siim24.htm#fr_823) (525-6) The soul
is "veiled" (ignorant of the truth) so long as she does not perceive
that the bodily senses (sight, hearing, taste, etc.) are really
attributes of the universal Soul with which she is essentially one.

<span id="fn_822"></span>[247:527](siim24.htm#fr_824) (527) The
attributes, which limit the essence and prevent it from being seen as it
is absolutely, are compared to rust that darkens the surface of a steel
mirror.

<span id="fn_823"></span>[248:529](siim24.htm#fr_825) (529) See *vv*.
539-540 and *vv*. 546-8 below.

<span id="fn_824"></span>[248:530](siim24.htm#fr_826) (530) This verse
refers to *v*. 519:

And I press my hand on my vitals that peradventure I may embrace Her
when I lay it there in clasping.

The whole passage (*vv*. 521-531) is parallel to the verses immediately
preceding it (510-520): the former describes mystical "intoxication"
(*sukr*), the latter mystical "sobriety" (saḥw).

<span id="fn_825"></span>[248:531](siim24.htm#fr_827) (531) *I.e.* I did
not cry, like Mohammed, "O God, let me smell the perfume of Paradise!"
for I myself was the perfumer, the perfume and everything that is
perfumed.

<span id="fn_826"></span>[248:532](siim24.htm#fr_828) (532) Cf. *v*.
529. The deified mystic is transcendent "in himself" because he is One
and All.

<span id="fn_827"></span>[248:534](siim24.htm#fr_829) (534) "Will never
alight at my abode," *i.e.* will never attain to knowledge of my
essence.

<span id="fn_828"></span>[249:536](siim24.htm#fr_830) (536) Knowledge
derived by means of induction is inferior to knowledge revealed in
contemplation. Perfect knowledge of God is truly a re-cognition of that
which the soul contemplated before the existence of the body.

<span id="fn_829"></span>[249:537](siim24.htm#fr_831) (537) "The
principal attributes," such as sight, hearing, speech, and power, whose
respective organs are the eye, the ear, the tongue, and the hand.

<span id="fn_830"></span>[249:538](siim24.htm#fr_832) (538) The
attributes, although their real nature is hidden in the Essence,
manifest themselves in the bodily organs. The Names, having no such
organs attached to them, cannot be manifested except through the
attributes: thus, before we apply the name *al-Raḥmán* (the Merciful) to
the Divine Essence, we must be assured that the quality of *raḥma*
(mercy) is latent in the Essence.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[249:539](siim24.htm#fr_833) (539-540) There is
only a metaphorical (unreal) connexion between the attributes of the
Essence and the physical faculties and organs with which they are
associated. In reality these attributes belong entirely to the Essence,
inasmuch as the faculties and organs through which they are manifested
are themselves no more than objectified aspects of the Essence. When a
man says "I saw" and "I heard," naming himself by the names of the
attributes of sight and hearing, he does so because he judges that what
really sees and hears is not his eye and his ear, but the spiritual
essence underlying them.

<span id="fn_832"></span>[250:541](siim24.htm#fr_834) (541-42) The
inmost meaning of the Divine Names, which depend on the Divine
Attributes (see *v*. 538), cannot be apprehended except mystically or
conveyed otherwise than symbolically. Knowledge of the Names and
Attributes gladdens the spirit by revealing the mysteries of Oneness
(*ittiḥád*) and by exalting Man, as the microcosm, above all created
beings.

<span id="fn_833"></span>[250:543](siim24.htm#fr_835) (543-4) The whole
world of phenomena exhibits the effects (*áthár*) of the Divine Names
and Attributes, *i.e.* it is constituted, sustained, and replenished by
a continuous series of illuminations (*tajalliyát*) proceeding from
these Names and Attributes. All created beings praise God and render
thanks to Him who endows them with existence, since they know—and this
is the import of the words "together with the knowledge of them," *i.e.*
the knowledge of the *áthár*—that His Names and Attributes are
manifested in themselves.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[250:545](siim24.htm#fr_836) (545) Before God
actually revealed Himself in Man and Nature, He was potentially revealed
to Himself in His eternal knowledge.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[250:546](siim24.htm#fr_837) (546-8) All
faculties which are separate and distinct in the body are united and
indistinguishable in the soul. "The soul, having no parts, speaks with
hearing and sight, and sees with hearing and speech, and hears with
sight and speech, because all its attributes are involved in one
another." The commentator assigns to *ma‘ání* in *v*. 548 an unusual
meaning, *viz*. "places <span id="page_251">p. 251</span> of submission
or will (to manifestation)"; but *ma‘ání ṣifát<sup>in</sup>* may signify
"realities (consisting) of attributes." "That which sensation related to
the soul" is the multiformity of phenomenal existence, which corresponds
to the variety of the Essential Names. From perception of sensible
things the soul rises to knowledge of their spiritual realities.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[251:575](siim24.htm#fr_839) (575) "Having
realised the Truth (*ḥaqíqa*), namely, that subject and object are One,
I continue to walk in the Path (*ṭaríqa*)," *i.e.* to observe the
ascetic and ethical discipline which the Súfí novice learns from his
spiritual director.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[251:576](siim24.htm#fr_840) (576) The
phenomenon of "separation" arises from the diversity of the Divine Names
and Attributes, not from any duality in the Essence itself.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[251:577](siim24.htm#fr_841) (577-8) Lover and
Beloved are two attributes of one essence (Love), <span id="page_252">p.
252</span> and their union *quâ* attributes is impossible, since the
former is characterised by need, abasement and weakness, while power and
pride are inherent in the latter. So long as they co-exist, they stand
opposed to one another and in peril of "estrangement"; only by
absorption in their essence, *i.e.* by ceasing to be attributes, do they
become united. The mystic's real Beloved is the oneness of Love, which
begins in a rapture obliterating all distinctions (*jam‘*) but ends by
"restoring the notion of separation" (*tafriqa*), *i.e.* perceiving
clairvoyantly that Lover, Beloved and Love are one.

<span id="fn_839"></span>[251:1](siim24.htm#fr_838) <span
id="page_251">p. 251</span> The *‘álamu ’l-malakút* and the *‘álamu
’l-jabarút* denote the Attributes and the Essence.

<span id="fn_840"></span>[253:595](siim24.htm#fr_842) (595) Spiritual
dominion, grace, and energy emanate from the Divine Essence with which
the prophets and saints have been made one.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[253:596](siim24.htm#fr_843) (596) "My
volition" (*himma*), *i.e.* the concentration of my thought upon the
particular Divine Names which are the causes of the (miraculous) effects
that I desire to produce.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: vv. 600-699](siim25)
