[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim21)  [Next](siim23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\(300\) And haughtily sweep the clouds with thy skirts—the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

skirts of an impassioned lover which in his union (with the Beloved)
trail over the top of the Milky Way!

\(301\) And traverse the various degrees of oneness and do not join a
party that lost their lifetime in (attachment to) something besides.

(302 <span id="fr_741"></span>[302](#fn_739)) For its single champion is
a host, while all others are but a handful who were vanquished by the
most convincing of testimonies.

(303 <span id="fr_742"></span>[303](#fn_740)) Therefore make that which
it (the term "oneness") signifies thy means of access (to God) and live
in it, or else die its captive, and follow a community which attained
the primacy therein.

\(304\) Thou art worthier of this glory than one who strives and exerts
himself in hope (of reward) and in fear (of punishment).

\(305\) ’Tis not marvellous that thou shouldst shake thy sides
(boastfully) before him in the sweetest delight and the completest joy,

\(306\) Since the attributes related to it (to Oneness)—how many a man
have they chosen out in obscurity! and its names—how many a one have
they raised to renown!

\(307\) Yet thou, in the degree (of union) to which thou hast attained,
art remote from me: the Pleiades have no connexion with the earth.

\(308\) Thou hast been brought to thy Sinai and hast reached a plane
higher than thy soul had ever imagined;

\(309\) But this is thy limit: stop here, for wert thou to advance a
step beyond it, thou wouldst be consumed by a brand of fire.

Leaving his disciple in "the intoxication of union" (*sukru ’l-jam‘*),
with an emphatic warning not to exceed the measure of his spiritual
capacity, Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ depicts from his own experience the unitive life
in its perfect and final development, which is known technically as "the
sobriety of union" (*saḥwu ’l-jam‘*). Cf. the notes on *vv*. 233-5,
260-4, and 326-7.

\(310\) My degree is of such a height that a man who has not

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

reached it may still be deemed happy; but the state for which I am
deemed happy transcends thy degree.

\(311\) All men are the sons of Adam, (and I am as they) save that I
alone amongst my brethren have attained to the sobriety of union.

(312 <span id="fr_743"></span>[312](#fn_741)) My hearing is like that of
Kalím (Moses) and my heart is informed (about God) by the most excellent
(*aḥmad*) vision of an eye like that of him who is most excellent (Aḥmad
= Mohammed).

(313 <span id="fr_744"></span>[313](#fn_742)) And my spirit is a spirit
to all the spirits (of created beings); and whatsoever thou seest of
beauty in the universe flows from the bounty of my nature.

(314 <span id="fr_745"></span>[314](#fn_743)) Leave, then, to me (and do
not ascribe to any one else) the knowledge with which I alone was
endowed before my appearance (in the phenomenal world), while (after my
appearance) amongst created beings my friends knew me not (as I really
am).

(315 <span id="fr_746"></span>[315](#fn_744)) Do not give me the name of
"lover" (*muríd*) amongst them (my friends), for even he who is rapt by
Her and is called Her "beloved" (*murád*) hath need of my protection;

(316 <span id="fr_747"></span>[316](#fn_745)) And let names of honour
fall from me and pronounce them not, babbling foolishly, for they are
but signs fashioned by one whom I made;

(317 <span id="fr_748"></span>[317](#fn_746)) And take back my title of
"gnostic," for according to the Koran, if thou approvest people's
calling each other names, thou wilt be loathed.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

(318 <span id="fr_749"></span>[318](#fn_747)) The least of my
followers—the virgin brides of gnosis were led home to the eye of his
heart.

\(319\) He plucked the fruit of gnosis from a branch of perception that
grew by his following me and springs from the root of my nature;

\(320\) So that, if he is questioned about any (spiritual) matter, he
brings forth wondrous sayings which are too sublime for comprehension,
nay, too subtle for the mind to conceive.

(321 <span id="fr_750"></span>[321](#fn_748)) And amongst them (my
friends) do not call me by the epithet of "favourite" (*muqarrab*),
which in virtue of my union (with God) I deem to be a sinful severance;

\(322\) For my meeting is my parting, and my nearness is my being far,
and my fondness is my aversion, and my end is my beginning,

(323 <span id="fr_751"></span>[323](#fn_749)) Since for Her sake by whom
I have disguised myself—and ’tis but myself I mean—I have cast off my
name and my style and my name of honour,

(324 <span id="fr_752"></span>[324](#fn_750)) And have journeyed beyond
where those of old stood still, and where minds perished misled by (the
search after intellectual) gains.

\(325\) I have no attributes, for an attribute is a mark (of substance).
Similarly, a name is a sign (of an object). Therefore, if thou wouldst
allude to me, use metaphors or epithets.

(326 <span id="fr_753"></span>[326](#fn_751)) From " I am She " I
mounted to where is no " to," and I perfumed (phenomenal) existence by
my returning;

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

\(327\) And (I returned) from "I am I" for the sake of an esoteric
wisdom and external laws which were instituted that I might call (the
people to God).

(328 <span id="fr_754"></span>[328](#fn_752)) The goal of my disciple
who was rapt to Her (in ecstasy) and the utmost limit reached by his
masters is the point to which I advanced before my turning back;

\(329\) And the highest peak gained by those who thought themselves
foremost is the lowest level that bears the mark of my tread;

\(330\) And the last pinnacle of that which is beyond indication, and
where is no progress upwards (but only backwards)—*that* is where my
first footstep fell!

(331 <span id="fr_755"></span>[331](#fn_753)) There is nothing existent
but hath knowledge of my grace, nor aught in being but utters my praise.

(332 <span id="fr_756"></span>[332](#fn_754)) No wonder that I lord it
over all who lived before me, since I have grasped the firmest stay
(which is a verse) in (the chapter of the Koran entitled) *Ṭá-há.*

\(333\) My greeting to Her is metaphorical: in reality my salutation is
from me to myself.

Here Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ inserts in praise of his Beloved an ode of fifty-two
verses (336-387) in the same metre and rhyme

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

as the rest of the *Tá’iyya*. Beautiful as this lyric interlude is and
welcome for the relief which its warm colouring affords to imaginations
fatigued by "the white radiance of eternity," it interrupts the course
of the poem and may be omitted here.

After a short passage (*vv*. 388-393) concerning the "railer" and the
"slanderer," whom the mystic when he regards them under the aspect of
union (*jam‘*) perceives to be really inspired by love, not by enmity,
Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ resumes his description of the unitive state at its
supreme level, marked by the return from ecstasy to a new and enlarged
consciousness of the One Reality which manifests itself in every form of
thought and sense.

\(394\) And therein (in *ittiḥád*) are matters of which the veil was
entirely raised for me by my recovery from intoxication, while they were
screened from every one besides.

\(395\) A mystic can dispense with plain words and will understand me
when I speak allusively on account of those who would trip me up.

(396 <span id="fr_757"></span>[396](#fn_755)) None may divulge them
without making his lifeblood the forfeit, and in symbols there is a
meaning that words cannot define.

(397 <span id="fr_758"></span>[397](#fn_756)) Now my exposition begins
with the twain who sought to bring about my severance, albeit my union
defies separation.

(398 <span id="fr_759"></span>[398](#fn_757)) Those twain are one with
us (the Beloved and me) in inward union, though in outward separation we
and they are counted as four.

\(399\) For truly I and She are one essence, while he who told tales of
her and he who turned me away from her are attributes which appeared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_739"></span>[228:302](siim22.htm#fr_741) (302) An allusion
to Kor. 2, 250: "How many a little band hath overcome a great army by
the permission of Allah!"

<span id="fn_740"></span>[228:303](siim22.htm#fr_742) (303) "Or else die
its captive," *i.e.* "even though you fail to attain to oneness, at
least pursue it until you die." *Mu‘annáhu* ("its captive") may also
mean "pining for it" and is so explained by K.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[229:312](siim22.htm#fr_743) (312) *I.e.* "I
hear God with my ear, as Moses did when God said to him 'Thou shalt not
see Me' (Kor. 7, 139), and see Him with my eye, as Mohammed saw Him."
Moses is called Kalím or Kalímu’llah because God spoke to him
(*kallamahu*). As regards Mohammed, cf. *Kashf al-Maḥjúb*, transl., p.
186.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[229:313](siim22.htm#fr_744) (313 foll.) Here
Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ speaks, as it were, out of the depths of his consciousness
of God. According to the commentator, he hints that he is the *Quṭb*.
See [p. 194](siim17.htm#page_194) *supra*.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[229:314](siim22.htm#fr_745) (314) God created
the world in order that He might be known: before the creation He alone
knew Himself, and after it His friends (the prophets and saints) did not
know Him with His own eternal knowledge of Himself.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[229:315](siim22.htm#fr_746) (315) See note on
*vv*. 204-5 for the distinction between *muríd* and *murád*. Even the
latter, as an object of Divine protection, is other than God and
therefore not to be identified with the mystic who is wholly one with
Him.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[229:316](siim22.htm#fr_747) (316) A "name of
honour" (*kunya*) is one of the class of names which begin with the word
*Abú* (father) and are used as a mark of respect to the person
addressed. "One whom I made," *i.e.* Man, whose language is meaningless
as applied to God.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[229:317](siim22.htm#fr_748) (317) Cf. Kor. 49,
11. The poet includes the name "gnostic" among *alqáb* (which is here
equivalent to "nicknames" or "ill names") because the Absolute suffers a
limitation when it is described by any title, however exalted.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[230:318](siim22.htm#fr_749) (318-20) The
argument is: "Gnostic," a name appropriate to the meanest of my.
disciples, is a term of abuse in relation to me, who am the source of
all gnosis.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[230:321](siim22.htm#fr_750) (321) Muqarrab,
literally "one who is brought near (to God)." Ṣúfís often use this term,
which is borrowed from the Koran, to describe the highest class of the
saints. See *Kitáb al-Luma‘*, ch. 43. The *muqarrab* prefers union to
separation, whereas in perfect union there are no contraries. Cf. note
on *vv*. 294-5.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[230:323](siim22.htm#fr_751) (323) *I.e.* the
name "She," or "Beloved," disguises me, for it really signifies the One
Essence, which is my true and eternal self.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[230:324](siim22.htm#fr_752) (324) The
intellect moving in the world of relations and distinctions cannot reach
the Absolute.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[230:326](siim22.htm#fr_753) (326-7) Three
stages of Oneness (*ittiḥád*) are distinguished here:

1\. "I am She," *i.e.* union (*jam‘*) without real separation
(*tafriqa*), although the appearance of separation is maintained. This
was the stage in which al-Ḥalláj said *Ana ’l-Ḥaqq*, "I am God."

2\. "I am I," *i.e.* pure union without any trace of separation
(individuality). <span id="page_231">p. 231</span> This stage is
technically known as "the intoxication of union" (*sukru ’l-jam‘*).

3\. The "sobriety of union" (*saḥwu ’l-jam‘*), *i.e.* the stage in which
the mystic returns from the pure oneness of the second stage to
plurality in oneness and to separation in union and to the Law in the
Truth, so that while continuing to be united with God he serves Him as a
slave serves his lord and manifests the Divine Life in its perfection to
mankind.

"Where is no 'to,'" *i.e.* the stage of "I am I," beyond which no
advance is possible except by means of retrogression. In this stage the
mystic is entirely absorbed in the undifferentiated oneness of God. Only
after he has "returned," *i.e.* entered upon the third stage (plurality
in oneness) can he communicate to his fellows some perfume (hint) of the
experience through which he has passed. "An esoteric wisdom," *i.e.* the
Divine providence manifested by means of the religious law. By returning
to consciousness the "united" mystic is enabled to fulfil the law and to
act as a spiritual director.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[231:328](siim22.htm#fr_754) (328) "His
masters," literally "his objects of desire" (*murddíhi*), *i.e.* those
eminent theosophists whom the disciple seeks to imitate, but who have
not reached the highest degree of perfection.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[231:331](siim22.htm#fr_755) (331) All created
things glorify God with diverse tongues which are heard and understood
by spiritual men. Cf. The *Mystics of Islam*, p. 64.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[231:332](siim22.htm#fr_756) (332) *I.e.* "I
have attained to perfection in *ittiḥád* through my faith in the verse
(Kor. 20, 7): 'God, there is no god but He.'" This proves, according to
the Ṣúfís, that nothing but God has a real existence.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[232:396](siim22.htm#fr_757) (396) The
mysteries of Oneness cannot be revealed otherwise than symbolically: an
open statement would not only cost the writer his life but would also
fail to convey the meaning, which is too subtle to be expressed by
direct explanation and definition.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[232:397](siim22.htm#fr_758) (397) "The twain,"
*i.e.* the railer and the slanderer; cf. verse 51. "My union defies
separation," because the mystic who has attained to permanent union
(*saḥwu ’l-jam‘*) knows that all things in spite of their apparent
plurality are really one.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[232:398](siim22.htm#fr_759) (398-9) Under the
aspect of union the Divine attributes are identical with the Essence:
only in the realm of phenomena do they appear as particular modes of the
Essence and distinct from it in respect of their particularisation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: vv. 400-499](siim23)
