[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim09)  [Next](siim11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### III. THE ESSENCE AS GOD.

In the *Insánu ’l-kámil* we find the same contrast as in the Vedanta
system between Being with attributes, *i.e.*, God, and Being which would
not be absolute unless it were stripped of all qualities. The essence of
God is Pure Being, but Divinity (*Iláhiyya*)—the domain of Allah,
regarded as He who necessarily exists—is the highest manifestation of
the Essence, embracing all that is manifested: "it is a name for the sum
of the individualisations of Being, *i.e.*, Being in the relation of
Creator (*al-Ḥaqq*) to created things (*al-khalq*), and for their
maintenance in their respective order in that sum <span
id="fr_279"></span>[1](#fn_278.md)." Here the full ideal content of every
individualisation, existent or non-existent <span
id="fr_280"></span>[2](#fn_279.md), is manifested according to its proper
place in the series, and all opposites exhibit their relativity in the
greatest possible perfection; thus, the Creator (*al-Ḥaqq*) appears in
the form of the creature (*al-khalq*) <span
id="fr_281"></span>[3](#fn_280.md), and conversely the creature in the form
of the Creator <span id="fr_282"></span>[4](#fn_281.md). Since Divinity
represents the sum of the attributes, it is invisible to the eye,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

though visible everywhere in its effects, *i.e.*, in the sensible world;
the Essence, on the other hand, is visible, though its where is unknown.
Similarly, when you see a man, you know or believe that he has certain
qualities, but you do not see them; his essence (*dhát*), however, you
see as a whole, even if many of his qualities are unknown to you. Only
the effects of his qualities are visible, the qualities themselves you
cannot see, because the attribute must always remain hidden in the
Essence; otherwise, it could be separated from the Essence, and that is
impossible <span id="fr_283"></span>[1](#fn_282.md). In a scale of
existence where each lower individualisation marks a loss of simplicity,
the difference-in-identity (*Iláhiyya*) in which the sunken riches of
the Absolute are completely realised, might be expected to succeed the
identity-in-difference which belongs to the stage of *Wáḥidiyya*. Jílí,
as a mystical theologian, does not take this view. He enthrones Allah in
the seat of the Absolute and gives the following line of descent <span
id="fr_284"></span>[2](#fn_283.md):

1\. Divinity (*Iláhiyya*).

2\. Abstract Oneness (*Aḥadiyya*).

3\. Unity in plurality (*Wáḥidiyya*).

4\. Mercifulness (*Raḥmániyya*).

5\. Lordship (*Rubúbiyya*).

Mercifulness and Lordship are specialised aspects of Divinity.
*Raḥmániyya* <span id="fr_285"></span>[3](#fn_284.md) manifests the
creative attributes (*al-ṣifátu ’l-ḥaqqiyya*) exclusively <span
id="fr_286"></span>[4](#fn_285.md), whereas *Iláhiyya* comprehends both the
creative and the creaturely (*khalqí*). The first mercy (*raḥmat*) of
God was His bringing the universe into existence from Himself <span
id="fr_287"></span>[5](#fn_286.md). His manifestation pervaded all that
exists, and His perfection was displayed in every particle and atom of
the whole, yet He remains One (*wáḥid*) in the Many which mirror Him and
Single (*aḥad*) according to the necessity of His nature, for He is
indivisible and He created the world

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

from Himself. It is wrong to say that God "lends" His attributes to
things; the things are really His attributes, to which He lends the name
of creatureliness (*khalqiyya*) <span id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_287.md),
in order that the mysteries of Divinity and the antithesis inherent in
it may be revealed. God is the substance (*hayúlá*) of the universe. The
universe is like ice, and God is the water of which it is made: the name
"ice" is "lent" to the congealed mass, but its true name is "water."
Jílí pursues this analogy in four verses which he quotes from an ode of
his own composition <span id="fr_289"></span>[2](#fn_288.md). He says in
the second verse that although Religion declares the ice and the water
to be different, "we mystics know that they are the same." He asks how
this doctrine—the permeation of existence by the Essence—can be
confounded with *ḥulúl* (incarnation), which affirms contact, *i.e.*,
non-identity <span id="fr_290"></span>[3](#fn_289.md). In virtue of the
name *al-Raḥmán*, God exists in all the things that He brought into
being. His mercy towards His creatures was shown by His manifesting
Himself in them and by causing them to appear in Himself. "In every idea
that you form God is present as its Creator, and you are God in respect
of its existence in you, for you must needs form ideas in God and find
(feel the presence of) God in forming them <span
id="fr_291"></span>[4](#fn_290.md)."

Lordship (*Rubúbiyya*) establishes a necessary relation between God and
His creatures, since it typifies the class of attributes which involve a
complementary term or require an object; *e.g.*, "lord" implies "slave,"
and "knower" <span id="fr_292"></span>[4](#fn_290.md) refers to something
"known."

It will be understood that "comparison" (*tashbíh*), *i.e.*, the
bringing of God into relation with created things, is

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "a judgment about
Him <span id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_291.md)" and does not affect His
absolute transcendence (*tanzíh*) as He is in Himself, which He alone
can conceive and know <span id="fr_294"></span>[2](#fn_292.md). This fact
is known intuitively by Perfect Men; for other mystics it is a truth
apprehended by faith. While the Essential *tanzíh* has no opposite, the
antithesis of *tanzíh* and *tashbíh* is associated with God in His
creative and creaturely aspects by those who perceive that He is One and
that the form of all existent things is the form of, Divine excellence
(*ḥusn*) <span id="fr_295"></span>[3](#fn_293.md). Considered absolutely,
the Divine nature does not admit of change. Change consists in the
relations of God, *i.e.*, in the diverse aspects wherein He manifests
Himself to us. His manifestation of Himself to Himself, and His
occultation of Himself in Himself, is eternally one and the same <span
id="fr_296"></span>[4](#fn_294.md). The notion of eternity, without
beginning and without end, when it is applied to God, involves no
time-relation with His creatures, but only a judgment that His nature is
necessarily timeless <span id="fr_297"></span>[5](#fn_295.md).

Jílí makes a fourfold division of the Divine attributes: (1) attributes
of the Essence, *e.g.*, One, Eternal, Real; (2) attributes of Beauty
(*jamál*), *e.g.*, Forgiving, Knowing, Guiding aright; (3) attributes of
Majesty (*jalál*), *e.g.*, Almighty, Avenging, Leading astray; (4)
attributes of Perfection (*kamál*), *e.g.*, Exalted, Wise, First and
Last, Outward and Inward <span id="fr_298"></span>[6](#fn_296.md).

Every attribute has an effect (*athar*), in which its *jamál* or *jalál*
or *kamál* is manifested. Thus, objects of knowledge are the "effect" of
the Name *al-‘Alím*, the Knower. All attributes of *jamál*, and some of
*jalál*, are displayed by everything that exists. Paradise is the mirror
of absolute *jamál*, Hell of absolute *jalál*, and the universe is the
form of these Divine attributes. Evil, as such, does not exist, although
it has its appointed place in the world of opposites. What we call evil
is really the relation of some parts and aspects of the whole to other
parts and aspects; in a word, all imperfection arises

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

from our not looking at things *sub specie unitatis*. Sin is not evil
except in so far as we judge it to be forbidden by God. The author's
treatment of the seven principal attributes—*i.e.*, Knowledge, Will,
Power, Speech, Hearing, and Sight—is marked by great subtlety, but the
discussion is somewhat arid. I will give a few specimens.

Life <span id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_297.md). The existence of a thing for
itself is its complete life; its existence for another is its relative
life. God exists for Himself. He is the Living One (*al-Ḥayy*), and His
life is the life complete and immortal. Created beings in general exist
for God: their life is relative and linked with death. While the Divine
life in created beings is one and complete, some manifest it in a
complete form, *e.g.*, the Perfect Man and the Cherubim; others
incompletely, *e.g.*, the animal man (*al-insánu ’l-ḥayawání*), the
inferior angels, the *jinn* (genies), animals, plants, and minerals.
Yet, in a certain sense, the life of all created beings is complete in
the measure suitable to their degree and necessary for the preservation
of the order of the universe. Life is a single essence, incapable of
diminution or division, existent for itself in everything; and that
which constitutes a thing is its life, that is to say, the life of God
whereby all things subsist: they all glorify Him in respect of all His
names, and their glorification of Him in respect of His name "the
Living" is identical with their existence through His life. The author
states, as a fact known to few but revealed to him by mystical
illumination, that everything exists in and for itself, and that its
life is entirely free and self-determined. This—which, as he admits,
does not tally with what has been said above—is confirmed by the Divine
information that on the Day of Resurrection each of a man's deeds will
appear in visible shape and will address him and say, "I am thy deed."

*Knowledge* <span id="fr_300"></span>[2](#fn_298.md). Although every
attribute is independent and uncompounded, knowledge is most nearly
connected with life: whatever lives knows <span
id="fr_301"></span>[3](#fn_299.md). Jílí controverts the doctrine of Ibnu
’l-‘Arabí that God's knowledge is given Him by the

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

objects which He knows <span id="fr_302"></span>[1](#fn_300.md). God
certainly decreed that every individual thing should be what its nature
required it to be, but the consequence drawn by Ibnu ’l-‘Arabí, namely,
that His knowledge of things is derived from the necessity of their
natures, is false: on the contrary, their natures were necessitated by
His knowledge of them before they were created and brought into
existence—it was His knowing them, not the necessity inherent in them of
being what they are, that caused them to become objects of His
knowledge. Afterwards (*i.e.*, when they were created), their natures
required other than that which He knew of them at first, and He then for
the second time decreed that they should be what their natures required,
according to that which He knew of them.

*Will* <span id="fr_303"></span>[2](#fn_301.md). The will of God is "His
particularisation of the objects of His knowledge by existence,
according to the requirements of His knowledge." Our will is identical
with the Divine eternal will, but in relation to us it partakes of our
temporality (*ḥudúth*), and we call it "created." Nothing but this
(unreal) attribution prevents us from actualising whatever we propose:
if we refer our will to God, all things become subject to it. Jílí
enumerates nine phases of will, beginning with inclination (*mayl*) and
ending with the highest and purest love (*‘ishq*), in which there is no
lover or beloved, since both have passed away in the love that is God's
very essence <span id="fr_304"></span>[3](#fn_302.md). The Divine will is
uncaused and absolutely free, not, as Ibnu ’l-'Arabí holds, determined
by the obligation of the Knower to act as His nature demands <span
id="fr_305"></span>[4](#fn_303.md).

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

*Power* <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_304.md). This is defined by Jílí
as "the bringing of the nonexistent into existence." Here again he
disagrees with Ibnu ’l-‘Arabí, who asserts that God did not create the
world from not-being, but only brought it from being in His knowledge
into actual being. But in that case, Jílí argues, the world would be
co-eternal with God. It is not so: the judgment that God exists in
Himself is logically prior to the judgment that things exist in His
knowledge; and the former judgment involves the non-existence of things
and the existence of God alone. God brought things from not-being into
being and caused them to exist in His knowledge, *i.e.*, He knew them as
brought into existence from not-being; *then* He brought them forth from
His knowledge and caused them to exist externally. Does it follow,
because they were produced from not-being, that they were unknown to Him
before He caused them to exist in His knowledge? No; the priority is of
logic, not of time. There is no interval between the not-being of things
and their existence in His knowledge. He knows them as He knows Himself,
but they are not eternal as He is eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[97:1](siim10.htm#fr_279.md) K I. 31, 4 fr. foot.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[97:2](siim10.htm#fr_280.md) The universal
correlation of *Iláhiyya* links Being with Not-being (cf. [p.
89](siim07.htm#page_89), note [3](siim08.htm#fn_249).md), a truth which
cannot be apprehended except by mystical intuition (K I. 33, 2 foll.).

<span id="fn_280"></span>[97:3](siim10.htm#fr_281.md) According to the
Ḥadíth, "I saw my Lord in the form of a beardless youth."

<span id="fn_281"></span>[97:4](siim10.htm#fr_282.md) *E.g.* "God created
Adam in His own image."

<span id="fn_282"></span>[98:1](siim10.htm#fr_283.md) K I. 34, 14 foll. Cf.
p. 92 *supra*.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[98:2](siim10.htm#fr_284.md) K I. 32, 8 foll.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[98:3](siim10.htm#fr_285.md) K I. 38, 16 foll.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[98:4](siim10.htm#fr_286.md) *I.e.*, the
attributes peculiar to the Essence (*Aḥadiyya*, *Wáḥidiyya*, etc.) as
well as those of the Creator (*al-Ḥaqq*), which necessarily bear a
relation to created beings, *viz*., life, knowledge, power, will,
speech, hearing, and sight.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[98:5](siim10.htm#fr_287.md) K I. 39, 6.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[99:1](siim10.htm#fr_288.md) Cf. Ibnu ’l-‘Arabí,
*Tarjumán al-ashwáq*, No. 41, *vv*. 11-13.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[99:2](siim10.htm#fr_289.md) K I. 39, 6 fr. foot.
The title of the ode is *al-nawádiru ’l-‘ayniyya fi ’l-bawádiri
’l-ghaybiyya*. Cf. No. 19 in the list of his works given by Brockelmann,
II. 206.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[99:3](siim10.htm#fr_290.md) K I. 40, 5 foll.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[99:4](siim10.htm#fr_292.md) K I. 40, 9 foll. In
another passage (i. 66, 3 fr. foot and foll.) Jílí argues that by means
of man the impossible is judged to be necessary. If you suppose what is
impossible, *e.g.*, a living being without knowledge, that being exists
in your thought and is a creature of God, inasmuch as thought with its
content is a creature of God: thus by means of man there came into
existence in the world that which had its centre of thought elsewhere
(*i.e.*, in the knowledge of God).

<span id="fn_291"></span>[100:1](siim10.htm#fr_293.md) K I. 46, 21.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[100:2](siim10.htm#fr_294.md) K I. 45, 12 foll.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[100:3](siim10.htm#fr_295.md) True knowledge of
God combines His transcendence with His immanence (*Fuṣúṣ*, 228).

<span id="fn_294"></span>[100:4](siim10.htm#fr_296.md) K I. 43, 10 foll.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[100:5](siim10.htm#fr_297.md) See the chapters on
*azal*, *abad* and *qidam* (K I. 85-89).

<span id="fn_296"></span>[100:6](siim10.htm#fr_298.md) K I. 75 foll. A list
of the attributes in each class is given in K I. 78

<span id="fn_297"></span>[101:1](siim10.htm#fr_299.md) K I. 63, 25 foll.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[101:2](siim10.htm#fr_300.md) K I. 64, 22 foll.

<span id="fn_299"></span>[101:3](siim10.htm#fr_301.md) Animals and insects
have an inspirational knowledge (*‘ilm ilhámí*).

<span id="fn_300"></span>[102:1](siim10.htm#fr_302.md) See Appendix.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[102:2](siim10.htm#fr_303.md) K I. 67, 23 foll.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[102:3](siim10.htm#fr_304.md) Here the lover is
named the beloved, and vice versa. Jílí quotes three verses by himself;
the last runs: "Thou seest them as two separate individuals in the point
of Love, which is one." Cf. p. 80.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[102:4](siim10.htm#fr_305.md) According to Ibnu
’l-‘Arabí, all action is the necessary result of God's infinite nature
as eternally known to Himself (see Appendix), and free-will in the
ordinary sense is excluded. Jílí tries to make room for it by ascribing
to God a power of origination (*ikhtirá‘*) which affects the things
written in the Guarded Tablet, so that sometimes that which comes to
pass is the contrary of what was decreed. Although the actions required
by the Divine nature correspond with the capacity of the recipient
individual in whom they are manifested, yet in consequence of his
weakness and imperfection they lose their unalterable character and
become contingent, *i.e.*, God, who is All-wise, determines whether they
shall happen or not (K II. 8, 20 foll.). <span id="page_103">p.
103</span> In another passage (i. 72, 1 foll.) Jílí says that God
imputes free-will to mankind in order that He may show His justice by
punishing them with Hell, and His mercy by rewarding them with Paradise.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[103:1](siim10.htm#fr_306.md) K I. 69, 24 foll.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Heavenly Man](siim11.md)
