[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim19)  [Next](siim21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

(100 <span id="fr_676"></span>[100](#fn_674)) Cease, then, pretending to
love, and call thy heart to something else, and drive thy error from
thee by that (state) which (is the best).

(101 <span id="fr_677"></span>[101](#fn_675)) And shun the quarter of
union: ’tis far off, and was never reached (in life), and lo, thou art
living. If thou art sincere, die!

\(102\) Such is Love: if thou diest not, thou wilt not win thy will of
the Beloved in aught. Then choose death or leave my love alone!"

\(103\) I said to her, "My spirit is thine: ’tis for thee to take it.
How should it be in my power?

\(104\) I am not one that loathes to die in love—I am always true (to
death): my nature refuses aught else.

\(105\) What should I hope to be said of me except \`Such a one died of
love'? Who will ensure me of that (death)?—for it is that I seek.

\(106\) Ay, it pleaseth me well that my life be ended by longing ere
thou art gained, if my claim to love thee shall be found real;

(107 <span id="fr_678"></span>[107](#fn_676)) And if I shall not make
good such a claim in regard to thee, because it is too high, I am
content with my pride in being reputed thy lover;

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

\(108\) And if I die of anguish without the reputation, thou wilt have
done no wrong to a soul that delights in martyrdom;

\(109\) And if thou wilt spill my blood in vain and I shall not be
reckoned a martyr, ’tis grace enough for me that thou shouldst know the
cause of my death.

\(110\) Methinks, my spirit is not worth so much that it should be
offered in exchange for union (*wiṣál*) with thee, for it is too
threadbare to be prized."

The poet then refers to the warning that he must show his sincerity by
dying to self. Does the Beloved threaten him with death?

\(115\) "To me thy menace is a promise, and its fulfilment is the wish
of an affianced lover who stands firm against the blows of all calamity
except absence (from thee).

\(116\) I have come to hope that which others fear: succour therewith a
dead man's spirit that is prepared for (everlasting) life!"

By passing-away (*faná*) the mystic wins immortal life in God (*baqá*).

\(120\) If she lets my blood be shed in love of her, yet hath she
established my rank on the heights of glory and eminence.

\(121\) By my life, though I lose my life in exchange for her love, I am
the gainer; and if she wastes away my heart, she will make it whole once
more.

But this is an inward glory, which causes him to be scorned by his
fellow-men.

\(126\) ’Tis as though I had never been honoured amongst them but they
had always despised me both in easy fortune and in hard.

\(127\) Had they asked me " Whom dost thou love?" and had I declared her
name, they would have said, "He speaks a parable," or "A touch of
madness hath smitten him."

\(128\) Yet, had abasement for her sake been impossible, my passion had
not been sweet to me; and but for love, my glory had not been in
abasement.

\(129\) Because of her, I am endowed with the understanding of one
crazed, the health of one shattered by disease, and the glory of
ignominy.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

The following lines, curiously subtle in their psychology and phrasing,
represent the "self" (*nafs*) as desiring Divine Love, but keeping its
desire beyond the reach of mental perception.

(130 <span id="fr_679"></span>[130](#fn_677)) My soul secretly imparted
its desire for her love to my heart alone, where the intellect was
unable to spy upon it;

\(131\) For I feared that the tale, if it were told, would transport the
rest of me, so that the language of my tears would declare my secret.

(132 <span id="fr_680"></span>[132](#fn_678)) In order to keep safe that
secret, part of me (my soul) was misleading part of me (my intellect),
but my falsehood in hiding it was really my speaking the truth.

\(133\) And when my first (intuitive) thought refused to divulge it to
my ribs (my mental faculties), I guarded it also from my reflection,

(134 <span id="fr_681"></span>[134](#fn_679)) And I did my utmost to
conceal it, so that I forgot it and was caused to forget my concealment
of that which my soul confided to my heart.

\(135\) And if in planting those desires I shall pluck the fruit of
suffering, God bless a soul that suffered for its desires,

\(136\) Since of all love's wishes the sweetest to the soul is that
whereby she who caused it to remember and forget them willed it to
suffer.

\(137\) She set, to guard her, one taken from myself who should watch
against me the amorous approach of my spiritual thoughts;

(138 <span id="fr_682"></span>[138](#fn_680)) And if they, unperceived
by the mind, steal into my heart without hindrance, I cast down mine
eyes in reverent awe.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

\(139\) Mine eye is turned back if I seek but one glance, and if my hand
be stretched forth to take freely (its will of her), it is restrained.

\(140\) Thus in every limb of me is an advance prompted by hope, and in
consequence of the awe born of veneration a retreat prompted by fear.

The poet now attempts to describe the mystical union of the lover with
the Beloved.

(144 <span id="fr_683"></span>[144](#fn_681)) ’Tis my being crazed with
love of her that makes me jealous of her; but when I recognise my worth
(to be naught), I disown my jealousy,

\(145\) And my spirit is rapt in ecstatic joy (towards her), though I do
not acquit my soul of conceiving a desire.

(146 <span id="fr_684"></span>[146](#fn_682)) Mine ear sees her, far
though she be from the eye, in the form of blame which visits me in my
hours of waking,

\(147\) And when she is mentioned, mine eye deems mine ear lucky, and
the part of me that remains (in consciousness) envies the part that she
has caused to pass away.

(148 <span id="fr_685"></span>[148](#fn_683)) In reality I led my Imám
(leader in prayer), and all mankind were behind me. Wheresoever I faced,
there was my (true) direction.

\(149\) Whilst I prayed, mine eye was seeing her in front of me, but my
heart was beholding me in front of all my Imáms.

(150 <span id="fr_686"></span>[150](#fn_684)) And no wonder that in
conducting the prayer the Imám faced towards me, since in my heart dwelt
she who is the *qibla* of my *qibla*,

(151 <span id="fr_687"></span>[151](#fn_685)) And that towards me had
faced all the six directions with their whole contents of piety and
greater and lesser pilgrimage.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

(152 <span id="fr_688"></span>[152](#fn_686)) To her I address my
prayers at the Maqám, and behold in them that she prayed to me.

(153 <span id="fr_689"></span>[153](#fn_687)) Both of us are a single
worshipper who, in respect of the united state, bows himself to his
essence in every act of bowing.

\(154\) None prayed to me but myself nor did I pray to any one but
myself in the performance of every genuflexion.

\(155\) How long shall I keep to the veil? Lo, I have rent it! ’Twas in
my bond of allegiance that I should loose the loops of the curtains.

(156 <span id="fr_690"></span>[156](#fn_688)) I was given my fealty to
her before she had appeared to me at the taking of the covenant, on a
day when no day was, in my primal state.

\(157\) I gained my fealty to her neither by hearing nor by sight nor by
acquisition nor by the attraction of my nature,

(158 <span id="fr_691"></span>[158](#fn_689)) But I was enamoured of her
in the world of command, where is no manifestation, and my intoxication
was prior to my appearance (in the created world).

(159 <span id="fr_692"></span>[159](#fn_690)) The attributes dividing us
which were not subsistent *there* (in the world of command) Love caused
to pass away *here* (in the created world), and they vanished;

(160 <span id="fr_693"></span>[160](#fn_691)) And I found that which I
cast off going out of me unto me and again coming from me with an
increase,

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

(161 <span id="fr_694"></span>[161](#fn_692)) And in my contemplation
(of the Divine essence) I beheld myself endowed with the attributes by
which I was veiled from myself during my occultation,

(162 <span id="fr_695"></span>[162](#fn_693)) And I saw that I was
indubitably she whom I loved, and that for this reason my self had
referred me to myself.

(163 <span id="fr_696"></span>[163](#fn_694)) My self had been
distraught with love for itself unawares, though in my contemplation it
was not ignorant of the truth of the matter.

Continuing Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ shows that the railer and the slanderer (who
symbolise respectively the sensual and intellectual attributes of the
self) are in reality one with the Lover-Beloved. He next explains more
fully what he meant when he spoke of the passing-away (*faná*) of these
attributes (*v*. 159), and describes the successive stages by which his
self (*nafs*) was gradually stripped bare of all the affections that
stood between him and a purely disinterested love.

\(168\) I sought to approach her by sacrificing my self, reckoning upon
her as my recompense and not hoping for any (other) reward from her; and
she drew me nigh.

\(169\) I offered readily what was mine (of promised bliss) in the world
to come and what she might peradventure give to me (of her grace),

(170 <span id="fr_697"></span>[170](#fn_695)) And with entire
disinterestedness I put behind me any regard for that (self-sacrifice),
for I was not willing that my self should be my beast of burden.

(171 <span id="fr_698"></span>[171](#fn_696)) I sought her with poverty,
but since the attribute of poverty enriched me I threw away both my
poverty and my wealth.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

(172 <span id="fr_699"></span>[172](#fn_697)) My throwing away my
poverty and riches assured to me the merit of my quest: therefore I
discarded my merit,

\(173\) And in my discarding it my own welfare appeared: my reward was
she who rewarded me, nothing else.

\(174\) And through her, not through myself, I began to guide unto her
those who by themselves had lost the right ways; and ’twas she that
(really) guided them.

The following verses (175-196) show the poet as a director of souls,
preaching unselfishness, poverty, humility, and repentance; exhorting
his disciple to lose no time and to beware of saying "To-morrow I will
work"; bidding him shun vainglory and ambition; pointing out that the
true gnostic is silent inasmuch as the mysteries revealed to him are
incommunicable. All self-activity, all self-consciousness, must be
renounced.

(194 <span id="fr_700"></span>[194](#fn_698)) Be sight (not a seer) and
look; be hearing (not a hearer) and retain (what is heard); be a tongue
(not a speaker) and speak, for the way of union (with the Beloved) is
the best.

The detachment or isolation (*tafríd*) of the soul from all desires and
affections costs bitter pain.

(197 <span id="fr_701"></span>[197](#fn_699)) Formerly my soul was
reproachful: when I obeyed her, she disobeyed me, or if I disobeyed her,
she was obedient to me.

\(198\) Therefore I brought her to that of which (even) a part was
harder than death and I fatigued her that she might give me rest,

\(199\) So that she came to endure whatever burden I laid upon her, and
if I lightened it she grieved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_674"></span>[210:100](siim20.htm#fr_676) (100) "That
(state) which (is the best)," *i.e.* the complete passing-away (*faná*)
of the self (*nafs*). So N., but K. renders "that (quality) which (is
the best)," namely, veracity. In this case the meaning will be: "Do not
pretend to love, but give thy passion its true name, and let veracity
purge thee of thy false pretensions."

<span id="fn_675"></span>[210:101](siim20.htm#fr_677) (101) "Shun the
quarter of union": cf. note on *v*. 98. For the meaning of "union"
(*walí*) see note on verse 441.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[210:107](siim20.htm#fr_678) (107) Cf. [p.
171](siim17.htm#page_171), l. 25 foll.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[212:130](siim20.htm#fr_679) (130) The *nafs*
cannot love God purely and disinterestedly: therefore the poet does not
say that it loves, but only that it desires to love. It communicates
this desire to the *sirr*—the organ of mystical contemplation, Eckhart's
"ground of the soul"—but withholds it from the intellect (*‘aql*).

<span id="fn_678"></span>[212:132](siim20.htm#fr_680) (132) "My
falsehood, etc."—*i.e.* concealment is one of the signs of true love.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[212:134](siim20.htm#fr_681) (134) The words "I
was caused to forget" indicate the higher stage of unconsciousness that
is produced in the mystic by an act of the Divine will, when his own
will has entirely ceased.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[212:138](siim20.htm#fr_682) (138) *Wahm*, here
rendered by "mind," is properly the faculty of judgment, which by its
activity prevents the thought of God (*kháṭiru ’l-ḥaqq*), residing in
the ground of the soul (*sirr*), from penetrating into the heart
(*qalb*). For this reason it is depicted in the preceding verse as a
"watcher" (*muráqib*).

<span id="fn_681"></span>[213:144](siim20.htm#fr_683) (144-5) Jealousy
involves duality, and not until it is denied can the spirit (*rúḥ*)
attain to oneness with God. Complete spiritual oneness is incompatible
with the desire of the soul (*nafs*) for vision.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[213:146](siim20.htm#fr_684) (146) Cf. [p.
180](siim17.htm#page_180).

<span id="fn_683"></span>[213:148](siim20.htm#fr_685) (148) The
following lines describe a unitive state in which the mystic, by losing
his apparent individuality, realises his essential oneness with the One
whom he loves and worships.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[213:150](siim20.htm#fr_686) (150) "My *qibla*"
is the point to which Moslems face when they pray, *i.e.* the Ka‘ba,
which (like every other created thing) turns in worship towards the
Being who endues it with existence.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[213:151](siim20.htm#fr_687) (151) "The six
directions " are above, below, before, behind, right and left.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[214:152](siim20.htm#fr_688) (152) The Maqám
Ibráhím, *i.e.* the standing-place of Abraham, is a rock situated to the
east of the Ka‘ba.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[214:153](siim20.htm#fr_689) (153) In mystical
union the unity of Being is revealed: worshipper and Worshipped are
distinguished only as aspects of one reality.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[214:156](siim20.htm#fr_690) (156) Those who
interpret this verse according to the doctrine of Ibnu ’l-‘Arabí take
the meaning to be "I was pledged to love God before the creation of Time
when all things, though not yet objectified in material forms, existed
as objects of knowledge in the Divine essence." God did not become
manifest to His creatures until at the word "Be!" they issued forth from
the Divine essence (which from this point of view is named "the world of
command") into the world of creation. It is by no means certain,
however, that Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ regarded the human spirit as eternally
pre-existent. Cf. Nallino, *op. cit.* p. 535 foll. "The covenant" refers
to the pledge taken by every soul, before its earthly existence, to love
God for evermore. See note on verse 69.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[214:158](siim20.htm#fr_691) (158) "The world
of command" is the invisible or intelligible world.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[214:159](siim20.htm#fr_692) (159) Divine Love
enables the mystic to rid himself of the attributes of self which hinder
him from attaining to union with God.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[214:160](siim20.htm#fr_693) (160) The
complement and consummation of death to self (*faná*) is everlasting
life in God (*baqá*). In this life the lost attributes are restored, but
"with an increase," *i.e.* they have been "deified" and display
themselves in the eternal process of Divine manifestation, "going out of
me," *i.e.* from the undifferentiated Unity, "unto me," *i.e.* to Unity
in plurality, and again returning <span id="page_215">p. 215</span>
"from me," *i.e.* from the One in the Many to the One who remains when
the Many have passed away.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[215:161](siim20.htm#fr_694) (161) "In my
contemplation," *i.e.* in the state of *baqá* after *faná*. "During my
occultation," *i.e.* in the state preceding *faná*, when the mystic is
veiled by his phenomenal attributes from his real self.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[215:162](siim20.htm#fr_695) (162) Cf. the
Tradition, "He who knows himself knows his Lord."

<span id="fn_694"></span>[215:163](siim20.htm#fr_696) (163) So long as
the "self" is attached to its desires, it is blind to its real nature,
which is only revealed to it when God is the sole object of
contemplation.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[215:170](siim20.htm#fr_697) (170) *I.e.* "I
was unwilling to attain 'my goal by means of anything directly or
indirectly connected with self." The commentator quotes the Tradition,
"Honour the animals which ye offer in sacrifice, for they will carry you
across the Bridge of Ṣiráṭ (into Paradise)."

<span id="fn_696"></span>[215:171](siim20.htm#fr_698) (171) He who is
truly poor (in the mystical sense) does not regard himself as possessing
anything whatever—not even poverty.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[216:172](siim20.htm#fr_699) (172-3) It is not
enough to regard one's self as possessing nothing: the thought that such
a state of mind is meritorious must be eliminated.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[216:194](siim20.htm#fr_700) (194) In the
unitive state (*jam‘*) it is God that sees, hears, and speaks through
the mystic, who has become His organ of sight, hearing, and speech.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[216:197](siim20.htm#fr_701) (197) The epithet
"reproachful" (*lawwáma*) is applied to the soul whilst it is still
engaged in the struggle with the passions; after these have been
vanquished, it is called "calm" (*muṭma’inna*). During the former
condition the soul is disobedient (sinful) if its desires are complied
with, and obedient (virtuous) if they are thwarted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: vv. 200-299](siim21)
