[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](siim17)  [Next](siim19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0548805903/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Studies in Islamic Mysticism*, by Reynold A. Nicholson, \[1921\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### ARGUMENT

The poem, addressed to a real or imaginary disciple, sets forth in due
order the phases of mystical experience through which the writer passed
before attaining to oneness with God, and describes the nature of that
abiding oneness so far as it can be indicated by words.

In the opening verses (1-7) Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ recalls a time when his love
of God was still imperfect and unfixed, so that the "intoxication" of
ecstasy would be followed by the " sobriety " of a relapse into
selfhood.

He tells (8-83) how he sought the favour of the Beloved and related to
her his sufferings, not by way of complaint—

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

for suffering is the law of love—but in the hope of relieving them; how
he said that he was enraptured by her beauty, that he would never
change, that he cared for nothing but her and for her sake had abandoned
all.

The Beloved answers (84-102), accusing him of insincerity and
presumption. He is not really in love with her, but only with himself.
If he would love her in truth, he must die to self.

In reply he protests that this death is his dearest wish and prays the
Beloved to grant it, whatever pain it may cost (103-116). Then,
addressing the disciple, he describes his dying to self and its effects:
how it has brought him great glory, though he is despised by his
neighbours and regarded as a madman; and how it has caused his love to
be hidden even from himself, his faculties to be jealous of one another,
and his identity to be lost, so that in worshipping he feels that he is
the object of worship (117-154). He proceeds to explain the mystery of
his love, saying that he loved before the creation but was separated
from his Beloved in this world, and that by casting-off his
self-existence he has found her to be his own real self. There was no
thought of merit in his sacrifice, so she accepted it (155-174). He
exhorts the disciple to follow the *via purgativa*, by which mystics are
prepared for the highest things, and describes how he himself
disciplined his soul (175-203).

The poet now begins to explain the origin and nature of his *ittiḥád* or
oneness with the Beloved. As it is hard for the mind to conceive that
two may be one, he points to the analogous case of a woman possessed by
a spirit. He urges the disciple to get rid of the illusion of dualism,
and the mystery will then become clear to him. He says that this was the
way by which he himself attained to his present state (204-238).

He bids the disciple mark that all beauty is absolute. Every fair
earthly form is in reality a manifestation of the Beloved (239-264).

He then explains why, notwithstanding his exalted degree, he strictly
fulfils the duties of the religious law and occupies himself with
voluntary works of devotion. Antinomianism

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

would be consistent with belief in incarnation (*ḥulúl*); but he does
not hold that doctrine. His own doctrine is supported by the Koran and
the Apostolic Traditions (265-285).

He calls on the disciple to follow him in the path of love, but warns
him that he must not aspire to the supreme grade of *ittiḥád*, which is
now described as being beyond love (286-333)

After a hymn of praise to the Beloved (336-387), he resumes the
description of his oneness. His spirit and soul, which formerly drew him
up and down between them, are in reality one with the Beloved, *i.e.*,
they are identified with Universal Spirit and Universal Soul, whence all
forms of spiritual and sensible life are fed. The image of the Beloved
that he receives through sensation agrees with the image of her in his
spiritual consciousness; and this is a proof that he is one with her. He
says that she is presented to him by all that he sees, hears, tastes and
touches. He describes particularly his listening to music: at that time
he beholds her with his whole being and is riven asunder by the struggle
of his spirit to escape from the body; then dancing soothes him, and, as
it were, rocks him to sleep (388-440).

Continuing, he declares that the state which he has now reached is
higher than "union" (*wiṣál*). He gained it through casting aside every
vestige of self-regard. It was he who imposed the laws of religion on
himself and was sent as an apostle to himself before any prophet
appeared in the world. His overruling influence is exerted throughout
heaven and earth. He is beyond all relations: place, time, and number
are gone; he has no rival or opposite; he is the object of his own
worship. No change of state can now befall him: the alternation of
"intoxication" and "sobriety" has been superseded by a permanent
consciousness in which past and future are the same. He is the Pole
(*Quṭb*) on which the universe revolves (441-501).

He mentions, as a strange effect of his love, that he sought his Beloved
in himself until he found that he was seeking himself, so that in being
united with himself he embraced his own essence (502-532). Speaking in
the person of God, he

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

says that his attributes, names, and actions cannot be known except
through himself, and that he cannot be known through them. As the names
of his external attributes, *e.g.*, sight and hearing, which are really
faculties of the soul, are derived from his organs of sensation, so the
names of his inward attributes are ultimately derived from his (the
Divine) essence. By means of the names God manifests Himself in
creation. Their qualities and the benefits which they confer on the body
and the soul are described at some length (533-574)

He is so entirely one, he says, that all his faculties are interfused
and each part has become absorbed in the whole. Hence he acts
universally and infinitely. This is the explanation of the miracles
wrought by the prophets. Mohammed, the last of the prophets, not only
summed up in himself all the marvellous powers of his predecessors but
is the source from which these powers were bestowed on the prophets
before him and the Moslem saints after him. Ibnu ’l-Fáriḍ, making
himself one with the spirit of Mohammed, claims to be the father of
Adam, the final cause of creation, and the origin of life: all creatures
obey his will, speak his word, see with his sight; he is hidden in
everything sensible, intellectual, and spiritual (575-650).

He forbids the disciple to believe in metempsychosis, pointing out that
what appears in different forms is really the same, *e.g.*, Abú Zayd
(the hero of Ḥarírí's fiction) in all his disguises, the image in a
mirror, the echo, the phantom seen in dream, and the figures shown by a
shadow-lantern. He describes the various scenes of the shadow-play—all
of them the work of a single person behind a screen—and likens the soul
to the showman, the body to the screen, and the figures to the objects
perceived in sensation. When the bodily screen is removed, the soul
becomes unified (651-730).

He says that faith and infidelity are not essentially different. The One
God is adored in every form of worship—by Moslems, Christians, Jews,
Zoroastrians, even by idolaters; those who go astray from Him are none
the less seeking Him: it is He that guides and misguides them, according
as they are

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

destined for salvation or perdition. All is determined by the Divine
will and is the effect of the Divine nature. This the soul knows from
itself (731-749)

He declares that he is not to be blamed for having revealed the
mysteries imparted to him, and concludes with the assertion that none
living or dead has attained to such a height as he (750-761).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_614"></span>[195:1](siim17.htm#fr_616.md) K. on *v*. 501. Cf.
*Kashf al-Maḥjúb*, transl., p. 214. Concerning the *Quṭb* and the
subordinate members of the Ṣúfí hierarchy see Blochet, *Études sur
l’ésotérisme musulman* in the *Journal asiatique*, vol. 20 (1902), p. 49
foll.; Haneberg, *Ali Abulhasan Schadeli* in *ZDMG*., vol. 7, p. 21
foll.; Flügel, *Scha‘rânî und sein Werk über die muhammadanische
Glaubenslehre*, *ibid*. vol. 20, p. 37 foll.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[195:2](siim17.htm#fr_617.md) Cf. pp.
[87](siim07.htm#page_87) and [103](siim10.htm#page_103.md) foll.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[195:3](siim17.htm#fr_618.md) 574 verses out of a
total of 761. The following verses have not been translated: 111-114,
117-119, 122-125, 141-143, 164-167, 175-193, 195-196, 265-276, 334-393,
503-505, 515-520, 549-574, 580-588, 602-613, 622-626, 632-636, 750-758.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: vv. 1-100](siim19.md)
