[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13000)  [Next](cc13002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>All who take delight in the Holy Scriptures are
familiarly acquainted with the writings of The Prophet Isaiah. Every
variety of taste finds in them its appropriate gratification. Lofty
conceptions, illustrated by splendid imagery, and clothed in language
usually copious and flowing, some times abrupt, but always graceful,
leave no room for hesitation to pronounce him, with Bishop Lowth, to be
“the most sublime and elegant of the Prophets of the Old Testament.” He
is regarded with peculiar veneration as an honest, fearless, and able
messenger of the Most High God, boldly reproving nobles and monarchs,
denouncing the judgments of Heaven against all transgressors, and
asserting the claims of the Divine law and government above all human
authority. In his Prophecies he takes a wide range, surveys those
nations which power or wealth or learning or commerce had raised to the
highest celebrity in those remote times, and describes their rise and
fall, and wonderful revolutions, so eagerly traced by us in the page of
history, as the execution of Jehovah’s counsels, and the arrangements of
unerring wisdom. But chiefly does he pour out rich instruction
concerning the Messiah, whose life and sufferings, and death and
glorious reign, he delineates so faithfully, and with such thrilling
interest, that he has obtained the appellation of “The Evangelical
Prophet.” To the devout reader there is added a still more powerful
attraction in his seraphic piety, which, breathing throughout all his
communications, and kindling a holy flame in the hearts of the children
of God, attests the important fact, not only that in the visions of God
he reached the noblest heights of inspiration, but — which was far more
valuable — that he enjoyed habitual and intimate fellowship with *The
Father of Spirits.*

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The period during which he exercised the
prophetical office is declared, in the inscription of his Prophecies, to
have been during the reigns *of* *Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah,
kings of Judah*. Beyond this general indication nothing certain can be
obtained; for dates were only beginning to attract the notice of
civilized nations, and had not yet been examined with such carefulness,
or denoted with such precision, as their importance demands. The
Translator of “The Commentaries on the Twelve Minor Prophets” (volume 1,
page 12) tells us that Isaiah flourished between 810 B.C and 698 B.C.
This interval of 112 years leaves a large margin, which chronologers
have filled up with considerable diversity of views.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>Assuming 763 B.C. to be the year in which the
prophetic ministry of Isaiah is believed by some to have commenced, we
are led to observe this remarkable coincidence, that about thirteen
years earlier began the Grecian or Olympic era, which opens with the
First Olympiad; and about ten years later began the Roman Era, which
opens with the founding of the city of Rome. This reminds us to glance
at the contemporary history of nations unlike in their origin and
progress, and in the effects which they produced on the human race.
Historians, to whom the name of despised Palestine was scarcely known,
have traced the brilliant career of those gigantic empires by which it
was overshadowed. While amidst a long list of warriors, and poets, and
orators, and statesmen, who were supposed to have achieved a deathless
fame, those empires hastened to decay, Isaiah and his brethren the
prophets were laying the foundations of the universal dominion and
glorious reign of Him who

<span id="ii-p5"></span>*hath on his vesture, and on his thigh, a name
written*, King of kings, and Lord of lords. (<span
id="ii-p5.1"></span>[Re 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016.md)<span
id="ii-p5.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii-p6"></span>During the season of highest prosperity, when
the literature of Greece and Rome, which even now exerts a powerful
influence on modern Europe, enjoyed its most exalted renown, that
undisguised heathenism which disowned the government and denied the
perfections of the Most High God, presented a humiliating contrast to
those noble and affecting views of the Divine nature and attributes and
works which prevailed in the land of Jehovah. The difference reminds us
of one of the plagues of Egypt; for there was spread over the nations a
moral darkness,

<span id="ii-p7"></span>a darkness which might be felt, but all the
children of Israel had light in their dwellings. (<span
id="ii-p7.1"></span>[Exod. 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023)<span id="ii-p7.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii-p8"></span>Rome was proud of having reduced that favored
land to the rank of one of her provinces, and struck medals to represent
Judea sitting under a palm-tree bewailing her captivity; but the
religion of Judea, instead of being crushed and annihilated, assumed the
more lovely aspect of the religion of Jesus, and *went forth conquering
and to conquer*.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>Many of our Author’s published Commentaries were
nothing else than reports of his public Lectures. Budaeus  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) has explained the manner in which these
reports were prepared. The language was extemporaneous, and, had we not
known his prodigious command of the Latin tongue, we might have wondered
at the elegance with which he spoke on such occasions; but his slow and
distinct utterance, as Scaliger assures us, was such as to enable an
expert writer to take down the very words which Calvin used. Two or
three scribes were usually employed, and a copy, drawn out by a
comparison of their manuscripts, was submitted to the perusal of the
Lecturer, who, after making, any corrections which appeared to be
necessary, attested it as a faithful record of what had been uttered.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>This Commentary has come down to us in a still
more authentic shape. Not only does the Author assert, in his Dedication
to King Edward, which was prefixed to the First Edition, that it had
been “faithfully and skillfully compiled from his Lectures,”  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) but in his Dedication to Queen Elizabeth,
prefixed to the Second Edition, he pronounces the revision to have been
so thorough and laborious, that “it ought justly to be reckoned a new
work.”  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) It is highly gratifying to
find that, in the exposition of a book so important and extensive as the
prophecies of Isaiah, Calvin gave the fruits of his mature judgment,
while he was in the full vigor of his age.

<span id="ii-p14"></span>Clement Cotton translated this Commentary into
English from the French Version, in 1609. His translation, though not
altogether suitable to modern taste, is faithful, vigorous, idiomatic,
and not inelegant. To this volume is prefixed his Title-page and
“Epistle Dedicatorie,” together with a curious “Epigram,” in which a
physician of that period expresses his warm admiration of the great
Reformer.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>In the concluding volume of this Commentary
will be given a Literal Translation Of Calvin’s Latin Version, and
copious Indices similar to those which have already appeared in the
other Commentaries.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>Auchterarder, 17th May, 1850.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc13001.htm#fr_0.md) <span id="ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p10"></span> See *Commentaries on the Twelve Minor
Prophets* —p. xxiv.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc13001.htm#fr_1.md) <span id="ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p12"></span> See p. xix.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc13001.htm#fr_2.md) <span id="ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p13"></span> See p. xvi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Clement Cotton's Dedication](cc13002.md)
