[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13010)  [Next](cc13012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 5:1-30

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now will I sing to my well-beloved a
song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My well-beloved hath a
vineyard in a very fruitful hill:

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Cantabo, agedum, pro dilecto meo,
canticum dilecti mei ad vineam suam. Vinea fuit dilecto meo in cornu
filio olei.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he fenced it, and gathered out the
stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower
in the midst of it, and also made a wine-press therein: and he looked
that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Eam sepiverat, et elapidaverat, et
plantaverat, ut vineam electam; turrim aedificaverat in medio ejus, et
torcular in ea construxerat. Itaque speravit ut produceret uvas, et
producit labruscas.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Nunc igitur, habitator Ierusalem, et
vir Iuda, judicate inter me et vineam meam.

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4.** What could have been done more to my
vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it
should bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quid faciendum fuit amplius vineae
meae, quod non fecerim ei? Quomodo expectavi ut proferret uvas, et tamen
produxit labruscas?

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And now go to; I will tell you what I
will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall
be eaten up; *and* break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down:

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et nunc ostendam, agendum, vobis,
quid ego facturus sim vineae meae. Auferam sepem ejus, ut sit in
depastionem: interrumpam maceriem ejus, ut sit in conculcationem.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And I will lay it waste: it shall not
be pruned nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will
also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Faciam ut sit deserta: non putabitur
neque fodietur; et ascendet sentis et spina. Quinetiam nubibus
praecipiam, ne super eam pluant.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**7.** For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts
*is* the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and
he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but
behold a cry.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Sane vinea Iehovae exercituum domus
Israel est; et vir Iuda palmes ejus delectabilis. Inde expectavit
judicium, et ecce oppressio; justitiam, et ecce clamor.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Woe unto them that join house to
house, *that* lay field to field, till *there be* no place, that they
may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Vae qui conjungunt domum ad domum,
agrum ad agrum copulant, donec non sit locus; ut collocemini scilicet
vos soli in medio terrae.

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**9.** In mine ears *said* the Lord of
hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, *even* great and fair,
without inhabitant.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Hoc in auribus Iehovae exercituum, Si
non domus multae in solitudinem redigantur, magnae et pulchrae absque
habitatore.

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**10.** Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall
yield one bath, and the seed of an homer shall yield an ephah.

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Quinetiam decem jugera vineae
facient batum unum, et semen cori reddet ephi.

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**11.** Woe unto them that rise up early in
the morning, *that* they may follow strong drink; that continue until
night, *till* wine inflame them!

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Vae qui mane surgunt ad sectandam
ebrietatem, et qui tempus ad noctem extrahunt, dum vinum accendit eos.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And the harp and the viol, the
tabret and pipe, and wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the
work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands.

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et est cythara, lyra, tympanum,
tibia, et vinum, in conviviis eorum; opus autem Iehovae non respiciunt;
nec opus manuum ejus considerant.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Therefore my people are gone into
captivity, because *they have* no knowledge; and their honourable men
*are* famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst.

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Propterea in captivitatem abiit
populus meus; quia non fuit praeditus scientia; et gloria ejus, viri
famis, et multitudo ejus aruit siti.

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>**14.** Therefore hell hath enlarged
herself, and opened her mouth without measure: and their glory, and
their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend
into it.

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Propterea dilatavit infernus animam
suam, et os suum distendit absque modo descenditque gloria ejus; et
multitudo ejus, et opulentia ejus, et qui laetatus est in ea.

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And the mean man shall be brought
down, and the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty
shall be humbled:

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et incurvabitur homo, et
humiliabitur vir; oculi inquam sublimium humiliabuntur.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>**16.** But the Lord of hosts shall be
exalted in judgment, and God, *that is* holy, shall be sanctified in
righteousness.

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Exaltabitur autem Iehova exercituum
in judicio, et Deus qui sanctus est sanctificabitur in justitia.

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Then shall the lambs feed after
their manner, and the waste places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et pascentur agni secundum rationem
suam; et desolata pinguium advenae comedent.

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>**18.** Woe unto them that draw iniquity
with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with a cart-rope:

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Vae trahentibus iniquitatem in
funibus vanitatis, et tanquam vinculis plaustri peccatum.

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span>**19.** That say, Let him make speed, *and*
hasten his work, that we may see *it*: and let the counsel of the Holy
One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know *it*!

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Qui dicunt, Acceleret, festinet opus
ejus, et videamus; appropinquet ac veniat consilium Sancti Israel, ut
sciamus.

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span>**20.** Woe unto them that call evil good,
and good evil; that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Vae qui dicunt malo bonum, et bono
malum; qui faciunt lucem ex tenebris, et tenebras ex luce; qui vertunt
amarum in dulce, et dulce in amarum.

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span>**21.** Woe unto *them that are* wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Vae sapientibus in oculis suis, et
qui coram seipsis sunt prudentes.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>**22.** Woe unto *them that are* mighty to
drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink;

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Vae qui fortes sunt ab libandum
vinum, et viris fortibus ad miscendam potionem:

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span>**23.** Which justify the wicked for reward,
and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him!

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Qui justificant impium propter
munus; justitiam autem justi tollunt ab eo.

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span>**24.** Therefore as the fire devoureth the
stubble, and the flame consumeth the chaff, *so* their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust; because they have
cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and despised the word of the
Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Propterea sicut devorat stipulam
lingua ignis, et palea a flamma dissolvitur; sic radix eorum quasi
putredo erit, et germen eorum quasi pulvis vanescet. Quoniam abjecerunt
legem Iehovae exercituum, et eloquium Sancti Israel aversati sunt.

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span>**25.** Therefore is the anger of the Lord
kindled against his people, and he hath stretched forth his hand against
them, and hath smitten them: and the hills did tremble, and their
carcasses *were* torn in the midst of the streets. For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand *is* stretched out still.

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Idcirca exarsit furor Iehovae in
populum suum; et extendens super eum manum suam percussit eum; et
contremuerunt montes, fuitque cadaver eorum mutilum projectum in medio
viarum; et in omnibus istis non est aversus furor ejus; sed adhuc manus
ejus est extenta.

<span id="xii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And he will lift up an ensign to the
nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the end of the earth:
and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly.

<span id="xii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et levabit signum ad gentes e
longinquo; sibilabit Genti ab extremo terrae; et ecce velox et levis
veniet.

<span id="xii.i-p54"></span>**27.** None shall be weary nor stumble
among them; none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of
their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken:

<span id="xii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Non erit lassus, neque impingens
inter ipsos; nullus dormitabit neque dormiet; non solvetur ulli cingulum
lumborum, neque rumpetur corrigia calceamentorum ejus.

<span id="xii.i-p56"></span>**28.** Whose arrows *are* sharp, and all
their bows bent, their horses’ hoofs shall be counted like flint, and
their wheels like a whirlwind.

<span id="xii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Sagittae ipsorum acutae erunt, et
omnes arcus extenti. Ungulae equorum quasi silex; et rotae ipsorum quasi
turbo reputabuntur.

<span id="xii.i-p58"></span>**29.** Their roaring *shall be* like a
lion, they shall roar like young lions; yea, they shall roar, and lay
hold of the prey, and shall carry *it* away safe, and none shall deliver
*it.*

<span id="xii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Rugitus ejus sicut leonis; fremet
instar leunculorum. Frendet atque apprehendet praedam. Spolia corradet,
et nemo eripiet.

<span id="xii.i-p60"></span>**30.** And in that day they shall roar
against them like the roaring of the sea: and if *one* look unto the
land, behold darkness *and* sorrow; and the light is darkened in the
heavens thereof.

<span id="xii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Fremet super eum in die illo, quasi
fremitus maris; tum aspiciet ad terram, et ecce tenebrae tribulationis;
et lux obtenebrata erit in coelis.

<span id="xii.i-p62"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p63"></span><span id="xii.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p64"></span>**1.** *Now will I sing to my beloved.* The
subject of this chapter is different from that of the former. It was the
design of the Prophet to describe the condition of the people of Israel,
as it then was, in order that all might perceive their faults, and might
thus be led by shame and self-loathing to sincere repentance. Here, as
in a mirror, the people might behold the misery of their condition. But
for this, they would have flattered themselves too much in their crimes,
and would not have patiently listened to any instructions. It was
therefore necessary to present a striking and lively picture of their
wickedness; and in order that it might have the greater weight, he made
use of this preface; for great and memorable events were usually
described in verse, that they might be repeated by every one, and that a
lasting record of them might be preserved. In like manner, we see that
Moses wrote a song, and many other compositions, (<span
id="xii.i-p64.2"></span>[Ex 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001.md)<span
id="xii.i-p64.2"></span>; <span id="xii.i-p64.3"></span>[De
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p64.3"></span>,.md)
in order that all the events might be proclaimed in this manner, both in
public and in private. The instruction becomes more widely diffused than
if it had been delivered in plainer language. For the same reason Isaiah
composed this song, that he might present to the people a clearer view
of their wickedness; and, undoubtedly, he handled this subject with
magnificent and harmonious language, for the highest skill is commonly
exercised in the composition of poems.

<span id="xii.i-p65"></span>*To my beloved.* There can be no doubt that
he means God; as if he had said that he would compose a poem in behalf
of God, that he might expostulate with the people about their
ingratitude; for it gave additional weight to his language to represent
God as speaking. But a question arises, Why does Isaiah call God his
friend? Some reply that he was a kinsman of Christ, and I acknowledge
that he was a descendant of David; but this appears to be a forced
interpretation. A more natural and appropriate one would be, to adopt
the statement of John, that the Church is committed to *the friends of
the bridegroom*, (<span id="xii.i-p65.1"></span>[Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="xii.i-p65.1"></span>,.md)
and to reckon prophets as belonging to that class. To them,
unquestionably, this designation applies; for the ancient people were
placed under their charge, that they might be kept under their leader.
We need not wonder, therefore, that they were jealous and were greatly
offended when the people bestowed their attachment on any other. Isaiah
therefore assumes the character of the bridegroom, and, being deeply
anxious about the bride entrusted to him, complains that she has broken
conjugal fidelity, and deplores her treachery and ingratitude.

<span id="xii.i-p66"></span>Hence we learn that not only Paul, but all
those prophets and teachers who faithfully served God, were jealous of
God’s spouse. (<span id="xii.i-p66.1"></span>[2Co
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span id="xii.i-p66.1"></span>..md)
And all the servants of God ought to be greatly moved and aroused by
this appellation; for what does a man reckon more valuable than his
wife? A well-disposed husband will value her more highly than all his
treasures, and will more readily commit to any person the charge of his
wealth than of his wife. He to whom one will entrust his dearly-beloved
wife must be reckoned very faithful. Now to pastors and ministers the
Lord commits his Church as his beloved wife. How great will be our
wickedness if we betray her by sloth and negligence! Whosoever does not
labor earnestly to preserve her can on no pretense be excused.

<span id="xii.i-p67"></span>*A song of my beloved.* By using the word
<span id="xii.i-p67.1"></span>דודי, *dodi*, he changes the first
syllable, but the meaning is the same as in the former clause. Though
some render it *uncle*, and others *cousin*, I rather agree with those
who consider it to contain an allusion; for greater liberties are
allowed to poets than to other writers. By his arrangement of those
words, and by his allusions to them, he intended that the sound and
rhythm should aid the memory, and impress the minds, of his readers.

<span id="xii.i-p68"></span>*My beloved had a vineyard.* The metaphor of
*a vineyard* is frequently employed by the prophets, and it would be
impossible to find a more appropriate comparison. (<span
id="xii.i-p68.1"></span>[Ps 80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008.md)<span
id="xii.i-p68.1"></span>; <span id="xii.i-p68.2"></span>[Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span id="xii.i-p68.2"></span>..md)
There are two ways in which it points out how highly the Lord values his
Church; for no possession is dearer to a man than *a vineyard*, and
there is none that demands more constant and persevering toil. Not only,
therefore, does the Lord declare that we are his beloved inheritance,
but at the same time points out his care and anxiety about us.

<span id="xii.i-p69"></span>In this *song* the Prophet mentions, first,
the benefits which the Lord had bestowed on the Jewish people; secondly,
he explains how great was the ingratitude of the people; thirdly, the
punishment which must follow; fourthly, he enumerates the vices of the
people; for men never acknowledge their vices till they are compelled to
do so.

<span id="xii.i-p70"></span>*On a hill.* He begins by saying that God
had placed his people in a favorable situation, as when a person plants
a vine on a pleasant and fertile hill. By the word *horn* or *hill* I
understand a lofty place rising above a plain, or what we commonly call
*a rising-ground*, (<span id="xii.i-p70.1"></span>*un coustau*.) It is
supposed by some to refer to the situation of Jerusalem, but I consider
this to be unnatural and forced. It rather belongs to the construction
of the Prophet’s allegory; and as God was pleased to take this people
under his care and protection, he compares this favor *to the planting
of a vineyard;* for it is better to plant vines on hills and lofty
places than on a plain. In like manner the poet says, *The vine loves
the open hills; the yews prefer the north wind and the cold*  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) The Prophet, therefore, having alluded to
the ordinary method of planting the vine, next follows out the
comparison, that this place occupied no ordinary situation. When he
calls it *the* *son of oil* or *of fatness*,  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) he means a rich and exceedingly fertile
spot. This is limited by some commentators to the fertility of Judea,
but that does not accord with my views, for the Prophet intended to
describe metaphorically the prosperous condition of the people.

<span id="xii.i-p73"></span><span id="xii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p74"></span>**2.** *And he fenced it.* The incessant
care and watchfulness of God in dressing his vine are asserted by the
Prophet, as if he had said, that God has neglected nothing that could be
expected from the best and most careful householder. And yet we do not
choose to attempt, as some commentators have done, an ingenious
exposition of every clause, such as, that the Church is *fenced* by the
protection of the Holy Spirit, so that it is safe against the attacks of
the devil; that the *wine-press* is doctrine; and that by *the stones*
are meant the annoyances of errors. The design of the Prophet, as I have
mentioned, was more obvious, namely, that by incessant care and large
expenditure God has performed the part of an excellent husbandman. Yet
it was the duty of the Jews to consider how numerous and diversified
were the blessings which God had conferred on them; and at the present
day, when the Church is represented under the metaphor of *a vineyard*,
we ought to view those figures as denoting God’s blessings, by which he
makes known not only his love toward us, but likewise his solicitude
about our salvation.

<span id="xii.i-p75"></span>In the verb *planted* the order appears to
be reversed, for one ought to begin with *planting* rather than with the
*fence*; but my explanation is, that after having *planted*, he did
everything else that was necessary. Justly, therefore, does he charge
them with ingratitude and treachery, when the fruits that ought to have
followed such laborious cultivation were not brought forth. There is
reason to fear that the Lord will bring the same accusation against us;
for the greater the benefits which we have received from God, the more
disgraceful will be our ingratitude if we abuse them. It is not without
a good reason, or to enable them to make any idle display, that the Lord
blesses his people; it is, that they may yield *grapes*, that is, the
best fruit. If he be disappointed of his expectation, the punishment
which the Prophet here describes will follow. The mention of his
benefits ought, therefore, to produce a powerful impression on our
minds, and to excite us to gratitude.

<span id="xii.i-p76"></span>Besides, the word *vineyard*, and a
*vineyard* so carefully cultivated, suggests an implied contrast; for so
much the more highly ought we to value the acts of God’s kindness, when
they are not of an ordinary description, but tokens of his peculiar
regard. Other blessings are indiscriminately bestowed, such as, that he

<span id="xii.i-p77"></span>maketh the sun to shine on the evil as well
as on the good, (<span id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="xii.i-p78"></span>and supplies them with what is necessary for
food and clothing. But how much more highly ought we to esteem that
covenant of grace into which he has entered with us, by which he makes
the light of the Gospel to shine on us; for his own people are its
peculiar objects! That care and diligence, therefore, which the Lord
continually manifests in cultivating our minds deserves our most earnest
consideration.

<span id="xii.i-p79"></span>*Therefore he hoped that it would bring
forth grapes*  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) He now complains
that the nation which had enjoyed such high advantages had basely and
shamefully degenerated; and he accuses them of undervaluing the kindness
of God, for he says that, instead of *pleasant grapes*, they yielded
only *wild* and bitter fruits. It is undoubtedly true that God, to whose
eyes *all things are naked and opened*, (<span
id="xii.i-p80.1"></span>[Heb 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013.md)<span
id="xii.i-p80.1"></span>,) is not deceived by his expectation like a
mortal man. In the Song of Moses he plainly declares that he well knew
from the beginning what would be the wickedness of his people.

<span id="xii.i-p81"></span>My beloved, says he, when she fares well and
becomes fat,  
will kick. (<span id="xii.i-p81.2"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="xii.i-p81.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p82"></span>It is therefore not more possible that God
should be mistaken in his expectations, than that he should repent.
Isaiah does not here enter into subtle reasonings about the expectations
which God had formed, but describes the manner in which the people ought
to have acted, that they might not lose the benefit of such excellent
advantages. Thus God commands that the Gospel be proclaimed *for the
obedience of* *faith*, (<span id="xii.i-p82.1"></span>[Ro
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#026)<span id="xii.i-p82.1"></span>,.md)
not that he expects all to be obedient, but because, by the mere hearing
of it, unbelievers are rendered inexcusable. Moreover, there is nothing
that ought to excite us more powerfully to lead a devout and holy life,
than to find that those duties which we perform towards God are compared
by the Holy Spirit to fruits of exquisite flavour.

<span id="xii.i-p83"></span><span id="xii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p84"></span>**3.** *Now, therefore, O inhabitant of
Jerusalem!* Those persons with whom he contends are made judges in their
own cause, as is usually done in cases so plain and undoubted that the
opposite party has no means of evasion. It is, therefore, a proof of the
strongest confidence in his cause, when he bids the guilty persons
themselves declare if this be not the true state of the fact; for
immediately afterwards we shall find him declaring that the accusation
is decided against those persons to whom he now commits the decision.

<span id="xii.i-p85"></span><span id="xii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p86"></span>**4.** *What more ought to have been done to
my vineyard?* He first inquires what could have been expected from the
best husbandman or householder, *which he has not done to his vineyard*?
Hence he concludes that they had no excuse for having basely withheld
from him the fruit of his toil.

<span id="xii.i-p87"></span>*How did I expect that it would yield
grapes?* In this clause he appears to expostulate with himself for
having expected any good or pleasant fruit from so wicked a people; just
as, when the result does not answer to our expectation, we complain of
ourselves, and are angry at having ill-bestowed our labor on ungrateful
persons whose wickedness ought to have restrained us from doing what we
did, and acknowledge that we are justly deceived, because we were too
simple and easily imposed on. But a more natural interpretation will be
this: “Since I discharged every part of my duty, and did more than any
one could have expected in dressing my *vineyard*, how comes it that it
yields me so poor a return, and that, instead of the fruit which was
expected, it yields what is absolutely bitter?”

<span id="xii.i-p88"></span>If it be objected that God had the remedy in
his hands, if he had turned the hearts of the people, this is an idle
evasion as applied to those men; for their conscience holds them fast,
so that they cannot escape by laying the blame on another. Though God do
not pierce the hearts of men by the power of his Spirit, so as to render
them obedient to him, yet they will have no right to complain that this
was wanting; for every pretense of ignorance is fully and abundantly
taken away by the outward call. Besides, God does not speak here of his
power, but declares that he was not under any obligation to do more than
he did.

<span id="xii.i-p89"></span><span id="xii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p90"></span>**5.** *And now come, I will show you what I
will do to my vineyard.* Having held the Jews to be condemned, as it
were, by their own mouth, he next adds that he will take vengeance for
their contempt of his grace, so that they will not escape from being
punished. The reproof would not have been sufficiently powerful to
affect their minds, if he had not also threatened punishment; and
therefore he now declares that the heinous offense, of having wickedly
imposed on him, will not escape vengeance. Now the punishment to be
inflicted on them amounts to this, that they will be deprived of the
gifts which they had abused, when God shall not only withdraw his care
of them, but shall give them up to be plundered by their enemies. At the
same time he shows how wretched their condition will be, when God shall
have ceased to bestow on them his multiplied favors.

<span id="xii.i-p91"></span>Hence it follows that it must have been
owing entirely to the extraordinary goodness of God, that the *vineyard*
remained safe and uninjured till that time. He goes so far as to point
out the various supports by which it was upheld, and the vast resources
which God possesses for destroying it both within and without; for when
his protection has been removed, they must become a prey to all that
pass by, whether men or beasts. “When the fence has been removed,” says
he, “the cattle will tread on it and lay it bare, robbers will ransack
and plunder it, and thus it will become a wilderness.”

<span id="xii.i-p92"></span><span id="xii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p93"></span>**6.** *I will lay it waste.* God will not
take pains to dig and prune it, and consequently it will become barren
for want of dressing; *briars and thorns* will spring up to choke its
branches; and, what is more, by withholding rain, God will dry up its
roots. Hence it is evident how manifold are the weapons with which God
is supplied for punishing our ingratitude, when he sees that we despise
his kindness. Isaiah is still, no doubt, proceeding with his metaphor,
and, in order to obtain more eager attention, adorns his style by
figures of speech. But we ought simply to conclude, that as God
continually bestows on us innumerable benefits, so we ought to be
earnestly on our guard lest, by withdrawing first one and then another,
he punish us for despising them.

<span id="xii.i-p94"></span>So far as relates to the government of the
Church, the more numerous the kinds of assistance which she needs, the
more numerous are the punishments to which she will be liable, if she
wickedly corrupt what was appointed by God for her salvation. Nor ought
we to wonder, if at the present day so many distresses threaten ruin and
desolation; for whatever calamity befalls us, whether it be that there
is a deficiency of instruction, or that the wicked abound, or that foxes
and wolves creep into the Church, all this must be ascribed to our
ingratitude, because we have not yielded such fruit as we ought, and
have been indolent and sluggish. Whenever, therefore, we are justly
deprived of those great favors which he freely bestowed on us, let us
acknowledge the anger of the Lord.

<span id="xii.i-p95"></span><span id="xii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p96"></span>**7.** *Truly the vineyard of Jehovah of
hosts is the house of Israel.* Hitherto he spoke figuratively; now he
shows what is the design of this *song*. Formerly he had threatened
judgment against the Jews; now he shows that they are not only guilty,
but are also held to be convicted persons; for they could not be
ignorant of the benefits which they had received from God.

<span id="xii.i-p97"></span>Thou broughtest a vine from Egypt, says the
Psalmist, and, having driven out the nations, plantedst it. (<span
id="xii.i-p97.1"></span>[Ps 80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008.md)<span
id="xii.i-p97.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.i-p98"></span>Their ingratitude was plain and manifest.

<span id="xii.i-p99"></span>Isaiah does not illustrate every part of the
metaphor; nor was it necessary; for it was enough to point out what was
its object. The whole nation was *the vineyard*; the individual men were
*the plants*. Thus he accuses the whole body of the nation, and then
every individual; so that no man could escape the universal
condemnation, as if no part of the expostulation had been addressed to
himself. Why the nation is called *a vineyard* is plain enough; for the
Lord chose it, and admitted it to the covenant of grace and of eternal
salvation, and bestowed on it innumerable blessings. The *planting* is
the commencement, and the dressing of it follows. That nation was
adopted, and in various respects was the object of Divine care; for the
adoption would have been of no avail, if the Lord had not continually
adorned and enriched it by his blessings.

<span id="xii.i-p100"></span>The same doctrine ought to be inculcated on
us at the present day. Christ affirms that he is *the vine*, (<span
id="xii.i-p100.1"></span>[Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p100.1"></span>,.md)
and that, having been ingrafted into this *vine*, we are placed under
the care of the Father; for God is pleased to perform towards us the
office of a husbandman, and continually bestows those favors which he
reproachfully asserts that he had granted to his ancient people. We need
not wonder, therefore, if he is greatly enraged when he bestows his
labor uselessly and to no purpose. Hence that threatening,

<span id="xii.i-p101"></span>Every branch in me that beareth not fruit,
he will cut off,  
and cast into the fire. (<span id="xii.i-p101.2"></span>[John
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006)<span id="xii.i-p101.2"></span>..md)
 <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md)

<span id="xii.i-p103"></span>*He looked for judgment.* He begins without
a metaphor to relate how wickedly the Jews had degenerated, among whom
equity and justice was despised, and every kind of injustice and
violence abounded. The words contain an elegant play of language,
(paronomasia,) for those which have nearly the same sound have an
opposite meaning. <span id="xii.i-p103.1"></span>משפט (*mishpat*)
denotes *judgment*; <span id="xii.i-p103.2"></span>משפח (*mishpach*)
denotes *conspiracy* or *oppression*; <span
id="xii.i-p103.3"></span>צדקה (*tzedakah*) denotes *righteousness*;
<span id="xii.i-p103.4"></span>צעקה (*tzeakah*) denotes the *cry* and
*complaint* of those who are oppressed by violence and injustice; sounds
which are not wont to be heard where every man receives what is his own.
He mentions two things which the Lord chiefly demands from his people as
the genuine fruits of the fear of God; for although piety comes first in
order, yet there is no inconsistency in taking the description of it
from the duties of the second table. They are justly charged with having
despised God, on the ground of having acted cruelly towards men; for
where cruelty reigns, religion is extinguished.

<span id="xii.i-p104"></span>Let us now understand that the same things
are addressed to us; for as that nation was *planted*, so were we. We
should call to remembrance what Paul says, that we were like *wild
olive-plants*, but that they were the true and natural olive-tree.
(<span id="xii.i-p104.1"></span>[Ro
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024.md)<span id="xii.i-p104.1"></span>.
 <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) .md) since we who were strangers have
been ingrafted into the true olive-tree, the Lord has cultivated and
adorned us with unceasing care. But what kind of fruits do we bring
forth? Assuredly they are not only useless, but even bitter. So much the
greater is the ingratitude for which we ought to be condemned, for the
blessings which he has bestowed and heaped on us are far more abundant.
And justly does this expostulation apply to us, for violence and
injustice abound everywhere. But since the general doctrine did not
strike their minds so powerfully, the Prophet described chiefly these
two kinds of wickedness; that he might point out with the finger, as it
were, how far that nation was from the fruit which a good *vineyard*
ought to have yielded.

<span id="xii.i-p106"></span><span id="xii.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p107"></span>**8.** *Woe to them that join house to
house and field to field.* He now reproves their insatiable avarice and
covetousness, from which the acts of cheating, injustice, and violence
are wont to arise. For it cannot be condemned as a thing in itself
wrong, if a man *add field to field and* *house to house*; but he looked
at the disposition of mind, which cannot at all be satisfied, when it is
once inflamed by the desire of gain. Accordingly, he describes the
feelings of those who never have enough, and whom no wealth can satisfy.
So great is the keenness of covetous men that they desire to have
everything possessed by themselves alone, and reckon everything that is
obtained by others to be something which they want, and which has been
taken from them. Hence the beautiful observation of Chrysostom, that
“covetous men, if they could, would willingly take the sun from the
poor,” for they envy their brethren the common elements, and would
gladly swallow them up; not that they might enjoy them, but because such
is the madness to which their greed carries them. All the while they do
not consider that they need the assistance of others, and that a man
left alone can do nothing: all their care is to scrape together as much
as they can, and thus they swallow up everything by their covetousness.

<span id="xii.i-p108"></span>He therefore accuses covetous and ambitious
men of such folly that they would wish to have other men removed from
the earth, that they might possess it alone; and consequently they set
no limit to their desire of gain. For what madness is it to wish to have
those driven away from the earth whom God has placed in it along with
us, and to whom, as well as to ourselves, he has assigned it as their
abode! Certainly nothing more ruinous could happen to them than to
obtain their wish. Were they alone, they could not plough, or reap, or
perform other offices indispensable to their subsistence, or supply
themselves with the necessaries of life. For God has linked men so
closely together, that they need the assistance and labor of each other;
and none but a madman would disdain other men as hurtful or useless to
him. Ambitious men cannot enjoy their renown but amidst a multitude. How
blind are they, therefore, when they wish to drive and chase away
others, that they may reign alone!

<span id="xii.i-p109"></span>As to the size of *houses*, the same remark
which we formerly made about *fields* will apply; for he points out the
ambition of those who are desirous to inhabit spacious and magnificent
*houses*. If a man who has a large family makes use of a large *house*,
he cannot be blamed for it; but when men, swollen with ambition, make
superfluous additions to their houses, only that they may live in
greater luxury, and when one person alone occupies a building which
might serve for the habitation of many families, this undoubtedly is
empty ambition, and ought justly to be blamed. Such persons act as if
they had a right to drive out other men, and to be the only persons that
enjoyed a house or a roof, and as if other men ought to live in the open
air, or must go somewhere else to find an abode.

<span id="xii.i-p110"></span><span id="xii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p111"></span>**9.** *This is in the ears of Jehovah of
hosts.* Here something must be supplied; for he means that the Lord sits
as judge, and as taking cognizance of those things. When covetous men
seize and heap up their wealth, they are blinded by their desire of
gain, and do not understand that they will one day render an account.
Never, certainly, were men so utterly stupid as not to ascribe some
judgment to God; but they flatter themselves so far as to imagine that
God does not observe them. In general, therefore, they acknowledge the
judgment of God: when they come to particular cases, they take
liberties, and suppose that they are not bound to proceed to that
extent.

<span id="xii.i-p112"></span>*If many houses be not laid desolate.*
Having warned them that none of these things escape the eyes of God,
lest they should imagine that it is a knowledge which does not lead to
action, he immediately adds, that vengeance is close at hand. He
likewise makes use of an oath; for the expression *If not* is a form of
swearing that frequently occurs in the Scriptures.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) In order to strike them with greater
terror he breaks off the sentence with studied abruptness.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) He might indeed have brought out this
threatening with full expression, but the incomplete form is better
fitted to keep the hearer in doubt and suspense, and is therefore more
alarming. Besides, by this instance of reserve the Lord intended to
train us to modesty, that we may not be too free in the use of oaths.

<span id="xii.i-p115"></span>But what does he threaten? *Many houses
will be laid desolate.* This is a just punishment, by which the Lord
chastises the covetousness and ambition of men, who did not consider
their own meanness, that they might be satisfied with a moderate
portion. In a similar manner the poet ridicules the mad ambition of
Alexander the Great, who having learned from the philosophy of
Anacharsis that there were many worlds, sighed to think, that after
having worn himself out by so many toils, he had not yet made himself
master of one world. “One globe does not satisfy the Macedonian youth.
He writhes in misery on account of the narrow limits of the world, as if
he were confined to the rocks of Gyaros, or to the puny Seriphos. But
when he shall enter the city framed by potters, he will be content with
a tomb. Death alone acknowledges how small are the dimensions of the
bodies of men.”  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md)

<span id="xii.i-p118"></span>Instances of the same kind occur every day,
yet we do not observe them; for the Lord exhibits to us, as in a mirror,
the absurd vanity of men, who spend a vast amount of money in building
palaces that are afterwards to become the receptacles of owls and bats
and other animals. These things are plainly before our eyes, and yet we
do not apply our mind to the consideration of them. So sudden and
various are the changes that happen, so many houses are laid desolate,
so many cities are overthrown and destroyed, and, in short, there are so
many other evident proofs of the judgment of God; and yet men cannot be
persuaded to lay aside this mad ambition. The Lord threatens by the
Prophet Amos:

<span id="xii.i-p119"></span>“You have built houses of hewn stones,  
but you shall not dwell in them.” (<span id="xii.i-p119.2"></span>[Am
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011)<span id="xii.i-p119.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p120"></span>And again,

<span id="xii.i-p121"></span>“He will smite the great house with
breaches,  
and the little house with clefts.” (<span id="xii.i-p121.2"></span>[Am
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011)<span id="xii.i-p121.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p122"></span>These things happen daily, and yet the
lawless passions of men are not abated.

<span id="xii.i-p123"></span><span id="xii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p124"></span>**10.** *Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall
yield one bath.* He foretells that the same thing will befall their
fields and vineyards; that covetous men will not obtain the desired
returns, because their greed is insatiable; that, like certain animals
which, by their breath, scorch the branches, and wither the corn, those
men destroy the fruits of the earth by their extortion. The fields will
be so barren as scarcely to yield a tenth part of the seed: the
vineyards will yield very little wine.

<span id="xii.i-p125"></span>*A bath,* as Josephus tells us, is a
measure of liquids, and contains seventy-two sextaries; a very small
measure, certainly, for ten acres, especially on a fertile soil. The
*cor* (<span id="xii.i-p125.1"></span>κόρος) or *homer*, is a measure of
dry substances, and, according to the same author, contains thirty-one
*medimni*  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) An *ephah* is the tenth
part of it, and therefore evidently contains a little more than three
*medimni*  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md)

<span id="xii.i-p128"></span>Now, when the soil is productive, it yields
not only tenfold, but thirtyfold, and in all cases goes beyond the
quantity of seed, and gives back far more abundantly than it received.
When the case is otherwise, it undoubtedly proceeds from the curse of
God punishing the extortion of men. And yet men blame the niggardliness
of the soil, as if the fault lay there, but all in vain; for we would
not want abundant increase, if God did not curse the soil on account of
men’s covetousness. When they are so eagerly employed in gathering and
heaping up, what else are they doing than swallowing up the goodness of
God by their greed? If this is not seen in all, because they want the
power, still they do not want the disposition. Never was the world so
much inflamed by this covetousness, and we need not wonder if God visit
it with punishment.

<span id="xii.i-p129"></span><span id="xii.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p130"></span>**11.** *Woe unto them that rise up early
in the morning to follow strong drink* The Prophet does not aim at an
enumeration of all the vices which then prevailed, but only points out
some particular kinds of them, to which they were peculiarly addicted.
After having handled the general doctrine, he found it necessary to come
to particular vices; and the enumeration of those was more urgently
needed, for there would have been no end of going through them all one
by one. Having reproved covetousness, he now attacks drunkenness, which
undoubtedly was also a prevailing vice; for the kinds of vices which he
selects are not those which were found in one person or another, but
those which universally prevailed; and indeed the vices are of such a
kind as infect the whole body by their contagion.

<span id="xii.i-p131"></span>To *rise early* means to be earnestly
employed in doing anything; as when Solomon says,

<span id="xii.i-p132"></span>Woe to the nation whose princes eat in the
morning,  
(<span id="xii.i-p132.2"></span>[Ec
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#016)<span id="xii.i-p132.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="xii.i-p133"></span>that is, whose chief care is to fill their
belly and enjoy delicacies. This is contrary to the order of nature; for
*man*, as David says,

<span id="xii.i-p134"></span>“riseth that he may go to his work, and may
be engaged in business till the evening.” (<span
id="xii.i-p134.1"></span>[Ps
104:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#023.md)<span
id="xii.i-p134.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.i-p135"></span>Now, if he lay aside his labors, and rise
to partake of luxuries, and to follow drunkenness, this is monstrous. He
adds —

<span id="xii.i-p136"></span>*And who continue till night*. The meaning
is, that from the dawn of the morning to the twilight of the evening
they continue their drunken carousals, and are never weary of drinking.
Abundance and luxury are closely joined together; for when men enjoy
abundance, they become luxurious, and abuse it by intemperance.

<span id="xii.i-p137"></span><span id="xii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p138"></span>**12.** *And the harp*. He adds the
instruments of pleasures by which men addicted to intemperance provoke
their appetite. These might be different from ours, but they belonged to
music. Now, Isaiah does not blame music, for it is a science which ought
not to be despised; but he describes a nation swimming in every kind of
luxury, and too much disposed to indulge in pleasures. This is
sufficiently evident from what follows.

<span id="xii.i-p139"></span>*And they regard not the work of the Lord*
As if he had said, “They are as constant in luxurious indulgence, and as
much devoted to it, as if this had been the purpose for which they were
born and reared; and they do not *consider* why the Lord supplies them
with what is necessary.” Men were not born to eat and drink, and wallow
in luxury, but to obey God, to worship him devoutly, to acknowledge his
goodness, and to endeavor to do what is pleasing in his sight. But when
they give themselves up to luxury, when they dance, and sing, and have
no other object in view than to spend their life in the highest mirth,
they are worse than beasts: for they do not *consider* for what end God
created them, in what manner he governs this world by his providence,
and to what end all the actions of our life ought to be directed.

<span id="xii.i-p140"></span>Having stated this meaning, which appears
to me to be natural, I consider nothing more to be necessary; for I
cannot adopt the ingenious expositions of some authors, such as, when
they explain the *work* of God to mean *the law*; nor did I intend to
state every opinion which others have maintained. It is enough to know
that all who are addicted to gormandizing are here subjected by the
Prophet to the reproach of voluntarily becoming like brute beasts, when
they do not direct their minds to God, who is the author of life.

<span id="xii.i-p141"></span><span id="xii.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p142"></span>**13.** *Therefore my people are gone into
captivity.* I do not approve of the interpretation given by some
commentators, that in consequence of the teachers having failed to
perform their duty, the people, through ignorance and error, fell into
many vices, which at length became the cause of their destruction. On
the contrary, he charges them with gross and voluntary ignorance, as if
he had said that, by their madness, they brought down destruction on
themselves. The meaning therefore is, that the people perished because
they despised instruction; whereas they might have been preserved if
they had listened to good counsels: and therefore he expressly says, *My
people*; that is, the nation which enjoyed the extraordinary privilege
of being separated from the rest of the nations, that by relying on the
guidance and direction of God, they might have a fixed rule of life.
Thus it is said,

<span id="xii.i-p143"></span>“What nation is so eminent and so
distinguished as to have gods nigh to it, as thy God draws near to thee
this day? This shall therefore be your knowledge and understanding above
all nations, to hear your God.” (<span id="xii.i-p143.1"></span>[Deut.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p143.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p144"></span>This baseness heightens the criminality of
the people, that they shut their eyes in the midst of so much light. It
was therefore a very severe accusation, that a people which God had
undertaken to govern possessed *no knowledge*: for the law might have
given them abundant direction for the whole conduct of life; it was a
light shining before them amidst the general darkness of the world; and
therefore it was monstrous that the nation should refuse to follow that
path which had been pointed out to them, and, on the contrary, should
shut their eyes, and rush forward to destruction.

<span id="xii.i-p145"></span>*Have gone into captivity.* Some consider
the word *captivity* to be used here in a metaphorical sense; but this
is a forced interpretation; for the Prophet here describes the
punishments which God had in part inflicted, and in part intended to
inflict, so as to make it evident that the people were wretched through
their own fault, as if they wished to draw down upon themselves the
curses of God. When this discourse was delivered, some tribes of Israel
had already been banished, and the destruction of both kingdoms was at
hand. The Prophet accordingly speaks as if all had already been led
*into captivity*

<span id="xii.i-p146"></span>*And their glory are men famished*  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md) *and their multitude are dried up with
thirst.* He now adds another punishment, namely, that they are wasted
with hunger and famine, and not only common men, but some persons of the
highest rank, in whom the vengeance of God is more clearly seen; for it
was shocking to see wealthy men and nobles, on whom the respectability
of the whole nation rested, wandering about and famished. And yet the
severity of God’s vengeance did not exceed proper bounds; for we must
always take into account that ignorance was the cause; that is, the Jews
were rebellious, and obstinately rejected the light of heavenly
doctrine; yea, shut their ears against God when he was willing to
perform the part of a master in instructing them. Hence we draw a useful
doctrine; namely, that the source of all our calamities is, that we do
not allow ourselves to be taught by the word of God, and this is what
the Prophet chiefly intended that we should observe.

<span id="xii.i-p148"></span>It may be asked, Is ignorance the cause of
all calamities? Many persons appear to sin not so much through ignorance
as through obstinacy; for they see what is right, but refuse to follow
it, and the consequence is that they sin willingly, and not merely
through inadvertency. I answer, ignorance is sometimes the *near*, and
sometimes the *remote* cause; or, to use the common expressions, the one
is *immediate, and the other is mediate*. It is the *near* cause, when
men deceive themselves under any pretense, and intentionally blind their
understanding. Again, it is the *remoter* cause, when men reject the
principles from which they ought to frame the rule of their life; for it
was their duty to look to God, and to attend to his will. When they
disregard his will, they are indeed rebellious and obstinate; but they
are ignorant because they refuse to learn, and on this rock they split:
and yet ignorance does not excuse them, for of their own accord they
bring it on themselves when they reject such a Teacher. So then it is a
true statement, that the reason why the people endure such a variety of
afflictions is, that they are ignorant of God, and will not allow
themselves to be taught by him.

<span id="xii.i-p149"></span><span id="xii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p150"></span>**14.** *Therefore hell hath enlarged his
soul*  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md) In this verse the Prophet
intended to heighten the alarm of men who were at their ease, and not
yet sufficiently affected by the threatenings which had been held out to
them. Though it was shocking to behold *captivity*, and also famine, yet
the slowness and insensibility of the people was so great that they did
not give earnest heed to these tokens of God’s anger. Accordingly the
Prophet threatens something still more dreadful, that hell has opened
his belly to swallow them all up.

<span id="xii.i-p152"></span>I said a little ago, that what is here
stated in the past tense refers partly to the future. Nor is it without
good reason that the Prophet speaks of the events as plain and manifest;
for he intended to bring them immediately before the people, that they
might behold with their eyes what they could not be persuaded to
believe. Again, when he compares *hell* or *the grave* to an insatiable
beast, by the *soul* he means the belly into which the food is thrown.
The general meaning is, that the grave is like a wide and vast gulf,
which, at the command of God, yawns to devour men who are condemned to
die. This personification carries greater emphasis than if he had said
that all are condemned to the grave.

<span id="xii.i-p153"></span>*And her glory hath descended, and her
multitude.* He joins together the nobles and men of low rank, that none
may flatter themselves with the hope of escape: as if he had said,
“*Death* will carry you away, and all that you possess, your delicacies,
wealth, pleasures, and everything else in which you place your
confidence.” It is therefore a confirmation of the former statement, and
we ought always to attend to the particle <span
id="xii.i-p153.1"></span>לכן (*laken*,) *therefore*; for the people
ascribed their calamities to fortune, or in some other way hardened
themselves against the Lord’s chastisements. On this account Isaiah says
that these things do not happen by chance. Besides, men are wont to
argue with God, and are so daring and presumptuous that they do not
hesitate to call him to account. In order, therefore, to restrain that
pride, he shows that the punishments with which they are visited are
just, and that it is owing entirely to their own folly that they are
miserable in every respect.

<span id="xii.i-p154"></span><span id="xii.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p155"></span>**15.** *And the mighty man shall be bowed
down.* This may be called the summing up, for it points out the end and
result of those chastisements, that all may be cast down, and that the
Lord alone may be exalted. We have formerly met with a similar
statement, (<span id="xii.i-p155.1"></span>[Isa.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#017)<span id="xii.i-p155.1"></span>,.md)
and on that occasion we explained what was the Prophet’s meaning;  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) which is, that he shows the design of the
chastisements which God inflicts on us. Adversity is so hateful to us,
that we can perceive nothing good in it. When he speaks of punishments,
we detest and abhor them, because we do not perceive the justice of God.
But the prophets remind us of another consideration, that so long as men
go on in their sins regardlessly, the justice of God is in some degree
smothered, and never shines so brightly as when he punishes our sins.
This fruit is indeed very great, and ought to be preferred to the
salvation of all men; for the glory of God, which shines in his
righteousness, ought to be more highly esteemed than all things else.

<span id="xii.i-p157"></span>There is, therefore, no reason why we
should so greatly dread the chastisements which God inflicts upon us,
but we ought to embrace with reverence what the prophets declare
concerning them. In this way, however, the Prophet has severely
chastised arrogant hypocrites. who become the more insolent when they
are not punished; as if he had said, “Do you imagine that, when God has
endured you so long, you will at last be able to tread him under your
feet? Assuredly he will arise, and will be exalted in your destruction.”

<span id="xii.i-p158"></span>As the Prophet has employed, first, the
word <span id="xii.i-p158.1"></span>אדם (*adam*) and next <span
id="xii.i-p158.2"></span>איש (*ish*), it is supposed that this denotes
both the noble and the mean; as if he had said, “Not only will the
common people perish, but likewise those who are eminent for riches,
honor, and high rank.” I cheerfully adopt this opinion; for <span
id="xii.i-p158.3"></span>איש (*ish*) is derived from *strength* and
<span id="xii.i-p158.4"></span>אדם (*adam*) from *earth*. But if any one
prefer a more simple interpretation, I leave it to his judgment. However
this may be, the Prophet includes all men, both the highest and the
lowest.

<span id="xii.i-p159"></span><span id="xii.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p160"></span>**16.** *But Jehovah of hosts shall be
exalted in judgment.* He expresses the manner, or, as it is commonly
called, the formal cause, of the excellence of which he has spoken; as
if he had said, “The God of hosts, whom ungodly men insolently tread
under their feet, will be raised on high, when he shall show himself to
be the judge of the world.” In this manner he ridicules the foolish
confidence with which the ungodly vaunted; for if judgment and
righteousness must at length come forth, it follows that they shall be
cast down, since the only way in which those men rise is by overturning
the order of nature. And it ought to be carefully observed, that it is
not more possible for wicked men to continue in prosperity than for God
to permit his glory to be set aside. Though *judgment* is not at all
different from *righteousness*, still the repetition is not superfluous.

<span id="xii.i-p161"></span>*And God, who is holy, shall be sanctified
in righteousness.* The language becomes more vehement, that wicked men
may not, by a false imagination, assure themselves of uninterrupted
happiness, which they cannot have, unless by setting aside the
*holiness* of God. But since God *is holy* by nature, he must be
*sanctified*. Hence it follows that destruction hangs over the wicked,
that their obstinacy and rebellion may be subdued, for God cannot deny
himself.

<span id="xii.i-p162"></span><span id="xii.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p163"></span>**17.** *And the lambs shall feed after
their manner.* Some render it *according to their measure*, or, *in
proportion to their capacity*, but it means *in the usual manner*. There
are various ways of explaining this verse; but we ought first of all to
observe that the Prophet intended to bring consolation to the godly, who
trembled at hearing the dreadful judgments of God; for the more
powerfully a man is under the influence of religion, the more does he
feel the presence of the hand of God, and the more is he impressed by
the apprehension of his judgment. In short, fear and reverence for God
cause us to be deeply moved by everything that is presented to us in his
name.

<span id="xii.i-p164"></span>Accordingly, after having heard such
dreadful threatenings, they must have fainted, if this consolation had
not been added as a seasoning, to give them a taste of the mercy of God.
It is customary with the prophets always to pay attention to the godly,
and to support their minds. “Although, therefore,” says Isaiah, “it may
seem as if God were about to destroy the whole nation, still he will
show himself to be a faithful shepherd to his *lambs*, and will *feed*
them in his usual manner.”

<span id="xii.i-p165"></span>This is one object; but it was also the
intention of the Prophet to repress the haughtiness of the nobles, who
oppressed with unjust tyranny the godly and poor, and yet boasted that
they were the Church of God. He reminds them, therefore, that it is an
idle and false boasting, when they assume the designation of God’s
flock; for they are *goats*, not *lambs*. Not only will God have it in
his power to feed his flock, when the *goats* have been cut off, but it
will never fare well with the *lambs* till they have been separated from
the *goats*.

<span id="xii.i-p166"></span>*And the waste places of the fat ones shall
strangers eat.* There is a still greater diversity here among
commentators; but I consider the true meaning to be, that the children
of God, banished and treated as foreigners for a time, will regain their
lost rights, and will then obtain those places which have been laid
*waste*, or reduced to desolation by *the fat ones*, that is, by the
proud and cruel men who had seized their property. For he calls the
children of God *strangers* who would be exiles for a time, and by
*waste places*, or *forsaken places*, he means those possessions which
they had relinquished, and which others had seized. He refers to a
custom well known and exceedingly common, which is, that if any one
possess fields or houses, he keeps his hand, as it were, stretched over
them, so that no one will venture to touch a clod; but if he forsake
them they are seized. The people, therefore, had forsaken the
possessions from which they had been expelled, so far as to despair of
being ever able to regain them; so that they might justly be called
*forsaken places*, with respect to themselves, and *forsaken places of
the fat ones*, because they had been possessed by the mighty and
powerful. We may, indeed, view the expression more simply as denoting
*forsaken fat places*, but it is more probable that by *the fat ones*
are meant tyrants.

<span id="xii.i-p167"></span><span id="xii.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p168"></span>**18.** *Wo unto them that draw iniquity
with cords of vanity!* After having inserted a short consolation for the
purpose of allaying the bitterness of punishments as regards the godly,
he returns to threatenings, and proceeds to launch those thunderbolts of
words which are fitted to awaken some degree of alarm. By *cords* he
means nothing else than the allurements by which men suffer themselves
to be deceived, and harden their heart in crimes; for either they
ridicule the judgment of God, or they contrive vain excuses, and allege
the plea of necessity. Any concealment, therefore, which they employ, he
calls *cords*; for whenever men are prompted to sin by the lust of the
flesh, they at first pause, and feel that something within restrains
them, which would certainly keep them back, if they did not rush forward
with opposing violence, and break through all opposition. When any man
is tempted to do what is sinful, his conscience secretly asks him, What
are you doing? And sin never advances so freely as not to feel this
check; for God intended in this manner to provide for the good of
mankind, lest all should break out into unbridled licentiousness.

<span id="xii.i-p169"></span>How comes it, then, that men are so
obstinate in doing what is sinful? Assuredly they permit themselves to
be deceived by allurements, and stupify their minds, that they may
despise the judgment of God, and may thus have some freedom to commit
sin. They flatter themselves by imagining that what is sin is not sin,
or by some excuse or idle pretense they lessen its enormity. These,
then, are *cords*, wicked *ropes*, by which they *draw iniquity*. Hence
it is evident that the Lord has good reason for threatening them; for
they sin, not only of their own accord, but perversely and obstinately,
and, in short, they bind themselves to sin, so that they are without
excuse.

<span id="xii.i-p170"></span><span id="xii.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p171"></span>**19.** *Who say, Let him make speed.* He
specifies one class of sins, by means of which he shows that they *draw
sins as by ropes*. When men not only lay aside all thought of the Divine
judgment, but despise and treat as fabulous all that is said about it,
nothing can be worse than this. He intended to say that the utmost
contempt is manifested when men, to whom the judgment of God has been
declared, say that it would give them joy to see it, and treat it with
ridicule as a silly alarm; which is denoted by these words full of
contempt and of wicked confidence: *Let him come, let him make speed.*

<span id="xii.i-p172"></span>*Work*, is here put, by way of eminence,
(<span id="xii.i-p172.1"></span>κατ ἐξοχὴν,) for *judgment*; for God
appears to be doing nothing when he does not punish the crimes of the
ungodly; but when he rises up to execute *judgment*, and inflicts
punishment, his *work* is then seen, and becomes visible (as is commonly
said) by action; because from the very fact we learn that the world is
governed by his authority and power. *Work*, therefore, is taken
specially for *judgment*; because by means of it we see that God is by
no means unemployed, but performs his office. Now, ungodly men speak of
him with reproach and contempt, and at this very day we have abundant
instances of such wickedness and rebellion; and the same war which was
formerly waged by the prophets is that which we also are called to
maintain.

<span id="xii.i-p173"></span>The ungodly think that God does nothing,
and cares not about the affairs of men; as Epicurus thought that God’s
highest happiness consisted in his being free from all occupation.
Though they imagine that there is some God, yet they do not at all
acknowledge his *judgment*; and in the meantime they bid themselves be
of good cheer, and resolve that they will not wear themselves out by
such thoughts. “Let these prophets and ministers cry, and bawl, and hold
out terrors and threatenings; we will wait without any concern for what
they tell us, and in the meantime we will enjoy our mirth.” In this way
the Prophet relates the speeches of the ungodly, by which they expressed
ridicule and contempt of the word. Not only do they say, *Let his work
come, but, Let him hasten, Let him make speed;* for when he delays, they
conclude that everything which God does not execute as soon as he has
spoken it is idle talk. Thus Peter represents the ungodly as saying,

<span id="xii.i-p174"></span>“*Since the world was* *created*, the
course of nature has been uniform; and, therefore, after so many ages,
it is idle to  
expect a day of judgment.” (<span id="xii.i-p174.2"></span>[2Pe
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p174.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p175"></span>In the meantime, they purposely, as it
were, provoke God to exert his power immediately, if he has any.

<span id="xii.i-p176"></span>*Let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel
draw near and come.* To *work* is added *counsel*, as if they had said,
“Why does God deliberate so long, or say what he intends to do? Let him
rather show that what he has decreed is accomplished.” It is a great
aggravation of their crime, that they wickedly dared to set aside the
doctrine which was well known to them. They were more wicked than the
heathen Gentiles in this respect, that they despised the doctrine by
which he had adopted them to be his peculiar people.

<span id="xii.i-p177"></span>*That we may see it*. These are proofs of
infidelity; for ungodly men will not acknowledge God, unless they have
immediate evidence of his presence, and they refuse to believe his
words. Now, if the Holy Spirit, by means of this mark, holds up ungodly
men to detestation, we ought to testify our faith and piety by the
opposite sign, that is, by relying on the word of God, though the effect
does not immediately appear; for it is the peculiar excellence of faith
to hold us dependent on the mouth of God. True, we next derive
confirmation from works, but we must not begin at them; for this is the
distinction between the elect and the reprobate, that the elect simply
rely on the word, but do not disregard works, while ungodly men scorn
and disdain the word, though God speak a hundred times; and yet they
continually and eagerly call upon him for works. And when the judgment
of God is declared, they say, “Where is it?” They cannot endure the
mention of it, unless it be immediately made known by action. When men
are so immoderate, it follows that they have no faith, but rather
obstinate rebelliousness, Which more and more withdraws and estranges
man from God.

<span id="xii.i-p178"></span><span id="xii.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p179"></span>**20.** *Wo to them that call evil good.*
Though some limit this statement to judges, yet if it be carefully
examined, we shall easily learn from the whole context that it is
general; for, having a little before reproved those who cannot listen to
any warnings, he now proceeds with the same reproof. It is evident that
men of this sort have always some excuse to plead, and some way of
imposing on themselves; and, therefore, there is no end to their
reproachful language, when their crimes are brought to light. But here
he particularly reproves the insolence of those who endeavor to
overthrow all distinction between *good* and *evil*

<span id="xii.i-p180"></span>The preposition <span
id="xii.i-p180.1"></span>ל (*lamed*), prefixed to the words *good* and
*evil*, is equivalent to *Of*; and therefore the meaning is, *They who
say of evil, It is good, and of good, It is evil*; that is, they who by
vain hypocrisy conceal, excuse, and disguise wicked actions, as if they
would change the nature of everything by their sophistical arguments,
but who, on the contrary deface good actions by their calumnies. These
things are almost always joined together, for every one in whom the fear
of God dwells is restrained both by conscience and by modesty from
venturing to apologize for his sins, or to condemn what is good and
right; but they who have not this fear do not hesitate with the same
impudence to commend what is bad and to condemn what is good; which is a
proof of desperate wickedness.

<span id="xii.i-p181"></span>This statement may be applied to various
cases; for if a *wo* is here pronounced even on private individuals,
when they *say of evil that it is good, and of good that it is evil*,
how much more on those who have been raised to any elevated rank, and
discharge a public office, whose duty it is to defend what is right and
honorable! But he addresses a general reproof to all who flatter
themselves in what is evil, and who, through the hatred which they bear
to virtue, condemn what is done aright; and not only so, but who, by the
subterfuges which they employ for the sake of concealing their own
enormities, harden themselves in wickedness. Such persons, the Prophet
tells us, act as if they would change *light into darkness, and sweet
into bitter*; by which he means that their folly is monstrous, for it
would tend to confound and destroy all the principles of nature.

<span id="xii.i-p182"></span><span id="xii.i-p182.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p183"></span>**21.** *Wo to them that are wise in their
own eyes!* Here he proceeds to rebuke those on whom no instruction can
produce a good effect, and who do not allow any wise counsels or godly
warnings to gain admission. In short, he pronounces a curse on obstinate
scorners, who set up either the lusts of the flesh or a preposterous
confidence in their wisdom, in opposition to God’s instruction and
warnings. And not only does he rebuke those who are puffed up with a
false conviction of their wisdom, and are ashamed to learn from others,
but he likewise pronounces a general condemnation on all who, through
prejudices in their own favor, refuse to hear God speaking, and to
listen to his holy warnings.

<span id="xii.i-p184"></span>This fault has been too common in all ages,
and we see it in very many persons at the present day, who, though they
would shrink from openly rejecting the doctrine of godliness, are yet so
far from being truly obedient and teachable, that they haughtily reject
everything that does not please them. They acknowledge that they need
some bridle, but, on the other hand, are so much blinded by their
presumption, that, when God points out the way, they immediately rebel;
and not only so, but break out into violent indignation at the censure
passed on their proceedings. Nay, where is the man who renounces his own
judgment, and is ready to learn only from the mouth of God? But nothing
is more destructive than this deceitful show of wisdom; for the
beginning of piety is willingness to be taught, when we have renounced
our own judgment and follow wherever God calls.

<span id="xii.i-p185"></span>Nor is this false belief condemned solely
on the ground of its rendering men disobedient to God, and thus being
the cause of their ruin, but also on the ground of being in itself what
God cannot endure. We must become fools if we desire to be God’s
disciples. But it is also certain that mad rebellion reigns wherever
there is not found that modesty and humility which leads a man willingly
to yield subjection, *In their own eyes* means what we say in French,
<span id="xii.i-p185.1"></span>*a leur semblant*, that is, *in their own
conceit*

<span id="xii.i-p186"></span><span id="xii.i-p186.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p187"></span>**22.** *Wo to them that are mighty to
drink wine!* Isaiah now censures another vice, namely, drunkenness and
excess in eating, of which he had spoken before; so that probably this
chapter is collected from various sermons, and the leading topics only
are briefly touched; for when the Prophet saw no repentance, he was
forced to repeat and frequently inculcate the same instructions. He
therefore returns to the same reproofs which he had previously noticed;
for he again discourses about drunkenness, luxury, covetousness, and
other corruptions. Hence we ought to conclude, that when warnings
produce no good effect, we ought to employ greater earnestness in
addressing the obstinate and disobedient, and that we must not be afraid
of giving offense by our eagerness, but must frequently repeat the
reproofs, until they either yield or manifest incurable malice.

<span id="xii.i-p188"></span>By calling them *strong or powerful to
drink*, he wittily accuses them of wasting their strength in
bacchanalian warfare. It is disgraceful and beastly ambition, when a man
of vigorous health makes a display of his strength by drinking largely.
Employing a figure of speech (*synecdoche*) which is frequent in the
Prophets, and indeed in the whole of Scripture, he takes a part for the
whole; as if he had said, “Wo to gluttony; Wo to intemperance.” But he
purposely mentioned that which was disgraceful in the highest degree, in
order to render that vice generally hated and abhorred; for, as we have
said, nothing is more base or disgraceful than for a man to make trial
of his strength in swallowing food or in guzzling wine, and thus
struggling with himself so as to cram down as much as his belly can
hold. Such men keep by no rule of life, and do not know why God gives
them nourishment; for we eat and drink to support the body, and not to
destroy it. We live that we may yield worship and obedience to God, and
that we may render assistance to our neighbors. When men act so as not
to maintain their strength, but to destroy it by trying how much food
and wine they can bear, most certainly they are worse than beasts.

<span id="xii.i-p189"></span><span id="xii.i-p189.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p190"></span>**23.** *Who justify the wicked for a
reward.* He censures a corruption which at that time abounded in
judgment-seats, and points out the reason why there is no room for
justice in these places, namely, that they are under the influence of
*gifts*. For covetousness *blindeth the eyes of the wise, and
perverteth* all regard to what is good and just, even among those who
would otherwise be disposed to follow what is right. (<span
id="xii.i-p190.1"></span>[Ex 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008.md)<span
id="xii.i-p190.1"></span>; <span id="xii.i-p190.2"></span>[De
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019)<span id="xii.i-p190.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p191"></span>It may be objected that there are other
methods, and that it is not by *gifts* only that judgments are
perverted; for favor, hatred, friendship, and other sinful passions,
often blind the understanding. This is undoubtedly true; but the Prophet
had in his eye what happens for the most part, (<span
id="xii.i-p191.1"></span>ἐπὶ τὸ πολὺ,) and at the same time did not
intend to spare those vices which he did not express by name. Following
this example, godly teachers ought to be wise and careful in observing
and correcting the vices which most extensively abound among the people,
and most of all to oppose everything which appears to be sanctioned by
wicked custom.

<span id="xii.i-p192"></span>Now this corruption which is mentioned is
that which most frequently of all is to be found in judgment-seats; and,
therefore, it ought to be most carefully avoided by those judges who
wish to form an upright judgment. Nor ought we to listen to what is
affirmed by many, that *gifts* are not bestowed on them for that
purpose, or that, after having accepted them, they are as free as ever
to give a just decision; for where *gifts* are allowed, the regard to
what is just and right must be corrupted, and it is impossible for your
mind not to be favourably disposed towards him from whom you received
them. In short, we should hear the Lord, who declares that the
understanding of the wisest man is corrupted, and the disposition of the
most upright man is perverted, unless we choose to be thought wiser than
God.

<span id="xii.i-p193"></span><span id="xii.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p194"></span>**24.** *Therefore as the flame of fire
devoureth the stubble.* Lest it should be thought that he has so
frequently cried out without good reason, he again shows what grievous
and dreadful punishment awaits the nation, and threatens utter
destruction to the stubborn, because they did not permit themselves to
be brought back to the right path, but obstinately resisted instruction.
He employs metaphors exceedingly well adapted to express his meaning,
and better fitted to affect their hearts than if he had spoken plainly
and without a figure. He begins with a comparison, but immediately
slides into a metaphor, attributing a *root* and *branch* to the nation
as to a tree. Under those two words he includes all the strength, either
hidden or visible, that belongs to the nation, and says that the whole
will be destroyed; for when the root, which alone gives strength and
nourishment to the tree, becomes rotten, it is all over with the tree;
and in like manner he threatens that it is all over with the nation, and
that its whole strength is wasted and consumed.

<span id="xii.i-p195"></span>*Because they have rejected the law of
Jehovah of hosts.* He does not now enumerate, as formerly, the
particular kinds of crime by which they had provoked the wrath of God,
but assigns a general cause, namely, contempt of the law of God; for
this, as all men know, is the source of everything bad. And it is no
small aggravation of their crime that, when the will of God had been
made known to them in his law, it was not through ignorance or mistake,
but through inveterate malice, that they shook of the yoke of God, and
abandoned themselves to every kind of licentiousness; which was nothing
else than to reject so kind a Father, and to give themselves up to be
the slaves of the devil. Besides, he accuses them of open revolt; as if
he had said that it was not in one or a few instances that they were
rebellious, but that they might be regarded as treacherous apostates,
and had altogether forsaken God.

<span id="xii.i-p196"></span>*And loathed the word of the Holy One of
Israel.* He complains that they not only despised the word of God, but —
what is far more shocking — turned away from it, or threw it away in
wicked disdain. But if contempt for *the law of God* is the source,
head, and accumulation of all that is evil, there is nothing against
which we ought more carefully to guard than that Satan should take away
our reverence for it; and if there are any faults to which we are
liable, we ought, at least, to allow a remedy to be applied to them, if
we do not choose, by wickedly rejecting it, to draw down upon ourselves
everlasting destruction.

<span id="xii.i-p197"></span><span id="xii.i-p197.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p198"></span>**25.** *Therefore is the anger of the LORD
kindled.* In this verse the Prophet relates the former punishments which
the Jews had already endured, and shows that they are not near an end;
but that, on the contrary, heavier judgments await them, if they do not
return to the right path. I readily acknowledge that the past tense is
frequently employed instead of the future, but the meaning which I have
stated will best agree with the context; for there are two things quite
distinct from each other, which he lays down, on account of the resolute
obstinacy of the people. First, how God perceives their crimes.
Secondly, since there are no signs of repentance, he has other scourges
within his reach for chastising the people. Thirdly, he describes what
those scourges are, and forewarns them that the Assyrians will come at
the bidding of the Lord, as soon as he shall express it by merely
*hissing* to them, (verse. 26.)

<span id="xii.i-p199"></span>Such is the connection of what the Prophet
states; and hence it ought to be observed that the great body of men, as
soon as they have escaped any calamity, forget their chastisements, and
no longer regard them as the judgments of God; and that, though
experience be the instructor of fools, still they grow hardened by
strokes. This insensibility Isaiah sharply rebukes; as if he had said,
“Have you so quickly forgotten the calamities under which you lately
groaned? Whence came the distressful casting out of dead bodies, but
because God had raised his arm against you? And if God has discharged
the office of a judge, why do not those recent chastisements induce you
to fear him, and to refrain from drawing down a succession of
chastisements by new crimes?”

<span id="xii.i-p200"></span>Accordingly, he repeats the term <span
id="xii.i-p200.1"></span>על-כן, (*gnal ken*,) *therefore*; as if he had
said that those distresses are not accidental, but are manifest tokens
of God’s vengeance; and so he expressly says that God *was angry with
his people*; for if the Jews had not fallen from their own rank, their
condition would have been happier than that of any other nation. When
God’s chosen people, therefore, are treated by him with so much
sharpness and severity, it is beyond all doubt that he has been provoked
by heinous crimes. At the same time he refutes the false boasting by
which the Jews were wont to vaunt and exalt themselves, as if they ought
to be exempt from chastisements on the ground of their being God’s
peculiar people.

<span id="xii.i-p201"></span>*And the mountains trembled.* By this
comparison the dreadful nature of those punishments to which they were
insensible is described in such a manner as to prove more clearly the
stupidity of the people. They were more stupid than inanimate objects,
if they did not perceive the wrath of God, and the dreadful vengeance
which had been inflicted on the kingdom of Israel.

<span id="xii.i-p202"></span>*For all these things.* He threatens
heavier chastisements in future, as we have already said; for although
wicked men acknowledge that the Lord has punished them, still they think
that they have no right to expect anything more than one or two
chastisements. As if therefore nothing worse could befall them, and as
if God’s power to punish them had been exhausted, they wrap themselves
up in blind indifference. This is the reason why he exclaims that the
wrath of God is not yet appeased, and that, although it has inflicted on
them many calamities, still it has within its stores many weapons from
which they have reason to dread innumerable wounds.

<span id="xii.i-p203"></span>The copulative <span
id="xii.i-p203.1"></span>ו (*vau*) may be taken as a disjunctive, so as
to mean, *but, on the contrary, his hand is stretched out still*. He
refers to what he had formerly said, that *the hand of God is stretched
out*. He tells them that it is not yet drawn back, and that it may yet
pursue them, and inflict plagues of the same kind, or even of greater
severity. We ought diligently to meditate on these statements, in order
to shake off that drowsiness to which the greater part of men are
frequently liable, even after having received chastisements.

<span id="xii.i-p204"></span><span id="xii.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p205"></span>**26.** *And he will lift up an ensign to
the nations.* In this and the following verses he describes the nature
of the punishment which the Lord would inflict on his people; namely,
that they were about to suffer from the Assyrians a similar, or even a
heavier calamity, than that which their brethren the Israelites had
lately endured. Many distresses had indeed been suffered by themselves
from the Assyrians, though the kingdom of Judah was not yet overturned.
Besides, what had befallen the kingdom of Israel might be viewed as a
mirror in which they could behold God’s wrath and righteous
chastisement.

<span id="xii.i-p206"></span>And yet this prediction, though it was
accompanied by clear proofs, must undoubtedly have appeared to be
incredible; for at that time they enjoyed repose, and the slightest
truce of any kind easily laid them asleep. He says, therefore, that this
calamity will come to them from distant nations, from whom nothing of
this kind was expected; and he sounds an alarm as if the enemy were
already at hand. It is not for the sake of soothing their fear that he
uses those words, *from afar,* and *from the end of the earth*; but, on
the contrary, he speaks in this manner for the express purpose of
informing them that they ought not to judge of the anger of God from
what meets the eye, for we are wont to judge of dangers from the outward
appearance of things. Now, if the enemies are not so near, or if other
circumstances hinder them from giving us immediate annoyance, we give
ourselves no concern. Thus the people were lulled into a profound sleep,
as if there were no danger to be dreaded. But Isaiah says that this will
not hinder the Lord from *erecting a* *banner*, and instantly
commissioning the Assyrians to slaughter them. The expression is
metaphorical; for when a banner is displayed it is customary for
soldiers, at the bidding of their general, to advance in hostile array
and rush into the battle.

<span id="xii.i-p207"></span>*He will hiss to it.*  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) Though a change of number frequently
occurs in Scripture, yet it is on solid grounds that the Prophet, by
changing the number, makes many nations to be but one nation. The
meaning is, that when it shall please God to assemble various nations,
and form them into one body, it will not be a confused multitude, but
will resemble a body which has a visible head that rules and guides. He
chose to employ the word *hiss* rather than a word of weightier import,
such as *sound a trumpet*, or anything of that sort; in order to show
that God does not need to sound a trumpet in order to call the enemies
to battle, and that he has no difficulty in inflicting punishment when
the time for taking vengeance is fully at hand, for by a mere nod he can
accomplish the whole.  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md)

<span id="xii.i-p212"></span>*And lo, it will come speedy and swift.*
This confirms still more what I have already observed, that we ought not
to judge of the anger of the Lord from the present appearance of things;
for although everything appears to give assurances of peace, yet
suddenly war will break out from a quarter from which we do not expect
it. Even though we think that we are defended on all sides by friends,
yet God will stir up enemies from the farthest corners of the earth, who
will break through every obstruction, and overtake us with ease, as if
the way were plain and smooth. This ought to be carefully observed, that
we may not suffer ourselves to be blinded by vain presumption and
foolish confidence.

<span id="xii.i-p213"></span>We ought also to observe that wars are not
kindled accidentally, or by an arrangement of men, but by the command of
God, as if he assembled the soldiers by the sound of a trumpet. Whether,
therefore, we are afflicted by battle, or by famine, or by pestilence,
let us know that all this comes from the hand of God, for all things
obey him and follow his direction. And yet it was not the intention of
the Chaldeans to obey God, for they were hurried on by their eagerness
to obtain wealth and power, while he has quite another object in view:
but God employs their agency for executing his judgments. Hence arises a
remarkable and illustrious display of the power of God, which is not
limited by the will of men, or dependent on their decisions, but leads
them, though contrary to their wish, or without their knowledge, to obey
him. And yet it is no excuse for the ungodly that they are drawn
contrary to the disposition of their mind, and do not willingly serve
God, for they aim at nothing else than fraud, cruelty, and violence; and
by their cruelty God punishes the transgressions and crimes of his
people.

<span id="xii.i-p214"></span><span id="xii.i-p214.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p215"></span>**27.** *None shall be weary, nor stumble
among them.* The meaning is, that everything will be prepared and
arranged in such a manner that there shall be no delay or obstruction to
their march; as if a prince, having recruited the ranks of his soldiers,
immediately gave orders that the roads should be cleared, provisions
obtained, and everything necessary provided. He therefore shows that
they will be fleet and swift, and that there will be nothing to hinder
their rapid march.

<span id="xii.i-p216"></span>*None shall slumber nor sleep.* He
expresses their vast activity by saying that they will not be drowsy. In
these words, *they shall not slumber nor sleep*, the natural order is
inverted, He ought rather to have said, *They shall not sleep nor
slumber*; for it is a smaller matter to *slumber* than to *sleep*. But
that phrase ought to be explained in this manner: *They shall not
slumber nor even sleep*; that is, they will be so far from *sleeping*,
that they will not even *slumber*. You have an instance of this in these
words:

<span id="xii.i-p217"></span>Lo, he that keepeth Israel will neither
slumber nor sleep.  
(<span id="xii.i-p217.2"></span>[Ps
121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)<span id="xii.i-p217.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p218"></span>It is a Hebrew phrase, with which neither
the Greek nor the Latin idiom agrees.

<span id="xii.i-p219"></span><span id="xii.i-p219.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p220"></span>**28.** *Their arrows will be sharp.* He
means that they will be provided with necessary weapons. The custom
alluded to is that which existed among the Assyrians and other eastern
nations, who frequently made use of bows and arrows in battle, as
Englishmen of the present day enter into the battlefield with a loaded
quiver.  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) Under this class he
includes every kind of weapons of war. But as the way was long, and the
journey difficult, the Jew might think that many things would occur to
interrupt the march of the enemy. He therefore says, that *the hoofs of
the horses will be like flint*; by which he means that they will suffer
no molestation, and will at length arrive in Judea without weariness.
For a similar reason he compares *their wheels to a whirlwind*. The
ancients were wont to employ chariots in going to war, and therefore he
mentions not only *horses*, but *wheels*. All these circumstances must
be understood to relate to the haste and rapidity with which they would
proceed; or, in other words, that no length of journey would prevent the
Lord from carrying forward the enemies without delay for the destruction
of the Jews.

<span id="xii.i-p222"></span><span id="xii.i-p222.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p223"></span>**29.** *His roaring shall be like that of
a lion.* This denotes fierceness and cruelty, for he compares the
Chaldeans to *lions*, which, we know, are frightful to behold, and
savage by nature; as if he had said that they would not be men who were
moved by any feeling of compassion or tenderness, but rather that they
would be savage beasts. He adds, that they will likewise possess great
strength, so that none will venture to approach for rescuing their prey.
He means that the Jews will have no defense for warding off their
attacks, because the dread of their cruelty will keep all at a distance
from them. It was God who employed their agency in punishing the Jews,
and therefore it was necessary that they should be armed with formidable
power, that this wayward people might at length acknowledge that they
had to do not with men but with

<span id="xii.i-p224"></span>God, into whose hands it is a fearful thing
to fall.  
(<span id="xii.i-p224.2"></span>[Heb
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)<span id="xii.i-p224.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xii.i-p225"></span><span id="xii.i-p225.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p226"></span>**30.** *He shall roar against him.*  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) The Prophet adds this, that the Jews may
understand that the fierce attack of the Chaldeans is not accidental,
but that they have been appointed by God and are guided by his hand. By
*the roaring of the sea* he means an attack so violent that it will look
like a deluge, by which the whole of Judea will suffer shipwreck. He
likewise cuts off all hope by foretelling that the punishment will have
no alleviation and no end. “The Jews,” he says, “will do what is usually
done in a season of perplexity, will cast their eyes up and down to
discover the means of escape; but in whatever direction they look,
whether to heaven or to earth, they will find no relief whatever; for on
all sides distresses and calamities will overwhelm them.” This mode of
expression has come to be frequently employed even by the common people,
when misery and ruin appear on all sides, and no escape or relief can be
found. This must unavoidably happen when the Lord pursues us, so that
his uplifted arm meets our eyes on every side, and, wherever we turn, we
behold his creatures armed against us to execute his judgments; for we
may sometimes escape the hand of men, but how can we escape the hand of
God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc13011.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="xii.i-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p71"></span> <span id="xii.i-p71.1"></span>Denique
apertos Bacchus amat colles: Aquilonem et frigora taxi. *Virg, Georg*.
II. 112.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc13011.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="xii.i-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p72"></span> *In a very fruitful hill*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc13011.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="xii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p80"></span> *And he looked that it should bring forth
grapes*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc13011.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="xii.i-p101.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p102"></span> In our Author’s quotation the 2d and 6th
verses are inaccurately blended. *Every branch in me that beareth not
fruit he will* *take away*. (<span id="xii.i-p102.1"></span>[Joh
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002)<span id="xii.i-p102.1"></span>..md)
*If a man abide not in me, he shall be cast out, and wither as a*
*branch; and men shall gather it, and cast it into the fire, and* *it
shall be burned*. (<span id="xii.i-p102.2"></span>[Joh
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006)<span id="xii.i-p102.2"></span>..md)
We follow the Author’s version. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc13011.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="xii.i-p104.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p105"></span> In the original text the reference reads:
<span id="xii.i-p105.1"></span>[Ro
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025.md)<span id="xii.i-p105.1"></span>
which I assume was a typographical error. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc13011.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="xii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p113"></span> The following is a striking instance: *To
whom I sware in my* *wrath, If they shall enter into my rest*; that is,
*they shall not enter into my rest*. (<span id="xii.i-p113.2"></span>[Ps
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011.md)<span
id="xii.i-p113.2"></span>.), — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc13011.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="xii.i-p113.3"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p114"></span> The classical reader may be reminded of a
fine instance of <span id="xii.i-p114.1"></span>ἀποσιώπησις, by which
the effect of a speech is prodigiously heightened:  
<span id="xii.i-p114.3"></span>*Quos ego* — sed motos praestat componere
fluctus. — *Virg. AEn*. 1:135.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc13011.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="xii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p116"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p117"></span><span id="xii.i-p117.1"></span>*Unus
Pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis:  
AEstuat infelix angusto limite mundi,  
Ut Gyari clausus scopulis parvaque Seripho:  
Quum tamen a figulis munitam intraverit urbem,  
Sarcophago contentus erit. Mors sola fatetur,  
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.  
*Juven. Sat. *10:168-173.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc13011.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="xii.i-p125.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p126"></span> A *medimnus*, or Greek bushel, is reckoned
to contain six Roman bushels, a Roman bushel (<span
id="xii.i-p126.1"></span>*modius*) being about an English peck. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc13011.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="xii.i-p126.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p127"></span> “For the actual size of these measures,”
says Dr. Kitto, “we must refer to Josephus, of whom Theodoret (*in
Exod.* 29.) says: <span id="xii.i-p127.1"></span>πιστευτέον δὲ ἐν
τούτοις τῷ Ἰωσήπῳ ἀκριβῶς τοῦ ἔθνους τὰ μέτρα ἐπισταμένῳ, — ‘follow in
these things Josephus, who well understood the measures of the nation.’
(Comp. *Antiq*. 8:3, 8.) To the *homer* or *cor* Josephus ascribes
(*Antic*. 15:9, 2) twelve Attic medimni, where the reading should be
metretae. Bath and Ephah are the same. Josephus (*Antiq*. 8:2, 9)
determines each at seventy-two xestae, and makes them equal to an Attic
metretes. The Attic metretes, which corresponded with the Hebrew bath
and ephah, contains 739,800 Parisian grains of rain-water, which would
fill a space of about 1985 Parisian cubic inches.” — *Cyclopaedia of
Biblical Literature*, Art. *Weights* *and Measures*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc13011.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="xii.i-p146.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p147"></span> *And their honourable men are famished*. —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc13011.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="xii.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p151"></span> *Therefore hell hath enlarged herself*. —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc13011.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="xii.i-p155.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p156"></span> See p. 116 of this volume.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc13011.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="xii.i-p207.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p208"></span> <span id="xii.i-p208.1"></span>*Sibilabit
ad eam*. In the version prefixed to the Commentary on this chapter, our
Author has likewise observed here the singular number, <span
id="xii.i-p208.3"></span>*sibilabit genti, he will hiss to the nation*.
Bishop Stock, following Bishop Lowth, renders <span
id="xii.i-p208.4"></span>ושקר לו, (*veshakar* *lo*,) *he will hiss to
every one of them*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc13011.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="xii.i-p208.5"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p209"></span> “The metaphor is taken from the practice
of those that keep bees, who draw them out of their hives into the
fields, and lead them back again, <span
id="xii.i-p209.1"></span>συρίσμασι, by a hiss or a whistle;” Cyril on
the place: and to the same purpose Theodoret, *ibid*. In <span
id="xii.i-p209.2"></span>[Isa
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018.md)<span id="xii.i-p209.2"></span>,
the metaphor is more apparent by being carried further, where the
hostile armies are expressed by the fly and the bee: —

<span id="xii.i-p210"></span>“Jehovah shall hist the fly,  
That is in the utmost parts of Egypt;  
And the bee, that is in the land of Assyria.”

<span id="xii.i-p211"></span>On which place see <span
id="xii.i-p211.1"></span>[De 1:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#044.md)<span
id="xii.i-p211.1"></span>; <span id="xii.i-p211.2"></span>[Ps
118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012.md)<span id="xii.i-p211.2"></span>.
— *Lowth*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc13011.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="xii.i-p220.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p221"></span> More than three hundred years have elapsed
since Calvin wrote these words, and *Englishmen of the present day* do
not carry bows and arrows into the field of battle. On the whole subject
of war the opinions of Englishmen are underdoing an important
revolution. Many of them entertain a confident hope that ere long the
bullet as well as the arrow, the cannon as well as the bow, will be laid
aside; that the revolting spectacle of human beings drawn up in
companies, for the purpose of wholesale murder, will disappear from the
earth; and that men will *beat their swords into* *plough-shares, and
their spears into pruning-hooks; nation* *shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they* *learn war any more*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc13011.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="xii.i-p226.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p227"></span> *And in that day they shall roar against
them*. — Eng. Ver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc13012.md)
