[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13006)  [Next](cc13008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHET ISAIAH

<span id="viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 1:1-31

<span id="viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz,
which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah,
Jotham, Ahaz, *and* Hezekiah, kings of Judah.

<span id="viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Visio Isaiae filii Amoz, quam vidit
super Iudam et Ierusalem in diebus Usiae, Iotham, Achaz, Ezechiae, regum
Iuda.

<span id="viii.i-p4"></span> **2.** Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O
earth: for the Lord hath spoken, I have nourished and brought up
children, and they have rebelled against me.

<span id="viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Audite caeli, et ausculta terra; quia
sic Dominus loquitur, Filios educavi et sustuli, ipsi tamen scelerate
egerunt in me, (*vel, rebellarunt contra me.*)

<span id="viii.i-p6"></span>**3.** The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass
his master's crib: *but* Israel doth not know, my people doth not
consider.

<span id="viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Cognovit bos possessorem suum, et
asinus praesepe dominorum suorum: Israel non cognovit, populus meus non
intellexit.

<span id="viii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Ah sinful nation, a people laden with
iniquity, a seed of evil-doers, children that are corrupters! They have
forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger,
they are gone away backward.

<span id="viii.i-p9"></span>**4.** O gens scelesta, populus onustus
iniquitate, semen malignorum, filii degeneres! dereliquerunt Iehovam,
spreverunt (*vel, provocarunt ad iram*) sanctum Israelis, alienati sunt
retrorsum.

<span id="viii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Why should ye be stricken any more?
ye will revolt more and more. The whole head is sick, and the whole
heart faint.

<span id="viii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quorsum adhuc vos percuterem?
Adjicietis praevaricationem. Totum caput languori, et totum cor dolori.

<span id="viii.i-p12"></span>**6.** From the sole of the foot even unto
the head *there is* no soundness in it; *but* wounds, and bruises, and
putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither
mollified with ointment.

<span id="viii.i-p13"></span>**6.** A planta pedis usque ad caput nulla
in eo sanitas. Vulnus, tumor, et saniosa plaga. Nec sunt emplastro
curatae, nec circumligatae, nec oleo delinitae.

<span id="viii.i-p14"></span>**7.** Your country *is* desolate, your
cities *are* burnt with fire: your land, strangers devour it in your
presence, and *it is* desolate, as overthrown by strangers.

<span id="viii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Terra vestra in vastitatem: Urbes
vestrae igni succensae: terram vestram alieni devorant in conspectu
vestro, redacta est in solitudinem, juxta subversionem exterorum.

<span id="viii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the daughter of Zion is left as
a cottage in a vineyard, as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a
besieged city.

<span id="viii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et residua manebit filia Zion, sicut
tugurium in vinea, sicut diversorium in cucumerario, sicut civitas
vastata.

<span id="viii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Except the Lord of hosts had left
unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, *and* we
should have been like unto Gomorrah.

<span id="viii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Nisi Dominus exercituum residuas
nobis fecisset reliquias vel tantillas, quasi Sodoma fuissemus, et
similes Gomorrhae.

<span id="viii.i-p20"></span>**10.** Hear the word of the Lord, ye
rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the law of our God, ye people of
Gomorrah:

<span id="viii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Audite verbum Domini, principes
Sodomae: auscultate Legem Dei nostri, populus Gomorrhae.

<span id="viii.i-p22"></span>**11.** To what purpose *is* the multitude
of your sacrifices unto me? saith the Lord: I am full of the
burnt-offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts; and I delight not in
the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats.

<span id="viii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Quorsum mihi multitudo
sacrificiorum vestrorum? dicit Dominus. Plenus sum holocaustis arietum,
et adipe saginatorum animalium: nec sanguinem boum, aut ovium, aut
hircorum desidero.

<span id="viii.i-p24"></span>**12.** When ye come to appear before me,
who hath required this at your hand, to tread my courts?

<span id="viii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quando venitis ut appareatis coram
facie mea, quis hoc e manu vestra requisivit? nempe conterere atria mea.

<span id="viii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Bring no more oblations; incense is
an abomination unto me; the new-moons and sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies, I cannot away with; *it is* iniquity, even the solemn
meeting;.

<span id="viii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Ne pergatis adducere oblationem
vanitatis. Incensum abominatio est mihi. Neomeniam, et sabbathum, et
solennes indictiones non potero: vana res est, nec conventum.

<span id="viii.i-p28"></span>**14.** Your new-moons and your appointed
feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear
*them*

<span id="viii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Neomenias vestras et solennia
vestra odio habet anima mea: superfuerunt mihi loco oneris, fatigatus
sum ferendo.

<span id="viii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And when ye spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I
will not hear: your hands are full of blood.

<span id="viii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Cum expanderitis manus vestras,
abscondam oculos meos a vobis. Etiamsi multiplicaveritis orationem, ego
non exaudiam. Manus vestrae sanguine plenae sunt.

<span id="viii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Wash you, make you clean; put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil;

<span id="viii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Lavate, mundemini, auferte malitiam
studiorum vestrorum a conspectu oculorum meorum, desinite mala facere.

<span id="viii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Learn to do well; seek judgment;
relieve the oppressed; judge the fatherless; plead for the widow.

<span id="viii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Discite benefacere: quaerite
judicium: restituite (*vel, dirigite*) oppressum: jus dicite pupillo:
tuemini viduam.

<span id="viii.i-p36"></span>**18.** Come now, and let us reason
together, saith the Lord: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be
as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool.

<span id="viii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Venite, agedum, et disceptemus,
dixit Dominus: si fuerint peccata vestra ut coccinum, quasi nix
dealbabuntur: si rubicunda fuerint instar purpurae, quasi lana erunt.

<span id="viii.i-p38"></span>**19.** If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall eat the good of the land:

<span id="viii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Si volueritis, et audieritis, bonum
terrae comedetis.

<span id="viii.i-p40"></span>**20.** But if ye refuse and rebel, ye
shall be devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken
*it*

<span id="viii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Quod si nolueritis, et rebelles
fueritis, gladio consummemini: quoniam os Domini loquutum est.

<span id="viii.i-p42"></span>**21.** How is the faithful city become an
harlot! it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now
murderers.

<span id="viii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Quomodo facta est meretrix civitas
fidelis? plena judicio fuit: et aequitas pernoctavit (*vel, habitavit*)
in ea; nunc autem homicidae.

<span id="viii.i-p44"></span>**22.** Thy silver is become dross, thy
wine mixed with water:

<span id="viii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Argentum tuum versum est in
scoriam, et vinum tuum est aqua mixtum.

<span id="viii.i-p46"></span>**23.** Thy princes *are* rebellious, and
companions of thieves: every one loveth gifts, and followeth after
rewards: they judge not the fatherless, neither doth the cause of the
widow come unto them.

<span id="viii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Principes tui perversi, et socii
furum: unusquisque diligit munus, et inhiat mercedibus: causam pupilli
non judicant, nec causa viduae pervenit ad eos.

<span id="viii.i-p48"></span>**24.** Therefore saith the Lord, the Lord
of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies:

<span id="viii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Propterea dicit Dominus, (*vel,
Dominator,*) Iehovah exercituum, fortis Israel, Heu! consolationem
capiam super hostibus meis, vindicabor de inimicis meis.

<span id="viii.i-p50"></span>**25.** And I will turn my hand upon thee,
and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin:

<span id="viii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Convertam manum meam super te:
purgabo ad liquidum scoriam tuam, et auferam omne stannum tuum.

<span id="viii.i-p52"></span>**26.** And I will restore thy judges as at
the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning: afterward thou shalt
be called, The city of righteousness, The faithful city.

<span id="viii.i-p53"></span>**26.** Et restituam judices tuos sicut a
principio, et consiliarios tuos ut ab initio. Tum dicetur de te, Civitas
justitiae, urbs fidelis.

<span id="viii.i-p54"></span>**27** Zion shall be redeemed with
judgment, and her converts with righteousness.

<span id="viii.i-p55"></span>**27.** Sion in judicio redimetur, et qui
reducentur ad eam, in justitia.

<span id="viii.i-p56"></span>**28.** And the destruction of the
transgressors and of the sinners *shall be* together, and they that
forsake the Lord shall be consumed.

<span id="viii.i-p57"></span>**28.** Contritio autem praevaricatorum et
sceleratorum simul fiet; et qui a Domino defecerunt consumentur.

<span id="viii.i-p58"></span>**29.** For they shall be ashamed of the
oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens
that ye have chosen.

<span id="viii.i-p59"></span>**29.** Nempe pudifient ab arboribus quas
concupivistis, et ignominia afficiemini a lucis quos elegistis.

<span id="viii.i-p60"></span>**30.** For ye shall be as an oak whose
leaf fadeth, and as a garden that hath no water.

<span id="viii.i-p61"></span>**30.** Eritis certe sicut arbor cujus
folium marcessit, et sicut lucus non habens aquas.

<span id="viii.i-p62"></span>**31.** And the strong shall be as tow, and
the maker of it as a spark, and they shall both burn together, and none
shall quench *them*

<span id="viii.i-p63"></span>**31.** Eritque fortis vester (*alias,
Deus*) sicut stuppa; et fictor ejus quasi scintilla; et comburentur
ambo, nec erit qui extinguat.

<span id="viii.i-p64"></span> 

<span id="viii.i-p65"></span><span id="viii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p66"></span>**1.** *The vision of Isaiah* The Hebrew
word <span id="viii.i-p66.1"></span>חזון (*chazon*,) though it is
derived from <span id="viii.i-p66.2"></span>חזה, (*chazah*,) *he saw*,
and literally is *a vision*, yet commonly signifies *a prophecy*. For
when the Scripture makes mention of special visions which were exhibited
to the prophets in a symbolical manner, when it was the will of God that
some extraordinary event should receive confirmation, in such cases the
word Tibet, (<span id="viii.i-p66.3"></span>מראה,) *vision*, is
employed. Not to multiply quotations, in a passage which relates *to
prophecy* in general the writer says, that *the word of God was
precious, because* <span id="viii.i-p66.4"></span>חזון, (*chazon*,)
*vision, was of rare occurrence*. (<span id="viii.i-p66.5"></span>[1Sa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p66.5"></span>..md) A
little afterwards, the word <span id="viii.i-p66.6"></span>מראה:
(mar-ah) is employed to denote the vision by which God revealed himself
to Samuel. (<span id="viii.i-p66.7"></span>[1Sa
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#013)<span id="viii.i-p66.7"></span>..md)
In distinguishing between two ordinary methods of revelation, *a vision
and a dream*, Moses speaks of *a vision* (<span
id="viii.i-p66.8"></span>מראה) as the special method. (<span
id="viii.i-p66.9"></span>[Nu 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#006.md)<span
id="viii.i-p66.9"></span>.) It is evident, however, that *the seer*,
<span id="viii.i-p66.10"></span>הראה, (*haroeh*,) was the name formerly
given to prophets, (<span id="viii.i-p66.11"></span>[1Sa
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009)<span id="viii.i-p66.11"></span>;.md)
but by way of excellence, because God revealed to them his counsel in a
familiar manner.

<span id="viii.i-p67"></span>So far as relates to the present passage,
this word unquestionably denotes the certainty of the doctrine; as if it
had been said that there is nothing contained in this book which was not
made known to *Isaiah* by God himself. The derivation of the word,
therefore, deserves attention; for we learn by it that the prophets did
not speak of their own accord, or draw from their own imaginations, but
that they were enlightened by God, who opened their eyes to perceive
those things which otherwise they would not of themselves have been able
to comprehend. Thus the inscription of Isaiah recommends to us the
doctrine of this book, as containing no human reasonings, but the
oracles of God, in order to convince us that it contains nothing but
what was revealed by the Spirit of God.

<span id="viii.i-p68"></span>*Concerning Judah* Were we to render it to
*Judah*, it would make little difference, for the preposition <span
id="viii.i-p68.1"></span>על (*al*) has both significations, and the
meaning will still be, that everything contained in this book belongs
strictly to *Judah and Jerusalem.* For though many things are scattered
through it which relate to Babylon, Egypt, Tyre, and other cities and
countries, yet it was not necessary that those places should be
expressly enumerated in the title; for nothing more was required than to
announce the principal subject, and to explain to whom Isaiah was
chiefly sent, that is, *to Jerusalem, and the Jews*. Everything else
that is contained in his prophecies may be said to have been accidental
and foreign to the subject.

<span id="viii.i-p69"></span>And yet it was not inconsistent with his
office to make known to other nations the calamities which should
overtake them; for in like manner Amos did not go beyond the limits of
his calling, when he did not spare the Jews, though he was not sent to
them. (<span id="viii.i-p69.1"></span>[Amos
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#005)<span id="viii.i-p69.1"></span>..md) A
still more familiar instance is found in the calling of Peter and Paul,
the former of whom was appointed to the Jews, and the latter to the
Gentiles. (<span id="viii.i-p69.2"></span>[Ga
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)<span id="viii.i-p69.2"></span>..md)
And yet Peter did not rush beyond the limits of his office, by preaching
to the Gentiles; as, for example, when he went to Cornelius: (<span
id="viii.i-p69.3"></span>[Ac
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#017)<span id="viii.i-p69.3"></span>:.md)
nor did Paul, when he offered his services to the Jews, to whom he
immediately went as soon as he entered into any city. (<span
id="viii.i-p69.4"></span>[Acts 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005.md),
[Acts 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001.md), [Acts
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#002.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#010.md), [Acts
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#004.md),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019)<span id="viii.i-p69.4"></span>..md)
In the same light ought we to view Isaiah; for while he is careful to
instruct the Jews, and directs his labors expressly towards that object,
he does not transgress his proper limits when he likewise takes a
passing notice of other nations.

<span id="viii.i-p70"></span>*Judah and Jerusalem* He takes *Judah* for
the whole nation, and *Jerusalem* for the chief city in the kingdom; for
he does not make a distinction between *Jerusalem* and *the Jews*, but
mentions it, by way of eminence, (<span id="viii.i-p70.1"></span>κατ ᾿
ἐξοχὴν,) as the metropolis, just as if a prophet of the present day were
to address the kingdom of France, and Paris, which is the metropolis of
the nation. And this was of great importance, that the inhabitants of
Jerusalem might not hold themselves exempted, as if they were free from
all blame, or placed above the laws on account of their high rank, and
thus might send the meaner sort of people to be instructed by homely
prophets. It is a mistake, however, to suppose that *Jerusalem* is
mentioned separately, on account of its being situated in the tribe of
Benjamin; for the half of that tribes which was subject to the posterity
of David, is included under the name of *Judah*

<span id="viii.i-p71"></span><span id="viii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p72"></span>**2.** *Hear, O heavens* Isaiah has here
imitated Moses, as all the prophets are accustomed to do; and there
cannot be a doubt that he alludes to that illustrious Song of Moses, in
which, at the very commencement, he calls *heaven and earth* to witness
against the people:

<span id="viii.i-p73"></span>Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak;
and hear, O earth, the words of my mouth. (<span
id="viii.i-p73.1"></span>[De 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001.md)<span
id="viii.i-p73.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p74"></span>This is unquestionably a very severe
protestation; for it conveys this meaning, that both turn to the
elements which are dumb and devoid of feeling, because men have now no
ears, or are bereft of all their senses. The Prophet, therefore, speaks
of it as an extraordinary and monstrous thing, which ought to strike
even the senseless elements with amazement. For what could be more
shocking than that the Israelites should revolt from God, who had
bestowed on them so many benefits? Those who think that by *heaven* are
meant angels, and by *earth* men, weaken too much the import of those
words, and thus destroy all their force and majesty.

<span id="viii.i-p75"></span>Almost all the commentators consider the
clause to end with the words, *for the Lord hath spoken*; as if the
Prophet had intimated, that as soon as the Lord opens his sacred mouth,
all ought to be attentive to *hear* his voice. And certainly this
meaning has the appearance of being more full; but the context demands
that we connect the words in a different manner, so as to make the word
hear to refer, not in a general manner to any discourse whatever, but
only to the expostulation which immediately follows. The meaning
therefore is, Hear the complaint which the Lord brings forward, *I have
nourished and brought up children*, etc. For he relates a prodigy, which
fills him with such horror that he is compelled to summon dead creatures
as witnesses, contrary to nature.

<span id="viii.i-p76"></span>That no one may wonder at the circumstance
of his addressing dumb and lifeless objects, experience very clearly
shows that the voice of God is heard even by dumb creatures, and that
the order of nature is nothing else than the obedience which is rendered
to him by every part of the world, so that everywhere his supreme
authority shines forth; for at his bidding the elements observe the law
laid down to them, and *heaven and earth* perform their duty. The
*earth* yields her fruits; the sea flows not beyond her settled
boundaries; the sun, moon, and stars perform their Courses; the
*heavens*, too, revolve at stated periods; and all with wonderful
accuracy, though they are destitute of reason and understanding But man,
endued with reason and understanding, in whose ears and in whose heart
the voice of God frequently sounds, remains unmoved, like one bereft of
his senses, and cannot bend the neck to submit to him. Against obstinate
and rebellious men shall dumb and lifeless creatures bear testimony, so
that they will one day feel that this protestation was not in vain.

<span id="viii.i-p77"></span>*I have nourished* Literally it runs, *I
have made them great*;  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) but as he is
speaking about children, we cannot obtain a better rendering than *I
have nourished*, or, *I have brought up*;  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) for instead of the verb, to nourish,  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) the Latins employ the phrase, *to bring up
children*  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) But he afterwards mentions
other benefits which he had bestowed on them in rich abundance; as if he
had said, that he not only had performed the part of a kind father, by
giving them food and the ordinary means of support, but had labored to
raise them to an honorable rank. For in every sort of kindness towards
them he had, as it were, exhausted himself, as he elsewhere reproaches
them,

<span id="viii.i-p82"></span>What could have been done to my vineyard
that I have not done? (<span id="viii.i-p82.1"></span>[Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)<span id="viii.i-p82.1"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.i-p83"></span>A similar charge the Lord might indeed have
brought against all nations; for all of them he feeds, and on all he
confers great and multiplied benefits. But he had chosen the Israelites
in a peculiar manner, had given them a preference above others by
adopting them into his family, had treated them as his most beloved
children, had tenderly cherished them in his bosom, and, in a word, had
bestowed on them every kind of blessings.

<span id="viii.i-p84"></span>To apply these observations to our own
times, we ought to consider whether our condition be not equal, or even
superior to that which the Jews formerly enjoyed. Their adoption into
the family of God bound them to maintain the purity of his worship. Our
obligation is twofold; for not only have we been redeemed by the blood
of Christ, but he who once redeemed us is pleased to favor us with his
Gospel, and in this manner prefers us to all those whom he still allows
to remain blinded by ignorance. If we do not acknowledge these things,
how much severer punishment shall we deserve? For the more full and
abundant the grace of God which hath been poured out on us, the higher
will be the ingratitude of which it shall convict us.

<span id="viii.i-p85"></span>*They have revolted.*  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) Jerome translates it, *they have
despised*;  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) but it is plain enough,
from many passages, that <span id="viii.i-p87.2"></span>פשע (pashang)
means something more, namely, *revolt*. God declares, that by no acts of
kindness could they be kept in a state of obedience, that they were
utterly disaffected and estranged, like a son who leaves his father’s
house, and thus makes manifest that there remains no hope of his
improvement. It is indeed a monstrous thing that children should not be
obedient to their father, and to a Father who is so kind, and who gives
unceasing attention to his family. Lycurgus refused to enact a law
against ungrateful persons, because it was monstrously unnatural not to
acknowledge a benefit received. A child who is ungrateful to his father
is therefore a double monster; but a child who is ungrateful to a kind
and generous father is a threefold monster. For he employs the word
*children*, not for the purpose of treating them with respect, but in
order to exhibit that *revolt* in a more striking manner, and in more
hateful colors.

<span id="viii.i-p88"></span><span id="viii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p89"></span>**3.** *The ox knoweth his owner* This
comparison marks the more strongly the criminality of the *revolt*; for
the Lord might have compared his people to the Gentiles; but he is still
more severe when he compares them to dumb beasts, and pronounces them to
be more stupid than the beasts are. Though beasts are destitute of
reason and understanding, still they are capable of being taught; to
such an extent, at least, as to recognize those who feed them. Since,
therefore, God had not only fed this people at a stall, but had
*nourished* them with all the kindness which is wont to be exercised by
a father towards his sons, and had not only filled their bellies, but
supplied them daily with spiritual food; having perceived them to be so
exceedingly sluggish, he justly considers that they deserve to be taught
in the school of beasts, and not of men; and therefore he sends them to
the oven and asses to learn from them what is their duty. Nor ought we
to wonder at this; for the beasts frequently observe the order of nature
more correctly, and display greater kindness, than men themselves.

<span id="viii.i-p90"></span>Not to multiply instances, it will be
sufficient to notice that which is here mentioned by Isaiah, that the
beasts, though they are exceedingly dull and stupid, do,
notwithstanding, obey their masters and those who have the charge of
them. But if we choose to attend to other points in which they excel
men, how many shall we discover? What is the reason why scarcely any
animal is cruel to its own species, and that it recognizes in another
its own likeness? What is the reason why all animals commonly bestow so
much care in rearing their young, while it frequently happens that
mothers, forgetful of the voice of nature and of humanity, forsake their
children? What is the reason why they are accustomed to take no more
meat and drink than what is sufficient for sustaining their life and
their strength, while men gorge themselves, and utterly ruin their
constitutions? In a word, What is the reason why they do not, in any
respect, transgress the laws which nature has prescribed to them?

<span id="viii.i-p91"></span>The papists, who are accustomed to set
aside the true meaning of the Scriptures, and to spoil all the mysteries
of God by their own fooleries, have here contrived an absurd fable; for
they have falsely alleged that the *oxen* and *asses* in the stall
worshipped Christ when he was born; by which they show themselves to be
egregious asses. (And indeed I wish that they would imitate the ass
which they have invented; for then they should be asses worshipping
Christ, and not lifting up the heel against his divine authority.) For
here the Prophet does not speak of miracles, but of the order of nature,
and declares, that those who overturn that order may be regarded as
monsters. We must not contrive new miracles for the purpose of adding to
the authority of Christ; for, by mingling the false with the true, there
is danger lest both should be disbelieved; nor can there be any doubt
but that, if such a miracle had been wrought, the Evangelists would have
committed it to writing.

<span id="viii.i-p92"></span>*Israel doth not know.* The name *Israel*,
which he contrasts with those beasts, is emphatic. We know how honorable
it was for the posterity of Abraham to be known by this name, which God
had bestowed on the holy patriarch, because he had vanquished the angel
in wrestling. (<span id="viii.i-p92.1"></span>[Ge
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)<span id="viii.i-p92.1"></span>..md)
So much the more dishonorable was it for bastard and rebellious children
to make false boasting of that honor. First, there is an implied
reproof, not only because those who do not at all resemble the holy mall
do wrong in assuming his name, but because they are ungrateful to God,
from whom they had received most valuable blessings. Secondly, there is
also conveyed an indirect comparison; for the higher their rank was in
being far exalted above all other nations, so much the greater disgrace
is flow intended to be expressed by separating them from other nations
under the honorable designation of *Israel*

<span id="viii.i-p93"></span>The Greek translators have added the word
*me*  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) ; but I prefer to repeat what
he had said before, *Israel doth not know* His Owner, that is, God; nor
*his crib*, that is, the Church, in which he had been brought up, and to
which he ought to be attracted; while those beasts, on the other hand,
recognize the master by whom they are nourished, and willingly return to
the place where they have been fed.

<span id="viii.i-p95"></span><span id="viii.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p96"></span>**4.** *Ah sinful nation*!  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) Though he held already reproved their
crime with sufficient severity, yet, for the purpose of exposing it
still more, he adds an exclamation, by which he expresses still more
strongly his abhorrence of such base ingratitude and wickedness. Some
are of opinion that the particle <span id="viii.i-p97.2"></span>הוי
(*hoi*) denotes grief; Jerome renders it <span
id="viii.i-p97.3"></span>*vae* (*Wo to*); but for my part I reckon it
sufficient to say that it is an exclamation, suggested partly by
astonishment, and partly by sorrow. For we burst into loud cries, when
the disgracefulness of the action is such as cannot be expressed in
plain terms, or when we want words to correspond to the depth of our
grief Where we have rendered *wicked nation*, the Greeks have translated
<span id="viii.i-p97.4"></span>ἁμαρτωλὸν that is, *a sinner*; and such
is likewise the rendering of the Vulgate. But the Hebrew word denotes
those who are given up to crime; and the Prophet unquestionably charges
them with abandoned wickedness.

<span id="viii.i-p98"></span>*A people laden with iniquity* The force of
the metaphor ought to be observed; for not only does he mean that they
are sunk in their iniquity, as in a deep mire, but he likewise brings a
charge against them, that they sin, not through mistake or
thoughtlessness, as frequently happens with those who are easily led
astray, but that they follow out their rebellion with a firm purpose of
mind; as if he had said that they were the slaves of sin, or sold to act
wickedly.

<span id="viii.i-p99"></span>When he adds, *a seed of evil-doers,* he
means *a wicked seed*. Others, with greater ingenuity, consider this
passage to mean, that they are declared to be unworthy of holding a
place among the children of Abraham, because they are bastards, and not
related to him; as they are elsewhere called the seed of Canaan, and are
reproached with being *uncircumcised*, (<span
id="viii.i-p99.1"></span>[Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026)<span id="viii.i-p99.1"></span>,.md)
as if they had been the descendants of heathens and foreigners. But it
is customary with the Hebrews to employ the phrase, “children of the
good” for “good children,” a mode of expression which has been imitated
by the Greeks.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)

<span id="viii.i-p101"></span>*Degenerate children*. The word <span
id="viii.i-p101.1"></span>משחיתים (*mashchithim*) literally means
*corrupting*, and accordingly translators supply the word *themselves*,
or, *their pursuits*. But I reckon that degenerate is a more appropriate
rendering; for the Prophet means that they are so depraved as to be
altogether unlike their parents. The four epithets which are here
bestowed by him on his nation are far from being honorable, and are
widely different from the opinion which they had formed about
themselves. For this is the manner in which we must arouse hypocrites;
and the more they flatter themselves, and the farther they are from
being regulated by the fear of God, so much the more ought we to wield
against them the thunderbolts of words. On such persons a milder form of
instruction would produce no effect, and an ordinary exhortation would
not move them. It is necessary, also, to remove that false conviction of
their holiness, righteousness, and wisdom, which they commonly employ as
a disguise, and as the ground of idle boasting.

<span id="viii.i-p102"></span>*For they have forsaken the Lord* He
assigns the reason why he reproves them with such sharpness and
severity. It is, that they may not complain, as they are wont to do, of
being treated with excessive harshness and rigour. And first he upbraids
them with that which is the source of all evils, their revolt from God;
for, as it is the highest perfection of righteousness to *cleave to*
God, agreeably to those words of Moses, *Now, Israel, what doth thy God
require from thee but that thou shouldst cleave to him*?  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) so, when we have revolted from him, we
are utterly ruined. The design of the Prophet is, not to convince the
Jews that they are guilty of a single crime, but to show that they are
wholly apostates.

<span id="viii.i-p104"></span>The following words, *they have provoked
the Holy One of Israel*, whether the word be rendered *provoke*, or
*despise*, the latter of which I prefer, are undoubtedly added in order
to place their sin in a still stronger light; for it was shamefully base
to treat with contempt the favor of him who had chosen them alone out of
all the nations to be adopted into his family. This is also the reason
why he calls himself *the Holy One of Israel*; because, by admitting
them to alliance with him, he had at the same time adorned them with his
*holiness*; for wherever this name occurs it is ascribed to him on
account of the effect. What barbarous pride was there in despising so
great an honor! If any one choose rather to render the word *provoke*,
the meaning will be, that they rejected God, as if they expressly
intended to *provoke his anger*; which shows how detestable their
apostasy is.

<span id="viii.i-p105"></span>*They are gone away backward* The meaning
is, that when the Lord laid down to them a fixed way and rule of living,
they were hurried along by their sinful passions; but he confirms the
statement which he had just now made, that their licentiousness was so
unbridled that they utterly revolted from God, and deliberately turned
aside from that course to which their life ought to have been directed.

<span id="viii.i-p106"></span><span id="viii.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p107"></span>**5.** *Why should ye be stricken any
more*? Some render it, *Upon what*? or, *On what part*? and interpret
the passage as if the Lord had said that he had not another scourge
left; because so various are the methods by which he has attempted to
bring them back to the path of duty, that no other way of chastising
them remains to be tried. But I prefer to render it *Why*? because this
corresponds to the Hebrew word, and agrees better with the context. It
is equivalent to phrases in daily use, *To what purpose? For what
object*?  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) He means that the Jews
have proceeded to such a pitch of wickedness and crimes, that it is
impossible to believe that chastisements will do them any good; for when
desperate men have been hardened, we know that they will rather be
broken to shreds than submit to correction. He complains of their
prodigious obstinacy, like a physician who should declare that every
remedy had been tried, and that his skill was now exhausted.

<span id="viii.i-p109"></span>At the same time he charges them with
extreme malice; for when ungodly men are not even humbled by
punishments, they have arrived at the very height of wickedness; as if
the Lord had said, “I see that I should do you no good if I were to
chastise you;” for although chastisements and afflictions are the
remedies which God employs for curing our vices, yet, when they are
found to be of no advantage to us, we are past hope. True, indeed, God
does not on that account cease to punish us, but, on the contrary, his
wrath against us is the more enflamed; for such obstinacy God abhors
above all things else. But he justly says that his labor is lost when he
does not succeed in bringing us to repentance, and that it is useless to
apply remedies to those who cannot be cured. Thus he does not fail to
double their chastisements and afflictions, and to try the very utmost
of what can be done, and he is even compelled to take this course until
he absolutely ruin and destroy them. But in all this he does not
discharge the office of a physician; but what he laments is, that the
chastisements which he inflicts will be of no avail to his people.

<span id="viii.i-p110"></span>*You will yet grow more faithless* It is a
confirmation of the former statement, and therefore I separate it from
the former clause, though there are some who put them together. It is as
if he had said, “Still you will not cease to practice treachery; yea,
you will add to your crimes; for I perceive that you rush to the
commission of iniquity as if you had leagued and banded yourselves for
that purpose, so that we can no longer hope that you will slacken in
your course.” The design of God is to exhibit their incorrigible
disposition, that they may be left without excuse.

<span id="viii.i-p111"></span>*The whole head is sick.* Others translate
it *every head*, and suppose that those terms denote the princes and
nobles of the nation. I rather agree with the opinion of those who
render it *the whole* head; for I consider it to be a plain comparison
taken from the human body, to this effect, that the body is so severely
afflicted that there is no hope of returning health. He points out two
principal parts on which the health of the body depends, and thus shows
the extent of the disease which, he tells us, has infected this wretched
people to such a degree that they are wasting away; that the disease
exists not in a single member, or in the extremities of the body, but
that *the heart* itself has been wounded, and *the head* is severely
afflicted; in short, that the vital parts, as they are called, are so
much injured and corrupted that it is impossible to heal them.

<span id="viii.i-p112"></span>But here also commentators differ; for
some of them view this state of disease as referring to sins, and others
to punishments. Those who view it as referring to sins interpret it
thus: “You are like a rotten and stinking body, in which no part is
sound or healthy. Crimes of the worst description prevail amongst you,
by the infection of which every thing is corrupted and debased.” But I
choose rather to interpret it as referring to punishments; for
unquestionably God still proceeds with this complaint, that the nation
is so obstinate as to be incapable of being cured by any chastisements,
because, though it has been beaten almost to death, or at least has been
maimed and frightfully torn by repeated blows, still it is not reformed.
Such too is the import of —

<span id="viii.i-p113"></span><span id="viii.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p114"></span>**6.** *From the sole of the foot even
unto the head there is no soundness in it* Here he proceeds with the
same comparison, and repeats the same statement; for certainly those who
explain the former part of the verse, as referring to punishments, do
not sufficiently consider the remaining part of the context. If we shall
admit that a nation corrupted by vices is compared to a diseased body,
what is the meaning of the words which immediately follow, that *the
wounds have not been bound up or mollified with ointment*? It is plain
that the Prophet speaks of afflictions by which the nation had almost
wasted away, and that he adduces this long-continued weakness as a proof
of hardened impenitence. He calls it a *putrifying sore*, from which
diseased matter is continually flowing, as if some concealed fountain
were perpetually sending forth an additional supply of venom. By this
comparison he shows that the wound is incurable, because that supply
cannot be stopped. All this is prodigiously heightened by affirming that
no remedies have been applied; for the three metaphors which he joins
together — *they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither
mollified with ointment* — have all the same meaning that the nation,
without any hope of relief, without comfort, without remedy, is reduced
to such a state of distress, that in such punishments the utmost
severity of God is openly displayed.

<span id="viii.i-p115"></span><span id="viii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p116"></span>**7.** *Your country is desolate*
Literally, it is *desolation*; and thus Isaiah goes on to speak more
fully and plainly of what he had already said figuratively about
chastisements, that the country has been reduced to a frightful state of
devastation: for I choose to interpret all those statements as relating
to past occurrences, because the Prophet does not threaten the vengeance
of God, but describes those heavy calamities which have already
happened. He upbraids them with indolence and stupidity in remaining
unmoved by their afflictions.

<span id="viii.i-p117"></span>*Like the destruction of strangers*  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) . This is added for the sake of
heightening the picture; for the opinion that <span
id="viii.i-p118.4"></span>זרים (*zarim*) is here put for <span
id="viii.i-p118.5"></span>זרם (*zerem*), *an inundation*, is farfetched.
That word might no doubt be applied to enemies, but it is better to take
it as literally denoting *foreigners*. The calamity is more grievous
when it is brought on by men who are unknown, and who have come from a
distant country, who lay waste with far greater recklessness and cruelty
than neighboring tribes. Such men destroy cities, burn houses,
buildings, and villages, and spread desolation all around. In short,
they rush forward with barbarous ferocity, bent on murders and
conflagrations, and are more eager to inflict damage than to make gain.
But neighbors, when they have subdued a country, can retain possession
of it by having a garrison, and as soon as a revolt is attempted, or an
insurrection takes place, can send additional troops; and therefore they
are not so cruel; nor do they lay waste a country from which they hope
to derive some advantage. It is therefore no ordinary calamity, but the
most shocking of all calamities, that is here described.

<span id="viii.i-p119"></span>Hence we ought to learn that, when God
begins to punish us, if we do not repent, he does not immediately
desist, but multiplies the chastisements, and continually follows them
up with other afflictions. We ought therefore to abstain from such
obstinacy, if we do not wish to draw down upon ourselves the same
punishments, or at least to deserve the same reproach which was brought
against the Jews, that though they had received sharp warnings, and had
felt the hand of God, still they could not be corrected or reformed.

<span id="viii.i-p120"></span>Moreover, we ought not to wonder that we
are visited with so great an amount and variety of afflictions, of which
we see no end or limit, for by our obstinacy we fight with God and with
his stripes. It must therefore happen with us as with wincing and unruly
horses, which, the more obstinate and refractory they are, have the whip
and spur applied to them with greater severity. In the present day there
are many who almost accuse God of cruelty, as if he always treated us
with harshness, and as if he ought to chastise us more gently; but they
do not take into account our shocking crimes. If those crimes were duly
weighed by them, they would assuredly acknowledge that, amidst the
utmost severity, the forbearance of God is wonderful; and that we may
not think that in this case the Lord was too severe, we must take into
consideration the vices which he afterwards enumerates.

<span id="viii.i-p121"></span>Here an objection will be started. Why
does Isaiah declare that the nation endured such a variety of
afflictions, while we have already mentioned that he began to prophesy
under Uzziah,  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) during whose reign
the kingdom of Judah was in a prosperous condition? (<span
id="viii.i-p122.2"></span>[2Ch
26:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#005.md)<span
id="viii.i-p122.2"></span>.) For although, towards the end of his life,
the kingdom of Israel met with some disasters, still this did not affect
the kingdom of Judah. Accordingly, the Jews think that these words
relate to the reign of Jotham, (<span id="viii.i-p122.3"></span>[2Ki
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032.md)<span
id="viii.i-p122.3"></span>,) and not of Uzziah. Their opinion appears at
first sight to have little weight; and yet, when the whole matter is
examined, it is not destitute of probability; for we know that the
prophets did not always attend to chronological arrangement in
collecting their prophecies; and it is possible that this discourse of
Isaiah was placed first in order for no other reason but because it
contains a summary view of that doctrine which is afterwards to be
delivered.

<span id="viii.i-p123"></span>Others think that they can easily get rid
of the difficulty by interpreting the whole passage as a description of
vice, and not of punishments; but what is said about the burning of
cities and about the desolation of the country cannot easily be disposed
of in that manner. If it is supposed that the Prophet speaks of the
future and not the present condition of that kingdom, and that in the
name of God he foretells approaching calamities, though they did not
behold them with their eyes, I do not greatly object to that view,
though it is probable that he treats of events which were known to them.
It is a real narrative, and not a prediction, though in the next verse I
acknowledge he announces the approaching result.

<span id="viii.i-p124"></span><span id="viii.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p125"></span>**8.** *And the daughter of Zion shall be
left*  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) *as a cottage in a vineyard*
He alludes to a custom which exists in France, that the vinekeepers rear
*a cottage* for themselves when the grapes begin to ripen. His next
comparison, which is closely allied to the former, is taken from a
custom of that nation of protecting also *gardens of cucumbers*  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) by means of men who kept watch during the
night. He next explains what he intended to convey by both comparisons.

<span id="viii.i-p128"></span>*Like a besieged city* This may be
explained in two ways; either that the whole country will be wasted,
with the solitary exception of the *city*, which shall be left standing
like *a cottage*, or that the city itself will be destroyed. The former
interpretation is adopted by the Jews, and they understand this passage
to relate to the siege of Sennacherib; but I think that it has a wider
signification, and embraces other calamities which followed afterwards.
This may indeed refer to the neighboring country, from the misery and
devastation of which it was impossible but that the city should sustain
much damage; but I consider the Prophet’s meaning to be, that the evils
of which he speaks shall reach even to *the city* itself, until, broken
and ruined, it shall wear the aspect of a mean *cottage*

<span id="viii.i-p129"></span>*The daughter of Zion* is the name here
given to Jerusalem, in accordance with what is customary in Scripture to
give the designation of *daughter* to any nation, in the same manner as
*the daughter of Babylon* (<span id="viii.i-p129.1"></span>[Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)<span id="viii.i-p129.1"></span>.md)
and *the daughter of Tyre* (<span id="viii.i-p129.2"></span>[Ps
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#012)<span id="viii.i-p129.2"></span>.md)
are names given to the Tyrians and Babylonians. *Zion* is the name here
employed rather than *Jerusalem*, on account of the dignity of the
temple; and this figure of speech, by which a part is taken for the
whole, is frequently employed.

<span id="viii.i-p130"></span><span id="viii.i-p130.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p131"></span>**9.** *Except the Lord of hosts had left
unto us* Here he concludes what he had formerly declared concerning
God’s chastisements, that the desolation which shall take place — or
rather which is present, and which they now behold — may be compared to
the destruction of *Sodom*, were it not that the Lord snatched as it
were from the *burning a very small remnant*. And this verse confirms
what I formerly said, that the Prophet’s description of the calamities
which had already taken place is interwoven with those events which were
immediately at hand, as if he had said, Be not deceived by flatteries;
you would be in the same condition that Sodom and Gomorrah now are, were
it not that God, in compassion on you, has preserved *a remnant*. This
agrees with the words of Jeremiah,

<span id="viii.i-p132"></span>It is of the Lord’s mercies that we are
not consumed. (<span id="viii.i-p132.1"></span>[La
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022)<span id="viii.i-p132.1"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.i-p133"></span>Hence we ought to observe two things.
First, the Prophet here describes utter destruction; and yet, because
God had to deal with his Church and his beloved people, that judgment is
mitigated by special grace, so that out of the general ruin of the whole
nation God rescues his people, whom he justly compares to *a very small
remnant*. But if God punished the crimes of the Jews by such dreadful
chastisements, let us consider that we may share the same fate if we
imitate their rebellion: for God had set apart that nation for himself,
and had distinguished them from the ordinary lot of other men. Why then
should he spare us if we shall be hardened in our ungodliness and
treachery? Or rather, what is likely to be the result of that mass and
sink of crimes in which men throughout the whole world give way to their
passions? Unquestionably it will be the same with the fate of *Sodom and
Gomorrah*, unless his vengeance shall be restrained by a regard to that
gracious covenant in which he promised that the Church shall be eternal;
and this threatening, which is truly awful and alarming, is applicable
to all obstinate and incurable men, whose vices no punishments can
destroy or weaken.

<span id="viii.i-p134"></span>Again, we ought to observe that saying of
Jeremiah, which I have already glanced at, that it must be attributed to
the tender mercies of God that we are not altogether destroyed. (<span
id="viii.i-p134.1"></span>[La
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#022)<span id="viii.i-p134.1"></span>..md)
For if We Shall Consider the vast amount Of wickedness which prevails
among all classes, we shall wonder that even a single individual is
left, and that all have not been removed from the land of the living;
and in this way God *withdraws his hand*, (<span
id="viii.i-p134.2"></span>[Eze
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#022.md)<span
id="viii.i-p134.2"></span>,) that there may be some Church preserved in
the world. This is the reason assigned by Paul, who is the best
interpreter of this passage, when, by quoting it, he represses the
haughtiness of the Jews, that they may not boast of the mere name, as if
it had been enough that they were descended from the fathers; for he
reminds them that God could act towards them as he had formerly done
towards the fathers, but that through his tender mercies *a remnant
shall be saved*. (<span id="viii.i-p134.3"></span>[Ro
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)<span id="viii.i-p134.3"></span>..md)
And why? That the Church may not utterly perish; for it is through the
favor which he bears towards it that the Lord, though our obstinacy lays
him under the necessity of trying the severest judgments, still reserves
some small *seed*. (<span id="viii.i-p134.4"></span>[Ro
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)<span id="viii.i-p134.4"></span>..md)
This statement ought to yield us powerful consolation even in those
heaviest calamities in which we are apt to think that it is all over
with the Church; that, though everything should go into confusion, and
the world, as we say, be turned upside down, we may persevere with
unshaken fortitude, and may rest assured that God will always be mindful
of his Church.

<span id="viii.i-p135"></span>*A very small remnant* This clause may be
connected either with what goes before or with what follows, and
accordingly some render it, *We would have been almost like Sodom*. But
I prefer connecting it with the former clause, so as to deduce that the
number which God had *reserved* out of the destruction is *small*. Some
think that: <span id="viii.i-p135.1"></span>כ (*caph*) is here used
affirmatively, so as to express the matter more strongly; and I have no
objection to that view, though we may take it in its natural and literal
signification, as if he had said, “and that shall be a small number.”
This declaration ought to be carefully observed; for if the Church does
not spread far and wide, men are wont to despise her. Hence it comes
that hypocrites are proud of their numbers; and weak men, terrified by
the pompous display of those numbers, stagger. We also learn from it
that we ought not to judge by the largeness of the number, unless we
choose to prefer the chaff to the wheat, because the quantity is
greater; but we ought to be satisfied with knowing that, though the
number of the godly be small, still God acknowledges them as his chosen
people; and we ought also to call to remembrance that consolatory
saying,

<span id="viii.i-p136"></span>Fear not, little flock; for it is your
Father’s good pleasure  
to give you the kingdom. (<span id="viii.i-p136.2"></span>[Lu
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#032.md)<span
id="viii.i-p136.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p137"></span><span id="viii.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p138"></span>**10.** *Hear the word of the Lord* He
confirms what he had formerly said, that the Lord’s vengeance is not
cruel; because they deserved far more severe punishment. For although
there was a difference between them and the inhabitants of *Sodom* as to
punishment, yet their guilt was the same; so that equal punishment might
have been inflicted, if the Lord had not spared them. It amounts to
this, that, if they have received milder treatment, it is not because
they have sinned less heinously than the inhabitants of *Sodom*, but it
must be ascribed to the mercy of God.

<span id="viii.i-p139"></span>When he gives to the *rulers* the name of
*Sodom*, and distinguishes the *people* by the name of *Gomorrah*, this
does not point out that there is a difference, but rather that their
condition is alike. But by repeating the same thing twice, the diversity
of the names lends additional elegance; as if he had said, that there is
no greater difference between the rulers and the *people* than there is
between *Sodom* and *Gomorrah*. There is, no doubt, an allusion to the
various ranks of men, by assigning to them, separately, as it were, two
cities; but as *Sodom* and *Gomorrah* mean the same thing, we perceive
that he throws them, as it were, into one bundle. In short, the meaning
is, “If any one shall form an opinion about the people and the rulers,
he will find that there is as close a resemblance between them as
between Sodom and Gomorrah, or between one egg and another; for no one
part is more sound than any other part.”

<span id="viii.i-p140"></span>The Prophet begins with stripping the Jews
of their disguises, and justly; for while all hypocrites are accustomed
to employ strange coverings for concealing themselves from view, that
nation was particularly addicted to this vice, and on no subject did the
prophets contend with them more keenly or fiercely. Along with their
vaunting about pretended holiness pride also reigned, and they boasted
of the grandeur and excellency of their nation as much as of ceremonies
and outward worship. So much the more were they offended at the great
harshness with which Isaiah addressed them. But it was necessary to drag
their wickedness from their lurking places, and therefore the more
haughty their demeanour, the greater is the vehemence with which the
Prophet thunders against them. In the same manner ought we to deal with
all hypocrites.

<span id="viii.i-p141"></span>*The word of the Lord* The Prophet takes
the *word* and the *law* for the same thing; and yet I fully believe
that he purposely employed the term *law*, in order to glance at their
absurd opinion; because, by imagining that the offering of sacrifices,
unaccompanied by faith and repentance, can appease God, they put an
absurd interpretation on the *law*. By these words he reminded them
that, by quoting Moses to them, he introduces nothing new and makes no
addition to the law; that it is only necessary for them to hear what the
will of God is; and that on this subject he will faithfully instruct
them. Lest they should suppose that, by an unfounded belief of their own
righteousness, they can deceive God, he likewise reminds them that the
*law* gives no countenance to them in this matter.

<span id="viii.i-p142"></span><span id="viii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p143"></span>**11.** *To what purpose is he multitude
of your sacrifices to me*? Isaiah now introduces God as speaking, for
the purpose of making known his own meaning; for it belongs to a
lawgiver not only to issue commands, but likewise to give a sound
interpretation to the laws, that they may not be abused. Beyond all
doubt, the former reproof was exceedingly unpalatable and oppressive to
them; for what language expressive of stronger disapprobation or
abhorrence could have been employed? They gloried in the name of
Abraham, boasted that they were his children, and on this ground
maintained a haughty demeanor. This is the reason why the Prophet arms
himself with the authority of God against them; as if he had said, “Know
that it is not with me but with God that you have to do.”

<span id="viii.i-p144"></span>Next he explains the intention and design
of God in demanding sacrifices; that he does so, not because he sets a
high value on them, but in order that they may be aids to piety; and,
consequently, that the Jews were greatly mistaken who made all their
holiness to consist of those services. For they thought that they had
performed their duty admirably well when they offered sacrifices of
slain beasts; and when the prophets demanded something beyond this, they
complained that they were treated harshly. Now the Lord says that he
rejects and abhors them, which may appear to be excessive severity, for
it was by him that they were appointed. But it ought to be observed that
some of the commandments of God ought to be obeyed on their own account,
while others of them have a remoter object. For instance, the law
enjoins us to serve and worship God, and next enjoins us to do good to
our neighbors. (<span id="viii.i-p144.1"></span>[De
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005.md)<span id="viii.i-p144.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p144.2"></span>[Le
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018.md)<span
id="viii.i-p144.2"></span>.) These things are in themselves acceptable
to God, and are demanded on their own account. The case is different
with ceremonies; for they are performances which are not demanded on
their own account, but for a different reason. The same thing may be
said of fasting*;*

<span id="viii.i-p145"></span>For the kingdom of God does not consist in
meat and drink; (<span id="viii.i-p145.1"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md)<span
id="viii.i-p145.1"></span>;)

<span id="viii.i-p146"></span>and therefore fasting is directed to
another object.

<span id="viii.i-p147"></span>It follows, therefore, that ceremonies
were not appointed in such a manner as if they were a satisfaction by
which he should be appeased, but in order that by means of them the
nation might be trained to godliness, and might make greater and greater
progress in faith and in the pure worship of God. But hypocrites observe
them with the most scrupulous care, as if the whole of religion turned
on this point, and think that they are the most devout of all men, when
they have long and anxiously wearied themselves in observing them. And
that they may be thought more devout, they likewise add something of
their own, and daily contrive new inventions, and most wickedly abuse
the holy ordinances of God, by not keeping in view their true object.
All their ceremonies, therefore, are nothing else than corruptions of
the worship of God. For when their whole attention is given to the
outward and naked performance, in what respect do their sacrifices
differ from the sacrifices of the Gentiles, which, we know, were full of
sacrilege, because they had no regard to a lawful end?

<span id="viii.i-p148"></span>This is the reason why the Lord rejects
those ceremonies, though they had been appointed by his authority,
because the nation did not consider the object and purpose for which
they were enjoined. The unceasing contest between the prophets and the
nation was to tear off these masks, and to show that the Lord is not
satisfied with merely outward worship, and cannot be appeased by
ceremonies. In all places godly ministers have experience of the same
kind of conflicts; for men always form their estimate of God from
themselves, and think that he is satisfied with outward display, but
cannot without the greatest difficulty be brought to offer to him the
integrity of their heart.

<span id="viii.i-p149"></span>All the perplexity of this passage will be
easily removed by Jeremiah, who says,

<span id="viii.i-p150"></span>When I redeemed your fathers out of Egypt,
I did not order them to offer sacrifices to me; I only enjoined them to
hear me and to keep my commandments. (<span
id="viii.i-p150.1"></span>[Jer
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022)<span id="viii.i-p150.1"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.i-p151"></span>For he shows that the observance of
ceremonies depends wholly on the word, and that it is as idle and
unprofitable to separate there from the word as it would be for the soul
to be parted from the body. To this also belongs the argument in <span
id="viii.i-p151.1"></span>[Ps. 50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md)<span id="viii.i-p151.1"></span>, —

<span id="viii.i-p152"></span>Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink
the blood of goats? Offer to God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to the
Most High.

<span id="viii.i-p153"></span>And in another passage the same Jeremiah
says,

<span id="viii.i-p154"></span>“Trust not in words of falsehood, saying,
The temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD, the temple of the LORD
are we.  
But rather excel in doing good, etc.” (<span
id="viii.i-p154.2"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="viii.i-p154.2"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.i-p155"></span>The Prophet Micah likewise says, “Doth the
LORD take pleasure in thousands of rams, or in ten thousand rivers of
oil?” Immediately afterwards he adds,

<span id="viii.i-p156"></span>“I will show thee, O man, what is good,
and what the LORD requireth from thee, namely, to do justly, to love
mercy,  
and to walk humbly with thy God.” (<span id="viii.i-p156.2"></span>[Mic.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008)<span id="viii.i-p156.2"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.i-p157"></span>From these passages it is evident that the
reason why ceremonies are condemned is, that they are separated from the
word as from their soul. Hence we see how great is the blindness of men,
who cannot be convinced that all the pains they take to worship God are
of no advantage unless they flow from integrity of heart. Nor is this
vice confined to the common people, but is found in almost all men; and
in those who in their opinion excel all others. Hence springs the notion
of the efficacy which belongs to the mere performance of the outward act
— or, as they call it, *the* <span id="viii.i-p157.1"></span>*opus
operatum* — which Popish doctors have contrived, and which at the
present day keeps a firm hold of the minds of many. Now here it is not
man but God himself who speaks, and who pronounces, by an unchangeable
decree, that all that men do is in vain offered for his acceptance, is
empty and unprofitable, unless they call upon him with true faith.

<span id="viii.i-p158"></span><span id="viii.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p159"></span>**12.** *Who hath required this at your
hand*? What an admirable confutation of false worship, when God declares
that they will not come before him according to the appointed manner,
and makes a general declaration, that in vain do they offer to him
anything which he does not require; for he does not choose to be
worshipped in any other way than that which has been enjoined! For how
comes it that men are so highly delighted with those inventions, but
because they do not consider that all their services are neither
profitable to themselves nor acceptable to God? Otherwise they would
immediately recollect that obedience is all that remains for them to do;
(<span id="viii.i-p159.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="viii.i-p159.1"></span>;) and they would not so insolently vaunt of
their exertions, which the Lord looks upon with scorn, not only because
he derives no advantage from it, but because he does not wish that men
should attribute to him what they have rashly undertaken without his
authority, or suffer the caprice of men to pass for a law: Yet in order
to express still stronger contempt, he immediately adds, that they
improperly give the name of *obedience* to that which he considers to be
labor thrown away; namely, that their close attendance at the temple
amounts to nothing more than treading its pavements; as if, in reference
to their hypocritical prayers, he had said, “Truly they lay me under
deep obligations by stunning my ears.”

<span id="viii.i-p160"></span><span id="viii.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p161"></span>**13.** *Bring no more vain oblations*
This is a useful admonition for restraining the irregular desires of
those who do not cease to follow inveterately unmeaning and hypocritical
worship, that, warned by God, they may at length repent, if they would
listen to any advice. But hence we learn how hard it is to shake the
false confidence of hypocrites, when they have once been hardened, since
they cannot even endure to hear God plainly warning them not to go on in
losing their pains, and in the practice of such madness.

<span id="viii.i-p162"></span>*Incense is an abomination to one* To
press them more closely, he proceeds farther, and declares that such
worship is not only unprofitable, but even that he detests and abhors
it; and justly, because the profanation of the worship of God, in which
his name is falsely employed, is not free from sacrilege. For as nothing
is more dear to God than his own glory, so there is nothing which he
more strongly detests than to have it infringed by any kind of
corruptions: and this is done, when any sort of unmeaning service is put
in the room of true worship. The meaning of this passage has been
mistaken by some, who have thought that the Prophet speaks of the repeal
of the law; for that is not his object, but he recalls the people of his
time to the right manner of observing ceremonies, and shows with what
design and for what purpose they were instituted. For since the
beginning of the world the worship of God was spiritual, and the
diversity of our worship from that which prevailed under the Old
Testament had a reference to men, but not to God. In God there is no
change, (<span id="viii.i-p162.1"></span>[Jas
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span id="viii.i-p162.1"></span>,.md)
but he accommodates himself to the weakness of men. That kind of
government therefore was suitable to the Jews, just as a preparatory
training  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) is needed for children.
For what purpose they were instituted, and what is the right manner of
observing ceremonies, he now describes.

<span id="viii.i-p164"></span><span id="viii.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p165"></span>**14.** *Your new-moons* The Prophet adds
nothing new to his former doctrine; but with respect to all ceremonies,
in which there is no spiritual truth, but only the glare of a false
pretense, he declares generally that they are not merely useless but
wicked. Hence we ought to observe that we labor to no purpose, if we do
not worship God in the right manner, and as God himself enjoins. In all
things God delights in truth, but especially in the worship due to his
majesty. Besides, not only do we lose our labor, but the worship of God
(as we have already said) is perverted; and nothing can be more wicked
than this. Now all superstitions are so many corruptions of the worship
of God; it follows, therefore, that they are wicked and unlawful.

<span id="viii.i-p166"></span>Superstition may be viewed, either in
itself, or in the disposition of the mind. *In itself* when men have the
audacity to contrive what God has not commanded. Such are those actions
which spring from *will-worship*, (<span
id="viii.i-p166.1"></span>ἐθελοθρησκεία, <span
id="viii.i-p166.2"></span>[Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span id="viii.i-p166.2"></span>,.md)
Which is commonly called devotion. One man shall set up an idol, another
shall build a chapels another shall appoint annual festivals, and
innumerable things of the same nature. When men venture to take such
liberties as to invent new modes of worship, that is superstition. *In
the disposition of the mind*, when men imitate those services which are
lawful and of which God approves, but keep their whole attention fixed
on the outward form, and do not attend to their object or truth. In this
manner the Jews earnestly adhered to the ceremonies which Moses had
enjoined, but left out what was of the greatest importance; for they
paid no regard to a pure conscience, never mentioned faith and
repentance, had no knowledge of their guilt, and — what was still worse
— separated Christ from them, and left no room for the truth. This
plainly shows, as I have already stated, that it was a spurious and
deceitful mask; so that their sacrifices did not at all differ from the
sacrifices of the Gentiles. It is therefore not wonderful that the Lord
calls them *abomination*

<span id="viii.i-p167"></span>I shall not stay to notice the phrases
here used, which are various; and yet they ought not to be lightly
passed over. For the Lord perceives how great is the wantonness of men
in contriving modes of worship; and therefore he heaps up a variety of
expressions, that he may more powerfully restrain that wantonness, and
again declares that those actions are hateful to him. Moreover, because
men flatter themselves, and foolishly entertain the belief that the Lord
will hold in some estimation the idle contrivances which they have
framed, he declares, on the contrary, that he regards them with
detestation and abhorrence.

<span id="viii.i-p168"></span><span id="viii.i-p168.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p169"></span>**15.** *When ye spread forth your hands*
The ancient custom of *spreading forth the hands* in prayer did not
arise from superstition; nor did that practice, like many others, obtain
currency through foolish and idle ambition; but because nature herself
prompts men to declare, even by outward signs, that they betake
themselves to God. Accordingly, since they cannot fly to him, they raise
themselves by this sign. No injunction, certainly, respecting this sign,
was given to the fathers; but they used it as men divinely inspired; and
by this very sign all idolaters are convicted of gross blindness; for,
while they declare by an outward attitude that they betake themselves to
God, in reality they betake themselves to idols. In order to convict
them more strongly, the Lord permitted the uninterrupted use of this
custom to continue among them. The Prophet, therefore, does not condemn
the *spreading forth of the hands*, but their hypocrisy; because they
assumed the appearance of men who called on God, while in their heart
they were wholly averse to him, as he elsewhere declares more fully that

<span id="viii.i-p170"></span>“this people draw near me with their
mouth, and with their lips do honors me, but have removed their heart
far from me”  
(<span id="viii.i-p170.2"></span>[Isa
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.i-p170.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p171"></span>The Lord saith that he is *nigh*, but it
is  
*to those who call upon him in truth*. (<span
id="viii.i-p171.2"></span>[Ps
145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018.md)<span
id="viii.i-p171.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p172"></span>Where hypocrisy is, there can be no true
calling on God. And yet this passage does not contradict what is said
elsewhere, “When they shall spread forth their hands, I will hear.”
 <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) For in that passage the Lord
speaks of that *calling* which proceeds from confidence in him. Faith is
the mother of calling on God; and if that be absent, nothing is left but
empty mockery.

<span id="viii.i-p174"></span>*Yea, when ye make many prayers* He
amplifies the former statement by threatening that he will be deaf to
their cries, to whatever extent they may multiply prayers; as if he had
said, “Though you be constant in prayer, that diligence will be of no
avail to you.” For this also is a fault which belongs to hypocrites,
that the more their prayers abound in words, they think that they are
more holy, and will more easily obtain what they wish. Thus their idle
talkativeness is indirectly rebuked.

<span id="viii.i-p175"></span>*Your hands are full of blood* Here he
begins to explain more fully the reason why he disapproves, and even
disdainfully rejects, both their prayers and their sacrifices. It is
because they are cruel and bloody, and stained with crimes of every
sort, though they come into his presence with hypocritical display.
Though he will afterwards add other kinds of crime, yet as he had
mentioned the *spreading forth of the hands*, so he speaks of the
*hands*, and says that in them they carry and hold out a testimony of
their crimes, so that they need not wonder that he thrusts them back so
harshly. For, on the other hand, the phrase, *to lift up clean hands*,
was employed not only by prophets and apostles, (<span
id="viii.i-p175.1"></span>[1Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="viii.i-p175.1"></span>,.md)
but even by profane authors, who were driven by mere instinct to reprove
the stupidity of men; if it were not that God perhaps forced them to
make this confession, in order that true religion might never be without
some kind of attestation.

<span id="viii.i-p176"></span>And yet the Prophet does not mean that
they were robbers or murderers, but reproves the tricks and deceit by
which they obtained possession of the property of others. God judges in
a different manner from men; for the hidden tricks and wicked arts, by
which wicked men are accustomed to deceive and take advantage of the
more simple, are not taken into account by men; or if they are taken
into account, they are at least extenuated, and are not estimated
according to their just weight. But God, dragging forth to light those
very men of dazzling reputation, who under specious pretenses had been
in the habit of concealing their unjust practices, plainly declares that
they are murderers. For in whatever way you kill a man, whether you cut
his throat or take away his food and the necessaries of life, you are a
murderer. Consequently, God does not speak of men who are openly wicked,
or whose crimes have made them openly infamous, but of those who wished
to be thought good men, and who kept up some kind of reputation.

<span id="viii.i-p177"></span>This circumstance ought to be carefully
observed; for on the same grounds must we now deal with wicked men, who
oppress the poor and feeble by fraud and violence, or some kind of
injustice, and yet cloak their wickedness by plausible disguise. But
with whatever impudence they may exclaim that they do not resemble
thieves or assassins we must reprove them with the same severity which
the Prophet employed towards persons of the same stamp; for when we
speak in the name of God, we must not judge according to the views and
opinions of men, but must boldly declare the judgment which the Lord
hath pronounced.

<span id="viii.i-p178"></span><span id="viii.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p179"></span>**16.** *Wash you, make you clean* He
exhorts the Jews to repentance, and points out the true way of it,
provided that they wish to have their obedience approved by God. Hence
we conclude that nothing can please God, unless it proceed from a pure
conscience; for God does not, like men, judge of our works according to
their outward appearance. It frequently happens that some particular
action, though performed by a very wicked man, obtains applause among
men; but in the Sight of God, who beholds the heart, a depraved
conscience pollutes every virtue. And this is what is taught by Haggai,
holding out an illustration drawn from the ancient ceremonies, that
*everything which an unclean person has touched is polluted*; from which
he concludes that nothing clean proceeds from the wicked. Our Prophet
has already declared, that in vain do they offer sacrifices to God, in
vain do they pray, in vain do they call on his name, if integrity of
heart do not sanctify the outward worship. For this reason, in order
that the Jews may no longer labor to no purpose, he demands that
*cleanness*; and he begins with a general reformation, lest, after
having discharged one part of their duty, they should imagine that this
would be a veil to conceal them from the eyes of God.

<span id="viii.i-p180"></span>Such is the manner in which we ought
always to deal with men who are estranged from God. We must not confine
our attention to one or a few sores of a diseased body but if we aim at
a true and thorough cure, we must call on them to begin anew, and must
thoroughly remove the contagion, that they who were formerly hateful and
abominable in the sight of God may begin to please God. By the metaphor
*washing*, he unquestionably exhorts to remove inward pollution, but
shortly afterwards he will also add the fruits of actions.

<span id="viii.i-p181"></span>When he bids them *wash*, he does not mean
that men repent by their own exercise of free-will; but he shows that
there is no other remedy but this, that they shall appear pure in the
sight of God. Now, we know that the sacred writers attribute to men what
is wrought in them by the Spirit of God, whom Ezekiel calls *clean
water*, because to him belongs the work of repentance. (<span
id="viii.i-p181.1"></span>[Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025.md)<span
id="viii.i-p181.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p182"></span>*Put away the evil of your doings* The
Prophet now comes to describe the fruits of repentance; for not only
does he explain without a metaphor what it is to wash and to be
cleansed, but he enjoins them to exhibit in their whole life, and in
every action, the evidence of their being renewed. Yet he confirms the
former statement, that the pollution of the people is *before the eyes*
of God, that it stains and debases all their actions, and thus makes it
impossible that they shall be pleasing in his sight. And he particularly
mentions *the eyes of God*, lest, when they employed a veil to hinder
themselves from seeing, they should vainly imagine that God shared with
them in their blindness.

<span id="viii.i-p183"></span>*Cease to do evil* He still proceeds to
reprove their manner of life. This passage is commonly interpreted as if
by *doing ill* the Prophet meant loving ill; but it ought strictly to be
understood as denoting those crimes by which a neighbor is injured; so
that in the exhortation, *Learn to do well,* which occurs in the next
verse, the expression *to your neighbor* ought to be supplied; for he
speaks of the injuries and kind offices which Eve perform to our
neighbors. Now since repentance has its seal in the heart of man, he
describes it by those outward appearances by means of which it is, in
some measure, brought before the eyes of men. There is no man who does
not wish to be reckoned a good man; but the true character of every man
is manifested by his actions. He therefore calls them to the performance
of those outward actions by which they may give evidence of their
repentance.

<span id="viii.i-p184"></span>He comprehends under two heads the fruits
of repentance, *ceasing to do evil*, and *doing well.* First, we must
cease to commit every act of injustice; for we must not imitate those
spendthrifts who wish to be thought bountiful, and fraudulently take
from one person what they bestow on another. Again, we must not resemble
those idle people who think that they have done enough, if they have
kept themselves from doing harm, and from invading the property of their
neighbors, but are not careful to perform acts of kindness. He intended,
therefore, to include both; for under those two heads the keeping of the
second table of the law is comprehended.

<span id="viii.i-p185"></span><span id="viii.i-p185.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p186"></span>**17.** *Learn to do well* As he had just
now, ill enjoining them to *cease to do evil*, charged them with the
continual practice of iniquity as if he had said that their whole life
was a constant habit of sinning; so now he enjoins them to become
skilled in acts of kindness, and in entreating them to *learn* this, he
addresses them as scholars who had not yet learned their earliest
lessons. And first he bids them *seek judgment*. Others render it,
inquire respecting *judgment*, of which I do not approve; for by the
word *seek* the Prophet meant more than this, he meant what we call the
actual practice of it. By the word *judgment* he denotes what is good
and right; as if he had said, “Aim at uprightness.”

<span id="viii.i-p187"></span>*Relieve the oppressed* The Prophet, after
his wonted manner, adds to the general description the mention of
particular classes; and although he has already given a special
exhortation to kindness and justice, yet wishing to press them more
closely, he enters into a more careful enumeration of certain classes,
so as to present a more complete view of the subject. For otherwise men
always wish to be reckoned good and righteous, and can scarcely be moved
by general instruction; but when we come to particular cases, they are
forced, as it were, to deal with the matter in hand, and are compelled
to yield, or at least become more tractable, of which we have daily
experience.

<span id="viii.i-p188"></span>*Judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow* The Prophet here selects two classes, by means of which the
wickedness of men is more fully exposed; for it seldom happens that the
causes of the *fatherless and widows* are defended, because men do not
expect from them any rewards. To such an extent are they exposed to
every kind of injustice, that no man comes forward in defense of them,
because there is no man who follows justice on its own account; and not
only so, but there is a very great number of persons who are ready to
plunder the poor and needy. This proves that there is no one who cares
about exercising judgment; for we need not at all wonder that men of
wealth and influence have friends to assist them, who are excited and
allured by the expectation of reward. But the Lord declares that he
takes charge of *the fatherless and widows*, and will avenge them if
they shall sustain any injury.

<span id="viii.i-p189"></span>“Ye shall not afflict any widow, or
fatherless child. If thou afflict then in any wise, and they cry at all
unto me, I will surely hear their cry: and my wrath shall wax hot, and I
will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.” (<span id="viii.i-p189.1"></span>[Ex
22:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022.md)<span
id="viii.i-p189.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p190"></span>The same declaration is now extended to
all others, who are oppressed and groan under the violence and lawless
passions of men of rank and influence.

<span id="viii.i-p191"></span>This ought to yield the highest
consolation to all the children of God, who are enjoined to *possess
their souls in patience*. (<span id="viii.i-p191.1"></span>[Lu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019.md)<span
id="viii.i-p191.1"></span>.) Whatever may be the haughty boasting of
enemies, this will not prevent the people of God from glorying amidst
their tribulations, while such considerations as these shall have an
abiding place in their minds: “The Lord will be our avenger. Though men
disregard us, he takes care of us. He will aid the destitute, and will
defend their cause.”

<span id="viii.i-p192"></span><span id="viii.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p193"></span>**18.** *Come now, and let us reason
together*  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) The Hebrew word <span
id="viii.i-p194.2"></span>נא (*na*) is commonly translated *I pray*, or
*therefore*; but I think that it denotes the confidence of a good cause,
and thus is an exhortation, *Come*. For the Lord declares that the Jews
will have nothing, to reply, and that, even though they obtain an
opportunity of clearing themselves, they will still be speechless. And
certainly this is the way in which hypocrites ought to be treated; for
they boldly enter into disputes with God, and there is no end of their
reasonings. Accordingly, he tells them that, if they choose to debate,
he will be equally prepared on the other side.

<span id="viii.i-p195"></span>The question will perhaps be put, Why does
the Prophet speak chiefly about the second table of the law, and not
rather about the worship of God? For we know that there were good
reasons why God assigned the foremost place to the first table, when he
divided the law; and there can be no doubt that, as it comes first in
order, so it is likewise of greater importance. I reply, when the
Prophets reprove the hypocrisy of men, they employ various modes of
address. Sometimes they complain that the Sabbath has been profaned;
sometimes they say that men do not call on God; but for the most part
they censure idolatry, and raise their voice against superstitions. But
here Isaiah complains that their duties towards their neighbors have not
been performed.

<span id="viii.i-p196"></span>Still in all these cases the object is the
same, to show that our actions are of no value in the sight of God, when
they do not proceed from a good conscience, and when we are destitute of
the fear of God. This fear they sometimes denote by “calling on the name
of God,” sometimes by “keeping the Sabbath,” and sometimes by other
actions; but as the distinction between true worship and hypocrisy is
most clearly and manifestly pointed out by means of the duties of
brotherly kindness, there are good reasons why the mention of those
duties is brought forward by Isaiah. For hypocrites are careful to
perform outward worship and ceremonies; but inwardly they are full of
envy, they swell with pride and contempt of the brethren, they burn with
covetousness and ambition; and while they conceal themselves under those
masks, they cannot easily be detected. They must, therefore, be tried by
this rule, as by a touchstone, and thus it must be ascertained whether
or not they fear God.

<span id="viii.i-p197"></span>We might, indeed, be deceived, were it
from the second table only that we formed our judgment about the
godliness of a man; but if any one discharge the duties of the first
table, which are evidences of godliness and of the worship of God, he
must then be brought to this standard, Does he act inoffensively towards
other men? Does he abstain from every act of injustice? Does he speak
truth? Does he live in the exercise of kindness to his brethren? This is
the reason why Christ pronounces

<span id="viii.i-p198"></span>mercy, judgment, and faith, to be the
weighty matters of the law, (<span id="viii.i-p198.1"></span>[Mt
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023.md)<span
id="viii.i-p198.1"></span>,)

<span id="viii.i-p199"></span>and censures the Pharisees because, in
their eagerness about tithes and offerings, they attended only to
smaller matters, and neglected true righteousness. By *faith* he means
fidelity, or what we commonly call *loyalty*.  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) By *judgment* he means every kind of
uprightness, when we render to every man what belongs to him, and do not
allow others to be injured, but assist them, as far as lies in our
power.

<span id="viii.i-p201"></span>But if these are *the weighty matters of
the law*, in what order ought we to place the commandments of the second
table? I answer, they retain their due importance and order; but by
means of those duties which Christ so rigidly demands, and on which he
dwells so largely, hypocrisy is more fully detected, and we are better
enabled to judge whether a man sincerely fears God or not. In the same
sense ought we to understand that passage, *I will have mercy and not
sacrifice*; (<span id="viii.i-p201.1"></span>[Ho
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006.md)<span id="viii.i-p201.1"></span>;
<span id="viii.i-p201.2"></span>[Mt
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)<span id="viii.i-p201.2"></span>;.md)
for mercy is an evidence and proof of true godliness. Again, it is
pleasing to God, because it is a true demonstration of the love which we
owe to our fellow-men; but sacrifices are pleasing to him for a
different reason. It is now, I think, sufficiently plain why the Prophet
Isaiah mentions kindness rather than faith or calling upon God; and why
the prophets employ such variety in their modes of address, when they
endeavor to bring back hypocrites to the true worship of God, and when
they bid them show it by its fruits.

<span id="viii.i-p202"></span>*Though your sins be as scarlet* It is as
if he had said, that he does not accuse innocent persons, and has no
wish to enter into controversy; so that the charges which he makes
against them are not brought forward or maintained without strong
necessity. For hypocrites are wont to find fault with God, as if he were
too severe, and could not be at all appeased. They go still farther, and
discover this excuse for their obstinacy, that it is in vain for them to
attempt to return to a state of favor with God. If every other expedient
fail, still they fly to this, that it is not proper to make such rigid
demands on them, and that even the very best of men have something that
needs to be forgiven. The Prophet anticipates the objection, by
introducing the Lord speaking ill this manner — “For my part, if it be
necessary, I do not refuse to dispute with you; for the result will be
to show that it is your own obstinacy which prevents a reconciliation
from taking place between us. Only bring cleanness of heart, and all
controversy between us will be at an end. I would no longer contend with
you, if you would bring me an upright heart.”

<span id="viii.i-p203"></span>Hence we obtain a declaration in the
highest degree consolatory, that God does not contend with us as if he
wished to pursue our offenses to the utmost. For if we sincerely turn to
him, he will immediately return to favor with us, and will blot out all
remembrance of our sins, and will not demand an account of them. For he
is not like men who, even for a slight and inconsiderable offense, often
refuse to be reconciled. Nay, so far is he from giving us reason to
complain of his excessive severity, that he is ready to cleanse us, and
to make us as white as snow. He is satisfied With cleanness of heart,
and if, notwithstanding of this cleanness of heart, there be any
offense, he forgives it, and acquits those who have provoked him.

<span id="viii.i-p204"></span><span id="viii.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p205"></span>**19.** *If ye be willing and obedient*
Isaiah continues to plead the cause of God against the people, and
states in a few words, that not only must the people bear the blame of
all the calamities which they endured, but that it lies in their own
power to regain immediately prosperity and happiness; because God is
always ready to forgive them, provided that they do not harden their
hearts. But because happiness appears here to be placed in the power of
men, and at their disposal, the papists openly maintain that men, by the
exercise of their own will, are free to choose either good or evil. When
God charges men with obstinacy, we must not on that account believe that
he describes the nature or extent of their ability.

<span id="viii.i-p206"></span>But it would be useless to say, *if ye be
willing*, unless it were in the power of men to will. I answer, though
the choice be not so free as they pretend that it is, yet sinners are
justly chargeable with being the voluntary agents of their calamities,
because it is of their own accord, and not by compulsion, that they
provoke God to anger. It is therefore true, that it is a special gift of
God when a man aims at what is good; but it is equally true that it is
their own wickedness that hinders the reprobate from applying their mind
to it, and, consequently, that the whole blame of their obstinacy rests
with themselves. On this depends the reproach brought against the
people, that they would have led a prosperous and happy life, if they
had been submissive and obedient to God. For since God is by nature
disposed to acts of kindness, nothing but our ingratitude and enmity
hinders us from receiving that goodness which he freely offers to all.
On the other hand, he adds a sharp and heavy threatening, that it is in
his power to take vengeance; lest they should imagine that they who
despise God will escape without punishment. It ought also to be
observed, that the only rule of living well is to yield obedience to God
and his word; for to *will* and to *hear* mean nothing else than to
comply with the will of God.

<span id="viii.i-p207"></span>A change of the construction of the words
(*hypallage*) has been admitted into this sentence; for the meaning
fully brought out would stand thus: “if your mind be ready, and your
will be disposed, to obey;” or, which amounts to the same thing, “if you
render obedience to me, and lend an ear to my word.” since, therefore,
God places the happiness of men in obedience, it follows that our life
is properly conducted, when we hear God speaking, and obey him in all
things. How great, therefore, is the wickedness of men, when they refuse
to listen to God who is continually speaking to them, and reject the
happiness which he has provided and offered! It was proper that their
wayward dispositions should be subdued, lest those wretched men should
draw down on themselves the wrath of God, and willingly throw
themselves, like wild beasts, on the edge of the sword. We must likewise
observe, that he at length threatens them with final destruction, if
they shall obstinately refuse to submit themselves to God.

<span id="viii.i-p208"></span>*Ye shall eat the good of the land* He
means the fruits which the earth yields for supplying the necessaries of
life; for in some sense the earth may be said to be unkind when it does
not produce its fruits, and keeps them, as it were, in its bosom. Yet I
have no doubt he alludes to the promises of the law, in which God
declares, that to those who fear him he will bless the earth and will
cause it to produce a great abundance of all good things.

<span id="viii.i-p209"></span>The Lord shall make thee plenteous in the
fruit of the ground, in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers
to give thee. (<span id="viii.i-p209.1"></span>[De
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#011.md)<span
id="viii.i-p209.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.i-p210"></span>And yet, when he offers to us the
conveniences of the earthly life, it is not because he wishes that our
attention should be confined to our present happiness, which alone
hypocrites value, and which entirely occupies their minds; but in order
that, by the contemplation of it, we may rise to the heavenly life, and
that, by tasting so much goodness, he may prepare us for the enjoyment
of eternal happiness. More especially was God accustomed to act in this
manner towards the ancient people, that, by tasting present benefits, as
by a shadow, they might be called to the heavenly inheritance. This
distinction ought to be carefully observed, that we may apply this
instruction to ourselves, according to the degree of prosperity to which
God has exalted us. The Prophet intended to show that true happiness,
with its accompaniments, consists in obedience to God; and that the
wicked, by their obstinacy, bring upon themselves every kind of
calamities, and therefore that all our distresses ought to be ascribed
to the sins and crimes which we have committed.

<span id="viii.i-p211"></span><span id="viii.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p212"></span>**20.** *But if ye refuse and rebel* The
wicked always think that the severity of the punishment is greater than
their guilt, even though the Lord chastise them very gently; and
although they do not venture to justify themselves entirely, yet they
never cease, as I formerly said, to accuse God of excessive severity.
But the Prophet threatens that there will be no end of their calamities
till they be destroyed; and lest they should imagine that they had
nothing more to fear than those slight and inconsiderable punishments
which they had hitherto suffered, he declares that far heavier judgments
of God are still awaiting them.

<span id="viii.i-p213"></span>The papists torture this passage to
support the doctrine of freewill, and argue in the following manner: —
“If men be happy whenever they are willing to obey God, it follows that
this is placed in our own power.” The argument certainly is very
childish; for the Lord does not inform us by the Prophet what is the
nature or extent of our capacity for good or evil; but he reminds us
that it is our own fault if we do not enjoy good things, and that the
calamities with which we are afflicted are the punishments of our
disobedience. The question, whether a man can make his bad will good, is
altogether different from the question, whether, by the bad will, which
is natural to him, he brings upon himself all the evils which he
endures. Unjustly and falsely, therefore, do those skillful and
ingenious doctors employ this passage to support their doctrine about a
free choice of good and evil.

<span id="viii.i-p214"></span>*For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it*
 <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) Since men who are blinded by their
lusts are little moved by threatenings, the Prophet, in order to arouse
them from deep slothfulness, reminds them that this declaration is not
uttered by a mortal man, but has proceeded from the *mouth of God*, who
is not changeable like men, but adheres constantly to his purpose.
 <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) He therefore mentions *the mouth
of the Lord*, in order to terrify them, that they who in their vices
have fallen into a deep slumber may give earnest attention to his
threatenings.

<span id="viii.i-p217"></span><span id="viii.i-p217.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p218"></span>**21.** *How is the faithful city become
an harlot*! In order to make the rebuke more forcible, and the crime of
the people more shocking, in having thus departed from God and from all
uprightness, he cries aloud as if he had seen some monstrous thing; and
certainly it was a change fitted to awaken horror, that a nation devoted
to God, and chosen to a *royal priesthood*, (<span
id="viii.i-p218.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span id="viii.i-p218.1"></span>,.md)
had fallen from lofty piety to the lowest sink of wickedness. More
especially he speaks of the *city* of Jerusalem, which was God’s
sanctuary and royal abode. He complains that the *city* which had
formerly been a guardian of justice is a den of robbers; that she who
formerly was a chaste and pure virgin hath *become a harlot,* To strike
the deeper shame into the degenerate Jews, who had departed widely from
their holy fathers, he assumes the air of a person astonished, and asks
himself how this could possibly have happened.

<span id="viii.i-p219"></span>*The faithful city* By the word *faithful*
he alludes, in my opinion, to the conjugal fidelity which a wife ought
to preserve to her husband. The signification is undoubtedly more
extensive; but when I look at the connection of the passage I do not
hesitate to say that *faithful* means *chaste*; for immediately
afterwards he employs another term in contrast with it, calling her *an
harlot*. Whereas she once was a virtuous wife, faithful to the
marriage-contract, she has now *become an harlot,* and her base conduct
brings not a blush on her countenance. The Scriptures frequently call
the Church the wife of God. (<span id="viii.i-p219.1"></span>[Hos.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#020)<span id="viii.i-p219.1"></span>..md)
That honorable rank Jerusalem held, so long as she maintained spiritual
chastity, and continued in the pure and lawful worship of God; but as
soon as she departed from it she *became an harlot.*

<span id="viii.i-p220"></span>This astonishment of the Prophet was
undoubtedly joined with the deepest grief; for we ought to look upon it
as something monstrous when men revolt from God, and refuse that
allegiance which they have promised to render; nor is it possible that
right-hearted men, when they behold such a revolt, can fail to be
affected with the most poignant grief. We read that the angels in heaven
rejoice at the conversion of one sinner; (<span
id="viii.i-p220.1"></span>[Luke 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010)<span id="viii.i-p220.1"></span>;.md)
and therefore they cannot but mourn over the final ruin of any sinner.
How much more then will they bewail the ruin and destruction of a whole
state and Church!

<span id="viii.i-p221"></span>Besides, that astonishment conveys also a
complaint; as if the Prophet had said, “O Jerusalem, from what a
flourishing condition hast thou fallen! Into what distress hast thou
plunged thyself! What shame and disgrace hast thou brought upon thee!”
When the flourishing state in which she had been, and the respect that
had been paid to her in former times, are called to her remembrance, it
ought to produce a still deeper impression on her mind; for she who was
at one time the respected mother of a family is naturally more careful
about her honor and reputation than one who has spent her whole life in
base and licentious conduct.

<span id="viii.i-p222"></span>*It was full of judgment* He shows what
fruits were produced by that allegiance to God at a former period. We
may take *judgment* as but another name for uprightness; or, if it be
thought preferable, we may call it *justice* when men render to every
man his own, and *judgment* when the cause of the innocent is defended,
and the poor and needy are avenged; for such is the use of the words in
Scripture when they are employed together; but as they are not perfectly
connected in this passage, I consider *judgment* to denote uprightness;
so that the same thing is twice expressed for the purpose of explaining
it more fully.

<span id="viii.i-p223"></span>*But now murderers* He shows in what
manner Jerusalem *became an harlot*. It was, that the city, which had
formerly been distinguished for the love of justice and equity, was now
full of *murders*. The meaning is, as we have formerly said, not that
they were assassins or robbers, but that, by fraudulent and dishonest
methods, under the pretense of justice, they had gained the property of
others. In short, he means that they did not act fairly and justly
towards their fellow-men, whatever might be the estimation in which they
were held; for sometimes, and indeed very frequently, it happens that
very wicked men are held in high esteem.

<span id="viii.i-p224"></span>The condition to which Jerusalem was
reduced should lead us to consider how often Satan exercises what may be
called unbounded tyranny over the Church of God; for if ever there was a
Church, there was one at that time in Jerusalem; and yet Isaiah affirms
that it was a den of robbers, or a slaughterhouse, where they cut men’s
throats. But if Satan could freely riot in that Church, let us not
wonder that the same thing takes place among us; but let us labor not to
suffer ourselves to be corrupted by such wicked examples.

<span id="viii.i-p225"></span><span id="viii.i-p225.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p226"></span>**22.** *Thy silver is become dross, thy
wine mixed with water* Isaiah speaks metaphorically, and by two
comparisons shows here, that though the outward appearance of affairs
was not openly overturned, yet their condition was changed and
corrupted, so as to be widely different from what it had formerly been:
for he says that *dross* now shines instead of *gold*, and that the
*wine*, though it retains its color, has lost its flavour. “Though thou
still make an empty show,” saith the Prophet, “yet nothing *pure* will
be found in thee: that *wine* which was wont to be Stare in thee is
corrupted; and though its color deceive the eye, its taste shows that it
has been *mixed*.”

<span id="viii.i-p227"></span>All this means nothing more than that the
Jews should lay aside hypocrisy, and should begin to confess their sins,
and no longer flatter themselves after the manner of hypocrites. The
comparisons here employed are exceedingly well adapted to this end, for
*dross* bears some resemblance to *gold*; and in like manner, the color
of *wine mixed with water* resembles that of pure wine; and yet both are
very far from having that purity of which they make an outward show. In
like manner hypocrites, by their hypocrisy, may be said to assume a
false color of *silver*, though they are of no more value than dross,
and indeed are the more detestable on this account, that, though they
are exceedingly wicked, yet, with not less treachery than baseness, they
present to God and to men those hollow pretensions by which they cloak
their malice.

<span id="viii.i-p228"></span><span id="viii.i-p228.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p229"></span>**23.** *Thy princes are rebellious* There
is here an elegant allusion or play on words.  <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) He does not speak of *princes* in such a
manner as if the common people were holy and needed no reproof, but he
points out the source of the evil; for as no disease is more injurious
than that which spreads from the head into the whole body, so no evil is
more destructive in a commonwealth than a wicked and depraved *prince*,
who conveys his corruptions into the whole body both by his example and
by the liberty which he allows. Hence, too, comes the proverb, <span
id="viii.i-p230.8"></span>ὁποῖα ἡ δέσποινα, τοῖαι καὶ αἱ θεραπαινίδες,
*like mistress, like maids*. The meaning, therefore, is as if the
Prophet had said that there was no one vice more than another that
reigned among the people, but that an unbounded commission of crimes
prevailed among the nobles themselves, and that in this manner the whole
body was stained with pollution. Something which gives additional force
to the statement is implied in the word *princes*; for it is deeply to
be lamented when an evil arises from that very quarter in which the
remedy for it ought to be expected. He next mentions a particular
instance.

<span id="viii.i-p231"></span>*Companions of thieves* By these words he
means that they are so far from restraining theft and false dealing,
that, on the contrary, they draw gain from them; and he justly calls
those persons *companions of thieves*, who, by receiving part of the
booty, grant permission to commit theft. And, indeed, when a judge is
corrupted by a bribe, it is impossible but that crimes shall abound and
pass unpunished, with the perpetrators of which we must consider him to
be in collusion.

<span id="viii.i-p232"></span>*Every one loveth a gift* He next points
out the reason why princes have made themselves *companions of thieves*,
and have bound themselves by a wicked conspiracy to lend countenance to
crimes. It is avarice. When judges are devoted to the love of money,
justice is utterly destroyed; for if the acceptance of persons be a
corruption of judgment, so that no room is left for justice, every man
who is under the dominion of covetousness will assuredly regard the
person rather than the cause. The consequence is, that he will not be
able to perceive what is just and right, but, as one expresses it, will
make laws and unmake them.

<span id="viii.i-p233"></span>This reminds us how great a virtue it is
in a magistrate to disregard money; for unless he keep his mind, his
hands, and his eyes under restraint, he will never be able to judge
justly. It is absurd to say, as some men do, that they keep their heart
pure and uncorrupted, even though they receive bribes. What the Lord
saith must be true, that a gift blindeth the eyes of the wise, and
perverteth the words of the righteous. (<span
id="viii.i-p233.1"></span>[Ex
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008)<span id="viii.i-p233.1"></span>..md)
No man is so upright, no man is so clearsighted and sagacious, that his
mind shall resist the enchantment, and his eyes the blinding influence,
of gifts. Such judges, therefore, he justly declares to be *companions
of thieves*; for, hurried along by a blind desire of money, they
overturn all law both of God and man, and leave no room for justice or
modesty.

<span id="viii.i-p234"></span>We must likewise observe that the Prophet,
in order to convince hypocrites, brings forward their actions which were
open and universally known; for otherwise they would not submit. And yet
there can be no doubt that there were at that time many who objected,
when he thus called them thieves, as even in the present day most men
impudently and obstinately exclaim that they are not thieves on account
of receiving the rewards and gifts which are offered to them, because
their do not prevent them from passing a just judgment. But these
replies being frivolous, the Prophet, after having exposed their wicked
actions, satisfies himself with the reproof which he has given, and
argues with them no longer. And, indeed, nature declares that it is
impossible to give just judgment, when judges are so eager for gain and
regard; because they cannot but absolutely expose to sale their honesty
and reputation.

<span id="viii.i-p235"></span>*They judge not the fatherless* As the
Lord specially recommends to us the *fatherless* and *widows*, because
they have been deprived of the protection of men, so we need not wonder
if he is displeased when they are abandoned by the judges, who ought to
have been their guardians and defenders; for since they have neither
foresight, nor industry nor strength if no one comes forward to render
assistance they must be exposed without redress to every kind of
violence and injustice. Now, when no regard is paid to them, it follows
that the sway is held, not by justice, but by covetousness and plunder.

<span id="viii.i-p236"></span><span id="viii.i-p236.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p237"></span>**24.** *Therefore saith the lord, the
LORD of hosts* He first employs the word <span
id="viii.i-p237.1"></span>האדון, (*haadon*) which literally signifies
lord, and expresses the relation to a servant. Next is added the word
<span id="viii.i-p237.2"></span>יהוה (*Jehovah*,) which denotes the
eternal essence and majesty of God. After having laid open some kinds of
crimes, which made it manifest that in that nation everything was
corrupted, Isaiah, now wishing to threaten and to hold out to them the
judgment of God, not only represents God as invested with the power and
authority of a Judge, but at the same time reminds them that the
children of Abraham are his peculiar people, and for this reason he
immediately adds, *the mighty One of Israel*. There may also be implied
in it a kind of irony, by which he stings the Jews, as if he had said
that it was foolishness in them to boast of the name of God, seeing that
they were worthless and unprincipled servants, and that it was vain for
them to rely on his strength, which would immediately break forth
against them. After this preface, he adds —

<span id="viii.i-p238"></span>*Ah! I will take consolation on my
adversaries*  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) By these words he
intimates that God will not be pacified until he has satiated himself
with inflicting punishment. He employs the word consolation after the
manner of men; for as anger is nothing else than the desire of revenge,
so revenge gives relief to the mind, and he who has taken vengeance
congratulates himself and is satisfied. By this course, which may be
regarded as a kind of compensation, the Lord says that he will satisfy
himself with inflicting punishment *on his adversaries*

<span id="viii.i-p240"></span>There are various ways, indeed, of
expounding this passage; and I shall not undertake the task of examining
all the interpretations and refuting those which I do not approve: it
will be enough if we ascertain the true meaning. He does not here speak
of Chaldeans or Assyrians, as some imagine, but of Jews, to whom, in the
character of a herald, he proclaims war in the name of the Lord. This
threatening sounded harshly in their ears; for they supposed that they
were joined in such a confederacy with God, that he was an adversary to
their adversaries. He declares, on the other hand, that he is their
enemy because he had so often been provoked by their crimes. In this
manner we must shake off the slothfulness of hypocrites, who are
continually waging war with God, and yet do not hesitate to allege that
they enjoy his protection. We need not wonder, therefore, if the Prophet
sternly pronounces them to be *adversaries* of God, who had broken the
covenant, and had thus carried on war against him.

<span id="viii.i-p241"></span>And yet, in order to show that he is
unwillingly, as it were, constrained to inflict punishment on his
people, God utters his threatening with a kind of groan. For as nothing
is more agreeable to his nature than to do good, so whenever he is angry
with us and treats us harshly, it is certain that our wickedness has
compelled him to do so, because we do not allow his goodness to take its
free course. More especially he is disposed to treat his own people with
gentleness, and when he sees that there is no longer any room for his
forbearance, he takes measures, as it were in sorrow, for inflicting
punishment.

<span id="viii.i-p242"></span>Some would rather choose perhaps to
explain the particle <span id="viii.i-p242.1"></span>הוי (*hoi*) as of
God made this exclamation when aroused by anger. For my own part, I
rather consider it, in this passage, to be an expression of grief;
because God, being mindful of his covenant, would willingly spare his
chosen people, were it not that pardon was entirely prevented by their
obstinacy.

<span id="viii.i-p243"></span>*And avenge me of mine enemies* In this
second clause there is a reduplication, (<span
id="viii.i-p243.1"></span>ἀναδίπλωσις) a figure of speech customary with
the Hebrews, who frequently express the same thing twice in one verse.
Hence also we learn that the object of the statement is, that God cannot
rest until he has taken vengeance on a wicked and treacherous people

<span id="viii.i-p244"></span><span id="viii.i-p244.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p245"></span>**25.** *And I will turn my hand upon
thee* This is an alleviation of the former threatening; for though he
still proceeds with what he had begun to state about his severity, he at
the same time declares that, amidst those calamities which were to be
inflicted, the Church would be preserved. But the principal design was
to comfort believers, that they might not suppose the Church to be
utterly ruined, though God treated them more roughly than before. The
Spirit of God, by the Prophets, continually warns the children of God,
who always tremble at his word, not to be overwhelmed and lose heart on
account of terrors and threatening; for the more daringly that wicked
men practice licentiousness and scoff at all threatening the more do
those who are affected by a sincere fear of God tremble at them.

<span id="viii.i-p246"></span>Besides, the *turning of the hands of God*
denotes generally a token of his presence, as if he should say, *I will
display my hand*. This he is wont to do in two ways, either by
chastising the wicked, or by delivering believers from their distresses.
Since, therefore, it is evident from the context that God purposes, by
applying consolation, to mitigate the severity of punishment, the
*turning of the hands* must here be viewed as referring to the
restoration of the Church; for although he declared in general terms
that all were his enemies, he now modifies or limits that statement by
addressing Jerusalem or Zion by name.

<span id="viii.i-p247"></span>When he adds, *I will purge away thy
dross*, though he points out the fruit of correction, that believers may
not be immoderately grieved or distressed on account of it, yet we learn
from this expression that the purification of the Church is God’s own
work. For this purpose he always lifts up his hand to punish
transgressions, that he may bring back wanderers into the road; but rods
would be of no avail, if he did not make them useful by touching their
hearts inwardly. And, indeed, since he points out here a special favor
which he bestows on his elect, it follows from this that repentance is a
true and peculiar work of the Holy Spirit; for otherwise the sinner,
instead of profiting in the smallest degree, would be more and more
hardened by chastisements.

<span id="viii.i-p248"></span>The pure *purging*, so that no *dross*
remains, must not, however, be understood as if God ever cleansed his
Church entirely in this world from every stain, but must be regarded as
spoken after the manner of men; as if he said that the condition of his
Church will be such that her holiness will shine like pure silver. These
words, therefore, indicate real purity, for the Jews had formerly been
too well satisfied with their filthiness. This is a highly appropriate
comparison, by which the Prophet declares, that though the Church was at
that time polluted by many defilements, still some remnant would be
left, which, after the removal of the pollution, would regain its
brightness. In this manner he also connects both clauses; for when he
formerly spoke of their crimes, he said that their *silver had become
dross*. (<span id="viii.i-p248.1"></span>[Isa
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span id="viii.i-p248.1"></span>..md)

<span id="viii.i-p249"></span><span id="viii.i-p249.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p250"></span>**26.** *And I will restore thy judges as
at the first* He now speaks without a figure; and having said that the
source and origin of the evils was in the princes, he shows that a
divine hand will purify that rank, when the Lord shall be pleased to
restore the Church to perfect health. And, indeed, when they who rule
are good and holy men, public order is maintained; for when wicked men
have power, everything goes to ruin. By *judges and counsellors* are
evidently meant any kind of magistrates; and when he promises that they
will be such as they were *at the beginning*, he brings to their
remembrance the extraordinary goodness of God, of which they had been
deprived. God had graciously raised up the throne of David, and in that
government was pleased to give a bright resemblance of his own parental
love. Though the authority of the family of David had degenerated into
the grossest tyranny, yet they continued to boast of a false title; for
they still vaunted of the reign of David in the same manner as the
papists of the present day plume themselves on a false pretense of the
Church. Justly, therefore, are the people reminded of the happiness from
which they had fallen by their own fault, that they might not be
displeased at a diminution of their numbers, by means of which they
would again possess that order which God had established

<span id="viii.i-p251"></span>*Then shalt thou be called* He describes
the fruit of that reformation, of which he has spoken, as extending to
the whole body; for, having said that Jerusalem, before she revolted
from God, was a *faithful city, full of righteousness*, the Prophet now
says, that when she shall have been chastised the same virtues will be
illustriously displayed in her. Here, too, is expressed the sum of true
repentance; for by *righteousness* is meant uprightness, when every man
obtains what belongs to him, and men live with each other without
committing injury. The word *faithful* has a still more extensive
meaning; for when a city is called *faithful*, it means not only that
justice and honesty between man and man are observed, but that the
purity of God’s worship is maintained and therefore the chastity and
purity of the mind are included under that designation.

<span id="viii.i-p252"></span>It must also be observed, however, that
from this *faithfulness* springs justice; for when we adhere to truth in
our mutual intercourse, justice easily gains the ascendency. And,
indeed, when I closely examine the whole passage, I think that the
Prophet now employs the word *faithfulness* in a more limited sense than
formerly, and connects the two virtues as leading to the same object, so
that, while truth goes first as the cause, justice is the effect of it.
Isaiah promises not only that she will be *righteous* and *faithful*,
but that she will also be distinguished by these commendations; by which
he means that the knowledge or reputation of it will be everywhere
diffused. We know that hypocrites, too, are adorned with honorable
titles; but Isaiah, having introduced God as speaking, takes for granted
that the city will actually be *righteous*, as it is foretold that she
shall be. In the meantime, as I have said, he describes the fruit of a
true conversion; as if he had said,” When Jerusalem shall be brought
Jack to true godliness, men will be persuaded that she is renewed.”

<span id="viii.i-p253"></span><span id="viii.i-p253.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p254"></span>**27.** *Zion shall be redeemed with
judgment* He confirms the same doctrine; and because the restoration of
the Church was hard to be believed, he shows that it does not depend on
the will of men, but is founded on the *justice* and *judgment* of God;
as if he had said, that God will by no means permit his Church to be
altogether destroyed, because he is *righteous*. The design of the
Prophet, therefore, is to withdraw the minds of the godly from earthly
thoughts, that in looking for the safety of the Church they may depend
entirely on God, and not cease to entertain good hopes, although instead
of aids they should see nothing but obstructions. It is a great mistake
to consider *justice* and *judgment* to refer to the Church, as if
Isaiah were speaking about the well-ordered condition of a city; for the
plain meaning is what I have stated, that though men yield no
assistance, the justice of God is fully sufficient for redeeming his
Church. And, indeed, so long as we look at ourselves, what hope are we
entitled to cherish? How many things, on the contrary, immediately
present themselves that are fitted to weaken our faith! It is only in
the justice of God that we shall find solid and lasting ground of
confidence.

<span id="viii.i-p255"></span>*And they that return to her*  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) This second clause points out the manner
of their deliverance; namely that the exiles, who had been widely
dispersed, will again be gathered together.

<span id="viii.i-p257"></span><span id="viii.i-p257.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p258"></span>**28.** *And the destruction of the
transgressors* Lest hypocrites should imagine that any fruit of these
promises belongs to them, and should indulge in vain boasting, he
threatens that they shall perish, though God redeem his Church. For
hypocrites have always been mingled with the Church, and indeed are
connected with it in the closest manner; but they form their estimation
of it from outward show. All that God promises they at once apply
confidently to themselves. The apostle tears from them this trust, if
indeed it deserve the name of trust, which springs from pride and the
arrogance of a haughty mind. Here we ought to observe how great wisdom
is needed by godly teachers, that, while they terrify the wicked by the
judgment of God, they may at the same time support good men, and
strengthen them by some consolation, that they may not be cast down and
discouraged. On the other hand, when believers are encouraged be the
promise of God, and when wicked men falsely apply it to themselves, and
puff up their minds with vain confidence, the method and course which we
ought to pursue is, that we neither give occasion to wicked men to
become proud, nor depress and discourage the minds of the godly; as
Isaiah does in this passage. For while he speaks of the redemption of
the Church, he at the same time threatens that sinners, that is, wicked
men, shall be destroyed, that they may not suppose that these acts of
God’s kindness belong at all to them.

<span id="viii.i-p259"></span>And yet, while he pronounces destruction
against the wicked, by this comparison he exhibits more fully the favor
of God towards believers, which is far more distinctly seen, when God
allows the reprobate to perish, but preserves his own in safety, as it
is said,

<span id="viii.i-p260"></span>A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten
thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. <span
id="viii.i-p260.1"></span>[Ps
91:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#007.md)<span id="viii.i-p260.1"></span>.

<span id="viii.i-p261"></span>Besides, he mitigates the grief and
anguish which the diminution of the numbers of the Church might produce
in godly minds; for he shows that there is no other way of imparting
health to the whole body than by removing its corruption.

<span id="viii.i-p262"></span><span id="viii.i-p262.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p263"></span>**29.** *For* (or, *that is*) *they shall
be ashamed* In the Hebrew the particle <span id="viii.i-p263.1"></span>
כי(*ki*) is employed, which properly denotes a cause, but frequently
also denotes exposition. Now, since the Prophet does not here state
anything new, but only explains the cause of the destruction which
awaited the ungodly, to render <span id="viii.i-p263.2"></span>כי (*ki*)
by *that is*, appears to connect it better with the preceding word,
<span id="viii.i-p263.3"></span>כלה, (*kalah*,) *consumed, They shall be
consumed, that is, they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have
desired*; as if the Prophet had said that no evil will be more
destructive to them than their own superstition. The idols, says he,
which you call upon for your protection and safety will rather bring
destruction upon you.

<span id="viii.i-p264"></span>The word <span
id="viii.i-p264.1"></span>אלים, (*elim*,) *oaks*,  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) has been sometimes rendered *Gods*;
 <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) but this meaning is set aside by
the context; for immediately afterwards he adds the word groves: *Ye
shall be ashamed of the groves which you have chosen*. Now, under the
image both of trees and of groves, the Prophet, by a figure of speech,
in which a part is taken for the whole, reproves every kind of false
worship; for although among the Jews there were many forms of idolatry,
the custom here mentioned, of choosing *groves* and *forests* for
offering sacrifices, was the most common of all. Whether the word <span
id="viii.i-p266.2"></span>גנות (*gannoth*) in the second clause be
translated *groves* or *gardens*, there can be no doubt that it means
the altars and sacred buildings in which they performed their idolatrous
worship. Although they did not intend openly to revolt from God, they
invented new kinds of worship; and, as if one place had been more
acceptable to God than another, they devoted it to his service, as we
see done by the papists. Next follows a change of the person; for, in
order to make the reproof more severe, those wicked men of whom he spoke
in the third person are now directly addressed, *Ye shall be ashamed*

<span id="viii.i-p267"></span>*Which you have desired* By the word
*desired* he reproves the mad and burning eagerness with which wicked
men follow their superstitions. They ought to have been earnestly
devoted with their whole heart to the service of one Gods but they rush
with blind violence to false worship, as if they were driven by brutish
lust. In almost every human mind there naturally exists this disease,
that they have forsaken the true God, and run mad in following idols;
and hence Scripture frequently compares this madness to the loves of
harlots, who shake off shame, as well as reason.

<span id="viii.i-p268"></span>*For the gardens that ye have chosen* That
the Prophet describes not only their excessive zeal, but their
presumption, in corrupting the worship of God, is evident from this
second clause, in which he says that they *chose gardens*, for this term
is contrasted with the injunction of the law. Whatever may be the
plausible appearances under which unbelievers endeavor to cloak their
superstitions, still this saying remains true, that *obedience is better
than all sacrifices*. (<span id="viii.i-p268.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="viii.i-p268.1"></span>.) Accordingly, under the term willworship
(<span id="viii.i-p268.2"></span>ἐθελοθρησκεία) Paul includes (<span
id="viii.i-p268.3"></span>[Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span id="viii.i-p268.3"></span>.md)
all kinds of false worship which men contrive for themselves without the
command of God. On this account God complains that the Jews have
despised his word, and have delighted themselves with their own
inventions; as if he had said, “It was your duty to obey, but you wished
to have an unfettered choice, or rather an unbounded liberty.”

<span id="viii.i-p269"></span>This single consideration is sufficient to
condemn the inventions of men, that they have it not in their power to
choose the manner of worshipping God, because to him alone belongs the
right to command. God had at that time enjoined that sacrifices should
not be offered to him anywhere else than at Jerusalem (<span
id="viii.i-p269.1"></span>[De
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#013.md)<span
id="viii.i-p269.1"></span>); the Jews thought that they pleased him in
other places, and that false imagination deceived also the heathen
nations. Would that it had gone no farther! But we see how the papists
are involved in the same error, and, in short, experience shows that the
disease has prevailed extensively in every age.

<span id="viii.i-p270"></span>If it be objected that there was not so
much importance in the place, that God ought to have regarded with such
strong abhorrence the worship which was everywhere offered to him, —
first, we ought to consider the reason why God chose that at that time
there should be only one altar, which was, that it might be a bond of
holy unity to an uncivilized nation, and that by means of it their
religion might continue unchanged. Besides, granting that this spiritual
reason were but of temporary force, we must hold by the principle that
commandments were given in the smallest matters, that the Jews might be
better trained to obedience; for since superstition conceals itself
under the pretense of devotion, it is hardly possible but that men will
flatter themselves with their own inventions. But since obedience is the
mother of true religion, it follows that when men exercise their own
fancy, it becomes the source of all superstitions.

<span id="viii.i-p271"></span>It must also be added, that as Isaiah
formerly complained of those crimes which were contrary to brotherly
love and to the second table of the law, so he now complains of their
having transgressed the first table. For since the whole perfection of
righteousness consists in keeping the law, when the Prophets wish to
reprove men for their sins, they speak sometimes of the first, and
sometimes of the second, table of the law. But we ought always to
observe the figurative mode of expression, when under one class they
include the whole.

<span id="viii.i-p272"></span><span id="viii.i-p272.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p273"></span>**30.** *Ye shall certainly be*  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) *as an oak whose leaf fadeth* The Hebrew
particle <span id="viii.i-p274.1"></span>כי (*ki*) may be taken in an
affirmative sense, as I have translated it; and the Prophet appears to
allude to those groves to which they had improperly restricted the
worship of God; for, having mentioned *gardens*, he reproaches them with
the confidence which they placed in theme and threatens drought. “You
take pleasure,” says he, “in your gardens and trees, but you shall be
like withered trees that have lost their foliage.” God therefore mocks
the vain boasting of idolaters, who marvellously flatter themselves with
their contrivances, and think that heaven is open to them, when they are
employed in their ceremonies. Just as at the present day, when the
papists have lighted their lamps and adorned their temples, when they
dazzle with gold and precious stones, when they have played on their
organs and rung their bells, they imagine that they are the happiest of
all men, as if there were now no reason to dread that any evil should
come to them from God, who had received from them a hundredfold
satisfaction.

<span id="viii.i-p275"></span><span id="viii.i-p275.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p276"></span>**31.** *And your God*  <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) *shall be as tow* The Hebrew word <span
id="viii.i-p277.1"></span>חסן (*chason*) signifies strong: and though it
is here applied to God, still it retains its signification, as if he had
said, “That god who was your strength shall be turned into stubble.”

<span id="viii.i-p278"></span>*And the maker of it* By the *maker* he
means the carver; but as he mentions an idol, we must explain it
agreeably to the matter in hand. Some think that he expresses the
repentance of idolaters, by telling us that they would acknowledge their
folly, and, being covered with shame, would burn their idols. But I
consider the meaning to be different; for as a fire is made of dry fuel
such as tow, “in like manner,” saith the Prophet,” gather you and your
idols into one heap, as when a pile of wood is built up, that you may be
consumed together, so that the idols may be like tow, and the men like
fire, and that one conflagration may consume the whole.”

<span id="viii.i-p279"></span>*And there shall be none to quench them*
It ought to be observed that the Prophets, when they mention the wrath
of God, describe it by outward representations, because it cannot be
perceived by the eyes or by any other sense. Thus the wrath of God, by
which the ungodly are destroyed, is compared to fire, which consumes all
things. It is now evident enough what the Prophet means, namely, that
all the ungodly shall be destroyed, whatever may be the nature of their
confidence; and not only so, but that their destruction shall be the
greater, because they have placed their confidence in false and
deceitful things, and that utter destruction will overtake them from
that very quarter from which they had vainly looked for deliverance. For
the images and idols are excitements of the wrath of God, kindling it
into a flame which cannot be quenched.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc13007.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="viii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p78"></span> <span id="viii.i-p78.1"></span>*Feci
magnos*. The term <span id="viii.i-p78.2"></span>*feci* (I *have made*)
exhibits the force of the Pihel form, <span id="viii.i-p78.3"></span>
גדלתי(*giddalti*,) which, as in other instances, approaches the meaning
of the Hiphil form, <span id="viii.i-p78.4"></span>הגדלתי, (*higdalti*.)
— *Ed*

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc13007.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="viii.i-p78.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p79"></span> <span id="viii.i-p79.1"></span>Educavi,
vel sustuli.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc13007.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="viii.i-p79.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p80"></span> <span id="viii.i-p80.1"></span>Enutrire.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc13007.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="viii.i-p80.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p81"></span> <span id="viii.i-p81.1"></span>Tollere
liberos.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc13007.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="viii.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p86"></span> Our Author, in his Latin version of the
Prophet, (see p. 33,) has rendered this word by “<span
id="viii.i-p86.2"></span>scelerate egerunt in me“ — “they have acted
wickedly towards me;” and, in the margin, by “<span
id="viii.i-p86.3"></span>rebellarunt contra me,” — “have rebelled
against me.” Without taking notice of either of these translations, he
has here introduced a third, “<span id="viii.i-p86.4"></span>defecerunt“
— “have revolted,” for which it would be easy to produce authorities.
The participle, <span id="viii.i-p86.5"></span>פושעים (*poshegnim*,) at
<span id="viii.i-p86.6"></span>[Ho
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009.md)<span id="viii.i-p86.6"></span>,
is defined by Aben Ezra (quoted by Buxtorff) to mean <span
id="viii.i-p86.7"></span>שיוצאים מהרשות, (*sheyotzeim* *meharshoth*,)
those who withdraw from authority, who set at nought, or oppose, the
authority of a lawful magistrate. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc13007.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="viii.i-p86.8"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p87"></span> <span id="viii.i-p87.1"></span>Spreverunt.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc13007.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="viii.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p94"></span> ‘<span id="viii.i-p94.1"></span>Ἰσραὴλ δέ
με οὐκ ἔγνω, καὶ ὁ λαός με ού συνὢκεν — *But Israel doth not know* me,
*and the people doth not understand* me

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc13007.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="viii.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p97"></span> This comes very near the rendering of the
Septuagint, <span id="viii.i-p97.1"></span>οὐαὶ ἔθνος ἁμαρτωλὸν

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc13007.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="viii.i-p99.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p100"></span> Vigerus remarks, that <span
id="viii.i-p100.1"></span>παῖδες, when construed with the genitives of
nouns, denoting *artists*, *nations*, or any particular condition or
profession of men, is put for the nouns themselves; and he adduces the
following instances, <span id="viii.i-p100.2"></span>ῥητόρων, ἰατρῶν
φιλοσόφων, γραφέων παιδες, which is far more elegant than <span
id="viii.i-p100.3"></span>ῥήτορες etc.; and in like manner, <span
id="viii.i-p100.4"></span>Κελτῶν παῖδες, *sons* *of* *the* *Celts*, or,
*Gauls*, that is, *Gauls*; <span id="viii.i-p100.5"></span>δυστήνων
παῖδες, *sons* *of* *the* *wretched*, that is, *the* *wretched* — *Ed*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc13007.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="viii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p103"></span> Our Author, quoting from memory, has
mingled two passages: *And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways,
and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul?* (<span id="viii.i-p103.1"></span>[De
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012.md)<span
id="viii.i-p103.1"></span>.) *Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him
shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave and swear by his name.*
(<span id="viii.i-p103.2"></span>[De
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020.md)<span
id="viii.i-p103.2"></span>.) — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc13007.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="viii.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p108"></span> <span id="viii.i-p108.1"></span>A quel
propos? Pour quelle fin?

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc13007.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="viii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p118"></span> In the English version it runs, *as
overthrown by strangers*; and the marginal reading, adhering more
closely to the Hebrew idiom, is, *as the overthrow of strangers*. The
interpretation rejected by Calvin has been approved by some able
critics; and Lowth, distrusting the philological views given by his
predecessors, has resorted to a conjectural alteration of the Hebrew
text: — “This reading, though confirmed by all the ancient versions,
gives us no good sense; *for your land is devoured by strangers, and is
desolate as if overthrown by strangers*, is a mere tautology, or, what
is as bad, an identical comparison. Aben Ezra thought that the word, in
its present form, might be taken for the same with <span
id="viii.i-p118.1"></span>זרם, *an inundation*. Schultens is of the same
opinion, (see Taylor’s Concord;) and Schindler, in his Lexicon, explains
it in the same manner, and so, says Kimchi, some explain it.” After
enumerating the attempts of Abendana “to reconcile it to grammatical
analogy,” he adds, “but I rather suppose the true reading to be <span
id="viii.i-p118.2"></span>זרם, and have translated it accordingly: the
word <span id="viii.i-p118.3"></span>זרים, in the line above, seems to
have caught the transcriber’s eye, and to have led him into this
mistake.” — *Notes on Isaiah*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc13007.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="viii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p122"></span> Called also Azariah, <span
id="viii.i-p122.1"></span>[2Ki
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001.md)<span id="viii.i-p122.1"></span>.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc13007.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="viii.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p126"></span> <span id="viii.i-p126.1"></span>Residua
manebit.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc13007.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="viii.i-p126.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p127"></span> A lively French traveler, Tavernier, who
flourished about the middle of the seventeenth century, in describing
the eastern shores of the Mediterranean Sea, gives the following
account: — “There we see large beds of *melons* and of *cucumbers*, but
especially of the latter, of which the inhabitants of the Levant are
particularly fond. Most frequently they eat them without peeling, and
afterwards drink a glass of water. Throughout the whole of Asia this is
the ordinary food of the common people for three or four months. The
whole family lives on it; and when a child asks for something to eat,
instead of giving it bread, as in France and other places is the custom,
in the Levant they offer it a *cucumber*, which it eats raw just as it
has been fresh pulled. *Cucumbers* in the Levant have a peculiarly
excellent flavour, and though they are eaten raw they never do any
injury.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc13007.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="viii.i-p162.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p163"></span> *Poedagogia*. In what sense our Author
uses this term may be gathered from his Commentary on <span
id="viii.i-p163.2"></span>[Galatians
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024.md)<span id="viii.i-p163.2"></span>.
*The law was our* schoolmaster (<span
id="viii.i-p163.3"></span>παιδαγωγός) *to Christ*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc13007.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="viii.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p173"></span> Our Author seems to allude to <span
id="viii.i-p173.1"></span>[Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024.md)<span id="viii.i-p173.1"></span>,
*It shall come to pass that before they call, I will answer; and while
they are yet speaking, I will hear*. This conjecture is confirmed by the
remarks which immediately follow on the word *call*, as the leading word
in the passage. It appears to have escaped his recollection, that in
this instance the *spreading forth of the hands* is not mentioned,
though it occurs in an analogous passage of Solomon’s prayer at the
dedication of the temple — *What prayer or what supplication soever
shall be made of any man*, when he shall *spread forth his hands in this
house; then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling-place*. <span
id="viii.i-p173.3"></span>[2 Chr.
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#029.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#030.md)<span id="viii.i-p173.3"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc13007.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="viii.i-p193.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p194"></span> <span id="viii.i-p194.1"></span>ונוכחה
(*venivvakechah*), *and let us settle our dispute.* — *Bishop Stock*.
“Both of us, I and you, that we may ascertain which of us has committed
an offense against the other; and if you have sinned against me, still I
hope to convert you.” — *Jarchi.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc13007.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="viii.i-p199.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p200"></span> <span id="viii.i-p200.1"></span>Loyauté

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc13007.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="viii.i-p214.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p215"></span> This paragraph, which our Author had
inadvertently inserted in his exposition of the nineteenth verse, is
here restored to its proper place. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc13007.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="viii.i-p215.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p216"></span> “*For Jehovah hath spoken*, who fulfills
his threatening as well as his promises, and does not rashly recall what
he hath spoken.” — *Rosensmuller*.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc13007.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="viii.i-p229.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p230"></span> Our author illustrates it by the
alliteration of <span id="viii.i-p230.2"></span>*primi pravi*. “The word
<span id="viii.i-p230.3"></span>סוררים (*sorerim*) is here equivalent,”
says Jarchi, “to <span id="viii.i-p230.4"></span>סרים, (*sarim*,) that
is, persons *departing* from the right path.” “In this word <span
id="viii.i-p230.5"></span>סוררים, (*sorerim*,)” says his annotator
Breithaupt, which our Commentator here explains by <span
id="viii.i-p230.6"></span>סרים, (*sarim*,) *departers*, “there is an
allusion to the word <span id="viii.i-p230.7"></span>שרים, *(princes*,)
which we here find in the sacred text.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc13007.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="viii.i-p238.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p239"></span> In our English version it runs, *Ah! I
will ease me of mine adversaries*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc13007.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="viii.i-p255.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p256"></span> In the English version it is rendered,
*her* *converts*; but the marginal reading is, *And* *they* *that*
*return* *of* *her*. “That is,” says Jarchi, “those who are in her (in
the city of Zion) that repent.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc13007.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="viii.i-p264.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p265"></span> “The word <span
id="viii.i-p265.2"></span>אילים (*elim*) has, in the singular number,
<span id="viii.i-p265.3"></span>אלה, (*elah*,) a kind of tree, called,
in the German language, <span id="viii.i-p265.4"></span>ulme.” —
*Jarchi*. For the purpose of proving that by <span
id="viii.i-p265.5"></span>אולמא, Jarchi means *the elm*, his annotator,
Breithaupt, adduces not only the German <span
id="viii.i-p265.6"></span>ulme, but the Italian <span
id="viii.i-p265.7"></span>*olmo*, the French <span
id="viii.i-p265.8"></span>*orme*, and the Latin <span
id="viii.i-p265.9"></span>*ulmus*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc13007.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="viii.i-p265.10"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p266"></span> Evidently supposing that it is the plural
of <span id="viii.i-p266.1"></span>אל, (*el*,) God, and overlooking the
medial radical *Yod*, which is sometimes expressed, but oftener left
out, in this word. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc13007.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="viii.i-p273.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p274"></span> *For ye shall be*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc13007.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="viii.i-p276.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p277"></span> *And the strong*. — Eng. Ver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc13008.md)
