[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13007)  [Next](cc13009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 2:1-22

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz
saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Verbum quod vidit Isaias, filius Amos
super Iuda et Ierusalem.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2.** And it shall come to pass in the last
days, *that* the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in
the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all
nations shall flow unto it.

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et accidet in novissimo dierum, ut
statuatur mons domus Iehovae in verticem montium, et erigatur supra
omnes colles; et fluent ad eum omnes gentes.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**3.** And many people shall go and say, Come
ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the
God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et venient populi multi, ac dicent,
Venite, et ascendemus in montem Iehovae, in domum Dei Iacob. Et
instituet nos in viis suis, et ambulabimus in semitis ejus. Quoniam e
Zion exibit lex, et verbum Domini e Ierusalem.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>**4.** And he shall judge among the nations,
and shall rebuke many people; and they shall beat their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift
up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et judicabit inter gentes, arguetque
populos multos: et concident gladios suos in ligones, et lanceas suas in
falces: nec levabit gens in gentem gladium, nec consuescent ultra
praelio.

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**5.** O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us
walk in the light of the Lord.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Domus Iacob, venite, et ambulabimus in
lumine Domini.

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>**6.** Therefore thou hast forsaken thy
people the house of Jacob, because they be replenished from the east,
and *are* soothsayers like the Philistines, and they please themselves
in the children of strangers.

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Certe deseruisti populum tuum, domum
Iacob: eo quod impleti sint Oriente, (*vel, antiquitate,*) et auguribus,
ut Philistaei: atque in filiis alienis acquieverint.

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>**7.** Their land also is full of silver and
gold, neither *is there any* end of their treasures; their land is also
full of horses, neither *is there any* end of their chariots:

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Impletur est terra ejus argento et
auro; nec finis thesauris ejus. Equis quoque repleta est terra ejus, nec
quadrigis ejus finis.

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>**8.** Their land also is full of idols; they
worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have
made:

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Impleta est etiam terra ejus idolis:
et coram opere manuum suorum se incurvarunt, coram eo quod fixerunt
digiti ipsorum.

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the mean man boweth down, and the
great man humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not.

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et inclinatus est homo, et humiliatus
est vir: ideo, ne remittas, (*vel, non remittes.*)

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>**10.** Enter into the rock, and hide thee in
the dust, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty.

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Ingredere in petram, abscondere in
pulvere a conspectu pavoris Domini, et gloria magnificentiae ejus.

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span>**11.** The lofty looks of man shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down; and the LORD
alone shall be exalted in that day.

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Sublimitas oculorum hominis
humiliabitur, et incurvabitur altitudo hominum, et exaltabitur Iehova
solus in die illa.

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span>**12.** For the day of the LORD of hosts
*shall be* upon every *one that is* proud and lofty, and upon every *one
that* is lifted up, and he shall be brought low:

<span id="ix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quoniam dies Iehovae exercituum super
omnem superbum et excelsum, et super omne elevatum, et humile erit.

<span id="ix.i-p26"></span>**13.** And upon all the cedars of Lebanon,
*that are* high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan,

<span id="ix.i-p27"></span>**13.** Super omnes, inquam, cedros Libani
sublimes et elevatos, super omnes quercus Basan,

<span id="ix.i-p28"></span>**14.** And upon all the high mountains, and
upon all the hills *that are* lifted up,

<span id="ix.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et super omnes montes excelsos, et
super omnes colles elevatos,

<span id="ix.i-p30"></span>**15.** And upon every high tower, and upon
every fenced wall,

<span id="ix.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et super omnem turrim excelsam, et
super omnem murum munitum,

<span id="ix.i-p32"></span>**16.** And upon all the ships of Tarshish,
and upon all pleasant pictures.

<span id="ix.i-p33"></span>**16.** Super omnes naves Tharsis, et super
exquisitas picturas.

<span id="ix.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the loftiness of man shall be
bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made low; and the LORD
alone shall be exalted in that day.

<span id="ix.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et incurvabitur celsitudo hominis, et
humiliabitur altitudo hominum, et exaltabitur Iehova solus in die illa.

<span id="ix.i-p36"></span>**18.** And the idols he shall utterly
abolish.

<span id="ix.i-p37"></span>**18.** Idola autem in universum abolebit.

<span id="ix.i-p38"></span>**19.** And they shall go into the holes of
the rocks, and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the LORD, and
for the glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the
earth.

<span id="ix.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et ingredientur in cavernas petrarum,
et in voragines terrae, a praesentia terroris Iehovae et gloria
majestatis ejus: cum surrexerit ut concutiat terram.

<span id="ix.i-p40"></span>**20.** In that day a man shall cast his
idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they made *each one* for
himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats;

<span id="ix.i-p41"></span>**20.** In die illa projiciet homo idola sua
argentea, et idola sua aurea, quae fecerunt ei ad adorandum, in cavernam
talparum et vespertilionum;

<span id="ix.i-p42"></span>**21.** To go into the clefts of the rocks,
and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and for the
glory of his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

<span id="ix.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et ingredientur in scissuras
petrarum, et cacumina saxorum, a facie pavoris Iehovae et gloria
majestatis ejus, cum surrexerit ut concutiat terram.

<span id="ix.i-p44"></span>**22.** Cease ye from man, whose breath *is*
in his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of?

<span id="ix.i-p45"></span>**22.** Cessate igitur ab homine cujus in
nare spiritus; qua enim in re (*vel, ad quid, vel, quanti*) ipse
reputatur?

<span id="ix.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p47"></span><span id="ix.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p48"></span>**1.** *The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz
saw* This prophecy is a confirmation of that doctrine which we had a
little before, concerning the restoration of the Church. For since it is
difficult to cherish the hope of safety, when we are, as it were, in the
midst of destruction, while the wrath of God burns and consumes
everything far and wide, or while his threatenings strike terror into
our minds, at such a period the bare promises are hardly sufficient to
support us and to allay our fears. For this reason the Lord determined
that to the consolation which had already been proclaimed there should
be added this special vision, by way of confirmation, in order to make
it more certain and undoubted that, whatever calamities might arise, his
Church would never perish. I have no doubt, therefore, but that this
vision agrees with what is stated in the 26th and 27th verses of the
former chapter.

<span id="ix.i-p49"></span>Hence we learn what was the advantage and
design of *visions*; for since doctrine sometimes has not sufficient
weight with us, God therefore adds *visions*, that by means of them he
may seal his doctrine to us. Since, therefore, this vision is connected
with the former promise, we learn from it this useful doctrine, that all
visions of every kind which God formerly gave to his Prophets must be
joined to the promises in such a manner as to be seals of them. And thus
we perceive more and more the astonishing goodness of God, that, not
satisfied with giving us his bare word, he places before our eyes, as it
were, representations of the events.

<span id="ix.i-p50"></span>He has added a confirmation, that the
restoration of the Church is a matter of very great importance, and
necessary to be known. For where is the truth of the Lord, where is
faith, if there be no Church? If there be none, it follows that God is a
liar, and that everything contained in his word is false. But as God
frequently shows, by striking proofs, that he preserves the Church by
unknown methods and without the assistance of men, so he now declares by
a remarkable prediction that he will do this.

<span id="ix.i-p51"></span>There were two purposes to be served by this
prediction. First, since Isaiah, and others who came after him, were
unceasingly to proclaim terror, on account of the obstinate wickedness
of the people, until the temple should be burnt, and the city destroyed,
and the Jews carried into captivity, it was necessary that such severity
should be mitigated towards believers by some consolation of hope.
Secondly, as they were to languish in captivity, and as their minds were
shaken, even after their return, by a succession of varied calamities,
and at length were almost overwhelmed with despair by the dreadful
desolation and confusion, they might a hundred times have fainted, if
they had not been upheld. As to those who had already fallen, they were
raised up and confirmed by the promised restoration, to such an extent,
at least, that they retained among them the practice of calling on God,
which is the only and undoubted remedy for the worst of evils. <span
id="ix.i-p51.1"></span>הדבר, (*haddabar*,) *the word*, is rendered by
some interpreters *the thing*, which accords with the general
signification of this term; but it is better to view it as denoting a
divine purpose. Isaiah says that it was revealed to him by a special
vision.

<span id="ix.i-p52"></span><span id="ix.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p53"></span>**2.** *And it shall come to pass in the last
of the days*  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) When he mentions the
end or completion of days, let us remember that he is speaking of the
kingdom of Christ; and we ought also to understand why he gives to the
kingdom of Christ this appellation. It was because till that time
everything might be said to be in a state of suspense, that the people
might not fix their eyes on the present condition of things, which was
only a shadow, but on the Redeemer, by whom the reality would be
declared. Since Christ came, therefore, if that time be compared with
ours, we have actually arrived at *the end of ages*. It was the duty of
the fathers who lived at that time to go, as it were, with outstretched
arms to Christ; and since the restoration of all things depended on his
coming, it is with good reason that they are enjoined to extend their
hope to that period. It was indeed always useful for them to know, that
under Christ the condition of the Church would be more perfect; more
especially because they were held under figures, for the Lord was
pleased to arouse them in various wavy for the express purpose of
keeping them in suspense.

<span id="ix.i-p55"></span>But there was a peculiar importance attached
to this prediction; for, during four hundred years or thereby, there
were innumerable occasions on which they might have fainted, had they
not called to remembrance that fullness of days, in which the Church was
to be perfectly restored. During the various storms, therefore, by which
the Church was nearly overwhelmed, every believer, when shipwrecked,
seized on this word as a plank, that by means of it he might be floated
into the harbour. Yet it ought to be observed, that while the fullness
of days began at the coming of Christ, it flows on in uninterrupted
progress until he appear the second time for our salvation. (<span
id="ix.i-p55.1"></span>[Heb 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028.md)<span
id="ix.i-p55.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p56"></span>*That the mountain of the Lord’s house shall
be established* This vision might be thought to wear the aspect of
absurdity, not only because Zion was a little hill of no extraordinary
height, just as if one should compare a handful of earth to huge
mountains; but because he had but a little before predicted its
destruction. How, then, could it be believed that Mount Zion, after
having lost all her greatness, would again shine with such lustre as to
draw upon her the eyes *of all the nations*? And yet she is extolled as
if she hail been loftier than Olympus.” Let the Gentiles,” says Isaiah,
“boast as much as they please of their lofty mountains; for they shall
be nothing in comparison of that hill, though it be low and
inconsiderable.” According to nature, this certainly was very
improbable. What! shall Zion be hung up in the clouds? And therefore
there can be no doubt that wicked men scoffed at this prediction; for
ungodliness has always been ready to break forth against God.

<span id="ix.i-p57"></span>Now the peculiarity which I have noticed
tended to weaken the belief of this prediction; for when Zion, after the
destruction of the temple, had fallen into the deepest disgrace, how
could she rise again so suddenly? And yet it was not in vain that Isaiah
prophesied; for at length this hill was actually raised above all the
mountains, because from it was heard the voice of God, and sounded
through the whole world, that it might lift us up to heaven; because
from it the heavenly majesty of God shone brightly; and lastly, because,
being the sanctuary of God, it surpassed the whole world in lofty
excellence.

<span id="ix.i-p58"></span>The use of this prophecy deserves our
attention. It was, that Isaiah intended to bring consolation, which
would support the minds of the people during the captivity; so that,
although there should be no temple, and no sacrifices, and though all
should be in ruins, still this hope would be cherished in the minds of
the godly, and, amidst a condition so desolate and so shockingly
ruinous, they would still reason thus: “The mountain of the Lord is
indeed forsaken, but there he will yet have his habitation; and greater
shall be the glory of this mountain than of all others.” To prevent
them, therefore, from doubting that such would be the result, the
Prophet has here, as it were, sketched a picture in which they might
behold the glory of God; for although the mountain was still in
existence, yet a disgraceful solitude made it almost an object of
detestation, since it had lost its splendor in consequence of having
been forsaken by God. But it was the duty of the pious to look not at
those ruins, but at this vision. Moreover, the reason why he speaks in
such lofty terms concerning the exaltation of Mount Zion is sufficiently
evident from what follows; because thence proceeded the Gospel, in which
the image of God shines. Other mountains might excel it in height; but
as the glory of God has surpassing excellence, so the mountain in which
he is manifested must also be highly distinguished. It was not,
therefore, on her own account that he extolled Mount Zion, but in
respect of her ornament, the splendor of which would be communicated to
the whole world.

<span id="ix.i-p59"></span><span id="ix.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p60"></span>**3.** *And many people shall go* In the
former verse he had slightly noticed the reason why Mount Zion would
hold so high a rank. It was because all nations would flow to it, as if
the rivers were overflowing through the great abundance of waters. He
now makes the same statement, and assigns the reason; for it might be
asked why various nations flocked to it in crowds from distant lands. He
says, therefore, that the desire of serving God was their motive.

<span id="ix.i-p61"></span>The word <span id="ix.i-p61.1"></span>רבים,
(*rabbim*,) *many*, implies a contrast; for it means that there will not
be, as formerly, but one nation which devotes itself to the worship of
the true God, but that those who formerly were *strangers and
foreigners* (<span id="ix.i-p61.2"></span>[Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="ix.i-p61.2"></span>.md)
will come into the same agreement with them about religion; as if he had
said that the Church, which had formerly been, as it were, shut up in a
corner, would now be collected from every quarter. By the word *many* he
meant *various*; for unquestionably he did not intend to weaken the
force of what he had said a little before about *all nations*. Now,
though this was never fulfilled, that the nations of the whole world,
each of them leaving their native country, made a journey into Judea;
yet, because the doctrine of the gospel, by which God hath gathered to
himself a Church indiscriminately out of all nations, proceeded from
Mount Zion, he justly says that they will come to it who having, with
one consent of faith, embraced the covenant of eternal salvation, have
been united into one Church. We must also observe the harmony between
the figures of the law and that spiritual worship which began to be
introduced at the coming of Christ.

<span id="ix.i-p62"></span>*And shall say, Come* By these words he first
declares that the godly will be filled with such an ardent desire to
spread the doctrines of religion, that every one not satisfied with his
own calling and his personal knowledge will desire to draw others along
with him. And indeed nothing could be more inconsistent with the nature
of faith than that deadness which would lead a man to disregard his
brethren, and to keep the light of knowledge choked up within his own
breast. The greater the eminence above others which any man has received
from his calling so much the more diligently ought he to labor to
enlighten others.

<span id="ix.i-p63"></span>This points out to us also the ordinary
method of collecting a Church, which is, by the outward voice of men;
for though God might bring each person to himself by a secret influence,
yet he employs the agency of men, that he may awaken in them an anxiety
about the salvation of each other. By this method he likewise
strengthens their mutual attachment, and puts to the test their
willingness to receive instruction, when every one permits himself to be
taught by others.

<span id="ix.i-p64"></span>Next Isaiah shows that those who take upon
them the office of teaching and exhorting should not sit down and
command others, but should join and walk along with them as companions;
as we see that some men are very severe instructors, and eager to urge
others forward, who yet do not move a step. But here believers, instead
of addressing to their brethren the command, Go up, rather lead the way
by their own example. This is the true method, therefore, of profitable
teaching, when, by actually performing what we demand, we make it
evident that we speak with sincerity and earnestness.

<span id="ix.i-p65"></span>*And he will teach us in his ways*  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) He shows, first, that God cannot be
worshipped aright until we have been enlightened by doctrine; and,
secondly, that God is the only teacher of the Church, on whose lips we
ought to hang. Hence it follows that nothing is less acceptable to God
than certain foolish and erring services which men call devotion and
likewise, that though he employs the agency of men in teaching, still he
reserves this as his own right, that they must utter nothing but his
word. Had this rule been followed by those who called themselves
teachers of the Church religion would not have been so shamefully
corrupted by a wide and confused diversity of superstitions. Nor is it
possible that we shall not be carried away into various errors, where we
are tossed about by the opinions of men. Justly therefore, does Isaiah,
when he claims for God alone the power and authority to teach the
Church, shut the mouths of all mortals; so that the office of teaching
is committed to pastors for no other purpose than that God alone may be
heard there. Let those who wish to be reckoned ministers of Christ allow
themselves to be regulated by this statement, that they may take nothing
away from his authority.

<span id="ix.i-p67"></span>The Hebrew words <span
id="ix.i-p67.1"></span>ויורנו מדרכיו (*veyorenu midderachaiv*) may be
literally rendered, *he will teach us OF his ways;* which means, “He
will show us what his ways are,” or, he will set before us his ways for
a perfect instruction.

<span id="ix.i-p68"></span>Next he adds obedience, *we will walk in his
paths*, by which he points out both the object and the result; for the
instruction which is delivered to us from the mouth of the Lord is not
mere speculation, but directs the course of our life, and leads us to
obey him. But we ought also to observe, that the commandments of God are
called ways and *paths*, in order to inform us that they go miserably
astray who turn aside from them in the smallest degree. Thus every kind
of unlawful liberty is restrained, and all men, from the least even to
the greatest, are enjoined to observe this rule of obedience, that they
keep themselves within the limits of the word of God.

<span id="ix.i-p69"></span>*For out of Zion shalt go forth the law* This
is an explanation of the former verse, in which he said that Mount Zion
will be placed above all mountains; that is, that she will be raised to
the highest pitch of honor, when she shall become the fountain of saving
doctrine, which shall flow out over the whole world. He calls it *the
law*; but we have elsewhere spoken of the derivation and meaning of this
word; for <span id="ix.i-p69.2"></span>תורה (*torah*) means
*instruction*, and the most complete of all kinds of instruction is
contained in *the law*. He speaks, therefore, after the manner of the
prophets; for since the rule of godliness was to be obtained from the
law, they were wont, by a figure of speech, (synecdoche,) in which a
part is taken for the whole, to include under the word *law* all the
instruction which God has given; just as under the word *altar* they
include the whole worship of God.

<span id="ix.i-p70"></span>Now, since we know that this prediction was
fulfilled, when the preaching of the gospel began at that very place,
(for Christ first taught at Jerusalem, and afterwards his doctrine was
spread throughout the whole world,) we must not take the word law in a
limited sense; for at that time, as to its figures and bondage, it was
rather abolished. (<span id="ix.i-p70.1"></span>[Lu
2:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#046.md)<span id="ix.i-p70.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p70.2"></span>[Mr
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#010.md)<span id="ix.i-p70.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p70.3"></span>[Eze
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.i-p70.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p70.4"></span>[Lu
24:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span id="ix.i-p70.4"></span>..md)
Hence we conclude that the term is applied, without limitation, to the
word of God. And when the prophets say that waters will spring out of
the temple to water the whole world, (<span id="ix.i-p70.5"></span>[Eze
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p70.5"></span>,.md)
they express metaphorically what Isaiah lays down in plain language;
namely, that the source of saving doctrine will be from that place; for
out of it the apostles and other teachers spread the gospel through the
whole world.

<span id="ix.i-p71"></span>We must observe the reason why the Prophet
made these statements. It was, that he might fortify the godly against
various changes, which otherwise, on manifold occasions, might have
crushed their minds; and therefore it was of great importance to provide
against offenses, and to fortify the minds of the godly. “Whatever may
be the condition of your affairs, and though you should be oppressed by
afflictions on all sides, still continue to cherish this assured hope,
that *the law will go forth out of Zion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem*; for this is an infallible decree of God, which no diversity
or change of events will make void.”

<span id="ix.i-p72"></span>How much the godly needed this consolation
may be easily inferred from the course of events which immediately
followed; for when Judea had been forsaken, the temple destroyed, the
worship of Goal overturned, and the comely order of the Church utterly
defaced while tyranny became more and more oppressive, it was natural
that their minds should be discouraged, and that all hope should be
thrown away. On the other hand, after the return of the Jews from
Babylon, when dreadful superstitions gradually obtained prevalence, and
the priests, instead of discharging their office in a lawful manner,
grasped at wicked tyranny, what else could have occurred to the minds of
the goodly than that religion had fallen into neglect, and that the
worship of Goal was entirely laid aside, if they had not been supported
by this promise? For there can be no doubt that this temptation, which
arose out of internal vices, was more injurious than their banishment
into Babylon. So long as they were exiles, they had at least prophets,
by whose instruction they were encouraged; but in that state of
corruption the good effect of instruction had been lost, and no regard
was paid to religion or godliness. But by the aid of this prediction
alone the Lord granted to them the support which they needed. For why
had *the law*, which God appeared to have consecrated for himself in his
own habitation, been thrown down and basely trampled under foot? Who,
then, would have thought not only that it would have a place there, but
that it would also reign in all foreign places, and in the most distant
regions? On the other hand, the Prophet declares not only that *the law*
will remain in its place, but that it will travel further; by which he
means that it will not be confined within its former boundaries, for it
will be proclaimed to the Gentiles without distinction.

<span id="ix.i-p73"></span>And undoubtedly this had very great authority
and weight with the Apostles, when they knew that they were appointed to
perform those things which are here promised. Otherwise they would never
have had courage enough to venture to undertake the office, and, in
short, would not have been able to endure the burden, especially when
the whole world furiously opposed them. But they knew that he by whom
this had been promised, and from whom they had received authority to
deliver this message, would easily remove every obstacle. It ought also
to be observed that we obtain from it a strong confirmation of our
faith, when we learn that the doctrine of the gospel *came forth out of
Zion*; because we thence conclude that it is not new, or lately sprung
up, but that it is the eternal truth of God, of which a testimony had
been given in all ages before it was brought to light.

<span id="ix.i-p74"></span>We also infer that it was necessary that all
the ancient ceremonies should be abolished, and that a new form of
teaching should be introduced, though the substance of the doctrine
continue to be the same; for *the law* formerly proceeded out of Mount
Sinai, (<span id="ix.i-p74.1"></span>[Ex
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020)<span id="ix.i-p74.1"></span>,.md)
but now it proceeded *out of Zion*, and therefore it assumed a new form.
Two things, therefore, must be observed; first, that the doctrine of God
is the same, and always agrees with itself; that no one may charge God
with changeableness, as if he were inconsistent; and though the law of
the Lord be now the same that it ever was, yet it came *out of Zion*
with a new garment; secondly, when ceremonies and shadows had been
abolished, Christ was revealed, in whom the reality of them is
perceived.

<span id="ix.i-p75"></span><span id="ix.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p76"></span>**4.** *And he shall judge among the nations*
He means that the doctrine will be like a king’s scepter, that God may
rule among all nations; for, by a figure of speech in which a part is
taken for the whole, the Hebrew word <span id="ix.i-p76.1"></span>שפט,
(*shaphat*,) *to judge*, means *to govern* or *to reign*. since,
therefore, God had not taken more than one nation to be subject to his
reign, the Prophet here shows that the boundaries of his kingdom will be
enlarged, that he may rule over various nations. He likewise notices
indirectly the difference between the kingdom of David, which was but a
shadow, and this other kingdom, which would be far more excellent. At
that time God ruled over his chosen people by the hand of David, but
after the coming of Christ he began to reign by himself, that is, in the
person of his only-begotten Son, who was truly *God manifested in the
flesh*. (<span id="ix.i-p76.2"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="ix.i-p76.2"></span>..md)
The prophets sometimes employ the name of *David* when they are speaking
about the kingdom of Christ, and they do so with propriety, that is,
with respect to his human nature; for the Redeemer had been promised to
spring from that family. (<span id="ix.i-p76.3"></span>[Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009.md)<span id="ix.i-p76.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p76.4"></span>[Ezek.
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023.md), [Ezek.
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024)<span id="ix.i-p76.4"></span>..md)
But here the Prophet extols his divine majesty from which it is evident
how much more excellent is the condition of the new Church than that of
the ancient Church, since God hath revealed himself as King in his Son.
And again he confirms the calling of the Gentiles, because Christ is not
sent to the Jews only, that he may reign over them, but that he may hold
his sway over the whole world.

<span id="ix.i-p77"></span>*And shall rebuke many nations* The word
<span id="ix.i-p77.1"></span>יכח (*yakach*) sometimes means to
*expostulate*, sometimes *to correct*, and likewise *to prepare*; but
the ordinary interpretation is most suitable to this passage, in which
the Prophet speaks of the reformation of the Church. For we need
correction, that we may learn to submit ourselves to God; because, in
consequence of the obstinacy which belongs to our nature, we shall never
make progress in the word of God, till we have been subdued by violence.
Accordingly, Christ makes the beginning of preaching the gospel to be,
*that the world be reproved concerning sin*. (<span
id="ix.i-p77.2"></span>[Joh 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008.md)<span
id="ix.i-p77.2"></span>.) That the doctrine may not be without profit,
Isaiah shows that the stubbornness of our flesh must be subdued; and
therefore he attributes to God the office of a *reproving judge*, that
he may try our life, and, by condemning our vices, may effect a
reformation of our morals. And, indeed, we see how little effect is
produced by the gospel unless where that power of the Spirit is
exercised which leads men to repentance.

<span id="ix.i-p78"></span>*And they shall beat their swords into
ploughshares* He next mentions the beneficial result which will follow,
when Christ shall have brought the Gentiles and the nations under his
dominion. Nothing is more desirable than peace; but while all imagine
that they desire it, every one disturbs it by the madness of his lusts;
for pride, and covetousness, and ambition, lead men to rise up in
cruelty against each other. Since, therefore, men are naturally led away
by their evil passions to disturb society, Isaiah here promises the
correction of this evil; for, as the gospel is the *doctrine of
reconciliation*, (<span id="ix.i-p78.1"></span>[2Co
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)<span id="ix.i-p78.1"></span>,.md)
which removes the enmity between us and God, so it brings men into peace
and harmony with each other. The meaning amounts to this, that Christ’s
people will be meek, and, laying aside fierceness, will be devoted to
the pursuit of peace.

<span id="ix.i-p79"></span>This has been improperly limited by some
commentators to the time when Christ was born; because at that time,
after the battle of Actium, the temple of Janus  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) was closed, as appears from the
histories. I readily admit that the universal peace which existed
throughout the Roman empire, at the birth of Christ, was a token of that
eternal peace which we enjoy in Christ. But the Prophet’s meaning was
different. He meant that Christ makes such a reconciliation between God
and men, that a comfortable state of peace exists among themselves, by
putting an end to destructive wars. For if Christ be taken away, not
only are we estranged from God, but we incessantly carry on open war
with him, which is justly thrown back on our own heads; and the
consequence is, that everything in the world is in disorder.

<span id="ix.i-p81"></span>Besides, Isaiah promises that, when the
gospel shall be published, it will be an excellent remedy for putting an
end to quarrels; and not only so, but that, when resentments have been
laid aside, men will be disposed to assist each other. For he does not
merely say, *swords shall be broken in pieces, but they shall be turned
into mattocks*; by which he shows that there will be so great a change
that, instead of annoying one another, and committing various acts of
injustice, as they had formerly done, they will henceforth cultivate
peace and friendship, and will employ their exertions for the common
advantage of all; for *mattocks* and *pruning-hooks* are instruments
adapted to agriculture, and are profitable and necessary for the life of
man. He therefore shows that, when Christ shall reign, those who
formerly were hurried along by the love of doing mischief, will
afterwards contend with each other, in every possible way, by acts of
kindness.

<span id="ix.i-p82"></span>*Neither shall they practice war any more*
 <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) The word <span
id="ix.i-p83.2"></span>למד (*lamad*) signifies either *to be accustomed
to*, or *to learn*. But the meaning of the Prophet is plain enough, that
they will not train themselves in destructive arts, and will not strive
with each other in acts of cruelty and injustice, as they were formerly
accustomed to do. Hence we infer that they have made little proficiency
in the gospel, whose hearts have not been formed to meekness, and among
whom there does not yet reign that brotherly love which leads men to
perform kind offices to each other. But this cannot be done before the
consciences have been brought into a state of peace with God; for we
must begin there, in order that we may also be at peace with men.

<span id="ix.i-p84"></span>Some madmen torture this passage to promote
anarchy, (<span id="ix.i-p84.1"></span>ἀναρχίαν) as if it took away from
the Church entirely the right to use the sword, and bring it forward for
condemning with great severity every kind of wars. For example, if a
prince defend the people entrusted to him, and protect them against
injustice, those people say, “It is unlawful for Christians to use the
sword.” But it is easy to reply to this; for the Prophet speaks
metaphorically about the kingdom of Christ, which leads men, through
mutual kindness, to become reconciled to each other. The Scriptures
frequently employ a metaphor, in which the thing signified is denoted by
a sign; as in that passage,

<span id="ix.i-p85"></span>He who hath not a sword, let him buy one.
(<span id="ix.i-p85.1"></span>[Lu
22:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#036)<span id="ix.i-p85.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p86"></span>Christ certainly did not intend to induce his
followers to fight, but intimated that the time of war was at hand. 0n
the other hand, we are told that swords shall cease to exist, or shall
be beaten down to serve a different purpose, when hatred and fighting
shall be at an end, and when they who formerly were at enmity shall be
reconciled to each other.

<span id="ix.i-p87"></span>It may be objected that, in a state of
harmony and peace, the sword will no longer be needed. I reply, that
peace exists among us just as far as the kingly power of Christ is
acknowledged, and that these two things have a mutual relation. Would
that Christ reigned entirely in us! for then would peace also have its
perfect influence. But since we are still widely distant from the
perfection of that peaceful reign, we must always think of making
progress; and it is excessive folly not to consider that the kingdom of
Christ here is only beginning. Besides, God did not gather a Church — by
which is meant an assembly of godly men — so as to be separate from
others; but the good are always mixed with the bad; and not only so, but
the good have not yet reached the goal, and are widely distant from that
perfection which is required from them. The fulfillment of this
prophecy, therefore, in its full extent, must not be looked for on
earth. It is enough, if we experience the beginning, and if, being
reconciled to God through Christ, we cultivate mutual friendship, and
abstain from doing harm to any one.

<span id="ix.i-p88"></span><span id="ix.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p89"></span>**5.** *O house of Jacob* He sharply rebukes
the Jews by holding out the example of the Gentiles; for since, in
consequence of the spread of his kingdom, God would give law to all
nations from Mount Zion, so as to ingraft them into the body of his
chosen people, nothing could be more strange than that the *house of
Jacob* should revolt from him, and that, when strangers were drawing
near, the members of the household, who ought to have been foremost,
should withdraw. This is, therefore, not only an exceedingly vehement
exhortation, but also a heavy and sharp complaint. Accordingly, he
addresses them by an honorable name, saying, *O house of Jacob,* come;
that he may express more strongly their ingratitude, which appeared in
twist that though they were in the Church God’s first-born, they utterly
renounced that right of inheritance which they held in common with
others.

<span id="ix.i-p90"></span>There is, therefore, an implied comparison,
as if he had said, “Lo, the Gentiles flow together to Mount Zion, and
every one exhorts and urges on his neighbor; they submit to receive
instruction from God, and to be reproved by him and why do you, O
Israelites, you who are the inheritance of God, why do you draw back?
Shall the Gentiles submit to God, and shall you refuse to acknowledge
his authority? Has so great a light been kindled in every part of the
world, and shall you not be enlightened by it? Shall so many waters
flow, and will you not drink? What madness is this, that when the
Gentiles run so eagerly, you sit still in idleness?”

<span id="ix.i-p91"></span>*And we will walk in the light of the Lord*
When he adds *we will walk*, he means that *the light* is placed before
their feet, but that they disregard it by shutting their eyes, and even
extinguish it as far as lies in their power; and yet its brightness
draws to it distant nations.

<span id="ix.i-p92"></span><span id="ix.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p93"></span>**6.** *Surely thou hast forsaken thy people*
In these words he now plainly charges the people with having a perverse
disposition; and he does this not in direct terms, but, as it were,
bursting into astonishment, he suddenly breaks off his discourse, and,
turning to God, exclaims, “Why should I waste words on a nation grown
desperate, which thou, O Lord, hast justly rejected, because, giving
itself up to idolatrous practices, it has treacherously departed from
thy word?”

<span id="ix.i-p94"></span>It may also be a prediction of punishment
still future which he foresaw by the Spirit; as if he had said, That it
was not wonderful if ruin and desolation were about to overtake Mount
Zion on account of the great crimes of the nation. His design may have
been, that so mournful a spectacle might not be the occasion of despair,
and that those who were capable of being cured might be moved by
repentance, and turn to God ere this calamity arrived. For while the
prophets are heralds of God’s judgments, and threaten vengeance against
the ungodly, they usually endeavor, at the same time, to bring as many
as they can to some kind of repentance. The servants of God ought never
to lay aside this disposition, which would lead them to endeavor to do
good even to the reprobate, if that were possible. (<span
id="ix.i-p94.1"></span>[2Ti 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025.md)<span
id="ix.i-p94.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p95"></span>This passage ought to yield abundant
consolation to godly teachers; for when we think that we are speaking to
the deaf, we become faint, and are tempted to give up all exertion, and
to say, “What am I about? I am beating the air.” Yet the Prophet does
not cease to exhort those in whom he perceived no ground of comfortable
hope; and while he stands like one astonished at this destruction of the
people, he nevertheless addresses those whom he sees going to ruin. At
the same time we must observe that, however obstinate the ungodly may
be, we must pronounce vengeance against them; and though they refuse and
gnaw the bridle, yet, that they may be left without excuse, we must
always summon them to the judgment-seat of God.

<span id="ix.i-p96"></span>I consider the <span
id="ix.i-p96.1"></span>כי (*ki*) to mean *surely*;  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md) for this signification is more suitable,
because he breaks off the exhortation which he had begun, and addresses
God. And when he again calls them *the house of Jacob,* this is added
for the purpose of imparting greater vehemence, as is usually done in a
moving discourse; as if he had said, “This holy nation, which God had
chosen, is now forsaken.”

<span id="ix.i-p98"></span>*Because they are replenished from the East*
As the Hebrew word <span id="ix.i-p98.1"></span>קדם (*kadem*) sometimes
denotes *the east*, and sometimes *antiquity*, it may be interpreted to
mean that they were *filled with ancient manners*; because they had
again brought into use those superstitions by which the land of Canaan
was formerly infected. For we know that the prophets often reproach the
nation of Israel with resembling the Canaanites more than they resembled
Abraham and the rest of the holy fathers. And, indeed, because they had
been brought into the possession of this land, when the ancient
inhabitants had been driven out, in order that it might be cleansed from
its pollution, and afterwards devoted to holiness, the refusal to change
their wicked customs involved a twofold ingratitude. But as the other
meaning — *from the East* — has been more generally adopted, I have
chosen to retain it; though even in this view the commentators differ,
for some consider the letter <span id="ix.i-p98.2"></span>מ (*mem*) to
denote comparison, and <span id="ix.i-p98.3"></span>מקדם (*mikkedem*) to
denote *more than the inhabitants of thee East*, while others adopt the
simpler, and, as I think, the more correct view, that they were *filled
with the east*, that is, with the vices which they had contracted from
that quarter; for wicked imitation is amazingly contagious, and nothing
is more natural than that corruptions should glide from one place into
another more distant.

<span id="ix.i-p99"></span>*And with divinations, like the Philistines*
This clause explains the former more fully; for under *divinations* he
includes, by synecdoche, the impostures of Satan to which heathen
nations were addicted. The Prophet therefore means that they now differ
in no respect from *the Philistines*, though God had separated them from
that people by the privilege of his adoption; and this was sufficient to
bring upon them the severest condemnation, that they had forgotten their
calling, and polluted themselves with the corrupted and ungodly customs
of the Gentiles. Hence it appears that to sin by the example of another
contributes nothing to alleviate the guilt.

<span id="ix.i-p100"></span>*And have delighted in the children of
strangers* The last part of the verse is interpreted in various ways;
because the phrase, *the children of strangers*, is viewed by some
metaphorically, as denoting laws and customs; while others regard them
as referring to marriages; because, by marrying indiscriminately women
of foreign extraction, they had mingled their seed, so that there were
many illegitimate children. Jerome gives a harsher exposition, that they
polluted themselves by wicked lusts contrary to nature. For my own part,
I have no doubt that by *the children of strangers* are meant foreign
nations, and not figuratively the laws themselves. The crime charged
against them by the Prophet therefore is, that, by endeavoring to please
the Gentiles, they entangled themselves in their vices, and thus
preferred not only mortal men, but wicked men, to God. He says that they
*delighted*, because the desire or delight of wicked imitation effaced
from their hearts the love of God and of sound doctrine.

<span id="ix.i-p101"></span><span id="ix.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p102"></span>**7.** *Their land is filled with silver and
gold* We must attend to the order which the Prophet here observes; for
he now enumerates the reasons why the Lord rejected his people. In the
former verse he began with *divinations* and the customs of *strangers*;
he now comes down to *silver and gold*; and afterwards he will speak of
*horses and chariots*. There can be no doubt that, having first
condemned idolatry, he reproves them, secondly, for covetousness, and,
thirdly, for sinful trust, when men depart from God, and contrive for
themselves vain grounds of confidence. It was not a thing in itself to
be condemned, that this nation had abundance of gold and silver; but
because they burned with insatiable covetousness, and trusted to *horses
and chariots*, he justly reproves them.

<span id="ix.i-p103"></span>The Hebrew particle <span
id="ix.i-p103.1"></span>ו (*vau*) is here viewed by some as denoting a
contrast, supposing the meaning to be, and yet *their land is filled
with silver and gold*. This would show the ingratitude of the people to
be the greater, because, though they enjoyed an abundance of all good
things, they betook themselves, as if their case had been desperate, to
magical arts and to idols, which is much less excusable than if they had
fled to them during their adversity; because, though they were fed to
the full with an abundance of good things, yet they shook off the yoke
of God. In this way he would aggravate the criminality of a nation that
fled to idols freely and of their own accord, even though they were
luxuriating in their abundance. But I do not receive this
interpretation, for I think it too far-fetched. On the contrary, he
includes in one continued enumeration the vices with which that nation
was chargeable, *covetousness, sinful confidence, and idolatry*.
Accordingly, though the opinion of those who explain it as a contrast be
a true opinion, it does not harmonize with this passage.

<span id="ix.i-p104"></span>*And there is no end of their treasures*
Isaiah proceeds to illustrate more clearly and forcibly what he has
formerly said; for, though it be not in itself sinful or blamable that a
person should possess gold or silver, provided that he make a proper use
of it, he properly launches out against that wicked desire and mad
eagerness to accumulate money, which is most detestable. He says that
*there is no end*, because their eagerness is insatiable, and goes
beyond the bounds of nature. The same opinion must be formed about
*horses and chariots*, for false confidence is here reproved. To prevent
this evil, the Lord had forbidden kings to gather together a great
multitude of horses or chariots, lest, trusting to them, they should
*cause the people to return to Egypt*. (<span
id="ix.i-p104.1"></span>[De 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016.md)<span
id="ix.i-p104.1"></span>.) since, therefore, it is difficult for men to
have resources of this kind in abundance without being also lifted up
with pride, it was the will of God that his people should not have them
at all, or at least should be satisfied with a moderate share.

<span id="ix.i-p105"></span><span id="ix.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p106"></span>**8.** *Their land is also full of idols* He
repeats what he had already noticed about idolatry, but enters into it
more fully; and, having first mentioned the subject itself, he next
speaks of the use of it, which almost always follows. It seldom happens
that we do not abuse *idols* when they are set up among us, for it is as
when fire has been applied to a pile of wood, which must immediately
burn; and wood is not more ready to be set on fire than we are to follow
superstition. In the Hebrew language idols are very properly denominated
by the word <span id="ix.i-p106.1"></span>אלילים, (*elilim*) which the
Prophet here employs, for they are empty things, and of no value.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md) And undoubtedly the Holy Spirit intended
by this word to reprove the madness of men who imagined that, by relying
on such inventions, they approached nearer to God; as the papists of the
present day, in order to plead for the usefulness of their idols, boast
that they are the books of the unlearned: but we ought rather to believe
the testimony of the Holy Spirit; and even the facts themselves plainly
show what advantage the unlearned derive from them; for, led away by
gross fancies, they imagine to themselves earthly and carnal gods. Hence
Jeremiah justly declares not only that *idols* are useless, but that
they are teachers of falsehood and lies. (<span
id="ix.i-p107.4"></span>[Jer
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014)<span id="ix.i-p107.4"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p108"></span>*And they have bowed down*  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md) *before the work of their own hands* We
must also attend to this description, in which the Prophet relates that
the people *bowed down before the works of their own hands*; for how
stupid was it that men should not only worship wood and stone instead of
God, but should honor their own workmanship with the appellation of
Deity, which they cannot bestow on themselves! It is truly shocking and
monstrous that, as soon as a block of wood which lay neglected has
received the finishing-stroke from a mortal man, he presently worships
it as if it had been made a God. Although the Prophet addresses the
ancient people, the same reasoning applies to the papists, who
acknowledge no majesty of God but in the works of their own hands.

<span id="ix.i-p110"></span>*Before that which their own fingers have
made* The repetition is emphatic, and to the *hands* he adds the
*fingers*, in order to exhibit more strongly the grossness of the crime.
We must also attend to the mode of expression, which denotes adoration
by means of outward gesture; not that it is unlawful among men to bend
the knee or the head for the sake of paying public respect, but because
he who *bows down before* an idol professes to render divine worship.
Consequently, the silly talk of papists about that adoration which they
call *Dulia*  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md) (<span
id="ix.i-p111.4"></span>δουλεία) is a childish evasion; for when the
Prophet speaks of religious worship he condemns universally every token
of homage.  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md)

<span id="ix.i-p113"></span><span id="ix.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p114"></span>**9.** *And the mean man boweth down* Some
commentators read these words in immediate connection with what goes
before, as if the Prophet were proceeding still farther to show the
extent of their criminality. If we adopt this meaning, then *by the mean
man and the mighty man* we must understand all the Israelites; as if the
Prophet said that no man is pure and free from this stain. Others not
improperly are of opinion that he repeats in other words what he had
said about punishment, and that in this way he expresses the destruction
which awaits a people forsaken by God. This will agree best with the
scope of the passage, that all, both small and great, will speedily be
overtaken by the ruin which lays low a whole nation; because amidst so
great wickedness there was no reason to expect deliverance from the
vengeance of God.

<span id="ix.i-p115"></span>Besides, in those two expressions, *bow
down* and *humble*, there is a rapid allusion to that *bowing down*
which he mentioned a little before, as if he had said, “They have *bowed
themselves* down before idols, therefore God will *lay them low* under a
vast weight of calamities.” Yet I have no doubt that he likewise attacks
their pride; for it was difficult to believe that a nation so abundantly
supplied with wealth would, in a short period, be overwhelmed by
calamities.

<span id="ix.i-p116"></span>*Therefore forgive them not;* or, *thou wilt
not forgive them*. This latter clause is explained in two ways, though
it does not much affect the real meaning which of the views you adopt;
for the design of the Prophet is to show that towards such obstinate men
God will not be appeased. If it be taken in the future tense, *thou wilt
not forgive them*, the meaning will be more easily brought out; but if
it be taken as a prayer, *forgive them not*, it will amount to the same
thing; for we know that, when the prophets, inflamed by zeal for God,
pour out prayers as under the dictation of the Spirit, they threaten
just punishment against the ungodly: and we need not wonder that the
Prophets offended by crimes so numerous and so shocking, kindles into
such warmth that he consigns his countrymen to destruction; for nothing
was more dear to him than the sacred honor of God. But at the same time
it must be understood that he makes a tacit reservation of a remnant;
because he does not here speak of every individual, but of the body of
the people, which was so deeply infected by its vices that there was no
hope of cure; otherwise it would have been unreasonable to give
exhortations to repentance, and to hold out the hope of pardon to men
who were incurable and thoroughly obstinate. The meaning therefore
amounts to this, that the restoration of a new Church must not be
expected till God has executed his judgments by destroying the temple.

<span id="ix.i-p117"></span><span id="ix.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p118"></span>**10.** *Enter into the rock* As ungodly
men, for the most part, lull themselves in excessive indifference about
God’s threatenings, it is customary with the prophets, when they
threaten sinners, with the view of producing terror, to add lively
descriptions, as if for the purpose of bringing those matters under the
immediate view of men. This is the reason why the Prophet now bids
despisers of *God enter into the rocks* and caves, to conceal themselves
under ground. And, first, he means that the judgment of God is more to
be dreaded than a thousand deaths, and that for the sake of escaping
that judgment it were to be wished that they should go down into the
grave. But, by addressing men themselves, he gives a more impressive
illustration of the weight of the divine vengeance.

<span id="ix.i-p119"></span>*From the dread of the LORD, and from the
glory of his majesty* Although *by the dread of God* he means the
scourges by which God would take vengeance on a wicked people, yet it is
not without good reason that he immediately adds, his *magnificent
glory*; as if he had said, “It is according to the measure of his own
glory that God ought to be dreaded by the ungodly, in whose destruction
he displays his boundless power.” But though the ungodly are not
reformed or made to bow down by any punishment, they are forced to
tremble when they feel the presence of the wrath of God. In quite a
different manner do punishments instruct the elect to fear God; for, in
consequence of being subdued by strokes, they learn to bear the yoke.
Isaiah therefore declares that the glory of God will be more
illustriously displayed when he shall come forth as a righteous judge;
for when he conceals himself he is not observed, and they scarcely think
of his existence.

<span id="ix.i-p120"></span>Hence let pastors learn how they ought to
deal with drowsy consciences, which must be awakened by the judgment of
God, that they may regard that judgment with actual *dread.* Though we
often sing to the deaf, yet terror pierces even hearts of iron, so that
they are without excuse. Frequently, too, it happens that some are
healed; and in like manner believers gain advantage from it, when they
learn the terrific forms of punishment which await the ungodly and
reprobate.

<span id="ix.i-p121"></span><span id="ix.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p122"></span>**11** *The loftiness of the looks of man*
 <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) *shall be humbled* Wicked men,
relying on the wealth and quietness and prosperity which they at present
enjoy, regard the threatenings of the Prophets with haughty disdain, and
thus harden their hearts against God, and are even led to indulge in
wantonness. 0n this account, Isaiah here determines, as we have already
said, to repress their arrogance; as if he had said, “The time will come
when this pride of yours, by which you vainly and madly contend against
God, shall be brought down.” For wicked men, though they pretend to have
some religion, are yet so daring that they raze against God himself, and
imagine that they are higher than God. On the other hand, by thundering
against them, he lays low their haughtiness, that he alone may be
exalted.

<span id="ix.i-p124"></span>And this is what we have already said, that
when crimes are allowed to pass unpunished, it is a sort of cloud held
before our eyes, which hinders us from beholding the glory of the Lord;
but when he takes vengeance on men’s transgressions, his glory shines
forth illustriously. This is also the reason which Solomon assigns why
wicked men are hardened against God: it is because they think that bad
and good men are equally happy in this world.

<span id="ix.i-p125"></span>Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set
in them to do evil, (<span id="ix.i-p125.1"></span>[Ec
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011)<span id="ix.i-p125.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="ix.i-p126"></span>for all of them grow more insolent, and are
more and more blinded.

<span id="ix.i-p127"></span>But here he shows that, when proud men shall
have been brought to their proper level, there will be nothing to
prevent God from being acknowledged to be what he is. It was indeed
highly becoming that the people should, of their own accord, humbly
behold the greatness of God, under whose shadow they were defended; and
for this purpose the posterity of Abraham was so remarkably
distinguished by numerous blessings, that it might be the mirror of the
glory and holiness of God. Isaiah now threatens that, because the Jews
have risen up against him, God will employ a new method of exalting his
glory, that is, by their destruction. When he speaks of *lofty looks*
and *loftiness*, he employs an outward gesture to denote the inward
pride of the mind; for sinful confidence almost always betrays, by the
very looks, a contempt of God and of men. In the same sense does David
describe *the man whose eyes are lofty*. (<span
id="ix.i-p127.1"></span>[Ps 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005.md)<span
id="ix.i-p127.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.i-p128"></span><span id="ix.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p129"></span>**12.** *For the day of the LORD of hosts
will be on every one that is proud and lofty* In this verse he confirms
the same thing more fully and from the vehement manner in which he heaps
up words, we may easily infer how bold was the wickedness which at that
time abounded. But we shall not wonder that he labors so hard to subdue
the arrogance of men, if we consider how difficult it is to bend the
stubbornness of those who, relying on their wealth, are afraid of
nothing, and who suppose that the design of their elevated rank is, that
whatever they do shall pass unpunished. For even at the present day we
experience how sensitive and passionate those men are who make arrogant
claims for themselves, and how obstinately they reject all admonitions.
And this is also the reason why the Prophet uses sharp language against
theme instead of threatening vengeance, in general terms, against the
whole nation.

<span id="ix.i-p130"></span>Yet it is not against the princes alone,
whose high rank raised them far above other men, that his invectives are
launched; for not only they, but even persons of the lowest rank, often
swell with pride; and, as the common proverb runs, “Every man carries
within him the heart of a king.” In like manner, we find that even the
basest persons, if you do but prick them with a pill, vomit out the
poison of intolerable arrogance. Since, therefore, this vice was so
widely spread, Isaiah includes both the highest and the lowest of the
people, declaring that in proportion to the forbearance which God had
exercised toward them is the severity of the impending judgment; for, in
consequence of their abundance, their hearts had swollen to fierceness.

<span id="ix.i-p131"></span>Moreover, though the letter <span
id="ix.i-p131.1"></span>ל, (*lamed*,)  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) which is the sign of the dative case, be
sometimes superfluous, yet in this passage it retains its force; for it
would appear that Isaiah appoints a fixed day, as usually happens in
judicial trials. Accordingly, I interpret it to mean that God himself
hath previously appointed a day on which proud men must be summoned to
the judgment-seat of God, to receive a sentence of condemnation.

<span id="ix.i-p133"></span>We may also learn from these words that God
avows himself to be the enemy of all the proud. This appointing of a day
is therefore to the same effect as if God declared that he cannot endure
men wickedly to indulge in pride, and that they who unduly exalt
themselves cannot escape being crushed by his hand. And if our minds
were sincerely convinced of this, who would not abhor pride, which
provokes the anger of God against us? If any person choose rather to
interpret (<span id="ix.i-p133.1"></span>*superbum et elatum*) *proud*
and *lofty* as in the neuter gender, meaning *that which is proud and
lofty*, we must understand them to refer to the fortresses, bulwarks,
and fortifications; but the rules of grammar do not admit of their being
applied in any other way than to persons.

<span id="ix.i-p134"></span><span id="ix.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p135"></span>**13.** *Upon all the cedars of Lebanon* The
allegory which is here introduced, about the *trees of Lebanon* and *the
lofty mountains*, instead of obscuring, sheds light on the subject; for
however high may be the wishes or endeavors of a mortal man, yet he will
never be able to reach the height of the *mountains* and the *lofty
trees, which* it is as easy for God to throw down as for a breath of
wind to scatter the fallen leaves. Accordingly, in what may be called a
painting, Isaiah shows to proud men how idle and foolish they are in
believing that their elevation will be their defense. There is also an
implied exaggeration, which must have contributed to heighten the
terror. It cannot be supposed that God is actually angry with the
mountains and trees, or that, having changed his purpose, he throws down
what he has built up; but in the harmless creatures Isaiah holds out to
view the judgment of God, in order more fully to convince wicked and
unprincipled men that their presumption will not pass unpunished. Thus
we see the reason why he mixes up the metaphors of *cedars, oaks*, and
*mountains*

<span id="ix.i-p136"></span><span id="ix.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p137"></span>**15.** *And upon every lofty tower* What he
adds about *towers* and *walls* is not figurative or metaphorical. We
know how men, when they think that they are well defended, congratulate
themselves that they no longer need the assistance of God. Accordingly,
under the name of *towers and walls* Isaiah mentions the object of false
confidence; for if any place seem to be impregnable, there do
irreligious men build their nest, that they may look down from it on
heaven and earth; for they imagine that they are placed beyond all the
uncertainties of fortune. Isaiah therefore threatens that, when it shall
please God to humble men, he will throw down all the defenses on which
they place a false confidence. And although those things are not in
themselves evil, yet because they receive too large a share of our
attention, it is with great propriety that Isaiah sharpens his pen
against them.

<span id="ix.i-p138"></span>To the same purpose is what he says about
*horses* and *chariots*; for, as we are told by Micah, because men have
improperly relied on earthly riches, they must be altogether deprived of
them, that they may owe this preservation entirely to the hand of God.
(<span id="ix.i-p138.1"></span>[Mic
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010)<span id="ix.i-p138.1"></span>..md) A
little before, he had reproved them for the abundance of their horses
(verse 7); he now addresses them about the judgment of God, and warns
them that, as the only possible way of gaining the favor of God, he must
take from the Jews all their horsemen, that they may no longer place
sinful reliance on earthly support.

<span id="ix.i-p139"></span><span id="ix.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p140"></span>**16.** *And upon all ships of Tarshish*
*Tarshish* was unquestionably the Hebrew name for Cilicia; and as the
Jews had much traffic with that nation, Scripture frequently mentions
*the ships of Tarshish*, which are so called, because they sailed on
that sea. Navigation cannot, indeed, be condemned on its own account;
for, by importing and exporting articles of merchandise, it is of great
advantage to mankind. Nor can any fault be found with this mode of
intercourse between nations; for it is the will of God that the whole
human race should be joined together by, mutual acts of kindness. But as
it most frequently happens that abundance leads to pride and cruelty,
Isaiah reproves this kind of merchandise, which was the chief source of
the wealth of the land. Besides, in that merchandise which is carried on
with distant and foreign nations, there is often a large amount of
tricks and dishonesty, and no limit set to the desire of gain. First,
then, Isaiah means that the Jews will be deprived of riches, that they
may learn to submit to God. Secondly, he describes covetousness and
unlawful gains by means of a sign, as if one were to express murder by
holding out a bloody sword.

<span id="ix.i-p141"></span>*And upon elegant pictures* This second part
of the verse shows still more clearly that the Prophet condemns
navigation, which had brought many corruptions into the land. It is too
frequent and common that riches are followed by luxury, effeminacy, and
a superfluity of pleasures, which we commonly see in wealthy countries
and commercial cities; for those who trade by sea in distant countries
are not satisfied with the commodities obtained at home, but carry away
new luxuries which were formerly unknown. Since, therefore, wealth is
usually the mother of superfluity, the Prophet here mentions costly
furniture, as if he had said that the Jews, by adorning their houses at
great expense, draw down upon themselves the judgment of God; for he
employs the word *pictures*, by a well-known figure of speech, to denote
rich tapestry, and the productions of Phrygia, and vessels framed with
consummate skill

<span id="ix.i-p142"></span>It is certain that the manners of men are
corrupted, when they eagerly pursue, in every direction, superfluous
enjoyments And we see how destruction was brought on the Roman Empire by
delicacies of this nature; for before they traveled into Greece, the
greatest moderation prevailed among them; and no sooner had Asia been
vanquished than they began to grow soft and effeminate; and when their
eyes were dazzled by pictures, furniture, precious stones, and tapestry
and their nostrils regaled by ointments and perfumes, all their senses
were immediately overpowered, and, by imitating the luxury of the East
as a higher form of civilization, they began gradually to indulge in
every kind of debauchery.

<span id="ix.i-p143"></span><span id="ix.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p144"></span>**17.** *And the loftiness of man shall be
bowed down* The Prophet declares that he had his eye on men, when he
described the various kinds of *loftiness*; for God is not displeased
saith the steep mountains or tall cedars, which he created, but informs
us that the whole evil lies in men, who vainly trust to what is high and
lofty. It may be objected, that it frequently happens that wicked men
are not rendered more humble by chastisement, but, on the contrary,
become more fierce and obstinate, as is evident from the case of
Pharaohs whose hardness of heart no plagues could subdue, (<span
id="ix.i-p144.2"></span>[Exod. 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#015.md),
[Exod. 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#034.md)<span
id="ix.i-p144.2"></span>;) and consequently that what the Prophet here
threatens does not always take place. I reply, he does not describe the
effect of chastisement, as if God bent rebellious men to obey hills; but
the meaning of this passage is, that, although the hearts of the
reprobate be not changed, yet the Lord will not cease to inflict
punishment upon them, till their haughtiness and presumption are brought
low. For, trusting to their wealth and fortifications, they congratulate
themselves, as we have said, on their safety, and do not fear God. But
whatever may be the nature of their defenses, the Lord will easily
subdue and lay them low, and that not only by one or another
chastisement, but by chastisements so numerous and so severe, that they
will at length be beaten down and subdued, will cease to rise up against
him, and will acknowledge that they gain nothing by their insolence and
presumption. The next clause, *and the LORD alone shall be exalted*, has
been already explained.

<span id="ix.i-p145"></span><span id="ix.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p146"></span>**18** *And the idols he will utterly
abolish* As he had formerly, in his reproof, joined idolatry with luxury
and covetousness, and other views; so he now joins them in the
threatening of punishment.

<span id="ix.i-p147"></span><span id="ix.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p148"></span>**19.** *And they shall enter into the holes
of the rocks* He had formerly used other words when addressing them in
the second person, *Enter into the rock*, (<span
id="ix.i-p148.1"></span>[Isa 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#010.md)<span
id="ix.i-p148.1"></span>,) that he might inflict a severer stroke on
their minds. But now he declares what they will do, and says that they
must *enter*; and hence it is evident that the former statement was not
an exhortation, but a severe denunciation of the wrath of God, in order
to terrify wicked and obstinate men, who despise all warnings and all
threatenings.

<span id="ix.i-p149"></span>*From the presence of the terror of Jehovah,
and from the glory of his majesty* What he adds about the *terror of
God* must be understood to mean that terror which was thrown into them
by the Chaldeans and Assyrians, whose hand he called a little before,
and now also calls, *the glory of God* for God employed their agency to
chastise his people. Although they were wicked and treacherous, yet they
promoted the *glory* of God; for even the devil himself contributes in
some way to the glory of God, though contrary to his wish. Thus he
speaks of the Assyrians and Chaldeans, because in the punishments which
the Lord will inflict on the Jews by their agency we may behold his
*glory*

<span id="ix.i-p150"></span>The same thing is confirmed by the word
*Arise*, which means to go before the judgment-seat. In the phrase which
immediately follows, <span id="ix.i-p150.1"></span>לערץ הארף, (*laarotz
haaretz*,) *to shake terribly the earth*, there is an elegant allusion
or play on words, which can hardly be conveyed in any other language.
 <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) He says that the Lord *ariseth*,
because he appears to sleep so long as he delays his judgments. But he
*ariseth*, when he comes forth as a judge to inflict punishments on the
wicked; so as to make it evident to men that nothing escapes the
knowledge, or is hidden from the eyes, of Him who permits no crime to
pass unpunished.

<span id="ix.i-p152"></span><span id="ix.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p153"></span>**20.** *In that day a man will cast away
his idols* Idolaters are amazingly delighted with their own
superstitions and ungodly worship; for although they abound in
enormities and crimes, still they betake themselves to this refuge, that
they imagine that their worship appeases God. Just as in the present
day, if we should represent the crimes and lawless passions of every
kind which abound among the papists, they certainly will not be able to
deny our statements, but will flatter themselves on this ground, that
they have a plausible form of worship, and will believe that this vail
covers all their crimes. Accordingly, the Prophet deprives idolaters of
this cloak, and threatens that they will no longer be able to conceal
their pollution; for the Lord will compel them to throw away their
idols, that they may acknowledge that they had no good reason for
placing their hope and confidence in them.

<span id="ix.i-p154"></span>In short, they will be ashamed of their
foolishness; for in prosperity they think that they enjoy the favor of
God, as if he showed that he takes delight in their worship; and they
cannot be convinced to the contrary, until God actually make evident how
greatly he abhors them. It is only when they are brought into adversity
that they begin to acknowledge their wickedness, as Hosea strikingly
illustrates by comparing them to whores, who do not acknowledge their
wickedness so long as they make gain, and live in splendor, but who,
when they are deprived of those enjoyments, and forsaken by their
lovers, begin to think of their wretchedness and disgrace, and enter
into the way of repentance, of which they had never thought while they
enjoyed luxury. (<span id="ix.i-p154.2"></span>[Ho
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005)<span id="ix.i-p154.2"></span>..md)
The same thing almost always happens with idolaters, who are not ashamed
of their wickedness, so as to *cast away their idols*, until they have
been visited by very sore distress, and made almost to think that they
are ruined.

<span id="ix.i-p155"></span>*Which they made*; that is, which were made
for them by the agency of workmen. Nor was this all unnecessary
addition; for he means that pretended gods are not entitled to
adoration: and what sort of gods can they be that have been made by men,
seeing that God exists from himself, and never had a beginning? It is
therefore highly foolish, and contrary to reason, that men should
worship the work of their own hands. So then by this expression, he
aggravates their criminality, that idols, though they are composed of
gold or silver, or some other perishable material, and have been
manufactured by men, are yet worshipped instead of God; and at the same
time he states the reason why they are displeasing to God: it is,
because they are worshipped. On what pretense will the papists now
excuse their ungodliness? for they cannot deny that they render
adoration to images; and wherever such worship is performed, there
ungodliness is clearly proved.

<span id="ix.i-p156"></span>*Into the holes of the moles and of the
bats* By *the holes of the moles* he means any filthy places in which
they are disgracefully concealed.

<span id="ix.i-p157"></span><span id="ix.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p158"></span>**21.** *And they shall enter into the
clefts of the rocks* This repetition is not superfluous, though Isaiah
again employs the same words which he had lately used; for what is so
difficult as to impress on the minds of men sincere fear of God? Nor is
it only in hypocrites that we perceive this, but in ourselves, if we
bestow careful attention; for how many things are presented to us by
which our minds ought to be deeply affected, and yet we are scarcely
moved! More especially, it was necessary that this judgment of God
should be earnestly placed before hypocrites, who took delight in
wickedness. But now he points out the severity of God’s vengeance by
this consideration, that the ungodly choose rather to be swallowed up by
the deepest gulfs than to come under the eye of God. This, too, is the
passage from which Christ borrowed the threatening which he pronounces
on the Jews,

<span id="ix.i-p159"></span>In that day shall they say to the mountains
cover us; and to the hills, Hide us. (<span id="ix.i-p159.1"></span>[Lu
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#030)<span id="ix.i-p159.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p160"></span><span id="ix.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p161"></span>**22** *Cease therefore from man* These
words are clearly connected with what goes before, and have been
improperly separated from them by some interpreters. For Isaiah, after
having addressed the ungodly in threatenings concerning the judgment of
God, exhorts them to refrain from deluding themselves by groundless
confidence; as if he had said, “I see that you are blinded and
intoxicated by false hope, so that no argument can prevail with you; and
this you do, because you claim too much for yourselves. But man is
nothing; and you have to do with God, who can reduce the whole world to
nothing by a single act of his will.”

<span id="ix.i-p162"></span>*Whose breath is in his nostrils* The former
part of the verse is explained in various ways; for some interpret it as
referring to Christ, and view the word <span
id="ix.i-p162.1"></span>רוח, (*ruach*,) which we render *breath*, as
denoting *violence*, by a comparison which is frequently used in other
parts of Scripture;  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) and the
nostril as denoting anger, because the outward sign of anger is in the
nostrils. They bring out the meaning in this manner: “Beware of
provoking the anger of Christ.”  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md)
But if we examine the passage closely, that exposition will be found to
be at variance with the meaning of the words.

<span id="ix.i-p165"></span>Others understand it as relating to men in
general, but explain it by that saving, *Fear not them who kill the
body*. (<span id="ix.i-p165.1"></span>[Mt
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ix.i-p165.1"></span>..md)
But neither can this interpretation be admitted, which does not agree
either with the time or the occasion, since there was no reason for
dissuading them from the fear of men. But, as I have already said, the
context will quickly remove all doubt; for the commencement of the
following chapter clearly explains and confirms what is here stated; and
he who made this division has improperly separated those things which
ought to have been joined together. For the Prophet is about to add,
“The Lord will take from you those things which so highly elevate your
minds, and put you in such high spirits. Your confidence is foolish and
groundless. “Such is the connection of what he now says, “Cease
therefore from man, whose breath is in his nostrils.”

<span id="ix.i-p166"></span>But first we must see what is meant by
*breath in the nostril*. It denotes human weakness, or, that the life of
man is like a *breath*, which immediately vanishes away. And as David
says,

<span id="ix.i-p167"></span>“If the Lord take away the breath, man
returns to the dust.”  
(<span id="ix.i-p167.2"></span>[Ps
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)<span id="ix.i-p167.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p168"></span>Again:

<span id="ix.i-p169"></span>“His breath will go out, and he will return
to his earth.”  
(<span id="ix.i-p169.2"></span>[Ps
146:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p169.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p170"></span>And again:

<span id="ix.i-p171"></span>“They are flesh, a breath that passeth away
and cometh not again.” (<span id="ix.i-p171.1"></span>[Ps
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)<span id="ix.i-p171.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p172"></span>Since, therefore, nothing is more weak or
frail than our life, what means that confidence, as if our strength were
deeply rooted? We ought therefore to *cease from man*; that is, we ought
to lay aside groundless confidence; because man has his *breath in his
nostril*, for when his breath goes out, he is immediately dissolved like
water. We speak here of the *breath* of life, for nothing is more frail.

<span id="ix.i-p173"></span>Besides, when we are forbidden to place
confidence in men, let us begin with ourselves; that is, let us not in
any respect trust to our own wisdom or industry. Secondly, let us not
depend on the aid of man, or on any creature; but let us place our whole
confidence in the Lord. *Cursed*. says Jeremiah, *is he who trusteth in
man*, and who placeth his strength and his aid in flesh, that is, in
outward resources. (<span id="ix.i-p173.1"></span>[Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)<span id="ix.i-p173.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.i-p174"></span>*For wherein is he to be accounted of?* This
is the true method of repressing haughtiness. Nothing is left to men on
which they ought to congratulate themselves; for the meaning is as if
the Prophet had said that the whole glory of the flesh is of no value.
It ought also to be observed that this is spoken comparatively, in order
to inform us, that if there be in us anything excellent, it is not our
own, but is held by us at the will of another. We know that God has
adorned the human race with gifts which ought not to be despised. We
know, also, that some excel others; but as the greater part of men
neglect God, and flatter themselves beyond measure; and as irreligious
men go so far as to think that they are more than gods, Isaiah wisely
separates men from God, which the Holy Spirit also does in many other
parts of Scripture: for when we look at them in themselves, we perceive
more fully the frail, and fading, and transitory nature of their
condition. Accordingly, as soon as men begin to make the smallest claim
for themselves, they ought to have an opportunity of perceiving their
vanity, that they may acknowledge themselves to be nothing. This single
expression throws down the pompous applauses of free-will and merits, by
which papists extol themselves in opposition to the grace of God. That
intoxicated self-love, in which irreligious men indulge, is also shaken
off. Lastly, we are brought back to God, the Author of every blessing,
that we may not suppose that anything excellent is to be found but in
hilly for he has not received what is due to hilly until the world has
been stripped of all wisdom, and strength, and righteousness, and, in a
word, of all praise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc13008.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="ix.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p54"></span> *In the last days*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc13008.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="ix.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p66"></span> *And he will teach us his ways*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc13008.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="ix.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p80"></span> The temple of Janus was built by Numa
Pompilius, whose wise and peaceful administration contrasts strongly
with the bloody and ferocious wars by which many of the succeeding
emperors endeavored to make themselves illustrious. It was expressly
intended by its founder that this temple should repress the natural
fierceness of the people by discouraging warlike operations. For this
purpose the opening or shutting of its doors was made to indicate
whether the Roman empire was in a condition of *war* or *peace* with the
surrounding states. When war raged on all sides, all its doors stood
open by night and by day; and the shutting of any one of them declared,
that in that direction towards which it looked peace had been restored.
Livy tells us, that so remarkable an event as the entire shutting up of
this temple, which proclaimed that universal peace existed throughout
the empire, had occurred but thrice during the long period of seven
hundred years; once under the reign of Numa, next, during the consulship
of Titus Manlius, and lastly, after the battle of Actium, in which the
Emperor Augustus gained a splendid naval victory over Mark Antony and
Cleopatra, queen of Egypt. (Liv. 1:19.) Historians have fixed the date
of the latter event with extraordinary precision; and, while their only
object was to pronounce a lofty panegyric on Augustus as the peculiar
favourite of heaven, they have unintentionally recorded that the temple
of Janus was shut up when *the Prince of Peace* (<span
id="ix.i-p80.1"></span>[Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)<span
id="ix.i-p80.1"></span>) was ushered into the world. So striking a
coincidence could not fail to attract observation, as belonging to *the
fullness of the time* (<span id="ix.i-p80.2"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p80.2"></span>.md) at
which the Messiah appeared, and as one of the beautiful arrangements of
him who is *wonderful in counsel and excellent in working*. (<span
id="ix.i-p80.3"></span>[Isa 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029.md)<span
id="ix.i-p80.3"></span>.) Rarely has chronology proved to be so
delightful and instructive. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc13008.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="ix.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p83"></span> *Neither shall they learn war any more.* —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc13008.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="ix.i-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p97"></span> In the English Version it is rendered
*therefore*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc13008.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="ix.i-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p107"></span> “So called,” says Buxtorf, “because they
are absolutely *nothing*, agreeably to that saying of the Apostle, *an
idol is nothing in the world*,” (<span id="ix.i-p107.1"></span>[1Co
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p107.1"></span>..md)
<span id="ix.i-p107.2"></span>רפאי אלל, (*rophee elil*) *physicians of
no value*, (<span id="ix.i-p107.3"></span>[Job
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p107.3"></span>,.md)
is an instance of the literal use of the word. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc13008.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="ix.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p109"></span> *They worship*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc13008.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="ix.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p111"></span> The popish distinction between an inferior
kind of adoration, called <span id="ix.i-p111.1"></span>δουλεία and a
higher kind of adoration, called <span id="ix.i-p111.2"></span>λατρεία,
is illustrated and refuted by our Author, in the Institutes, vol. 1, p.
141, and in the *Harmony of the Evangelists*, vol. 1, p. 221. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc13008.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="ix.i-p111.5"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p112"></span> That is, of homage paid to idols. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc13008.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="ix.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p123"></span> *The lofty looks of man*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc13008.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="ix.i-p131.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p132"></span> <span id="ix.i-p132.1"></span>ליהוה The
natural rendering of “<span id="ix.i-p132.2"></span>Quoniam dies Iehovae
exercituum super omnem superbum et exelsum erit“ appears to be what I
have given above, *for the day of the Lord of hosts will be on every one
that is proud and lofty*. But if *Jehovae* be in the dative, and not in
the genitive case, the ambiguity might have been partly removed by some
such collocation as the following: — <span
id="ix.i-p132.3"></span>*Quoniam Jehovae exercituum erit dies*, which
might have meant, *For to the Lord of hosts there will be a day*, or,
*the Lord of hosts will have a day*; and such an emphatic meaning of the
phrase must have been intended by our author. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc13008.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="ix.i-p150.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p151"></span> The “play on words,” which turns entirely
on the sound of the Hebrew noun and verb, cannot be expressed in a
translation. Our author has illustrated it by <span
id="ix.i-p151.1"></span>*ad terram terrendam*, which again may be fully
imitated by this alliteration, “to *terrify* the *terrestrial* globe.” —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc13008.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="ix.i-p162.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p163"></span> In <span id="ix.i-p163.1"></span>[1Ki
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011.md)<span id="ix.i-p163.1"></span>
<span id="ix.i-p163.2"></span>רוח (*ruach*) signifies *wind*, which the
accompanying epithets show to have been strong and violent. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc13008.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="ix.i-p163.3"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p164"></span> Instead of rendering, *Cease from man,
whose breath is in his nostrils*, they would render, *Cease from the man
who is terrible in his wrath*. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc13009.md)
