[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13003)  [Next](cc13005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>TO HER SERENE HIGHNESS,

<span id="v-p2"></span>NOT LESS ILLUSTRIOUS BY HER OWN VIRTUES THAN BY
THE SPLENDOR OF ROYALTY,

<span id="v-p3"></span>ELIZABETH, QUEEN OF ENGLAND ETC.

<span id="v-p4"></span>Although, in making improvements on this
Commentary, I have bestowed so much care and industry, most noble Queen,
that it ought justly to be reckoned a new work, yet, as in the first
edition it was dedicated to your brother King Edward, who, though a
youth, greatly excelled the men of his age, and whom I wish to be held
in remembrance by posterity, as he deserves, I had intended to make no
change in that dedication. But since, amidst that wretched and
lamentable dispersion of the Church and oppression of pure doctrine,
which raged with prodigious violence for a short period, this book,
together with the whole doctrine of true godliness, was banished from
England for a time, but now, I trust, favored by your happy reign, will
be restored to its former privileges, I thought that there would be no
impropriety if to the name of a most excellent king I should join your
own name, which is regarded by all good men with not less esteem and
satisfaction. Not only was an opportunity offered, but necessity
appeared to demand, that I should obtain your full protection to this
Commentary, the banishment of which, I am aware, was beheld by a great
number of your godly subjects with deep sorrow.

<span id="v-p5"></span>Yet it is not so much my object to be favored
with your countenance in my personal labors, as humbly to entreat, and
by the sacred name of Christ to implore, not only that, through your
kindness, all orthodox books may again be welcomed and freely circulated
in England, but that your chief care may be directed to promote
religion, which has fallen into shameful neglect. And if this is justly
demanded from all kings of the earth by the Only-begotten Son of God, by
a still more sacred tie does he hold you bound, most noble Queen, to
perform this duty; for when even you, though a king’s daughters were not
exempted from that dreadful storm which fell with severity on the heads
of all the godly, by the wonderful manner in which he brought you out
safe, though not unmoved by the fear of danger, he has laid you under
obligation to devote yourself and all your exertions to his service. So
far are you from having any reason to be ashamed of this deliverance
that God has given you large and abundant grounds of boasting, by
confirming you to the image of his Son, on whom the Prophet Isaiah
bestows this among other commendations, *that from prison and judgment*
(<span id="v-p5.1"></span>[Isa
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="v-p5.1"></span>.md) he was
raised to the loftiest height of heavenly dominion.

<span id="v-p6"></span>As it is no ordinary honor to resemble such a
model, so whenever you recollect, what ought never to be forgotten by
you, from what wretched and fearful trembling God rescued you, by openly
stretching out his hand, remember also that it was done for the express
purpose that you, on the other hand, should, with invincible
determination and unshaken firmness of mind, acknowledge your obligation
to your Protector and Redeemer, and, laying aside all other kinds of
business, a vast number of which I have no doubt, will crowd upon you at
the commencement of your reign, labor to have his worship, which for a
time was basely and disgracefully corrupted in that kingdom, restored to
its former splendor. And if Satan, by presenting many and powerful
obstructions, endeavor to produce fear or slothfulness, you are well
aware from whom you ought to ask boldness to go steadily forward and to
vanquish all opposition; and God, who bestows his blessing on the
actions of private individuals, will not fail to grant a happy and
desirable issue to his work.

<span id="v-p7"></span>You ought also to be stimulated, venerable Queen,
by a sacred regard to duty; for the Prophet Isaiah demands not only from
*Kings* that they be *nursing-fathers*, but also from *Queens* that they
be *nursing-mothers*. (<span id="v-p7.1"></span>[Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023)<span id="v-p7.1"></span>..md) This
duty you ought to discharge, not only by removing the filth of Popery,
and by cherishing the flock which not long ago lay trembling and
concealed, but by gathering the exiles who chose rather to part with the
advantages of their native country than to remain in it so long as
godliness was banished from it. This will be the crowning proof of your
gratitude to God, and a sacrifice of most delightful savor, that the
faithful worshippers of God, who, on account of their profession of the
Gospel, were constrained to wander far and wide through distant
countries, shall now, through your kindness, be restored to their native
country. We, too, in whom that mournful spectacle awakened, as it ought
to have done, the most poignant grief, have abundant cause for
rejoicing, and for congratulating you, when, through the gracious
exercise of your royal will, we see the way opened for the return of our
brethren, not only to be at liberty to worship God in your Majesty’s
dominions, but to render assistance to others.

<span id="v-p8"></span>And now, most noble Queen, if you shall be
graciously pleased, as I trust you will, not to disdain this testimony
of my respect for you, which some would perhaps reckon to be trivial and
of little value, I shall esteem it to be no ordinary kindness, and will
endeavor through my whole life to testify my gratitude by every means in
my power.

<span id="v-p9"></span>May the Lord guide you, most illustrious Queen,
by the Spirit of wisdom, uphold you with invincible courage, protect and
enrich your Highness with every kind of blessings!

<span id="v-p10"></span>Geneva, 15th January; the day which, it was
reported, had been fixed for your coronation; on which account I more
gladly set myself to write, having partially recovered from an attack of
quartan ague.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calvin's Dedication to the First Edition](cc13005.md)
