[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13008)  [Next](cc13010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 3:1-26

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** For, behold, the Lord, the Lord of
hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the stay and the
staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water,

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quoniam ecce Dominator Iehova
exercituum, Ierosolymae et Judae vigorem et vim adimet, omnem vigorem
panis, omnem vigorem aquae,

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** The mighty man, and the man of war, the
judge, and the prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient,

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fortem, et virum bellicosum, judicem et
prophetam, et divinum et senem,

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3.** The captain of fifty, and the honourable
man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent
orator.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ducem quinquagenarium, et conspicuum,
senatorem, eximium quemque inter artifices et disertum, (*vel,
intelligentem arcani sermonis*.)

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>**4.** And I will give children *to be* their
princes, and babes shall rule over them.

<span id="x.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et constituam pueros illis principes, et
parvuli dominabuntur eis.

<span id="x.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the people shall be oppressed,
every one by another, and every one by his neighbour: the child shall
behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the
honourable.

<span id="x.i-p11"></span>**5.** Violenter aget populus qisque in alium,
vir in proximum suum; insolescet adolescens contra senem, contemptus
adversus honoratum.

<span id="x.i-p12"></span>**6.** When a man shall take hold of his
brother, of the house of his father, *saying*, Thou hast clothing, be
thou our ruler, and *let* this ruin *be* under thy hand:

<span id="x.i-p13"></span>**6.** Cum apprehenderit quisque fratrem suum
e familia patris sui, Vestimentum, dicens, est tibi: Princeps noster
eris: ruina haec in manu tua:

<span id="x.i-p14"></span>**7.** In that day shall he swear, saying, I
will not be an healer; for in my house *is* neither bread nor clothing:
make me not a ruler of the people.

<span id="x.i-p15"></span>**7.** Is jurabit in illa die, dicens, Non ero
curator; nam domi meae neque panis est, neque vestimentum; itaque ne me
principem populi constituatis.

<span id="x.i-p16"></span>**8.** For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is
fallen; because their tongue and their doings *are* against the Lord, to
provoke the eyes of his glory.

<span id="x.i-p17"></span>**8.** Certe corruit Ierusalem, et Iuda
cecidit; quoniam lingua eorum et studia contra Iehovam, ad exacerbandos
oculos gloriae ejus.

<span id="x.i-p18"></span> **9.** The shew of their countenance doth
witness against them; and they declare their sin as Sodom, they hide
*it* not: woe unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto
themselves.

<span id="x.i-p19"></span>**9.** Probatio vultus eorum respondet in
ipsis: (*vel adversus iposos*:) peccatum suum, sicut Sodoma,
praedicaverunt, neque dissimularunt. Vae animae ipsorum, quia
accersiverunt sibi malum.

<span id="x.i-p20"></span>**10.** Say ye to the righteous, that *it
shall be* well *with him*; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.

<span id="x.i-p21"></span>**10.** Dicite justo, bene erit, quia fructus
manuum suarum comedent.

<span id="x.i-p22"></span>**11.** Woe unto the wicked! *it shall be* ill
*with him*; for the reward of his hands shall be given him.

<span id="x.i-p23"></span>**11.** Vae impio, male erit; quoniam secundum
opera manuum suarum rependetur ei.

<span id="x.i-p24"></span>**12.** *As for* my people, children *are*
their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, they which lead
thee cause *thee* to err, and destroy the way of thy paths.

<span id="x.i-p25"></span>**12.** Populi mei exactores sunt parvuli, et
mulieres illi dominuntur. Popule mi, qui te gubernant seducunt, et viam
semitarum tuarum depravant.

<span id="x.i-p26"></span>**13.** The Lord standeth up to plead, and
standeth to judge the people.

<span id="x.i-p27"></span>**13.** Stat ad disceptandum Iehova, et
praesto est ad judicandos populos.

<span id="x.i-p28"></span>**14.** The Lord will enter into judgment with
the ancients of his people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten
up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor *is* in your houses.

<span id="x.i-p29"></span>**14.** Iehova in judicium veniet cum senibus
populi sui, et cum principibus ejus; et vos perdidistis vineam, estque
rapina pauperis in domibus vestris.

<span id="x.i-p30"></span>**15.** What mean ye *that* ye beat my people
to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? saith the Lord God of hosts.

<span id="x.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quid vobis quod contunditis populum
meum, et facies pauperum commolitis? dicit Dominus Iehova exercituum.

<span id="x.i-p32"></span>**16.** Moreover, the Lord saith, Because the
daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with stretched-forth necks, and
wanton eyes, walking and mincing *as* they go, and making a tinkling
with their feet:

<span id="x.i-p33"></span>**16.** Dicit quoque Iehova, Quoniam
superbiunt filiae Sion, et porrecto collo incedunt, oculisque
vacantibus, et ambulando plaudendoque ambulant, tinnitumque pedibus suis
excitant:

<span id="x.i-p34"></span>**17.** Therefore the Lord will smite with a
scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and the Lord will
discover their secret parts.

<span id="x.i-p35"></span>**17.** Ideo decalvabit Dominus verticem
filiarum Sion, et Dominus pudenda earum nudabit.

<span id="x.i-p36"></span>**18.** In that day the Lord will take away
the bravery of *their* tinkling ornaments *about* *their feet*, and
*their* cauls, and *their* round tires like the moon,

<span id="x.i-p37"></span>**18.** In die illa auferet Dominus ornamentum
crepitaculorum, et reticula, et lunulas,

<span id="x.i-p38"></span>**19.** The chains, and the bracelets, and the
mufflers,

<span id="x.i-p39"></span>**19.** Olfactoria, armillas, et mitras,

<span id="x.i-p40"></span>**20.** The bonnets, and the ornaments of the
legs, and the headbands, and the tablets, and the earrings,

<span id="x.i-p41"></span>**20.** Tiaras, crurum ornatus, vittas,
bullas, et inaures,

<span id="x.i-p42"></span>**21.** The rings, and nose-jewels,

<span id="x.i-p43"></span>**21.** Annulos et monilia narium,

<span id="x.i-p44"></span>**22.** The changeable suits of apparel, and
the mantles, and the wimples, and the crisping-pins,

<span id="x.i-p45"></span>**22.** Mutatorias vestes, palliola, pepla, et
acus,

<span id="x.i-p46"></span>**23.** The glasses, and the fine linen, and
the hoods, and the vails.

<span id="x.i-p47"></span>**23.** Specula, et sindones, calyptras et
theristra.

<span id="x.i-p48"></span>**24.** And it shall come to pass, *that*
instead of sweet smell there shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a
rent; and instead of well-set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher
a girding of sackcloth; *and* burning instead of beauty.

<span id="x.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et erit pro suavi aromate putredo, et
pro cinctura laceratio, et pro cincinnus calvitium; pro balteo cinctura
sacci, adustio pro venustate.

<span id="x.i-p50"></span>**25.** Thy men shall fall by the sword, and
thy mighty in the war.

<span id="x.i-p51"></span>**25.** Viri tui in gladio cadent, et robur
tuum in bello.

<span id="x.i-p52"></span>**26.** And her gates shall lament and mourn;
and she, *being* desolate, shall sit upon the ground

<span id="x.i-p53"></span>**26.** Moerebunt ac lugebunt portae ejus; et
ipsa desolata humi jacebit.

<span id="x.i-p54"></span> 

<span id="x.i-p55"></span><span id="x.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p56"></span>**1.** *For, behold.* We stated, a little
before, that this is the same subject which the Prophet began to treat
towards the close of the former chapter; for he warns the Jews that
their wealth, however great it may be, will be of no avail to prevent
the wrath of God, which, when it has once been kindled, will burn up all
their defenses. Hence it follows that they are chargeable with excessive
madness, when, in order to drive away their alarm, they heap up their
forces, strength, and warlike accoutrements, consultations, armor,
abundant supply of provisions, and other resources.

<span id="x.i-p57"></span>The demonstrative particle <span
id="x.i-p57.1"></span>הנה, (*hinneth*,) “behold,” is employed not only
to denote certainty, but to express the shortness of time, as if Isaiah
caused wicked men to be eye-witnesses of the event; for it frequently
happens that they who do not venture openly to ridicule the judgments of
God pass them by, as if they did not at all relate to them, or were
still at a great distance. “What is that to us?” say they; “Or, if they
shall ever happen, why should we be miserable before the time? Will it
not be time enough to think of those calamities when they actually
befall us?” Since, therefore, wicked men, in order to set at naught the
judgments of God, dig for themselves lurking-places of this description,
on this account the Prophet presses them more closely and earnestly,
that they may not imagine that the hand of God is distant, or vainly
expect that it will be relaxed.

<span id="x.i-p58"></span>*The Lord Jehovah of hosts will take away from
Jerusalem*. This is also the reason why he calls God the *Lord* and
*Jehovah of Hosts*, that the majesty of God may terrify their drowsy and
sluggish minds; for God has no need of titles, but our ignorance and
stupidity must be aroused by perceiving his glory. First, the Prophet
threatens that the Jews will have the whole produce of the harvest taken
from them, so that they will perish through famine. Immediately
afterwards he speaks in the same manner about military guards, and all
that relates to the good order of the state. Hence we may infer that the
Jews boasted of the prosperity which they at that time enjoyed, so as to
entertain a foolish belief that they were protected against every
danger. But Isaiah threatens that not only the whole country, but
Jerusalem herself, which was the invincible fortress of the nation, will
be exposed to God’s chastisements; as if he had said, “The wrath of God
will not only fall on every part of the body, but will pierce the very
heart.”

<span id="x.i-p59"></span>*The power and the strength.*  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) As to the words <span
id="x.i-p60.2"></span>ומשענה משען, (*mashgnen umashgnenah*) which differ
only in this respect, that one is in the masculine, and the other in the
feminine genders, I have no doubt that the Prophet intended by this
change to express more fully the certainty that supports of every kind
would be broken; and therefore I have translated them the *power* and
the *strength*  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) I do not agree with
those interpreters who view it as referring to the persons of men, for
it more appropriately denotes all supports, whatever may be their
nature.

<span id="x.i-p62"></span>Still it is doubtful whether the Prophet
limits it to food, or extends it to all other kinds of support, which he
mentions immediately afterwards. But it is natural to suppose that by
<span id="x.i-p62.1"></span>משען ומשענה, (*mashgnen umashgnenah*) is
included generally everything that is necessary to sustain the order of
the city or of the people; and next that, for the sake of explanation,
he enumerates some particulars. The first clause therefore means, “God
will take away every help and assistance by which you think that you are
upheld, so that nothing whatever may be left to support you.”

<span id="x.i-p63"></span>Next, he adds, what will be their want and
nakedness; and he begins, as we have said, with food and nourishment,
which hold the first rank in sustaining the life of men. Now there are
two ways in which God takes away the *strength* of bread and water;
either when he deprives us of victuals, or when he takes from them the
power of nourishing us; for unless God impart to our food a hidden
power, the greatest abundance of it that we may possess will do us no
good. (<span id="x.i-p63.1"></span>[Le
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026)<span id="x.i-p63.1"></span>..md)
Hence in another passage God is said to *break the staff of bread*
(<span id="x.i-p63.2"></span>[Eze
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016)<span id="x.i-p63.2"></span>,.md)
when *the bakers deliver the bread by weight*, and yet it does not yield
satisfaction. And this comparison ought to be carefully observed, in
order to inform us that, even though the belly be will filled, we shall
always be hungry, there being nothing but the secret blessing of God
that can feed or support us.

<span id="x.i-p64"></span>Though the hunger which the Prophet threatens
in this passage may be understood to mean that the fields will be
unproductive, or, that God will take away from the Jews every kind of
food, yet, since the Prophets are generally accustomed to borrow their
forms of expression from the law, this interpretation will apply very
well. For he might simply have said, “I will take away the bread and
wine;” but he expresses something more secret when he speaks of the
*support of bread and water;* as if he had said that, though the people
be not reduced to famine, yet God will make them, even while they are
rioting in gluttony, to pine with hunger; for when the blessing of God
is withdrawn, all its usefulness will vanish away. We may sum it up in
this manner, that the people will have no food to strengthen them;
either because they will not have bread and water, or, if they have,
will derive no advantage from them.

<span id="x.i-p65"></span><span id="x.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p66"></span>**2.** *The strong man, and the man of war* He
mentions other ends which contribute to the safety and good order either
of nations or of cities. Of these he threatens that the Jews will be
wholly deprived, so that they will neither have wisdom or bravery at
battle, nor military forces abroad. He is not careful to attend to
order, but is satisfied with giving a short abridgement, and mixes one
subject with another. He begins with *men of war,* into whose hands was
committed the defense of the country. God sometimes takes them away by
death, and sometimes by making them soft and effeminate. The latter is
more frequent, so that posterity degenerates from the bravery of
ancestors, and those who were formerly courageous become, in process of
time, cowardly and unfit for war. But we see also that the former
sometimes happens, in consequence of which the boldest men suddenly lose
heart.

<span id="x.i-p67"></span>*The judge and the prophet.* We know that, in
the Hebrew language, the word *judge* stands for every kind of
governors; and it is certain that by *prophets* are meant every kind of
teachers. Accordingly, he threatens that the civil government will be
set aside, and that instruction will be at an end, and that thus the
Jews will be destroyed; and, indeed magistrates and teachers hold the
same place in the commonwealth that the two eyes do in the human body.

<span id="x.i-p68"></span>Aged diviners and old men  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) I consider the same rank as before to be
denoted by *old men*, who are more fit for governing, because age brings
along with it prudence, wisdom, and gravity. As to the word *diviner*,
though it is used in a bad sense in Scripture, yet here it appears to be
used in a good sense, when Isaiah enumerates those things which
contribute to preserve the good order of a city and of a kingdoms. The
term might, therefore, be applied to a soothsayer, who divines or
penetrates into dark matters, not by omens or superstitious arts, but by
extraordinary acuteness and skill. But as God forbade them to consult
magicians, soothsayers, and *diviners*, (<span id="x.i-p69.1"></span>[De
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#020)<span id="x.i-p69.1"></span>,.md)
and as Balaam himself declares that *there is no divination against
Israel*, (<span id="x.i-p69.2"></span>[Nu
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#023)<span id="x.i-p69.2"></span>,.md) I
do not quarrel with those who would prefer to use the word *diviner* as
denoting magical *divinations*; nor will there be any absurdity in
enumerating among the punishments of the nation, that it would be
deprived also of those aids which were sinful and criminal; for along
with the altar and sacrifices Hosea mentions teraphim.  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) (<span id="x.i-p70.3"></span>[Ho
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004)<span id="x.i-p70.3"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p71"></span>The captain of fifty. He employs this term
agreeably to the custom which then prevailed; for as the Romans had
*centurions*, or *captains of hundreds*, so the Jews had *captains*, or
*rulers of fifties*, which the Greeks call <span
id="x.i-p71.1"></span>πεντηκοντάρχους, but as that custom did not exist
among the Latins, so the name was unknown among them. By *persons of
venerable aspect*  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) he means those
whose reputation for bravery gave then influence among the people.

<span id="x.i-p73"></span>The senator.  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) The word <span id="x.i-p74.1"></span>יועף
(*yognetz*,) for which I have put *senator*, may be applied to men in
private life who are eminent for prudence; but as it is strictly
applicable to *counsellors*, who discharge a public office, I resolved
not to depart from the common opinion.

<span id="x.i-p75"></span>The sinful artificer. Because the mechanical
arts are not less advantageous for upholding the prosperity of a nation,
and for the support of animal life, Isaiah likewise mentions that,
through the want of them, the destruction of the Jews is at hand.

<span id="x.i-p76"></span>And the eloquent.  <span
id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) he word which is placed last in the
enumeration has been variously explained by commentators. Literally it
means, “skilled in muttering, or in a subdued tone of speech. “Now since
the heathen oracles give out their replies by whisperings or in
*mutterings*, some think that the word denotes *enchantments*. A better
exposition is given by those who interpret <span
id="x.i-p77.2"></span>לחש (*lahash*) to mean *secret designs*; but as a
style which is both mysterious and weighty may be not inappropriately
denoted by this word, I had no hesitation in rendering it by the word
*eloquent*. Yet if it be thought preferable to view it as denoting wise
and cautious men, who, though not qualified for public speaking, give
private advices of what may profitably be done, I have no objection.

<span id="x.i-p78"></span>We must attend to this comprehensive
description of a well-regulated state. For Isaiah has placed first corn
and other things necessary for bodily support; secondly, military
forces; thirdly, skill in governing a nation and the various parts of
civil government; fourthly, the prophetical office; and fifthly, the
mechanical arts. With these ornaments does God adorn the nations which
he intends to render safe and sound; and, on the other hand, he takes
them from those nations which he intends utterly to destroy. Let us,
therefore, know that everything which we find to be profitable for the
support of life flows from the undeserved goodness of God. Hence also
there follows another instruction, namely, that we ought to beware lest,
by our ingratitude, we deprive ourselves of those excellent gifts of
God.

<span id="x.i-p79"></span><span id="x.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p80"></span>**4.** *And I will appoint children to be
their princes*  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) That the vengeance
of God may be more manifest, he now describes how sad and wretched will
be the change, when competent and faithful rulers shall be taken from
among them and God shall put cowardly and worthless persons in their
room. By *children* are meant not only those who are so by age, but also
by mind and conduct, such as delicate and effeminate persons, who are
destitute of courage and cannot wield the sword entrusted to them. He
does not here carry out the contrast, clause by clause; for he thought
it enough to point out one way in which a commonwealth is speedily
ruined; that is, when its rulers are weak and foolish men like
*children*, who have no gravity or wisdom. But it must be laid down as a
principle, that no man is qualified for governing a commonwealth unless
he have been appointed to it by God, and be endued with uncommon
excellence. Plato, too, understood this matter well: for though, being a
heathen, he had no true knowledge of this kind, yet his quick sagacity
enabled him to perceive that no man is fit and qualified for public
government which has not been prepared for it by God in an extraordinary
measure; for public government proceeds from God alone, and in like
manner every part of it must be upheld by him. Besides, they whom the
Lord does not govern have nothing left for them but to be *children*, or
rather to be twice children, that is, destitute of all skill and of all
wisdom.

<span id="x.i-p82"></span>Now the Lord executes this vengeance in two
ways; because it frequently happens, that when we appear to have those
who are grave and skillful in business, no sooner do they come to action
than they stumble like blind men, and have no more wisdom than children;
for the Lord deprives them of that remarkable ability which they had
formerly received from him, and stuns them, as if he had struck them
with a thunderbolt. But sometimes the Lord proceeds more gently, and
gradually removes men of extraordinary ability, who were fit for ruling,
and commits the reins of government to those who were unable to govern a
family, or even a single child liken these things happen, it is very
certain that destruction is not far off.

<span id="x.i-p83"></span>Besides, it deserves our notice, as I lately
mentioned, that a well-regulated commonwealth is a singular gift of God,
when the various orders of judges and senators, soldiers, captains,
artificers, and teachers, aid each other by mutual intercourse, and join
in promoting the general safety of the whole people. For when the
Prophet threatens, and pronounces it to be a very severe punishment,
that these things shall be taken away, he plainly shows that those
eminent and uncommon gifts of God are necessary for the safety of
nations. Accordingly, he here commends the office of magistrates, and
captains, and soldiers, and likewise the office of teachers. This
deserves our notice in opposition to fanatics, who endeavor to banish
from the world the power of using the sword, together with all civil
government and order. But the Prophet declares that these things are not
taken away or removed unless when God is angry. It follows, therefore,
that they who oppose, and, as far as lies in their power, set aside or
destroy such benefits, are wicked men and enemies of the public safety.

<span id="x.i-p84"></span>He likewise commends instruction, without
which a commonwealth cannot stand; for, as Solomon says,

<span id="x.i-p85"></span>where prophecy is not, the nation must be
ruined. (<span id="x.i-p85.1"></span>[Pr
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#018)<span id="x.i-p85.1"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p86"></span>At the same time, he commends the mechanical
arts, agriculture, manual occupations of every description,
architecture, and such like, which we cannot dispense with; for all
artisans of every kind, who contribute what is useful to men, are the
servants of God, and have the same end in view with those who were
formerly mentioned, namely, the preservation of mankind

<span id="x.i-p87"></span>The same thing must be said about war; for,
although lawful, war ought to be nothing else than an attempt to obtain
peace; yet sometimes an engagement is unavoidable, that they who have
the power of the sword may use it, and defend themselves and their
followers by arms. War, therefore, is not in itself to be condemned; for
it is the means of preserving the commonwealth. But neither must
eloquence be despised; for it is often needed, both in public and in
private life, that something may be clearly and fully explained and
demonstrated to be true. This is also reckoned among the gifts and
important blessings of God, when a state abounds in wise and eloquent
men,

<span id="x.i-p88"></span>who can contend with the adversaries in the
gate.  
(<span id="x.i-p88.2"></span>[Ps
127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005)<span id="x.i-p88.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p89"></span>This passage may be thus summed up, “When God
takes away those gifts, and alters the condition of a people, in
whatever way this takes place, either by changing the form of
government, or by taking away the rulers, the anger of God ought to be
acknowledged;” for, as Hosea says,

<span id="x.i-p90"></span>He Taketh Away Kings In His Wrath,  
And Appointeth Them In His Indignation. (<span id="x.i-p90.2"></span>[Ho
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#011)<span id="x.i-p90.2"></span>..md)

<span id="x.i-p91"></span>Let us not, therefore, ascribe these changes
to chance or other causes.

<span id="x.i-p92"></span><span id="x.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p93"></span>**5.** *The people will oppress every man his
neighbor* He describes the utmost confusion, which was about to overtake
the Jews, when order was destroyed or relaxed; and this will happen to
all nations, as soon as government is removed or falls to the ground. We
know how great is the wantonness of the human mind, when every man is
hurried along by ambition and, in short, how furious the lawless
passions are when they are laid under no restraint. There is no reason,
therefore, to wonder if, when the judgment-seats have been laid low,
every man insults his neighbor, cruelty abounds, and licentiousness
rages without control. If we considered this wisely, we would set a
higher value on the kindness of God, when he preserves us in any
tolerable condition, and does not allow us to be lamentably ruined.
Hence it is evident that they who direct or apply their minds to sap the
foundations of civil government are the open enemies of mankind, or
rather, they are in no respect different from wild beasts.

<span id="x.i-p94"></span>But this confusion described by the Prophet is
most disgraceful, that a child shall dare to insult an old man, that the
dregs of a low and despised multitude shall rise up against nobles and
men of high reputation; for it is the most preposterous of all things
that modesty shall be thrown away, so that they who were worthy of
veneration shall be treated with contempt. And yet this spectacle, so
shameful and revolting, must unavoidably be exhibited when civil
government has been overthrown. As to my rendering of the verb <span
id="x.i-p94.1"></span>נגש (*niggash*) in an active sense, *to oppress*,
I was forced to adopt it, for otherwise the meaning of the passage would
have been imperfect.

<span id="x.i-p95"></span><span id="x.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p96"></span>**6.** *When every man shall take hold of his
brother* As this verse is closely connected with the former, and
proceeds without interruption as far as the phrase *he shall swear,* the
particle <span id="x.i-p96.1"></span>כי (*ki*) is evidently taken for an
adverb of time. For Isaiah, intending to express the extreme
wretchedness of the people, says that there will be no man who will
undertake to govern them, though he were requested to do so. To such an
extent unquestionably does ambition prevail among men, that many are
always eager to contend for power, and endeavor to obtain it even at the
hazard of their lives. In every age the whole world has been convulsed
by the desire of obtaining kingly power; and there is not a villain so
inconsiderable as not to contain men who willingly undertake to become
rulers; and all this proves that man is an animal desirous of honor.
Hence it follows that everything is in a deplorable condition, when that
dignity is not only despised but obstinately rejected; for the mournful
calamity has reached its lowest depth, when that which men naturally
desire with the greatest ardor is universally disclaimed.

<span id="x.i-p97"></span>Isaiah mentions other circumstances of an
aggravating nature, tending to show that the Jews will rather lay aside
every feeling of humanity and compassion than undertake the office of
rulers. If one shall refuse to rule foreign nations, it will not perhaps
be thought so wonderful; but when the preservation of brethren is in
question, it is excessively unkind to decline the honorable office. It
is therefore a proof that matters are utterly desperate, when the office
of ruler is disdainfully rejected by that man to whom his kinsmen
appeal, by entreating his support and throwing themselves on his
protection. Now, since princes are commonly selected on account of their
wealth, or, at least, kingly power is not usually bestowed on any who
have not a moderate share of riches, lest poverty should lay them open
to contempt and reproach, or drive them to unworthy means of gain, he
likewise adds this circumstance, that though they are able to bear the
burden, still they will not accept of it; as if he had said, “Not only
the common people, but also the nobles and the wealthy, decline the task
of government.”

<span id="x.i-p98"></span>The phrase *take hold* is likewise emphatic,
for it means to “lay hands” on a person; as if Isaiah had said that
those who shall wish to obtain a prince will not employ flatteries and
entreaties, but will proceed with disorder and violence to seize on some
person, and endeavor to compel him to occupy the throne.

<span id="x.i-p99"></span>*Let this ruin be under thy hand*. This last
circumstance is not less weighty. The meaning is, “At least if you have
any compassion or humanity, do not fail to aid us in our extreme
wretchedness.” For when a multitude of men, like a scattered flock,
bewailing with tears their ruinous condition, implore the protection of
a shepherd, he who will not stretch out a helping hand must have a heart
as hard as iron. Some translate it as if, by a figure of speech,
(hypallage,) one word had been put for another, *Let thy hand be under
this ruin*; that is, for the sake of upholding it.

<span id="x.i-p100"></span><span id="x.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p101"></span>**7.** *In that day shall he swear.* The word
*swear* expresses an absolute and vehement refusal; for frequently he
who at first excuses himself, or declares that he will not do it, at
length yields to entreaty; but he who, in refusing, employs an oath,
shuts out all hope, because he gives them to understand that his purpose
is firm and decided. Perhaps, too, the phrase *in that day*, means
“*immediately*, without any delay, and without long consultation;” but
as it may also be viewed demonstratively, (<span
id="x.i-p101.1"></span>δεικτικῶς,) as pointing out more fully the time
of the calamity, I do not express a strong opinion. The general meaning
is obvious, that their ruinous condition will be past remedy.

<span id="x.i-p102"></span>As to the word <span
id="x.i-p102.1"></span>חבש, (*chobesh*,) though commentators differ in
their interpretation of it, yet I cheerfully concur with those who think
that the metaphor is here borrowed from surgeons;  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) for nothing can more fully meet the case.
It is as if one, to whom application had been made to heal a sick man,
should declare that he has no skill in the art of healing, or that the
disease is too inveterate to admit of being cured.

<span id="x.i-p104"></span>The next copulative <span
id="x.i-p104.1"></span>ו, (*vau*,) means for; as if he had said, “And
undoubtedly I have not ability to do so.”  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) His meaning therefore is, that the state
of affairs will be so desperate, that no man, even when matters are at
the worst, will venture to take measures for their defense.

<span id="x.i-p106"></span><span id="x.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p107"></span>**8.** *For Jerusalem is ruined.* Lest it
should be thought that God is excessively cruel, when he punishes his
people with such severity, the Prophet here explains briefly the reason
of the calamity; as if he had said that the destruction of that ungodly
people is righteous, because in so many ways they have persisted in
provoking God. And thus he cuts off all ground of complaint; for we know
with what insolent fury the world breaks out, when it is chastised with
more than ordinary severity. He says that they were ready, both by words
and by actions, to commit every kind of crimes. In speaking of their
destruction, he employs such language as if it had already taken place;
though the past may be taken for the future, as in many other passages.

<span id="x.i-p108"></span>*To provoke the eyes of his glory*. This mode
of expression aggravates the crime, as denotes that they had
intentionally resolved to insult God; for those things which are done
before our eyes, if they are displeasing to us, are the more offensive.
It is true that wicked men mock God, as if they were able to deceive
him; but as nothing, however it may be concealed, escapes his view,
Isaiah brings it as a reproach against them, that they openly and
shamelessly, in his very presence, indulged in the commission of crimes.
The word *glory* also deserves our attention; for it is a proof of
extraordinary madness, if we have no feeling of reverence, when the
majesty of God is presented to our view. If God had so illustriously
displayed his *glory* before the nation of Israel, that they ought
justly to have been humbled, if they had any remains of shame or of
modesty. Whatever, then, may be the murmurings of wicked men against
God, or their complaints of his severity, the cause of all the
calamities which they endure will be found to be in their own hands.

<span id="x.i-p109"></span><span id="x.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p110"></span>**9.** *The proof of their countenance will
answer in them,* or, *will answer against them*  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) As the Prophet had to do with impudent
and brazen-faced hypocrites, who impudently boasted that they were good
men; so he says that their countenance testifies what kind of persons
they are, and that it will not be necessary to bring witnesses from a
distance, in order to prove their wickedness; for *to answer* means “to
bear testimony,” or “to confess.” Although, therefore, they disguise
their face and countenance, so that they frequently deceive others, yet
God compels them to show and prove what they are; so that, in spite of
themselves they carry, as it were, in their forehead a mark of their
deceit and hypocrisy.

<span id="x.i-p112"></span>Some explain it, that their crimes are so
manifest that they cannot avoid seeing, as in a mirror, the baseness
which they desire to conceal But the former meaning is confirmed by what
immediately follows, that they *declared their sin in the same manner as
the inhabitants of Sodom*. By these words he intimates that they devoted
themselves to iniquity in such a manner, that they boasted of their
transgressions without any shame; as if it had been honorable and
praiseworthy in them to trample on every distinction between right and
wrong, and not to indulge in every kind of wickedness. On this account
he compares them to the inhabitants of *Sodom*, (<span
id="x.i-p112.1"></span>[Gen. 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#020.md),
[Gen. 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005.md)<span
id="x.i-p112.1"></span>,) who were so much blinded by their lusts, that
they rushed, with brutish stupidity, to everything base. So, then, this
is *the answer of the countenance*, which he mentioned a little before,
that they carry about with them plain tokens of impiety, which are
abundantly sufficient to prove their guilt.

<span id="x.i-p113"></span>*Woe unto their soul!* Here he declares what
was formerly mentioned, that the whole cause of their calamities is to
be found in themselves; for by their sins and iniquities they provoked
the Lord; and consequently that they have no means of evasion, that it
is useless to contrive idle pretenses, because the evil itself dwells in
their bones; as if he had said, “God cannot be accused, as if he
punished you unjustly. Acknowledge that it has been done by yourselves;
give glory to a righteous judge and lay the whole blame on yourselves.”

<span id="x.i-p114"></span><span id="x.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p115"></span>**10.** *Say, it shall be well with the
righteous* Before quoting the opinions of others, I shall point out the
true meaning As punishments so severe commonly present to pious minds an
exceedingly sharp temptation, and especially since hardly any public
calamities occur which do not involve good men along with the bad; so
the Prophet — at least, in my opinion — reminds them of the providence
of God, which never confounds anything, but even, when there is apparent
confusion, never ceases to distinguish between good and bad men.

<span id="x.i-p116"></span>But there are various ways in which this
passage is explained; for some render it*, “Say to the righteous man,
because he is good, therefore he shall eat the fruit of his hands.”*
From that interpretation this meaning is obtained: “I wish and command
the godly to be of good cheer; for with whatever severity I may punish
the crimes of the nation, still it shall be well with the godly.” But a
more suitable meaning is this: *Say*; that is, hold it to be a settled
point; for in Scripture *to say* often means *to think*, and *to be
convinced*; as David writes, I said, I will take heed to thy ways,
(<span id="x.i-p116.1"></span>[Ps
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p116.1"></span>,.md)
and in a thousand instances of the same kind; so that he does not bid
them tell the righteous man, but he bids every man be fully convinced,
that happy will be the condition of the righteous man, though he may
only appear to be unhappy.

<span id="x.i-p117"></span>Besides, I consider <span
id="x.i-p117.1"></span>טוב, (*tob*,) to mean a happy and prosperous
condition; as in the former verse he employed the word <span
id="x.i-p117.2"></span>רעה, (*ragnah*) with which <span
id="x.i-p117.3"></span>טוב is now contrasted; and thus I do not think
that <span id="x.i-p117.4"></span>רעה, (*ragnah*,) means wickedness, but
a miserable condition. Now since it literally runs, *Say to the
righteous man*, <span id="x.i-p117.5"></span>כי טוב: (ki tob,) *that it
shall be well* either the particle <span id="x.i-p117.6"></span>כי,
(*ki*,) has an affirmative sense, as in many other passages, or it
appears to be superfluous, though the probability is, that it is
intended for confirmation. *Surely it shall be well with the righteous
man*; that is, let every ground of doubt be removed, and let us be fully
convinced, that the condition of the righteous man will be most
excellent and prosperous. It is difficult to believe this, and therefore
it is added, *he shall eat the fruit of his doings*; that is, he shall
not be defrauded of the reward of his good conduct. Others consider to
say as meaning *to exhort*, and render the two words, <span
id="x.i-p117.7"></span>כי טוב (*ki* *tob*,) *that he will do well*; but
I reject it as a forced interpretation.

<span id="x.i-p118"></span><span id="x.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p119"></span>**11.** *Woe unto the wicked!* It shall be
ill with him. He brings forward this clause as a contrast to the former
one; from which it may be easily inferred what was the design of the
Prophet, namely, to comfort the godly, and to terrify the wicked by the
judgment of God. For when an uncommonly severe calamity occurs, which
attacks all without discrimination, we doubt whether it be by the
providence of God, or, on the contrary, by blind chance, that the world
is governed. On this account godly men fear and dread that the same
destruction which overtakes the wicked will ruin them also. Others think
that it is of no importance whether a man be good or bad, when they see
both classes visited by pestilence, war, famine and other calamities.
And hence arises the wicked thought, that there is no difference between
the rewards of the good and of the bad; and in the midst of these gloomy
thoughts carnal appetites lead many to despair.

<span id="x.i-p120"></span>Accordingly, the Prophet shows that the
judgment of God is right, that men may continue to fear God, and may be
aware that those who, in the expectation of escape of punishment,
provoke God, will not pass unpunished. He likewise exhorts them to
ascribe to God the praise of justice; as if he had said, “Think not that
blind chance rules in the world, or that God punishes with blind
violence, and without any regard to justice, but hold it as a principle
fully settled in your minds, that *it shall be well with the righteous
man*; for God will repay him what he hath promised, and will not
disappoint him of his hope. On the other hand, believe that the
condition of the wicked man will be most wretched, for he brings on
himself the evil which must at length fall on his head.”

<span id="x.i-p121"></span>By these words the Prophet, at the same time,
charges the people with stupidity in not perceiving the judgment of God;
for they suffered the punishments of their crimes, and yet hardened
themselves under them, as if they had been altogether devoid of feeling.
Now there cannot befall us anything worse than that we should be
hardened against chastisements, and not perceive that God chastiseth us.
When we labor under such stupidity, our case is almost hopeless.

<span id="x.i-p122"></span><span id="x.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p123"></span>**12.** *The oppressors of any people are
children*  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) Here also is reproved
the madness and sottishness of the people, because they shut their eyes
at noon-day. There is nothing which men are more reluctant to allow than
to have a yoke laid on them; nor do they willingly submit to be governed
by nobles. Feeble and cowardly, therefore, must be the minds of those
who obey delicate and effeminate men, and permit themselves to be
oppressed by them; nor can it be doubted that God has struck with a
spirit of cowardice those who offer their shoulders, like asses, to bear
burdens. The power of a tyrant must indeed be endured, even by men of
courage; but the reproach which Isaiah brings against the Jews is, that
while they obstinately shake off the yoke of God, they are ready to
yield abject submission to men, and to perform any services, however
shameful or degrading.

<span id="x.i-p125"></span>For the Jews could not complain that they
were compelled by violence, when of their own accord they obeyed those
whose authority they would gladly have declined. Hence it is evident
that they were struck by the hand of God, and were shaken with terror,
so that they had no strength either of body or of mind.

<span id="x.i-p126"></span>This is also the vengeance which God had
formerly threatened by Moses; for the general doctrine of Moses, as we
have already said, is continually alluded to by the prophets.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) or how was it possible that men who had
the power of resistance should of their own accord undergo a slavery
from which they would willingly have escaped, had not God deprived them
of understanding and forethought that he might in this manner take
vengeance on their crimes? Whenever, therefore, anything of this kind
shall befall us; let us not imagine that it came by chance. On the
contrary, whenever it shall happen that we are governed by men who are
of no estimation, and which are more insignificant than children, let us
acknowledge the wrath of the Lord, if we do not choose that the Prophet
shall charge us with the grossest stupidity.

<span id="x.i-p128"></span>*They who govern thee*  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) He continues to teach the same doctrine,
that when God lets loose the reins against the wicked, so as to disturb
everything, he shows that he is highly offended at the Jews; for if they
had enjoyed his favor, there was reason to hope that his government
would be most holy and blessed. At the same time it is probable that the
common herd of men were so foolishly devoted to their rulers, that they
revered as oracles both their injunctions and their conduct; and hence
arose all the corruption that everywhere prevailed. Since, therefore,
the contagion was spreading farther without being perceived by the
people, Isaiah cries aloud that they ought to guard against the
governors themselves, who corrupt and destroy the people.

<span id="x.i-p130"></span>Others explain it, *they who bless thee*; but
as the participle which he employs may be taken from <span
id="x.i-p130.2"></span>ישר, (*yashar*,) which signifies *to rule*, I
shall rather adopt that interpretation, for it is more agreeable to the
context.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) I do acknowledge that the
false prophets flattered the people, but I see no reason why their
flatteries should be mentioned here. But it applies very well to the
rulers and heads, that they were the cause of the destruction; for as
princes are raised to their office for the sake of the public safety, so
no plague is more destructive than when they are bad men, and rule
according to their own caprice. He says, therefore, that they who rule
are the causes of the evils, and that they corrupt everything, since it
was their duty to correct other men, and to point out the way by their
own example.

<span id="x.i-p132"></span><span id="x.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p133"></span>**13.** *Jehovah standeth up to plead* So
long as wickedness rages without control, and the Lord sends no relief
from on high, we think that he is idle and has forgotten his duty. More
especially, when the nobles themselves are spared, he appears to grant
them liberty to commit sin, as if they were most sacred persons that
must not be touched. Accordingly, after having complained of the
princes, he adds that the Lord will do what his authority demands, and
will not permit such flagrant crimes to pass unpunished. For there is
hardly any conduct more offensive, or more fitted to disturb our minds,
than when the worst examples of every sort are publicly exhibited by
magistrates, while no man utters a syllable against them, but almost all
give their approbation. We then ask, Where is God, whose glory, a great
part of which, consisting in authority, is taken away, ought to have
been illustriously displayed by men of that rank? Isaiah meets this
difficulty by saying, “Though the nation is wicked, yet because the
princes themselves are very greatly corrupted, and even pollute the
whole nation by their vices, God sits as judge in heaven, and will at
length call them to account, and assign to every one his reward.”
Although he does not exempt the multitude from guilt, yet that the
sources of the evils may be known, he particularly attacks the rulers,
and threatens them with the punishment which they deserved.

<span id="x.i-p134"></span><span id="x.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p135"></span>**14.** *The Lord will enter into judgement
with the ancients of his people.* Formerly he had erected for God a
throne from which he might plead. Now he says that *he will enter into
judgment*. How? *with the ancients*. There might have been a slight
allusion to lawful assemblies, in which older men sit as God’s deputies;
but I assent to the opinion more commonly entertained, that God contends
against the *ancients* of his people. This passage, therefore,
corresponds to the saying of David,

<span id="x.i-p136"></span>God will stand in the assembly of the gods
(<span id="x.i-p136.1"></span>[Ps
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001.md)<span id="x.i-p136.1"></span>;
 <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) .md)

<span id="x.i-p138"></span>that is, though it may now be thought that
princes do everything with impunity, and though there be no one to
restrain their caprice and their lawless passions, yet one day they will
feel that God is above them, and will render an account to him of all
their actions

<span id="x.i-p139"></span>These reproofs, undoubtedly, the judges of
that time were very unwilling to hear. They have no wish, and do not
think that it is right, that any one should treat them with such
sharpness and severity; for they wish that everything should be at their
disposal, that their will should be held as a law, and that they should
be allowed to do whatever they choose; that all men ought to flatter and
applaud them, and to approve of their very worst actions. They think
that no man is a judge of their actions, and do not yield subjection to
God himself. Since, therefore, they are so unbridled that they neither
endure any advices nor any threatening the Prophet summons them to the
judgment seat of God.

<span id="x.i-p140"></span>*And with their princes* They are honorably
described, by way of acknowledgment, as the chosen *princes* of the
people. This also deserves attention; for they thought that, on account
of their rank, they enjoyed a kind of privilege which set them free from
the restraints of law, and that though heathen kings and princes might
give an account of their actions, they, on the contrary, were sacred
persons. They thought, therefore, that they were beyond the reach of all
reproof, and ought not to be addressed, like heathen men, by threats and
terrors. On this account Isaiah expressly declares, that the Lord will
not only call to account every kind of princes, but especially the proud
hypocrites to whose care he had committed his people.

<span id="x.i-p141"></span>*And you have destroyed the vineyard*  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) The metaphor of a vine is very common,
where a nation, and especially the nation of Israel, is the subject.
(<span id="x.i-p142.3"></span>[Ps
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008.md)<span id="x.i-p142.3"></span>;
<span id="x.i-p142.4"></span>[Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span id="x.i-p142.4"></span>..md)
And by this word the Prophet now shows their crime to be double, because
they paid no more regard to the people whom God had loved with
extraordinary affection that if they had ruled over a heathen nation.
The pronoun *you* is likewise emphatic; for he addresses the
vine-dressers themselves, who, instead of devoting themselves, as they
ought to have done, to the cultivation of the vine, devoured it like
wild beasts. Accordingly, he represents this to be a great aggravation
of their cruelty; for how treacherous was it to *destroy* what they
ought to have preserved and protected? By this comparison the Lord shows
how great care he takes of his own people, and how warmly he loves them;
not only because the Church is called his vine and inheritance, but by
declaring that he will not endure the treachery and wickedness of those
who have ruled over it tyrannically.

<span id="x.i-p143"></span>*The spoil of the poor is in your houses.* He
adds one circumstance, by which the other parts of their life might be
known, that they had in their houses the *prey and spoil of the poor.*
Now the palace of princes ought to resemble a sanctuary: for they occupy
the dwelling place of God, which ought to be sacred to all. It is,
therefore, the grossest sacrilege to turn a sanctuary into a den of
thieves. He represents still more strongly their criminality by adding
*of the poor*; for it is the most wicked of all acts of cruelty to
plunder a poor and needy man, who cannot defend himself, and who ought
rather to have been protected.

<span id="x.i-p144"></span><span id="x.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p145"></span>**15.** *What mean ye that ye beat my people
to pieces?* He mentions also other particulars, from which it is evident
that they ruled in a haughty, cruel and oppressive manner. It was not
necessary that the Prophet should describe minutely everything deserving
reproof in the princes; for from these few circumstances it is evident
with what injustice and cruelty and tyranny they ruled. But to whom
shall the poor betake themselves but to the magistrate, who ought to be
the father of his country and the protector of the wretched? On this
account he employs a vehement interrogation, *What?* as if he had said,
“What effrontery is this! What cruelty and barbarity, to abuse the mean
condition of the poor, so as to have no compassion on them!” By two
comparisons he describes their cruel oppression mingled with pride.

<span id="x.i-p146"></span>*Saith the Lord Jehovah of hosts.* That the
reproof may have all the weight that it ought to have, he brings forward
God as speaking; for there is an implied contrast that these things
should not be viewed as coming from the mouth of men, but that the
accusation proceeds from God himself, and that he pursues those who are
guilty of such injustice, and will at length take vengeance on them.
Because those who have been exalted to any kind of honor conduct
themselves so haughtily as to disdain every direction and advice, he
therefore meets their pride by bringing forward the majesty of God, that
they may not venture to despise his earnest and severe threatenings. Yet
let us remember that this passage ought not to be understood as if the
Prophet were speaking only about the mercy of God; for after having
threatened vengeance indiscriminately on all, he particularly mentions
those who are their heads, in order to show that no man can escape the
arm of God: and here he employs what is called the argument from the
greater to the less.” How would the Lord spare the lowest of the people,
when he punishes even the princes themselves, because they have
*destroyed the vineyard?”*

<span id="x.i-p147"></span><span id="x.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p148"></span>**16.** *Because the daughters of Zion are
haughty.* Next follows another threatening against the ambition, luxury,
and pride of women. On these points the Prophet has not followed an
exact order, but reproves sometimes one vice and sometimes another, as
the subject appears to require, and afterwards sums up what he has said
in a few words, as he did in the seventh verse of the first chapter. He
therefore pronounces censure on gorgeous robes and superfluous
ornaments, which were undoubted proofs of vanity and ostentation.
Wherever dress and splendor are carried to excess, there is evidence of
ambition, and many vices are usually connected with it; for whence comes
luxury in men and women but from pride?

<span id="x.i-p149"></span>*And walk with stretched forth neck.* First,
then, he justly declares pride to be the source of the evil, and points
it out by the sign, that is, by their gait; that the women *walk with
stretched-forth neck* For as it is a sign of modesty to have a down-cast
look, (as even heathen writers have declared,) so to have excessively
holy looks is a sign of insolence; and when a woman lifts up her head it
can betoken nothing but pride. The Prophet certainly acts wisely in
beginning at the very fountain; for if he had begun by mentioning signs,
such as dress, gait, and matters of that sort, it might have been easy
to reply that still the mind was pure and upright; and that if their
dress was somewhat too elegant and splendid, that was not a sufficient
reason for approaching them with such bitter language, and summoning
them to the judgement seat of God. Accordingly, in order to meet their
unfounded accusations, he lays open the inward disease, which is
manifested in the whole of their outward dress.

<span id="x.i-p150"></span>*And wandering eyes.*  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) What he adds about *wandering eyes*
denotes shameless lust, which for the most part is expressed by the
*eyes*; for unchaste eyes are the heralds of an unchaste heart; but the
*eyes* of chaste women are sedate, and not wandering or unsteady.

<span id="x.i-p152"></span>*And make a tinkling with their feet* This is
a part of the indecent gesture by which wantonness is discovered. But it
is not easy to say whether the women wore on their sandals some tinkling
ornaments which made a noise as they walked, or whether they imitated
the dancing women by a measured step; for the form of dresses since that
time has been greatly changed. Yet I readily adopt the interpretation
that they made a noise in walking, for this is very plainly expressed by
the word employed.

<span id="x.i-p153"></span><span id="x.i-p153.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p154"></span>**17.** *Therefore will the Lord make bald*
 <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) *the crown of the head* Here the
particle <span id="x.i-p155.1"></span>ו, (vau,) which signifies *and*,
is put for *therefore*; for he threatens that, since neither gentle
advices nor any words can reform them, the Lord will deal with them in a
very different manner, and will not only employ sharp and severe
language, but will advance in dreadful array, with an armed band, to
take vengeance. Accordingly, as they had manifested their obstinacy from
*head to foot*, so he declares that the Lord will exhibit the marks of
his vengeance in every part of their body. He therefore begins with the
head, where ornament is chiefly bestowed, and afterwards takes notice of
the other parts.

<span id="x.i-p156"></span>It is worthy of notice that the Prophet had
good reason for reproving, with so great earnestness and vehemence, the
luxury of women; for while they are chargeable with many vices, they are
most of all inflamed with mad eagerness to have fine clothes. Covetous
as they naturally are, still they spare no expense for dressing in a
showy manner, and even use spare diet, and deprive themselves of what
nature requires, that their clothes may be more costly and elegant. So
grievously are they corrupted by this vice, that it goes beyond every
other.

<span id="x.i-p157"></span>History tells us what vast crowds the women
brought together on account of the Oppian Law  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) which some wished to maintain, and others
to repeal; and that transaction was not conducted with any gravity or
moderation in consequence of the crowds of women. But we need not go far
to find examples; for they are innumerable in almost every nation, and
it is a vice which has been very common in every age. As we are
dexterous and sharp-sighted in contriving apologies for defending our
luxury and extravagance, the Prophet, on that account, has pointed his
finger at the source of all the evils, namely, that mad ambition by
which men are hurried along to obtain public notice, and to arrive at
eminence above others; for, in order that they may be better known, they
wish to outshine their neighbors by the elegance of their dress, that
they may draw the eyes of others upon them.

<span id="x.i-p159"></span>Having pointed to the source of the evil, the
Prophet descends to many particulars for the purpose of bringing to
public view the fooleries of women, and enumerates a long catalogue of
them, to show that, in gathering them together, nothing can exceed the
curiosity which dwells in woman. Indeed there is no end to those
contrivances; and it was not without reason that the ancients called the
collection of a woman’s ornaments *a world*;  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) for if they were collected into one heap,
they would be almost as numerous as the parts of the world. On this
account the Prophet appears to search the women’s chests, and to bring
into public view the gaudy trifles which they have treasured up in them,
that their extravagant delight and boasting of these things may render
their idleness and folly more evident to all. There is no superfluity,
therefore, in this enumeration, though spread out in many words, by
which their lawless desires are proved to be insatiable.

<span id="x.i-p161"></span>As to the particulars, I shall not stay to
explain them, especially as the best Hebrew scholars have doubts about
some of them, and cannot distinguish with certainty the forms of those
ornaments. It is enough if we understand the general import and design
of the Prophet; namely, that he heaps up and enumerates these trifles in
order that the prodigious variety of them may disclose their luxury and
ambition, so as to leave them without any excuse. It would be the height
of impudence to allege that the contrivances made by the childish vanity
of women, beyond what nature requires, are necessary for protecting the
body. How many things are here enumerated which are not demanded by
nature or necessity or propriety! What is the use of chains, bracelets,
earrings and other things of the same sort? Hence it is plain enough
that a superfluous collection of such ornaments admits of no excuse;
that it gives evidence of excessive luxury which ought to be suppressed
or restrained; and that frequently they are unchaste contrivances for
weakening the mind and exciting lust. We need not wonder, therefore,
that the Prophet speaks so sharply, and threatens severe punishments,
against this vice.

<span id="x.i-p162"></span><span id="x.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p163"></span>**24.** *Instead of a sweet smell there shall
be stink.* It is evident that the country here described abounds in
aromatic herbs; and there is no reason to doubt that in pleasant smells,
as well as in other matters, they were luxurious. We see that those
nations which are farthest removed from the east are not prevented
either by distance or by expense from indulging in that kind of luxury.
What may be expected to happen in those places where they are abundant?
That they will excite lust and promote luxury is beyond all doubt He
means, therefore, that ointments and *sweet smells* were abused by them
in a variety of ways; for the sinful desires of men are ingenious in
their contrivances, and can never be satisfied.

<span id="x.i-p164"></span>*Instead of a girdle a rent.* Others have
rendered it *a falling off*; because the Lord will ungird them. He
intends to contrast things which are exceedingly opposite to each other;
that as the women formerly were most carefully girt and adorned when
they walked, they shall henceforth be torn and naked. He likewise
contrasts *baldness* with *curls*; because they arranged their hair not
in a modest but an extravagant fashion. Again, *a belt* is contrasted
with *sackcloth.* Whether it was a belt, or some other kind of binding,
it is certain that the Prophet meant *a girdle*, which was held in high
estimation. Again, *burning* is contrasted with *beauty*; because
fashionable ladies hardly venture to expose themselves to the sun’s
rays, for fear of being sunburned; and he tells us that this will happen
to them. In short, both men and women are instructed to make a sober use
of the gifts of Goal, both in food and in clothing, and in the whole
conduct of life. For the Lord cannot endure extravagance, and absolutely
must inflict severe punishment on account of it; for it cannot be
restrained by a lighter chastisement.

<span id="x.i-p165"></span><span id="x.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p166"></span>**25.** *Thy men shall fall by the sword.* He
directs his discourse to Jerusalem and to the whole kingdom of Judah;
for, after having demonstrated that the whole body is infected with a
plague, and that no part of it is free from disease, and after leaving
not even spared the women, he returns to the general doctrine. It would
be improper that more than one husband should be assigned to one woman.
Besides, what immediately follows applies exclusively to this nation. He
particularly describes the punishment, that God will bring down by wars
the whole strength of the people.

<span id="x.i-p167"></span><span id="x.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p168"></span>**26.** *Her gates shall mourn and lament.*
Hence arises the *mourning of the gates*, which, he threatens, will take
place when they have met with their calamities; for he means, that where
there were great crowds and multitudes, nothing but a dismal solitude
will be found. We know that at that time public meetings were held at
*the gates*; and, therefore, as the gates sometimes rejoice at the
multitude of citizens, so they are said *to mourn* on account of their
frightful desolation. And yet I do not deny that he compares Jerusalem
to a woman who is sad, and who bewails her widowhood; for it was
customary with mourners *to sit on the ground*, as that nation was in
the habit of using ceremonies and outward signs to a greater degree than
would be consistent with our customs. But the sum of the matter is that
the city will have lost her inhabitants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc13009.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="x.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p60"></span> “Heb, ‘the support masculine and the support
feminine,’ that is, every kind of support, whether great or small,
strong or weak. *Al kenitz,* *wal kanitzan*; the wild beast, male and
female: proverbially applied both to fishing and hunting; that is, I
seized the prey, great or little, good or bad. From hence, as Schultens
observes, is explained <span id="x.i-p60.1"></span>[Isa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001.md)<span id="x.i-p60.1"></span>,
literally, *the male and female stay*; that is, the strong and weak, the
great and small.” *Chappelow*, quoted by *Lowth.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc13009.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="x.i-p60.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p61"></span> Calvin has imitated the Hebrew phrase by the
rendering <span id="x.i-p61.1"></span>*vigorem et vim*; employing two
words, of which one is in the masculine and the other in the feminine
gender, and both begin with the same letter, while each of them denotes
*strength*. Our English version has imitated the alliteration by *stay
and the staff* — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc13009.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="x.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p69"></span> *And the prudent and the ancient*. — Eng. Ver

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc13009.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="x.i-p69.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p70"></span> “The Prophet,” says Calvin, “seems to speak
here of idols, for he afterwards adds *teraphim*; and teraphim were no
doubt images, (<span id="x.i-p70.1"></span>[Gen.
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#030)<span id="x.i-p70.1"></span>.md) which
the superstitious used while worshipping their fictitious gods, as we
read in many places. The King of Babylon is said to have consulted the
teraphim; and it is said that Rachel stole the teraphim, and shortly
after Laban calls the teraphim his gods.” *Com. on the Twelve Minor
Prophets*, vol 1, p. 130.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc13009.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="x.i-p71.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p72"></span> *The honourable man*. — Eng. Ver

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc13009.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="x.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p74"></span> *The counsellor*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc13009.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="x.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p77"></span> In a marginal reading of the text our author
renders this phrase by *skilled in mysterious discourse*. “The powerful
in persuasion.” — *Lowth*. “The expert dealer in charms.” — *Bishop
Stock*. “<span id="x.i-p77.1"></span>לחש is to *whisper* or *mutter*
certain words, by which jugglers pretended to charm noxious creatures,
and to deprive them of their power of hurting.” — *Parkhurst.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc13009.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="x.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p81"></span> *And I will give children to be their
princes*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc13009.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="x.i-p102.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p103"></span> <span id="x.i-p103.1"></span>חבש(*chabash*)
literally signifies *to bind* *I will not be a binder*; that is, “I will
not be one who binds up your wounds.” Jarchi renders it, “*I will not be
a binder*, that is, I will not be one of those who *bind up.”* His
annotator, Breithaupt, explains it thus: “that is, who employ any
remedy, or apply a plaster, teaching in the school or synagogue what
should be done, and what should be avoided.” This accords with the
rendering, *healer*, as in the English version, which is supported by
that of Lowth, “I will not be a healer of thy breaches.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc13009.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="x.i-p104.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p105"></span> <span id="x.i-p105.1"></span>
ובביתי(*ubebethi*,) and *in my house*; that is, for *in my house is
neither bread nor clothing*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc13009.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="x.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p111"></span> See p. 122.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc13009.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="x.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p124"></span> *As for my people, children are their
oppressors.* — Eng. Ver

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc13009.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="x.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p127"></span> Our author appears to have particularly in
his eye, <span id="x.i-p127.1"></span>[Le
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036.md)<span id="x.i-p127.1"></span>,
*And upon them that are left alive of you I will send a faintness into
their hearts in the lands of their enemies; and the sound of a shaken
leaf shall chase them; and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword; and
they shall fall when none pursueth*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc13009.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="x.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p129"></span> *They which lead thee*. — (Eng. Ver.) The
marginal reading is, *they which call thee blessed*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc13009.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="x.i-p130.3"></span>

<span id="x.i-p131"></span> The reading of the Septuagint is, <span
id="x.i-p131.1"></span>οἱ μακαρίζοντες ὑμᾶς, *they who bless you*.
Undoubtedly <span id="x.i-p131.2"></span>מאשרים comes from <span
id="x.i-p131.3"></span>אשר, and not from <span
id="x.i-p131.4"></span>ישר, which in the corresponding participle gives
<span id="x.i-p131.5"></span>מישרים. From the Kal of <span
id="x.i-p131.6"></span>אשר, *to go*, the Pihel, taking a Hiphil meaning,
denotes *to cause to go*, or *to lead*. Not improbably our Author meant
that the one verb borrows one of its meanings from the other; but this
would need proof. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc13009.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="x.i-p136.2"></span>

<span id="x.i-p137"></span> Like some other quotations of our Author,
this is made from memory, and is not quite accurate. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc13009.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="x.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p142"></span> *Ye have consumed my vineyard*. — *Lowth*
*Ye have eaten bare my vineyard*. — *Stock* <span
id="x.i-p142.1"></span>̔Υμεῖς δὲ τί ἐνεπυρίσατε τὸν ἀμπελῶνά μου; *And
why did you burn up my vineyard*? — *Sept*. “<span
id="x.i-p142.2"></span>בער (*bagnar*,) in its usual acceptation of
*burnin*g, does not agree with the sense of a passage, which represents
people making a profit of what they consume. Understand it, therefore,
of *clearing away* the productions of the soil, as cattle do when they
eat down the grass.” — *Rosenmuller*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc13009.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="x.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p151"></span> *Wanton eyes*. Heb. *Deceiving with their
eyes*. — Eng. Ver. “*Leering with their eyes* — <span
id="x.i-p151.1"></span>*Nictitantes oculis*: from <span
id="x.i-p151.2"></span>סקר, Chald., <span id="x.i-p151.3"></span>*oculis
vagari*. This is Abarbanel’s interpretation, approved of by Parkhurst
and Rosenmuller. Bishop Lowth derives <span
id="x.i-p151.4"></span>משקרות from <span id="x.i-p151.5"></span>שקר, *to
falsify*, and translates it, *falsely setting of their eyes with paint*,
according to the eastern fashion of tinting the eyelids, on the inside,
black with stibium, called by the natives *al-cahol*. But the object of
the poet in this place is to describe, not ornaments, but affected
motions of the body.” — *Bishop Stock*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc13009.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="x.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p155"></span> *Smite with a scab*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc13009.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="x.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p158"></span> “The Oppian Law,” so called from the
tribune, Caius *Oppius*, who proposed it, was enacted during the
disastrous wars with Hannibal, about 213 years before the Christian era.
It was to this effect, “That no woman should wear on her person more
than half an ounce of gold, or use garments of variegated colors, or
ride in a carriage in any city or town, or within a mile’s distance of
one, unless when she was going to observe the public festivals.” This
law, though extorted by the hard necessities of the state, was all along
regarded by many persons as harsh and tyrannical, and, after producing
extraordinary commotions, was overwhelmed by the tide of public opinion.
Livy informs us (34:1) that “ladies, not restrained either by modesty or
by the authority of their husbands,” and neglecting the privacy which
belonged to the customs of that age, assembled in a tumultuous manner,
and publicly solicited the votes of the consuls and praetors, and other
persons in office, for the repeal of the law. Ultimately their chief
opponent was Cato, who spoke with all his ability and eloquence, but
with a sternness peculiar to his character, and increased by the nature
of the question under discussion. He was overmatched by the tact and
resources of Valerius, who brought to his aid a considerable amount of
historical information, placed the popular arguments in an advantageous
light, and succeeded in obtaining an almost unanimous repeal of the law,
when it had been twenty years in force. Our Author immediately
afterwards refers to the arguments employed on that occasion. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc13009.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="x.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p160"></span> In the speech already mentioned, Valerius
wittily alludes to this antiquated use of the Latin word <span
id="x.i-p160.1"></span>*mundus* (*a world*.) “Our ancestors,” he says,
“gave to it the appellation of *a woman’s world*.” <span
id="x.i-p160.2"></span>*Hunc mundum muliebrem appellarunt majores
nostra* — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc13010.md)
