[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13016)  [Next](cc13018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 11:1-16

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And there shall come forth a rod out
of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his roots:

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sed prodibit virga ex trunco Isai;
et surculus de radicibus ejus fructus edet.

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord;

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et requiescet super eum Spiritus
Iehovae, spiritus sapientiae et intelligentiae, spiritus consilii et
fortitudinis, spiritus scientiae et timoris Iehovae.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And shall make him of quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord; and he shall not judge after the
sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears:

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et sagacem illum reddet in timore
Iehovae; non secundum aspectum oculorum suorum judicabit, neque ex
auditu aurium suarum arguet.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>**4.** But with righteousness shall he
judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and
he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath
of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Nam judicabit in justitia pauperes,
et in aequitate arguet mansuetis terrae; et percutiet terram virga oris
sui, et spiritu labiorum suorum interficiet impium.

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And righteousness shall be the
girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et erit justitia balteus lumborum
ejus, et fides balteus renum ejus.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>**6.** The wolf also shall dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and the calf, and the
young lion, and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead
them.

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Habitabit lupus cum agno, et pardus
cum hoedo accubabit; vitulus, et leo, et pecus pingue pariter; et puer
parvus reget eos.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the cow and the bear shall
feed; their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat
straw like the ox.

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Vacca et ursus pascentur; simul
accubabunt foetus eorum. Et leo, quasi bos, comedet paleas.

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the sucking child shall play on
the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the
cockatrice’ den.

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et oblectabitur infans super
foramine aspidis; et super speluncam cerastis qui ablactatus est manum
suam mittet.

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span>**9.** They shall not hurt nor destroy in
all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Non nocebunt, neque injuriam
inferent in toto monte sanctitatis meae; quoniam impleta erit terra
scientia Iehovae, tanquam aquis mare operientibus.

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And in that day there shall be a
root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it
shall the Gentiles seek: and his rest shall be glorious.

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et erit in die illa, Radix Isai,
quae stabit in signum populorum, requiretur a Gentibus, et erit requies
ejus gloria.

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, *that* the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover
the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria, and from
Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar,
and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et erit in die illa, adjiciet
Dominus rursus manum suum ad possidendas reliquias populi sui, quae
residuae erunt ab Assur, et ab AEgypto, a Parthia, ab Arabia, ab
AEthiopia, a Perside, a Chaldaea, ab Hamath, et ab insulis maris.

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And he shall set up an ensign for
the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather
together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.

<span id="xviii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et levabit signum Gentibus,
congregabitque ejectos Israel, et dispersiones Iuda congregabit a
quatuor plagis terrae.

<span id="xviii.i-p26"></span>**13.** The envy also of Ephraim shall
depart, and the adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not
envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.

<span id="xviii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et abscedet aemulatio Ephraim, et
hostes Iuda excidentur. Ephraim non aemulabitur Iuda, nec Iuda anget
Ephraim.

<span id="xviii.i-p28"></span>**14.** But they shall fly upon the
shoulders of the Philistines toward the west; they shall spoil them of
the east together: they shall lay their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the
children of Ammon shall obey them.

<span id="xviii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Involabunt autem in humeros
Philistinorum ad occidentem; diripient pariter filios orientis, AEdom et
Moab missio manus eorum, et filii Ammon obedientia eorum.

<span id="xviii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And the Lord shall utterly destroy
the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake
his hand over the river, and shall smite it in the seven streams, and
make *men* go over dry-shod.

<span id="xviii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et in nihilum rediget Iehova
linguam maris AEgypti; et eriget manum suam super fluvium in fortitudine
venti sui; et percutiet illum in septem rivis, et faciet calcari cum
calceamentis.

<span id="xviii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And there shall be an highway for
the remnant of his people, which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it
was to Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="xviii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et erit semita reliquiis populi
ejus, quae residuae erunt ab Assur, quemadmodum fuit Israel, in die qua
ascendit e terra AEgypti.

<span id="xviii.i-p34"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p35"></span><span id="xviii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p36"></span>**1.** *But there shall come forth a rod.*
As the description of such dreadful calamities might terrify the godly,
and give them reason for despair, it was necessary to hold out
consolation; for when the kingdom was destroyed, cities thrown down, and
desolation spread over the whole country, there might have been nothing
left but grief and lamentation; and therefore they might have tottered
and fallen, or been greatly discouraged, if the Lord had not provided
for them this consolation. He therefore declares what the Lord will
afterwards do, and in what manner he will restore that kingdom.

<span id="xviii.i-p37"></span>He pursues the metaphor which he employed
towards the conclusion of the former chapter; for he had said that
Jerusalem would be destroyed, as if *a forest were* consumed by a single
conflagration. (<span id="xviii.i-p37.1"></span>[Isa.
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033.md),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#034)<span id="xviii.i-p37.1"></span>..md)
Its future desolation would be like that of a country formerly covered
with forests, when the trees had been cut down, and nothing could be
seen but ashes. That those things which are contrasted may answer to
each other, he says, that *out of the stock will come forth a branch,*
which will grow into a tree, and spread its branches and fruits far and
wide. I have therefore preferred translating <span
id="xviii.i-p37.2"></span>גזע (*gezang*) *a dry stock*, rather than *a
root*, though it makes little difference as to the meaning, but the
former expresses more fully what the Prophet meant, namely, that though
*the stock* be dry, *the branch which shall spring* from it shall be
more excellent than all the forests.

<span id="xviii.i-p38"></span>Hence we infer that this prediction
applies solely to the person of Christ; for till he came no such
*branch* arose. It certainly cannot be applied to Hezekiah or Josiah,
who, from their very infancy, were brought up in the expectation of
occupying a throne. Zerubbabel (<span id="xviii.i-p38.2"></span>[Ezr
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008)<span id="xviii.i-p38.2"></span>.md)
did not attain the thousandth part of that elevated rank which the
Prophet extols. We see, therefore, that to the wretched and almost
ruined Jews, consolation was held out in the Messiah alone, and that
their hope was held in suspense till he appeared. At the time of his
appearance, there would have been no hope that the kingdom would be
erected and restored, if this promise had not been added; for the family
of David appeared to be completely extinct. On this account he does not
call him *David*, but *Jesse*; because the rank of that family had sunk
so low, that it appeared to be not a royal family, but that of a mean
peasant, such as the family of *Jesse* was, when David was unexpectedly
called to the government of the kingdom. (<span
id="xviii.i-p38.3"></span>[1Sa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001.md)<span id="xviii.i-p38.3"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p38.4"></span>[2Sa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#008)<span id="xviii.i-p38.4"></span>..md)
So then, having sustained this calamity and lost its ancient renown, it
is denominated by the Prophet the family of *Jesse*, because that family
had no superiority above any other. Accordingly, I think that here, and
not towards the conclusion of the former chapter, the consolation
begins.

<span id="xviii.i-p39"></span>Amidst such frightful desolation they
might doubt who should be their deliverer. He therefore promises that
one *will spring* even out of a *dry trunk*; and he continues, as I
mentioned a little before, the same metaphor of *a forest*, because it
is far more beautiful than if he had said in plain language that the
Messiah would come. Having threatened that the forest would be entirely
cut down, he adds, that still *a* *branch* will arise out of it, to
restore the abundance and magnificence of the consumed forest; that is,
Christ, who should be the deliverer of the people. How low his beginning
was, it is unnecessary to explain. Undoubtedly, he was so far from
having anything splendid or attractive, that with the exception of his
birth, everything, to the view of the flesh, was inconsistent with the
character of the Redeemer. Even his birth was almost obscured; for who
would have thought that a poor *carpenter* (<span
id="xviii.i-p39.1"></span>[Mr 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p39.1"></span>) was descended from a royal family? Again,
where was Christ born, and how had he been brought up? In short, his
whole life having been mean and even contemptible, he suffered a most
disgraceful death, with which he had to begin his kingdom. Yet he grew
to an immeasurable height, like a large tree from a small and feeble
seed, as he himself shows, (<span id="xviii.i-p39.2"></span>[Matt.
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031.md),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032.md)<span id="xviii.i-p39.2"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p39.3"></span>[Mr
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#032)<span id="xviii.i-p39.3"></span>,.md)
and as we see by daily examples; for in the uninterrupted progress of
his kingdom the same things must happen as were seen in his person.

<span id="xviii.i-p40"></span><span id="xviii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p41"></span>*And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him.* He now begins to speak of Christ plainly and without a
figure; for it was enough to have represented the consolation under that
figure, in order that the full contrast between the burning of the wood
and its springing up anew might be made manifest. Two states of the
people are described by him; for, after having explained the calamity,
he next added the hope of restoration, though the commencement of it was
from a slender *branch*. But now he plainly shows what will be the
nature of the redemption, and what will be the condition of Christ and
of his kingdom.

<span id="xviii.i-p42"></span>Some think that this should rather be
viewed as referring to Hezekiah; but how groundless that opinion is we
have already shown;  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) for when he
was born, David had still a flourishing reputation, and the rank of
royalty belonged to his descendants; and Hezekiah was very far from
attaining that greatness which is shortly afterwards described. Now,
hence we infer that the spiritual kingdom of Christ was formerly
promised to the ancient people, because his whole strength, power, and
majesty, is here made to consist in the gifts of *the Spirit*. Although
Christ was not deficient in gifts of this kind, yet as he took upon him
our flesh, it was necessary that he should be enriched with them, that
we might afterwards be made partakers of all blessings of which
otherwise we are destitute; for *out of his fullness*, as John says, *we
must draw as* *from a fountain*. (<span id="xviii.i-p43.2"></span>[John
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md), [John
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)<span id="xviii.i-p43.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p44"></span>*The Spirit of the Lord* We must keep in
view what I mentioned a little ago, that this refers to Christ’s human
nature; because he could not be enriched with the gift and grace of the
Father, except so far as he became man. Besides, as he came down to us,
so he received the gifts of *the Spirit*, that he might bestow them upon
us. And this is the *anointing* from which he receives the name of
*Christ*, which he imparts to us; for why are we called *Christians*,
but because he admits us to his fellowship, by distributing to us out of
his fullness *according to the measure* (<span
id="xviii.i-p44.2"></span>[Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p44.2"></span>.md)
of undeserved liberality? And undoubtedly this passage does not so much
as teach us what Christ is in himself, as what he received from the
Father, that he might enrich us with his wealth.

<span id="xviii.i-p45"></span>*The spirit of wisdom and understanding.*
Though it is not necessary to bestow great attention on single words,
yet if any person wish to draw a slight distinction between *wisdom* and
*understanding*, I consider it to be this, that the word *wisdom*
comprehends generally all that relates to the regulation of the life,
and that *understanding* is added for the sake of explaining it; for if
we are endowed with this *wisdom*, we shall have sagacity enough.
*Counsel* means that judgment by which we can thread our way through
intricate affairs; for *understanding* would not be sufficient, if there
were not also *counsel*, that we might be able to act with caution in
doubtful matters. The word *might* is well enough known. *Knowledge*
differs little from *understanding*; except that it relates more to the
act of knowing, and thus declares what has taken place. *The fear of the
Lord* means a sincere desire to worship God.

<span id="xviii.i-p46"></span>The Prophet does not here enumerate all
the gifts of the Holy Spirit, as some have thought. Out of this passage
the Papists have foolishly and ignorantly drawn their sevenfold grace,
and some of the ancients fell into a similar blunder. He enumerates only
six kinds; but they have added a seventh out of their own head. But as
one error commonly follows another, they have chosen to limit the gifts
of *the Spirit* to the number seven, although in other parts of
Scripture (<span id="xviii.i-p46.1"></span>[Joh
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017.md)<span id="xviii.i-p46.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p46.2"></span>[2Ti
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p46.2"></span>.md)
he receives numerous and lofty commendations drawn from the variety of
the effects which he produces. Besides, it is very evident that it is
through the kindness of Christ (<span id="xviii.i-p46.3"></span>[Gal.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023)<span id="xviii.i-p46.3"></span>.md)
that we are partakers of other blessings than those which are here
enumerated, of meekness, chastity, sobriety, truth, and holiness; for
these proceed from none else than from Christ. He does not mention,
therefore, all the gifts which were bestowed on Christ, for that was
unnecessary; but only shows briefly that Christ came not empty-handed,
but well supplied with all gifts, that he might enrich us with them.

<span id="xviii.i-p47"></span>If these things had not been added, we
might have supposed, as the Jews commonly do, that the restoration of
this kingdom was carnal, and might have imagined that Christ was poor
and destitute of all blessings. Accordingly, the Prophet afterwards
shows that the gifts of the Spirit are laid up in him, first, generally,
and next, particularly; that we may go to him to obtain whatever we
want. He will enlighten us with the light of *wisdom* and
*understanding*, will impart to us *counsel* in difficulties, will make
us strong and courageous in battles, will bestow on us the true fear of
God, that is, godliness, and, in a word, will communicate to us all that
is necessary for our life and salvation. All gifts are here included by
the Prophet, so that it is excessively foolish to attempt to conceal
those which do not belong to the present enumeration.

<span id="xviii.i-p48"></span>He shows that they dwell in Christ, in
order that they may be communicated to us. We are also called his
*fellows*, (<span id="xviii.i-p48.1"></span>[Ps
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p48.1"></span>,.md)
because strength proceeds from him as the head to the individual
members, and in like manner Christ causes his heavenly anointing to flow
over the whole body of his Church. Hence it follows that those who are
altogether barren and dry have no interest in Christ, and falsely glory
in his name. Whenever therefore we feel that we are in want of any of
these gifts, let us blame our unbelief; for true faith makes us
partakers of all Christ’s benefits. We ought therefore to pray to the
Lord not to permit the lusts of the flesh to rule in us, that Christ may
wholly unite us to himself. It should also be observed, that we ought to
ask all blessings from Christ alone; for we are mistaken if we imagine
that anything can be obtained from the Father in any other way.

<span id="xviii.i-p49"></span><span id="xviii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p50"></span>**3.** *And will make him sagacious.*
 <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md) The verb <span
id="xviii.i-p51.1"></span>ריח, (*riach*,) which is here put in the
Hiphil conjugation, signifies literally *to* *smell*; but may also be
explained in an active sense, as meaning *to give a keen smell*; which
agrees better, I think, with this passage, so that this sagacity may be
also included among the gifts of the Spirit. And this effect is
peculiarly applicable to the person of Christ, namely, that far beyond
what the godly are able to conceive, he is endowed with shrewd
discernment for governing his people. We ought to attend, first of all,
to the metaphor in the verb *smell*, which means that Christ will be so
shrewd that he will not need to learn from what he hears, or from what
he sees; for by *smelling* alone he will perceive what would otherwise
be unknown.  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p53"></span>*In the fear of the Lord.* This phrase is
viewed by the greater part of commentators as meaning that all the
feelings of the heart will be manifest to Christ, so that he will easily
judge who are the sincere worshippers of God. But let the reader inquire
if it be not a more appropriate meaning, that *the fear of God* denotes
a fixed rule of judging. He expressly distinguishes between the heavenly
judgment of Christ and earthly judgments, in order to inform us, that
the outward mask of holiness or uprightness is of no avail in his
presence.

<span id="xviii.i-p54"></span>*And he shall not judge after the sight of
his eyes.* The meaning is, “When we come to the judgment-seat of Christ,
not only will outward actions be brought to trial after the manner of
human governments, but the life of men will be examined by the standard
of true godliness. It does not belong to man to penetrate into the
hearts; and those whom we suppose to be very excellent men have
frequently nothing but a hollow mask; but Christ judges not from outward
appearance, (<span id="xviii.i-p54.1"></span>[Lu
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#017.md)<span id="xviii.i-p54.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p54.2"></span>[Joh
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#025)<span id="xviii.i-p54.2"></span>,.md)
for he thoroughly knows and searches our inmost thoughts. His
*judgment*, therefore, is quite different from that of men, who, with
all their acuteness and quick sagacity, fall into the most shameful
mistakes.” Hence it follows that none can be the true worshippers of God
but those whom Christ approves. They cannot obtain his approbation,
unless they offer a pure and upright mind; for a false and hollow mask
cannot deceive him.

<span id="xviii.i-p55"></span><span id="xviii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p56"></span>**4.** *For he will judge the poor in
righteousness.*  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) Here he shows
that Christ will be the guardian of *the poor*, or, he points out the
persons to whom the grace of Christ strictly belongs, namely, to the
*poor* or *meek*; that is, to those who, humbled by a conviction of
their poverty, have laid aside those proud and lofty dispositions which
commonly swell the minds of men, till they have learned to be meek
through the subduing influence of the word of God. He therefore declares
that he will be the protector and guardian, not of all men whatsoever,
but of those who know that they are *poor*, and destitute of everything
good. This was also declared by Christ to John’s disciples, when he said
that *the gospel is preached to the poor*. (<span
id="xviii.i-p57.1"></span>[Mt
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p57.1"></span>..md)
Who are they that are capable of receiving this doctrine? Not all men
without exception, but those who, having laid aside the glory of the
flesh, betake themselves to that heavenly protection.

<span id="xviii.i-p58"></span>There is, therefore, an implied contrast,
namely, that Christ does not rule over the rich, that is, over those who
are swelled with a false opinion of themselves. Though he invites all
men to come to him, still the greater part refuse to submit to his
government. The *poor* alone allow themselves to be governed by him.
This passage teaches us, that if we are desirous to be protected by the
power of Christ, we must lay aside all pride, and put on the spirit of
*meekness* and modesty. That spiritual poverty which the Prophet
recommends to all the members of Christ is, to have no lofty views, but
to be truly humbled by a conviction of our poverty and nakedness, so as
to depend on Christ alone. When we have been brought to this state of
mind, the faithful King and Guardian will undertake to secure our
salvation, and will defend us to the last against all our enemies. We
also learn whom Christ invites to come to him: *Come to me, all ye that
labor and are burdened*. (<span id="xviii.i-p58.1"></span>[Mt
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p58.1"></span>.) We must, therefore, *labor* and be pressed
down by the weight of our *burden*, if we wish to feel and know his
assistance.

<span id="xviii.i-p59"></span>*And will reprove with equity for the meek
of the earth.* We must attend to the order which is here observed by the
Prophet. He places *poverty* first, and then *meekness*; because we must
first be *poor* before we become *meek*. So long as we think *that we
are* *somebody*, (<span id="xviii.i-p59.1"></span>[Ac
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036)<span id="xviii.i-p59.1"></span>,.md)
and are carried away by a vain confidence in ourselves, our heart is
filled with pride and self-conceit, and cannot yield or submit; but when
we are convinced of our poverty, we lose courage, and, subdued and
overpowered, begin to groan under the burden. The condition of Christ’s
people, therefore, is here described, as he had formerly illustrated the
nature of the king himself. Hence also we ought to learn, that those
precious gifts of the Spirit with which we saw a little before that
Christ was furnished,  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md) are not
bestowed by him on all men whatsoever, but on the *poor* and the *meek*;
for the word *judge* denotes government, a very important part of which
is, that Christ imparts to us the gifts which he received from the
Father, that he may live in us, and that we may live in him.

<span id="xviii.i-p61"></span>*And he shall smite the earth with the rod
of his mouth.* The Prophet here extols the efficacy of the word, which
is Christ’s royal scepter. By *the rod of his mouth* is meant a scepter
which consists in words, and in the second clause he repeats the same
idea by the phrase, *the* *breath of his lips*; as if he had said, that
Christ will have no need to borrow aid from others to cast down his
enemies, and to strike down everything that opposes his government; for
a mere *breath* or a *word* will be enough. The statement may be
general, since believers also must die, so as to be renewed to a
spiritual life; and in this sense the gospel is called a sword
appropriated for the slaying of sacrifices. (<span
id="xviii.i-p61.1"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p61.1"></span>.) But the latter part of the verse calls for
a different interpretation. If any one choose to make a distinction,
*the* *striking of the earth* will apply equally to the reprobate and
the elect; as the gospel is

<span id="xviii.i-p62"></span>a two-edged sword, piercing even to the
most hidden and secret feelings of the heart, and discerning the
thoughts and affections. (<span id="xviii.i-p62.1"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="xviii.i-p62.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p63"></span>Yet it wounds the former in a very
different manner from that in which it wounds the latter. By mortifying
in the elect a sinful nature, it kills their lusts, that they may become
a living sacrifice, and a sacrifice of sweet-smelling savor; but it
*strikes* the wicked in a manner altogether destructive, for they rot
and die, and to them it is even, as Paul says, *a savor of death to*
*death.* (<span id="xviii.i-p63.1"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="xviii.i-p63.1"></span>..md)
I should be willing enough to consider both effects as described here at
the same time, were it not that it is opposed by the custom of the
Hebrew language; for the Hebrew writers often repeat the same sentiment
in different words.

<span id="xviii.i-p64"></span>*And with the breath of his lips shall he
slay the wicked.* Christ is armed *with the breath of his lips to slay
the wicked.* But perhaps this second clause was added by Isaiah for the
purpose of amplification; and, indeed, *to slay* is much more than *to
strike*. As it belongs to the gospel to cast down all men without
exception, its effect on the reprobate may be said to be accidental, *to
slay* them with a deadly stroke. In this way the Prophet would add a
particular case to the general statement, intimating that the wicked
fall under the sword of Christ to their everlasting destruction, because
they are not set apart to be sacrifices.  <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md) However this may be, this latter
clause must undoubtedly be limited to the wicked alone; and it is added,
because that efficacy does not immediately appear in the preaching of
the gospel, but, on the contrary, many ridicule, and jeer, and treat as
a fable all that is said about Christ and his word. But though they do
not immediately feel its power, yet they will not be able to escape it,
and will at length be slain by a deadly wound.

<span id="xviii.i-p66"></span>But the Prophet’s meaning, I think, is not
yet fully explained; for he does not speak only of the inward feeling by
which wicked men are moved, whether they will or not, but of the
wickedness itself, which will be removed and driven away by the power
and efficacy of this scepter, as Paul also explains; for he undoubtedly
alludes to this passage when he speaks of the destruction of Antichrist.

<span id="xviii.i-p67"></span>And then shall that Wicked be revealed,
whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming. (<span
id="xviii.i-p67.1"></span>[2 Thess.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)<span id="xviii.i-p67.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p68"></span>Thus he explains to us the meaning of the
Prophet; for he shows that Christ will never be without enemies, who
will endeavor to overturn his kingdom, and to hinder or retard the
course of the gospel; otherwise these words of the Prophet would have
been spoken in vain. But Christ will drive away some of their number,
and the whole of them together, and their very head and leader, by the
sound of his doctrine.

<span id="xviii.i-p69"></span>Thus also Paul recommends a twofold use of
doctrine, demanding from a pastor that

<span id="xviii.i-p70"></span>he shall be qualified not only to teach,
but likewise  
to refute those who oppose. (<span id="xviii.i-p70.2"></span>Titus 1:9.)

<span id="xviii.i-p71"></span>A pastor ought not only to feed his flock,
but also to protect and guard them against every injury. This is what
Christ performs, and therefore he is provided with necessary armor, that
he may contend successfully against the falsehoods of Satan, and the
cruelty of tyrants, and every kind of enemies.

<span id="xviii.i-p72"></span>Hence it is evident that wicked doctrines
cannot be driven away by any other method than by the gospel. In vain
will the magistrate employ the sword, which undoubtedly he must employ,
to restrain wicked teachers and false prophets; in vain, I say, will he
attempt all these things, unless this sword of the word go before.
(<span id="xviii.i-p72.1"></span>[De
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p72.1"></span>..md)
This ought to be carefully observed in opposition to the Papists, who,
when the word fails them, betake themselves to new weapons, by the aid
of which they think that they will gain the victory. They are even so
impudent as to boast that heretics cannot be refuted by the *word*,
though both the Prophet and Paul lay down no other method.

<span id="xviii.i-p73"></span>When the Prophet says, *by the breath of
his lips*, this must not be limited to the person of Christ; for it
refers to the word which is preached by his ministers. Christ acts by
them in such a manner that he wishes their *mouth* to be reckoned as his
*mouth*, and their *lips* as his *lips*; that is, when they speak from
his mouth, and faithfully declare his word. (<span
id="xviii.i-p73.1"></span>[Lu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p73.1"></span>.) The Prophet does not now send us to secret
revelations, that Christ may reign in us, but openly recommends the
outward preaching of doctrine, and shows that the gospel serves the
purpose of a scepter in the hand of Christ, so far as it is preached,
and so far as it is *oral*, if we may use the expression; otherwise it
would have been to no purpose to mention the *mouth* and the *lips*.
Hence it follows that all those who reject the outward preaching of the
gospel shake off this scepter, as far as lies in their power, or pull it
out of the hand of Christ; not that the efficacy which he mentions
depends on the voice of men, but so far as Christ acts by his ministers;
for he does not wish that their labor should be fruitless, without
sacrificing the elect to obedience, (<span id="xviii.i-p73.2"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p73.2"></span>,) and slaying the reprobate; as Paul in
another passage boasts that there will be speedy vengeance against all
unbelievers and rebels.

<span id="xviii.i-p74"></span>Here we must again call to remembrance
what is the nature of Christ’s kingdom. As he does not wear a golden
crown or employ earthly armor, so he does not rule over the world by the
power of arms, or gain authority by gaudy and ostentatious display, or
constrain his people by terror and dread; but the doctrine of the gospel
is his royal banner, which assembles believers under his dominion.
Wherever, therefore, the doctrine of the Gospel is preached in purity,
there we are certain that Christ reigns; and where it is rejected, his
government is also set aside. Hence it is evident how foolishly the
Papists boast that the Church belongs to them, when they order Christ
himself to be silent, and cannot endure the sound of his voice, but
proclaim aloud, with distended cheeks, their own edicts, laws, decrees,
and tyrannical regulations.

<span id="xviii.i-p75"></span><span id="xviii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p76"></span>**5.** *And righteousness shall be the
belt.*  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) Some translate it
*girdle*; but as the Prophet represents Christ to us wearing, as it
were, the emblems of royalty, I have rather translated it *belt*, which
is also a royal emblem, in the same manner as the scepter, which he had
assigned to him a little before. When Job speaks of taking away the
authority of kings, he says that the Lord will ungird their *belt*.
(<span id="xviii.i-p77.1"></span>[Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p77.1"></span>.) To be *girded* with a *belt*, therefore, is
nothing else than to be exalted to royal authority, as we shall
afterwards see in another passage. (<span id="xviii.i-p77.2"></span>[Isa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p77.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p78"></span>The Prophet describes two ornaments
belonging to the *belt*. These are *righteousness* and *truth*; unless
it be thought that there is a change in the order of construction, as if
he had said that Christ will be girded *with true righteousness*; for
*truth* is not added as if it were different from *righteousness*, but
in order to point out the nature of that *righteousness* with which
Christ is *girded*. Some think that *righteousness* here denotes that
which Christ imparts to us, that it may dwell, not only in himself, but
in his members. *Faith* or *truth* they understand to be that by which
we embrace the salvation which he offers to us.

<span id="xviii.i-p79"></span>The Chaldee paraphrast explains it thus;
“and the righteous shall be round about him, believing worshippers shall
approach to him.”  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) But I adopt a
more simple interpretation, as if he had said, “He shall not appear like
kings, clothed with purple and a crown, or girded with a *belt*; but
*righteousness* and *truth* shall shine forth in him.” I acknowledge,
indeed, that *righteousness* is not confined to Christ, but belongs to
his members; but we must attend to the mode of expression, that Christ
comes forth to govern his people *girded with righteousness*, which he
afterwards imparts to them by the secret influence of the Spirit. If we
distinguish between the word <span id="xviii.i-p80.1"></span>אמונה
(*emunah*) and *righteousness*, I consider it to mean *faithfulness* or
*steadfastness*; as if he had said that Christ never disappoints his
followers, for he continues always to be like himself.

<span id="xviii.i-p81"></span><span id="xviii.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p82"></span>**6.** *The wolf shall dwell with the
lamb.* He again returns to describe the character and habits of those
who have submitted to Christ. As there is a mutual relation between the
king and the people, he sometimes ascends from the body to the head, and
sometimes descends from the head to the body; and we have already seen
that Christ reigns, not for himself, but for those who believe in him.
Hence it follows that he forms their minds by his heavenly Spirit. But
the Prophet’s discourse looks beyond this; for it amounts to a promise
that there will be a blessed restoration of the world. He describes the
order which was at the beginning, before man’s apostasy produced the
unhappy and melancholy change under which we groan. Whence comes the
cruelty of brutes, which prompts the stronger to seize and rend and
devour with dreadful violence the weaker animals? There would certainly
have been no discord among the creatures of God, if they had remained in
their first and original condition. When they exercise cruelty towards
each other, and the weak need to be protected against the strong, it is
an evidence of the disorder (<span id="xviii.i-p82.2"></span>ἀταξίας)
which has sprung from the sinfulness of man. Christ having come, in
order to reconcile the world to God by the removal of the curse, it is
not without reason that the restoration of a perfect state is ascribed
to him; as if the Prophets had said that that golden age will return in
which perfect happiness existed, before the fall of man and the shock
and ruin of the world which followed it. Thus, God speaks by Hosea:

<span id="xviii.i-p83"></span>I will make a covenant with the beast of
the field, with the fowl of the heaven, and with the creeping things.  
(<span id="xviii.i-p83.2"></span>[Ho
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018)<span id="xviii.i-p83.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p84"></span>As if he had said, “When God shall have
been reconciled to the world in Christ, he will also give tokens of
fatherly kindness, so that all the corruptions which have arisen from
the sinfulness of man will cease.”

<span id="xviii.i-p85"></span>In a word, under these figures the
Prophets teach the same truth which Paul plainly affirms, that Christ
came *to gather together* out of a state of disorder *those things which
are in heaven and which are on* *earth*. (<span
id="xviii.i-p85.1"></span>[Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md)<span id="xviii.i-p85.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p85.2"></span>[Col
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)<span id="xviii.i-p85.2"></span>..md)
It may be thus summed up: “Christ will come to drive away everything
hurtful out of the world, and to restore to its former beauty the world
which lay under the curse.” For this reason, he says, that *straw* will
be the food of *the lion* as well as of *the ox*; for if the stain of
sin had not polluted the world, no animal would have been addicted to
prey on blood, but the fruits of the earth would have sufficed for all,
according to the method which God had appointed. (<span
id="xviii.i-p85.3"></span>[Ge
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#030)<span id="xviii.i-p85.3"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p86"></span>Though Isaiah says that the wild and the
tame beasts will live in harmony, that the blessing of God may be
clearly and fully manifested, yet he chiefly means what I have said,
that the people of Christ will have no disposition to do injury, no
fierceness or cruelty. They were formerly like *lions* or *leopards*,
but will now be like *sheep* or *lambs*; for they will have laid aside
every cruel and brutish disposition. By these modes of expression he
means nothing else than that those who formerly were like savage beasts
will be mild and gentle; for he compares violent and ravenous men to
*wolves* and *bears* which live on prey and plunder, and declares that
they will be tame and gentle, so that they will be satisfied with
ordinary food, and will abstain from doing any injury or harm. On this
subject it is proper to argue from the less to the greater. “If Christ
shall bring brute animals into a state of peace, much more will
brotherly harmony exist among men, who will be governed by the same
spirit of meekness.” And yet Isaiah does not mean that any are mild and
peaceful by nature before they are renewed, but yet he promises, that
whatever may have been their natural disposition, they will lay aside or
conquer their fierceness, and will be like *lambs* and *sheep*.

<span id="xviii.i-p87"></span>*And a little child shall lead them.* This
means that beasts which formerly were cruel and untameable, will be
ready to yield cheerful obedience, so that there will be no need of
violence to restrain their fierceness. Yet we must attend to the
spiritual meaning which I noticed, that all who become Christ’s
followers will obey Christ, though they may formerly have been savage
wild beasts, and will obey him in such a manner, that as soon as he
lifts his finger, they will follow his footsteps, as it is said that
*his people shall be willing*. (<span id="xviii.i-p87.1"></span>[Ps
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p87.1"></span>.) Those who are not endued with this meekness
do not deserve to be ranked among the sheep. Let us, therefore, permit
ourselves to be ruled and governed by him, and let us willingly submit
to those whom he has appointed over us, though they appear to be like
*little children*. Besides, I think that the ministers of the word are
compared to children, because they have no external power, and exercise
no civil government over them.

<span id="xviii.i-p88"></span>A question arises, Do we find any persons
who are meek, though they have not been tamed by the gospel? The Prophet
appears to insinuate this, when he compares some men to *sheep*, and
others to *wolves* and *bears*; and certainly among men who follow the
bent of their natural disposition, we shall perceive an astonishing
diversity. Some are mild and gentle, others are fierce and violent; but
it is certain that all men are untamed till Christ subdues them by the
gospel; all are swelled with ambition and pride before they are cured by
this medicine. Many will be able to make a false and hollow profession
of modesty and humility, but they will swell with inward pride. In
short, where the Spirit of Christ is not, there will be no true
meekness.

<span id="xviii.i-p89"></span><span id="xviii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p90"></span>**8.** *And the child shall play on the
hole of the asp.* He continues to illustrate the same sentiment, that
when men have been brought into a state of favor with God, and have been
cleansed from their depravity by the Spirit of regeneration, they will
likewise be free from every hurtful disposition. There is no reason why
men dread the danger or poison arising from the bite of serpents, but
because they do not deserve that God should place every part of the
world under their control. And, indeed, since animals are permitted to
do injury even to *children*, this shows that the whole race of Adam has
been stained with pollution from the very womb.

<span id="xviii.i-p91"></span>We must again observe the comparison which
we stated, that those men whom a concealed poison led to deeds of
violence will have their disposition changed, and will do no harm even
to *little children*. Some men are openly fierce and cruel, (<span
id="xviii.i-p91.1"></span>[Ps
140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p91.1"></span>,) and others inwardly carry and cherish their
malice like poison, (<span id="xviii.i-p91.2"></span>[Ps
55:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p91.2"></span>,) as David also describes them; for some men
are more quick, and others are more slow, to manifest the desire of
doing injury. Whatever they may have formerly been, he means that all of
them must be cleansed from wickedness, both open and concealed, after
having submitted to Christ. He means, also, that henceforth safety,
which will reign everywhere, will be enjoyed even by those who have no
kind of protection; so that they will freely venture to expose
themselves to imminent dangers.

<span id="xviii.i-p92"></span><span id="xviii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p93"></span>**9.** *They shall not hurt.* He now
declares plainly, that men themselves, having laid aside the depravity
which naturally dwells in them, will be inclined, of their own accord,
to do what is right. He speaks of believers who have been truly
regenerated *to a new life*, (<span id="xviii.i-p93.1"></span>[Ro
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="xviii.i-p93.1"></span>;.md)
for though in the Church many hypocrites full of wickedness were mixed
with the elect of God, yet they are like the Ishmaelites, whom God will
cast out at the proper time. We ought also to observe, as we are taught
in <span id="xviii.i-p93.2"></span>[Ps.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001.md), [Ps.
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003.md)<span id="xviii.i-p93.2"></span>,
that those only who follow *righteousness* have a settled residence in
the temple of God, that they may dwell there for ever. It is, therefore,
a distinguishing mark of the genuine members of the Church, that they
are free from all desire of doing injury to others. Hence, also, we
infer, that it is a remarkable gift of the Spirit of Christ, that men
abstain from being evil-doers; for by nature, ambition, pride, cruelty,
and avarice, always prompt them freely and voluntarily to commit acts of
injustice.

<span id="xviii.i-p94"></span>*For the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord.* With good reason does the Prophet add, that this
invaluable blessing flows from *the knowledge of God*; for it abases all
flesh, and teaches men to commit themselves to his trust and
guardianship, and brings them into a state of brotherly harmony, when
they learn that they have the same Father. (<span
id="xviii.i-p94.1"></span>[Mal
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)<span id="xviii.i-p94.1"></span>..md)
Although many, who have not yet been renewed by the Spirit of Christ,
profess to have humanity, yet it is certain that self-love (<span
id="xviii.i-p94.2"></span>φιλαυτίαν) reigns in them; for in all it is
natural and so deeply-rooted, that they seek their own advantage and not
that of others, think that they are born for themselves and not for
others, and would wish to make the whole world subject to them, if they
could, as Plato has judiciously observed. Hence arise fraud, perjury,
theft, robbery, and innumerable crimes of this sort; and therefore there
is no other remedy for subduing this lawless desire than *the knowledge
of God*. We see how the Prophet again makes the government of Christ to
rest on faith and the doctrine of the gospel, as indeed he does not
gather us to himself (<span id="xviii.i-p94.3"></span>[Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span id="xviii.i-p94.3"></span>.md)
in another way than by enlightening our minds to reveal the heavenly
life, which is nothing else, as he himself declares, than

<span id="xviii.i-p95"></span>to know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom he hath sent. (<span id="xviii.i-p95.1"></span>[Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="xviii.i-p95.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p96"></span>As with waters that cover the sea. There
is an implied comparison between the abundance of knowledge and that
slender taste which God gave to the ancient people under the law. The
Jews having been kept in the rudiments of childhood, (<span
id="xviii.i-p96.1"></span>[Gal. 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023.md),
[Gal. 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p96.1"></span>,) the perfect light of wisdom hath fully
shone on us by the gospel, as was also foretold by Jeremiah:

<span id="xviii.i-p97"></span>They shall not every one teach his
neighbor, and a man his brother, to know God; for all shall know me,
from the least to the greatest. (<span id="xviii.i-p97.1"></span>[Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p97.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p98"></span>If this fullness of knowledge take
possession of our minds, it will free us from all malice.

<span id="xviii.i-p99"></span>This passage also instructs us what is the
character of the Church under Popery, where the light of doctrine is
choked and almost extinguished, and the highest religion is made to
consist in the benumbing influence of brutish stupidity. If we do not
immediately possess full knowledge, we must advance from day to day, and
make continual progress, (<span id="xviii.i-p99.1"></span>[2Pe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018)<span id="xviii.i-p99.1"></span>,.md)
and in such a manner that fruit may spring from that root. Hence it is
evident how little progress the greater part have made in the school of
Christ, seeing that fraud and robbery and acts of violence abound
everywhere.

<span id="xviii.i-p100"></span><span id="xviii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p101"></span>**10.** *And it shall be in that day the
root of Jesse.* He again returns to the person of Christ, and repeats
the same comparison which he had introduced at the beginning of the
chapter, that of a *root* or a *branch* springing from a decayed trunk,
of which no trace appeared; and he foretells that the Gentiles, who
formerly abhorred the Jews, will henceforth bow before their King with
lowly homage. This might be thought to be altogether incredible, and
unquestionably the promise was ridiculed for many centuries, because
such a gathering together was to be expected rather when the kingdom
remained and flourished than when it had been cut down. But it was
necessary that it should be cut down, so that it might afterwards sprout
again, and that the glory and power of God might shine in it more
brighter than in its flourishing condition. Who would have seen with the
eyes of men that the *branch* would rise to such a height as to be seen
by all nations, and to direct the eyes of all men towards it?

<span id="xviii.i-p102"></span>*Which shall stand for an ensign of the
peoples.* He compares it to a banner stretched aloft; and we know that
this was fulfilled by the preaching of the gospel, and indeed was more
illustrious than if Christ had soared above the clouds. To the same
purpose is what he says,

<span id="xviii.i-p103"></span>As Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up. (<span
id="xviii.i-p103.1"></span>[Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014.md)<span id="xviii.i-p103.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p103.2"></span>[Nu
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p103.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p104"></span>*Shall be sought by the Gentiles.* Christ
is said to be *sought*, when men flee to him for the purpose of asking
salvation, as to *seek God* means, in every part of Scripture, to cast
all our hopes upon him. Accordingly, the Greek translators have rendered
it <span id="xviii.i-p104.1"></span>ἐλπιοῦσι, *they shall hope*, looking
rather at the meaning than at the word.

<span id="xviii.i-p105"></span>*And his rest shall be glory.* These
words are commonly explained as referring to the burial of Christ, and
that by a figure of speech in which a part is taken for the whole; for
afterwards they apply it also to his death; and indeed the burial of
Christ was nothing else than an appendage to his death. They think that
the meaning is this, “The death of Christ, which was disgraceful in the
eyes of the world, will be *glorious* and splendid.” But when I take a
closer view of the whole, by *rest* the Prophet means in this passage
the Church; as it is also said,

<span id="xviii.i-p106"></span>This is my everlasting rest; here will I
dwell.  
(<span id="xviii.i-p106.2"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p106.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p107"></span>He bestows an honorable appellation on
the assembly of the godly, because he chooses to have a continual
habitation among them. Accordingly, the Church having been at that time
exposed to reproaches and disgrace, he promises that it will be again
raised to a more prosperous condition, and will recover its ancient
*glory*. Here, therefore, we have a remarkable proof that God is pleased
to dwell continually in his Church, though this may not always be seen
by men.

<span id="xviii.i-p108"></span><span id="xviii.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p109"></span>**11.** *And it shall be in that day, the
Lord will again set his hand.* The prediction about the future glory of
the Church having been incredible, he explains the method of restoring
it, namely, that God will display the power of *his hand*, as if for
performing a memorable and uncommon exploit. Now, to confirm the hope of
the elect people, he recalls to their minds the remembrance of a past
deliverance, that they may not doubt that God is as able to deliver them
now as their fathers found him to be in Egypt. (<span
id="xviii.i-p109.1"></span>[Ex
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p109.1"></span>.) Such is the import of the word <span
id="xviii.i-p109.2"></span>שנית, (*shenith*,) that is, *the second
time*, or *again*; as if he had said, “*Now also* will God be the
deliverer of his Church.”

<span id="xviii.i-p110"></span>*To possess the remnant of his people.*
He confirms what he has said by another argument; for though it appeared
as if God had disregarded his people, yet he will not allow himself to
be deprived of his inheritance. We may sum it up by saying, that God
will take care of the salvation of his Church, so as not to be robbed of
his right. He expressly calls them a *remnant*, because this deliverance
belonged only to a small seed. (<span id="xviii.i-p110.1"></span>[Isa.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009.md), [Isa.
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p110.1"></span>.) In short, he repeats what he formerly
said, “Though God disperse and scatter his Church, yet it is impossible
that he can ever cast it away altogether; for it is as dear to him as
our inheritance is to any of us.”

<span id="xviii.i-p111"></span>*Which shall be left from Assyria and
from Egypt.* He speaks not only of the *Assyrians*, who had led the
people captive, but also of other nations among whom the Jews were
scattered; for though the greater part of the people was carried to
Babylon, some fled into *Egypt*, some into Ethiopia, and some into other
countries. They were afraid lest they should endure the same bondage as
had been endured by others. Some think that by *Pathros* is meant
*Parthia*, which is highly probable; others think that it is Arabia the
Rocky. Under the name *Elam* he includes the Medes, Zocdians, Bactrians,
and other eastern nations. *Shinar* belongs to Chaldea. By *Hamath* they
mean Cilicia, and the other countries which lie towards Mount Taurus. By
the word *islands* the Jews mean all countries that lie beyond the sea;
for to them Greece, and Italy, and Spain, were islands, because they
were separated from them by the sea.  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p113"></span>We see that the Prophet speaks here not
only of the deliverance which took place under Zerubbabel, (<span
id="xviii.i-p113.1"></span>[Ezr
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002)<span id="xviii.i-p113.1"></span>,.md)
but that he looks beyond this; for at that time the Israelites were not
brought back from Egypt, Ethiopia, and other countries. These words,
therefore, cannot be understood to relate to the deliverance from
Babylon, but must be viewed as referring to the kingdom of Christ, under
whom this deliverance was obtained through the preaching of the gospel.
Besides, it is proper to observe that this work belongs to God, and not
to men; for he says, *The Lord shall stretch out his arm*; thus
ascribing to his heavenly power this work, which could not have been
accomplished by human ability.

<span id="xviii.i-p114"></span>It ought also to be observed, that from
God’s past benefits we ought always to entertain good hopes for the
future; so that whenever we call to remembrance the deliverances from
Babylon and from *Egypt*, (<span id="xviii.i-p114.1"></span>[Ezr
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002.md)<span id="xviii.i-p114.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p114.2"></span>[Ex
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p114.2"></span>,) we may be convinced that God is equally
able, and will equally assist us at the present day, that he may restore
the Church to her ancient glory. What he did once and again, he is able
to do a third time, and a fourth, and many times. When the Prophet calls
those whom he rescues *a remnant*, let us learn that we ought not to
desire a vast multitude, and let us be satisfied, though we be few, and
let us not be terrified by the smallness of our numbers; for, provided
that the righteousness of God abound, we have true and abundant ground
of confidence.

<span id="xviii.i-p115"></span><span id="xviii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p116"></span>**12.** *And he will lift up an ensign to
the nations*. This verse contains nothing more than the explanation of
the former verse. The language is metaphorical, and admits of two
meanings; either that, *by giving an ensign*, he will terrify
adversaries, so that they will not dare to prevent his people from
returning, or that he will *give an* *ensign* to the wretched exiles not
to hesitate to make preparations for their return. But even at the
present day this doctrine is highly useful among us; for as an *ensign*
is lifted up in the army, that the soldiers may assemble, and that every
one may follow and may keep his proper place, so a *banner* is here held
out to us, that we may assemble to it, namely, the gospel, which the
Lord has lifted up among the Gentiles, by which Christ is preached to
us.  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p118"></span>*And will gather together the dispersions
of Judah.* Hence we ought to conclude, that we cannot be *gathered* by
the Lord unless we assemble to this *ensign*, and be joined to him by
faith; for there is no other way in which he acknowledges us to be *his
sheep*, than when, after having been *scattered*, we are *gathered
together*, and meet in the same assembly under this *ensign*; as he
says,

<span id="xviii.i-p119"></span>My sheep hear my voice and follow me.
(<span id="xviii.i-p119.1"></span>[Joh
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p119.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p120"></span>The word *gather* is repeated. *He will
gather together the outcasts of Israel, and will gather together the
dispersions of Judah.* He shows how efficacious God’s calling will be;
for as soon as he shall give the slightest indication that such is his
pleasure, he will restore the people. *Dispersion* is a collective noun,
for it means the Jews *scattered* in all directions; and he appears to
allude, as he often does elsewhere, to similar passages in the writings
of Moses, in which the Lord promises that he will gather the people,
though they were scattered to the farthest parts of the world, and to
the four winds of heaven. (<span id="xviii.i-p120.1"></span>[Deut.
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004)<span id="xviii.i-p120.1"></span>..md)
Now, this was done under the direction of Christ. Under the same leader
we ought at the present day to expect the restoration of a wretched and
*scattered* Church; for there is no hope of *gathering the remnant* but
by the elect looking to this *ensign*. We ought frequently, therefore,
to call to remembrance those promises, that by relying on them we may
more and more strengthen our hearts.

<span id="xviii.i-p121"></span><span id="xviii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p122"></span>**13.** *And the envy of Ephraim shall
depart.* Here he promises that the Church will be in such a state of
peace, that neither will the Israelites and the Jews contend in civil
broils, nor will they suffer any annoyance from their enemies, and that
they will not be liable to hatred or *envy*, as they formerly were. Not
that there will be no wicked men, but the Lord will at length cut off
and destroy them. But we ought chiefly to observe what he adds about
allaying domestic quarrels, that henceforth the children of Abraham may
not harass each other, but unite in the same religion, and in the pure
worship of God; for it was a disgraceful and shocking spectacle that
their mutual strife and hostilities had been so long maintained.

<span id="xviii.i-p123"></span>With good reason does he point out the
source of quarrels, namely, *envy*, in consequence of which the
descendants of Abraham have torn each other, while the tribes of *Judah*
and *Ephraim* strive with each other for renown. This horrible torch has
always kindled wars in the world, while every man is unwilling to yield.
In short, the Lord here promises outward and inward peace, which is a
very great and most desirable blessing.

<span id="xviii.i-p124"></span>It will be objected that this was never
accomplished, and that the very opposite of this took place; for as soon
as the gospel began, it was followed by various wars, commotions, and
dreadful persecutions, and nearly the whole world was disturbed and
shaken. And inwardly what peace did the Church enjoy? Among Christians
themselves, Satan, by his *tares*, (<span id="xviii.i-p124.1"></span>[Mt
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p124.1"></span>,) has raised up dreadful disturbances, so
that no enemies were more ferocious and destructive than those which
were brought up in the bosom of the Church.

<span id="xviii.i-p125"></span>I reply, the Prophet here includes the
whole of Christ’s kingdom, and not merely a single age or century. In
this world we taste but the beginning of Christ’s kingdom; and while the
Church is harassed by enemies both within and without, still the Lord
defends and preserves her, and conquers all her enemies. Besides, this
prediction properly belongs to the true and lawful children of Abraham,
whom the Lord has purified by the cross and by banishment, and has
constrained to lay aside ambition and *envy*; as those who have been
tamed in the school of Christ cease to be desirous of renown. Thus the
promise which Isaiah makes in this passage has already been in part
fulfilled, and is fulfilled every day. But we must proceed in these
exercises, and must fight earnestly within and without, till we obtain
that everlasting peace which it will be our happiness to enjoy in the
kingdom of God.

<span id="xviii.i-p126"></span><span id="xviii.i-p126.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p127"></span>**14.** *And they shall fly on the
shoulders of the Philistines.* He means that there is also another way
in which the Lord will assist his people; which is, that he will conquer
their enemies, and subdue them under his dominion. Having spoken of the
safety of the Church, he now declares that she will be victorious over
her enemies. He mentions those nations with which the Jews incessantly
carried on wars; for on the one hand the *Philistines*, and on the other
the *Ammonites* and *Moabites*, to whom they were bound by the tie of
relationship and kindred, were continually molesting and attacking them.
On one side also were the *Edomites*, who were not restrained by
blood-relationship from being most determined enemies; for they were
descended from Esau, (<span id="xviii.i-p127.2"></span>[Gen.
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026.md), [Gen.
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#009)<span id="xviii.i-p127.2"></span>,.md)
the brother of Jacob; and the remembrance of this ought to have
dissuaded them from enmity and hatred. The Lord, therefore, promises
that the Church, though she is not absolutely without enemies, will gain
advantage over them by suffering, and in the end be victorious.

<span id="xviii.i-p128"></span>*Edom and Moab* shall be *the stretching
out of the hands.*  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md) *The
stretching out of the hands* means the dominion which the Church
obtained over her enemies; for by the word *hand* is usually meant
power; and the Hebrews use the phrase, *to stretch out the hand*,
instead of “to place this or that under subjection.” Thus it is said,

<span id="xviii.i-p130"></span>I will set his hand in the sea, and his
right hand in the rivers.  
(<span id="xviii.i-p130.2"></span>[Ps
89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p130.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p131"></span>*The stretching out of the hand*,
therefore, is full power to rule; and, on the other hand, he adds the
*obedience* which the enemies will yield to her: *and the children of
Ammon* shall be *their obedience*  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p133"></span>The Jews, who dream of an earthly kingdom
of Christ, interpret all this in a carnal sense, and apply it to I know
not what external power; but they ought rather to judge of it according
to the nature of Christ’s kingdom. Partly, no doubt, the accomplishment
of this prediction was seen, when the Jews returned from captivity, and
God brought them into moderate prosperity, contrary to the wish, and in
spite of the opposition, of all the neighboring nations; but believers
were led to expect a more splendid victory, which they at length
obtained through the preaching of the gospel. Although we must
continually fight under the cross, yet we vanquish our enemies, when we
are rescued from the tyranny of the devil and of wicked men, and are
restored to liberty by Christ, that the flesh may be subdued, and our
lusts laid low, and that thus we may live to him, and *in patience may
possess our souls*, (<span id="xviii.i-p133.1"></span>[Lu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p133.1"></span>,) calmly and patiently enduring everything
that happens. And thus we even *heap coals on the head* (<span
id="xviii.i-p133.2"></span>[Ro
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p133.2"></span>) of enemies, to whose attacks and reproaches
we appear to be subject.

<span id="xviii.i-p134"></span><span id="xviii.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p135"></span>**15.** *And the Lord will utterly
destroy.* In this verse he means nothing else than that the Lord, by his
amazing power, will open for his people a way, which formerly appeared
to be shut up. He speaks figuratively. What he calls a *tongue* is “a
bay of the sea;” for when the sea penetrates into the land, and occupies
a part of it, there is a resemblance to a person putting out his
*tongue*. He therefore means *the Egyptian sea* and *Egypt* itself, as
he afterwards more fully explains. But he chiefly mentions *the sea* and
the *rivers*, because they protect the countries and shut up every
entrance.

<span id="xviii.i-p136"></span>*And will stretch out the hand over the
river in the strength of his wind.* He undoubtedly means the Nile, which
waters the whole of Egypt, and divides it into many parts, and might
thus interrupt the march of the people when returning to their native
country. I have no doubt that <span id="xviii.i-p136.1"></span>רוח
(*ruach*) here denotes *wind*, though he adds *the* *Lord’s*; for all
the *winds* are *the Lord’s*, because he regulates and guides according
to his pleasure; and more especially this phrase is employed when it is
miraculously agitated by a violent whirlwind. He alludes to the former
deliverance of his people, by which he brought them out of *Egypt*; for
when the Lord was pleased to open up a way for them, he dried up the sea
by the force and violence of *the winds*. (<span
id="xviii.i-p136.2"></span>[Ex
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p136.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p137"></span>True, the Lord did not need the
assistance of *the winds*, for he might have done it by an immediate
exertion of his power. But when he makes use of outward means, let us
learn, first, that all creatures are ready to yield obedience to him;
for though they have a natural course, yet they are in his power, so
that he can direct their force and violence in whatever way he pleases.
For instance, when a wind arises, its beginning proceeds from a natural
cause, and each of the winds has its properties. The south wind is
moist, and the north wind is cold, and completely similar are the
effects which proceed from them; for the south wind moistens bodies, and
the north wind dries them. By extraordinary miracles the Lord shows that
he possesses an authority far above these natural causes, so that they
are governed, not by nature, (that is, by that succession of events or
chain of causes which irreligious men imagine to exist,) but by God
alone.

<span id="xviii.i-p138"></span>Secondly, he shows that he changes the
nature and order of events whenever he pleases, that he may be
acknowledged to be their only Lord; because such a change exhibits more
clearly his authority and dominion. On this account Isaiah called it not
simply *the wind*, but *the* *wind of the Lord*, that we may perceive
that it is not directed or moved by chance, but by the power *of the
Lord*.

<span id="xviii.i-p139"></span>*And shall smite it in the seven
streams.* Some render it *torrents*, and explain it thus: “he will
divide the Nile into *seven* parts.” Though this exposition has been
universally adopted, yet I do not approve of it; and I think that it has
arisen from forgetfulness, rather than from ignorance, on the part of
its authors, who are learned men notwithstanding, and deeply skilled in
the perusal of the ancient writers. It is well known from history that
the Nile had *seven* mouths. There are others which are little
mentioned, because they had no names, and are therefore called false
mouths. Whatever, then, is the number of the mouths or branches, it
appears to form that number of *streams* or rivers; and these might have
been so many hinderances to retard their journey. The Prophet expressly
mentions them, because the river was highly celebrated.

<span id="xviii.i-p140"></span>*And shall make them be shod with shoes.*
 <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) The river being deep, he says
that he will dry it up, so that it will not be necessary to pull off
their *shoes* in crossing it, though this would have been necessary if
only a small portion of water had remained.

<span id="xviii.i-p142"></span>By these metaphors, therefore, the
Prophet means nothing else than that nothing will stand in God’s way,
when it shall be his pleasure to rescue his people from captivity. He
glances at the history of a former deliverance, that they may learn that
it will be the same with that which they formerly enjoyed. On this
account he wished to place it, as it were, before their eyes; for the
means of this deliverance was not seen. If this promise had been stated
in plain terms, it might not have produced so deep an impression on
their minds as by holding out this remarkable example.

<span id="xviii.i-p143"></span><span id="xviii.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p144"></span>**16.** *And there shall be a path.*
 <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) This verse contains nothing
new, but explains the former verse. The people would perceive the same
power of God in the deliverance from Babylon as they had perceived in
the deliverance from Egypt. He had opened up a way through seas, (<span
id="xviii.i-p145.1"></span>[Ex
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p145.1"></span>; <span id="xviii.i-p145.2"></span>[Ps
77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p145.2"></span>,) through untrodden deserts, (<span
id="xviii.i-p145.3"></span>[Deut. 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002.md),
[Deut. 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#005.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p145.3"></span>,) and through Jordan; (<span
id="xviii.i-p145.4"></span>[Josh.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017)<span id="xviii.i-p145.4"></span>..md)
In like manner, Isaiah says, that by an unexpected and astonishing
method he will again open up a way for his people to go out.
Accordingly, what the Lord has once performed let us also expect for the
future; and for that purpose let us ponder the ancient histories. This
ought also to direct our thoughts to the final deliverance of the
Church, by which we shall all be delivered from all troubles and
distresses; so that, though what we are told about a resurrection and
immortal life may appear to be incredible, and the means of
accomplishing them are not seen by us, still the Lord will easily find a
way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc13017.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p43"></span> See page 372.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc13017.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p51"></span> *And shall make him of quick
understanding*. (Heb. *scent*, or *smell*.) — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc13017.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p52"></span> “*And his delight shall be in the fear of
Jehovah*. His delight, <span id="xviii.i-p52.1"></span>הריחו,
(*haricho*,) *his snuffing up with pleasure*, his pleasurable
sensations. So the verb <span id="xviii.i-p52.2"></span>רוח (*riach*)
signifies, when followed by the preposition <span
id="xviii.i-p52.3"></span>ב, as in <span id="xviii.i-p52.4"></span>[Le
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031.md)<span id="xviii.i-p52.4"></span>,
<span id="xviii.i-p52.5"></span>[Am
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021.md)<span id="xviii.i-p52.5"></span>.
The expression is equivalent to, but stronger than that of David in
<span id="xviii.i-p52.6"></span>[Ps
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002.md)<span id="xviii.i-p52.6"></span>,
<span id="xviii.i-p52.7"></span>בתורת יהוה חפצו, (*bethorath Yehovah
Chephtzo*,) *in the law of the LORD is* *his delight*.” — *Stock*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc13017.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p57"></span> *But with righteousness shall he judge
the poor*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc13017.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p60"></span> See page 374.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc13017.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p65"></span> The force of these repeated allusions to
<span id="xviii.i-p65.1"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016.md)<span id="xviii.i-p65.1"></span>
will be best understood by consulting the Author’s Commentary on that
remarkable passage. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc13017.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p77"></span> *The girdle*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc13017.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p80"></span> “The Targum of Jonathan renders it, *and
the righteous shall be* *round about him*; that is, ‘they shall cleave
to him like a girdle.’” — *Jarchi*.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc13017.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p111.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p112"></span> “Not *islands* merely, but all distant
regions are comprised in the meaning of this word <span
id="xviii.i-p112.1"></span>איי, (*iye*.)” — *Rosenmuller*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc13017.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p117"></span> “Set up his standard on an eminence, the
signal for the soldiery to assemble round their commander. Caesar terms
it <span id="xviii.i-p117.1"></span>*vexillum* *proponere, quod erat
insigne, cum ad arma concurri oporteret*. B. Gall. See Ammian, Hist.,
27:10.” — *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc13017.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p129"></span> *They shall lay their hand upon Edom and
Moab*. (Heb. *Edom* *and Moab* shall be *the laying on of their hand*.)
— Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc13017.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p132"></span> *And the children of Ammon shall obey
them*. (Heb. *the* *children of Ammon their obedience*.) — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc13017.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p140.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p141"></span> *And make* men *go over dry-shod*. (Heb.
*in shoes*.) — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc13017.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p145"></span> *An highway*. — Eng. Ver.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](cc13018.md)
