[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13019)  [Next](cc13021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 14:1-32

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob,
and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land: and the
strangers shall be joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house
of Jacob.

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Jam miserebitur Iehova Iacob, et
eliget adhuc Israelem, et faciet eos quiescere super terram suam;
adjungeturque illis advena; sociabuntur, inquam, domui Iacob.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the people shall take them, and
bring them to their place; and the house of Israel shall possess them in
the land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall take
them captives, whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their
oppressors.

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et assument eos populi, inducentque
eos in locum suum, possidebitque eos domus Israel in terra Iehovae, in
servos et ancillas; et capient eos quorum fuerant captivi, imperabuntque
oppressoribus suis.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And it shall come to pass, in the day
that the Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear,
and from the hard bondage wherein thou wast made to serve,

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et erit in die quo tibi requiem
dederit Iehova a labore tuo, et a tremore tuo, et a servitudine dura
quae imposita fuerat tibi:

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**4.** That thou shalt take up this proverb
against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the oppressor ceased! The
golden city ceased!

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tunc sumes dictum hoc super Regem
Babylonis, et dices: Quomodo cessavit exactor? Cessavit cupida auri?

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>**5.** The Lord hath broken the staff of the
wicked, *and* the sceptre of the rulers.

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Confregit Iehova baculum impiorum,
sceptrum dominantium.

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>**6.** He who smote the people in wrath with
a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted,
*and* none hindereth.

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Quod percutiebat populos in ira plaga
perpetua; dominabatur in iracundia Gentibus; si quis persequutionem
patiebatur, non prohibuit.

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>**7.** The whole earth is at rest, *and* is
quiet: they break forth into singing.

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Quievit, tranquilla est omnis terra,
cecinerant laudem.

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>**8.** Yea, the fir-trees rejoice at thee,
*and* the cedars of Lebanon, *saying*, Since thou art laid down, no
feller is come up against us.

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Etiam abietes laetatae sunt super te,
cedri Libani; ex quo quievisti non ascendit succisor contra nos.

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span>**9.** Hell from beneath is moved for thee
to meet *thee* at thy coming: it stirreth up the dead for thee, *even*
all the chief ones of the earth: it hath raised up from their thrones
all the kings of the nations.

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Infernus subtus commotus est propter
te, in occursum adventus tui excitavit tibi mortuos, et omnes duces
terrae suscitavit de soliis suis, omnes Reges gentium.

<span id="xxi.i-p20"></span>**10.** All they shall speak and say
untothee, Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou become like unto us?

<span id="xxi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Omnes loquentur, et dicent tibi: Tu
quoque infirmitate affectus es sicut nos? et similis factus es nobis?

<span id="xxi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Thy pomp is brought down to the
grave, *and* the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread under thee, and
the worms cover thee.

<span id="xxi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Deposita est in sepulchrum
magnificentia tua, et strepitus musicorum instrumentorum tuorum; subter
te stratus est vermis, et operiunt te vermiculi.

<span id="xxi.i-p24"></span>**12.** How art thou fallen from heaven, O
Lucifer, son of the morning! *how* art thou cut down to the ground,
which didst weaken the nations!

<span id="xxi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quomodo cecidisti e coelo Lucifer
fili Aurorae? Quomodo in terram detractus es, sortem projiciens super
Gentes (*vel, debilitans gentes*)?

<span id="xxi.i-p26"></span>**13.** For thou hast said in thine heart, I
will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God:
I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation, in the sides of the
north:

<span id="xxi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Atqui tu dicebas in corde tuo,
Ascendam in coelum: in supernis juxta sidera Dei collocabo solium meum,
et sedebo in monte testimonii, in lateribus Aquilonis.

<span id="xxi.i-p28"></span>**14.** I will ascend above the heights of
the clouds; I will be like the most High.

<span id="xxi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Ascendam super excelsa nubium, et
ero similis Altissimo.

<span id="xxi.i-p30"></span>**15.** Yet thou shalt be brought down to
hell, to the sides of the pit.

<span id="xxi.i-p31"></span>**15.** Tu vero in sepulchrum detractus es,
ad latera foveae.

<span id="xxi.i-p32"></span>**16.** They that see thee shall narrowly
look upon thee, *and* consider thee, *saying, Is* this the man that made
the earth to tremble, that did shake kingdoms;

<span id="xxi.i-p33"></span>**16.** Videntes te inclinabunt se, et
attente intuebuntur. Anne hic est vir ille tremefaciens terram,
concutiens regna?

<span id="xxi.i-p34"></span>**17.** *That* made the world as a
wilderness, and destroyed the cities thereof; *that* opened not the
house of his prisoners?

<span id="xxi.i-p35"></span>**17.** Posuit orbem quasi desertum, urbes
ejus excidit, vinctis suis non aperuit domum.

<span id="xxi.i-p36"></span>**18.** All the kings of the nations, *even*
all of them, lie in glory, every one in his own house:

<span id="xxi.i-p37"></span>**18.** Omnes Reges gentium, ipsi, inquam,
omnes jacent cum gloria; quisque domi suae.

<span id="xxi.i-p38"></span>**19.** But thou art cast out of thy grave
like an abominable branch, *and as* the raiment of those that are slain,
thrust through with a sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a
carcase trodden under feet.

<span id="xxi.i-p39"></span>**19.** Tu autem projectus es e sepulchro
tuo, tanquam surculus detestandus, tanquam vestes interfectorum, qui
gladio caesi sunt, descendentes in foveam; ut cadaver proculcatum.

<span id="xxi.i-p40"></span>**20.** Thou shalt not be joined with them
in burial, because thou hast destroyed thy land, *and* slain thy people:
the seed of evil doers shall never be renowned.

<span id="xxi.i-p41"></span>**20.** Non conjunges te cum eis in
sepultura; quoniam terram tuam vastasti, populum tuum occidisti, non
memorabitur perpetuo semen impiorum.

<span id="xxi.i-p42"></span>**21.** Prepare slaughter for his children
for the iniquity of their fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess
the land, nor fill the face of the world with cities.

<span id="xxi.i-p43"></span>**21.** Praeparate filiis ejus mactationem,
in iniquitate patrum suorum; ne consurgant et possideant terram, atque
impleant superficiem orbis urbibus.

<span id="xxi.i-p44"></span>**22.** For I will rise up against them,
saith the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant,
and son, and nephew, saith the Lord.

<span id="xxi.i-p45"></span>**22.** Nam consurgam super eos dicit Iehova
exercituum, et exterminabo e Babylone nomen et reliquias, filium et
nepotem, dicit Iehova.

<span id="xxi.i-p46"></span>**23.** I will also make it a possession for
the bittern, and pools of water; and I will sweep it with the besom of
destruction, saith the Lord of hosts.

<span id="xxi.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et ponam eam in possessionem
erinacei, et in stagna aquarum, et scopabo eam scopa evacuans, dicit
Iehova exercituum.

<span id="xxi.i-p48"></span>**24.** The Lord of hosts hath sworn,
saying, Surely as I have thought, so shall it come to pass; and as I
have purposed, *so* shall it stand;

<span id="xxi.i-p49"></span>**24.** Juravit Iehova exercituum, dicendo:
Si non quemadmodum cogitavi, sic factum est; et quemadmodum consultavi,
ita stabit;

<span id="xxi.i-p50"></span>**25.** That I will break the Assyrian in my
land, and upon my mountains tread him under foot: then shall his yoke
depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulders.

<span id="xxi.i-p51"></span>**25.** Ut conteram Assur in terra mea, et
in montibus meis conculcem eum; et recedat ab eis jugum illius, et onus
illius ab humero ejus auferatur.

<span id="xxi.i-p52"></span>**26.** This *is* the purpose *that is*
purposed upon the whole earth; and this *is* the hand *that is*
stretched out upon all the nations.

<span id="xxi.i-p53"></span>**26.** Hoc consilium quod consultatum est
super totam terram; et haec manus extenta super omnes gentes.

<span id="xxi.i-p54"></span>**27.** For the Lord of hosts hath purposed,
and who shall disannul *it?* And his hand *is* stretched out, and who
shall turn it back?

<span id="xxi.i-p55"></span>**27.** Quoniam Iehova exercituum decrevit,
et quis dissolvet? Manus ejus extenta, et quis avertet eam?

<span id="xxi.i-p56"></span>**28.** In the year that king Ahaz died was
this burden.

<span id="xxi.i-p57"></span>**28.** Anno quo mortuus est Rex Achaz, fuit
hoc onus.

<span id="xxi.i-p58"></span>**29.** Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina,
because the rod of him that smote thee is broken: for out of the
serpent’s root shall come forth a cockatrice, and his fruit *shall be* a
fiery flying serpent.

<span id="xxi.i-p59"></span>**29.** Ne laeteris universa tu Philistaea;
quoniam confracta sit virga percutientis te. Nam de radice colubri
nascetur regulus, et fructus ejus serpens ignitus.

<span id="xxi.i-p60"></span>**30.** And the first-born of the poor shall
feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety; and I will kill thy root
with famine, and he shall slay thy remnant.

<span id="xxi.i-p61"></span>**30.** Et pascentur primogeniti pauperum,
et inopes secure accubabunt; et fame interire faciam radicem tuam, et
reliquias tuas occidet.

<span id="xxi.i-p62"></span>**31**. Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou,
whole Palestina, *art* dissolved: for there shall come from the north a
smoke, and none *shall be* alone in his appointed times.

<span id="xxi.i-p63"></span>**31.** Ulula porta, clama civitas,
liquefacta es Palestina, universa tu. Quoniam ab Aquilone venit fumus;
nec quisquam solus praefixo ejus die.

<span id="xxi.i-p64"></span>**32.** What shall *one* then answer the
messengers of the nation? That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor
of his people shall trust in it.

<span id="xxi.i-p65"></span>**32.** Quid autem respondebitur nuntiis
gentis? Nempe quod Iehova fundavit Sion, et in ea fiduciam habebunt
pauperes populi ejus.

<span id="xxi.i-p66"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p67"></span><span id="xxi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p68"></span>**1.** *For the LORD will have compassion on
Jacob.* The particle <span id="xxi.i-p68.1"></span> כי(*ki*) having
various significations, we might take it as signifying *But*, and might
connect this verse with the former verse in the following manner: *But*
(or, *yet*) *the Lord will have compassion on Jacob*. But I consider it
to be better and more appropriate to view the particle <span
id="xxi.i-p68.2"></span>כי (*ki*), in this as well as in many other
passages, as used for assigning a reason; and thus the meaning will be,
“God will destroy Babylon, *because he will have compassion on Israel*,
whom he cannot despise or reject.” Hence we see that the Prophet had
hitherto endeavored to soothe the grief of a wretched people, in order
to inform them that they ought to entertain good hopes in the midst of
their afflictions, of which *God would be the avenger*. (<span
id="xxi.i-p68.3"></span>[Ps 94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p68.3"></span>.) Here, therefore, as in a picture, Babylon is
contrasted with the Church of God; Babylon, I say, elevated to the
highest power, which had plunged the Church into such a miserable and
afflicted condition, that it was not probable that she could ever be
raised up again. But the Lord casts down Babylon from her lofty
situation, and thus testifies that he cares for his people, however mean
and despicable they may be. It yields very great consolation to us to
learn that the whole world is governed by God for our salvation. All
things are directed to this object, that those whom he has elected may
be saved, and may not be overwhelmed by any changes, however numerous,
that shall befall them.

<span id="xxi.i-p69"></span>It will be asked, Was there a period during
which God *had no* *compassion*? Undoubtedly, he always *had
compassion*; but while the people were distressed by heavy calamities,
it was not perceived; for, having their minds previously occupied with a
view of God’s anger, and, judging from outward appearances, they could
not perceive *God’s* *compassion*. Yet the Lord was always like himself,
and never laid aside his nature. Thus it is proper to distinguish
between the knowledge which springs from faith and the knowledge which
springs from experience; for when the tokens of God’s anger are visible
all around, and when the judgment of the flesh leads us to believe that
he is angry, his favor is concealed from us; but faith raises our hearts
above this darkness, to behold God in heaven as reconciled towards us.
What follows is somewhat more startling.

<span id="xxi.i-p70"></span>*And will yet choose Israel,* or, *will
again choose Israel.* God’s election is eternal. He does not *choose* us
as if this had never before come into his mind; and as we were *chosen
before the* *foundation of the world*, (<span
id="xxi.i-p70.1"></span>[Eph 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p70.1"></span>,) so he never *repents of* *his choice*. (<span
id="xxi.i-p70.2"></span>[Ro 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p70.2"></span>.) But when the Lord chastises his people, this
has the appearance of rejecting them; as we learn from the frequent
complaints of the saints, *Lord, why hast thou cast us off*? (<span
id="xxi.i-p70.3"></span>[Ps 74:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p70.3"></span>.) We look at God’s rejection or election
according to our weakness, and judge of his feelings toward us by the
outward action. (I speak of the knowledge which is derived from
experience, and which is corrected by the light of faith.) Accordingly,
when the Lord calls us, that is, confirms his election, he is said to
*choose* us; and when he gives evidence that he is displeased, he is
said to reject us. The meaning, therefore, is, “Though the Lord has
treated his people so severely, as if he had rejected them; yet by the
actual event he will at length show and prove that he has adopted them,
by giving abundant evidence of his election, and by *having compassion
on them* for ever.”

<span id="xxi.i-p71"></span>We now may readily conclude what we have
already said, namely, that the chastisements which the godly endure are
widely different from that deadly stroke, however light it may be, which
is inflicted on the ungodly. The godly are immediately led to consider
their election, the confident belief of which cheers their hearts; but
the ungodly see nothing but darkness, bottomless pits, and frightful
desolation on all sides. Whenever, therefore, the Lord chastises us, we
ought immediately to call to remembrance this distinction, that we may
strengthen our hearts by the hope of a happier condition.

<span id="xxi.i-p72"></span>*And shall cause them to rest in their own
land.* In their return he holds out an evidence of favor and
reconciliation; for to the children of Abraham the *land* of Canaan was
a pledge of their adoption.

<span id="xxi.i-p73"></span>*And the stranger shall be joined to them.*
The Prophet foretells the calling of the Gentiles; as if he had said,
“Not only will the Lord restore them to the possession of the land of
Canaan, but will enlarge them by a great increase; for he will associate
the Gentiles with them, that the two peoples may become one and the same
body.” This benefit, therefore, is not limited to a short period, but
extends to the whole Church, which the Lord promises to place in safety;
for he speaks, not of the Church in his own time, but of the Church
which shall be till the kingdom of Christ, and during his kingdom;
otherwise that addition would have been inappropriate.

<span id="xxi.i-p74"></span><span id="xxi.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p75"></span>**2.** *And the peoples shall take them.* He
means that the foreign nations will be willing to become their
companions, and in such a manner that they will not scruple to discharge
the duties of servants. An instance of this was given, (<span
id="xxi.i-p75.1"></span>[Ezr 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p75.1"></span>,) when the people were brought back from
Babylon; but that was only a slight foretaste of those things which were
accomplished by Christ, to whom all these statements must be referred.
The Lord softened the hearts of the nations, who regarded that people
with deadly hatred, so that by their guidance he brought them back to
their native country, and bestowed on them their former liberty. But so
far were many of the nations from assisting the Jews, after their return
from Babylon, that all the neighbors earnestly entered into a league to
distress them. (<span id="xxi.i-p75.2"></span>[Ezr
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004)<span id="xxi.i-p75.2"></span>..md)
They certainly attempted not only to banish them from the land of
Canaan, but to drive them entirely out of the world. These things
therefore were done in the kingdom of Christ, to whom

<span id="xxi.i-p76"></span>has been given all power, not only in earth,
but also in heaven, (<span id="xxi.i-p76.1"></span>[Mt
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span id="xxi.i-p76.1"></span>,.md)

<span id="xxi.i-p77"></span>and by whom the Gentiles, who formerly had
been strangers, were united to the Jews, so as not only to assist them
in keeping their inheritance, but also to submit calmly and willingly to
bear the yoke. It is with this view that he adds —

<span id="xxi.i-p78"></span>*And the house of Israel shall possess them
in the land of the LORD for servants and handmaids.* The Jews being in
some sort the *first-born* (<span id="xxi.i-p78.1"></span>[Ex
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022)<span id="xxi.i-p78.1"></span>.md) in
the house of God, we who are joined to them appear as if we had
assembled under their roof; for they go before us, and hold the highest
rank above all the nations, and undoubtedly would still hold it, if they
did not by their ingratitude deprive themselves of these great
privileges. And yet their ingratitude did not hinder the Lord from
actually performing these things; for the Apostles, being Jews, subdued
foreign nations by the word of God, and even those very nations *by whom
they were formerly carried captive*, and to whom they had been
tributaries, such as the Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Persians, and
finally, the Roman empire; so that all the nations might justly be
called their inheritance, though they did not wish to rule over them,
but to gain them to God, that they might acknowledge the same Lord and
Prince as themselves. These statements must therefore be referred to the
dominion and yoke of Christ, to whom the Jews subdued the Gentiles, not
to a government of an outward nature, such as the Jews falsely imagine.

<span id="xxi.i-p79"></span><span id="xxi.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p80"></span>**3.** *And it shall be in that day.* He
adds a confirmation of the former promises. In this way the Lord
provides for our weakness; for we find it difficult to render a full
belief to his word, especially when the state of our affairs appears to
contradict it. But by this method the Lord chooses to put our faith to
the test, when he still promises the salvation of which all hope has
been taken away.

<span id="xxi.i-p81"></span>*From thy sorrow, and from thy trembling,
and from thy hard bondage.* He confirms what he has said by a variety of
expressions, that, by removing all doubt, we may not cease to rely on
his promises, even when our affairs are desperate. Yet by the same
considerations he at the same time exhorts the Jews to gratitude, that
they may never bury in forgetfulness a work of God so excellent and so
worthy of remembrance. He expressly intended to mention the *yoke and
bondage*, that the Jews might be fully aware that the Lord would take
away these obstructions whenever he pleased, and that they could not at
all prevent him from immediately delivering his people, when he thought
fit. We ought also to apply this to our own use, in the present day,
with reference to the wretched bondage and wicked yoke of Antichrist by
which Christians are bound. Though they are confined and bound by snares
and chains in every direction, they have God for their deliverer, who
will quickly remove all difficulties and every kind of annoyances; and
this ought to be extended to all sorrows, distresses, and afflictions.

<span id="xxi.i-p82"></span><span id="xxi.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p83"></span>**4.** *Then thou shalt take up this
saying.*  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) By the term *witty*
*saying*, or *parable*, (for the Hebrew word <span
id="xxi.i-p91.4"></span>משל (*mashal*) denotes “sayings that are weighty
and remarkable, and worthy of being observed,”) he shows that the ruin
of Babylon will be so great that it will even become *a proverb*, which
usually happens in great and astonishing events.

<span id="xxi.i-p92"></span>*How hath the oppressor ceased?* The word
*How* throws it into the form of a question expressive of astonishment
and ridicule. It might be thought incredible that Babylon, furnished
with such abundant wealth and forces, should be overturned and fall into
the hands of the enemy. Justly, therefore, does he ridicule their
foolish and vain confidence, that, being swelled with haughtiness, they
thought that they were invincible, and were placed beyond the reach of
all danger.

<span id="xxi.i-p93"></span>Yet it may be thought to be inconsistent
with the modesty of godly persons to scoff at the misery of others, for
they ought rather to have pitied them. But it is not inconsistent with
compassion, when our zeal is regulated by the justice of the judgment of
God; for in that case we may with human feelings compassionate those who
perish through their folly, and at the same time laugh at their
insolence and madness. As the Lord scoffs at them, laughing at their
senselessness, so he bids us, through zeal for his glory, mock at them;
not that we may be swelled with impudence, but that we may praise his
goodness and power. By this example, therefore, we may scoff at the
enemies of God, when they are vanquished or brought down, as we may
scoff at Antichrist, whose power we daily see diminished and gradually
falling into decay.

<span id="xxi.i-p94"></span>*How hath the city covetous of gold ceased!*
 <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md) The word <span
id="xxi.i-p95.1"></span>מדהבה, (*madhebah*,) in this clause, might be
rendered *golden*, or *ornamented with gold*; but as it is connected
with the word *Oppressor* or *Tyrant*, it probably denotes covetousness
and insatiable greediness for *gold*, to which the Babylonians were
subject. It is usually the case with great empires and states and
wealthy nations, that the greater their abundance, the stronger is their
greediness to possess more.  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md)

<span id="xxi.i-p97"></span><span id="xxi.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p98"></span>**5.** *The Lord hath broken the staff of
the wicked.* He answers the question which has just been put; for he did
not intend that believers should doubt that it would happen, but rather
that they should be amazed at such wonderful works of God; for the
question had a tendency to arouse their minds to more earnest attention.
It is as if he had said that it did not happen at random or through the
blind violence of fortune that they have not been oppressed by continual
bondage, but that it ought to be ascribed to the providence of God, who
*hath broken* that hard yoke of bondage. Now, the ungodly are amazed at
such works, and remain bewildered, because they do not see the reason;
but the godly know that this ought to be ascribed to God. Let us
therefore learn to admire the works of God, and while we are amazed at
them, let us acknowledge him to be the Author; and let us not think that
any of them ought to be lightly passed over, especially when he displays
his power for redeeming his Church, when by his wonderful power he
delivers each of us from the bondage of the devil, from the tyranny of
Antichrist, from eternal death. It is no ordinary work, of which any
part ought to be ascribed to the power of man or to any other cause.

<span id="xxi.i-p99"></span>To *the staff of the wicked* he adds *the
sceptre of the rulers;* and by this repetition he means that no imperial
power can support unjust tyranny. And immediately afterwards he states
more clearly that the monarchy of the Babylonians would be destroyed,
because it was unjust and tyrannical, when he says (<span
id="xxi.i-p99.1"></span>[Isa 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#006.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p99.1"></span>) that the people had been struck with *an
incurable stroke*,  <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) and that
there was no limit to the violence, because they had rioted with
impunity in unbounded licentiousness. This reminds us that at length God
will not spare tyrants, though he may wink at them for a time. The same
destruction awaits them as, we learn, befell Babylon; for *the Lord is*
*righteous*, (<span id="xxi.i-p100.1"></span>[Ps
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007)<span id="xxi.i-p100.1"></span>,.md)
and is always like himself.

<span id="xxi.i-p101"></span><span id="xxi.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p102"></span>**7.** and **8.** *They break forth into
singing.* Here he shows how greatly tyrants are hated by the whole
world. When they are dead or ruined, all men break forth into joy, and
express the feelings which they formerly entertained towards the
tyrants, and which they dissembled through fear. Then do their hatred
and spite burst forth, and not only do men make known their joy, but
even the dumb creatures, as the Prophet, for the sake of amplification,
adds *the fir-trees and the cedars*. As tyranny overturns everything, so
when tyranny is done away, everything appears to be restored to its
original condition.

<span id="xxi.i-p103"></span>*Since thou art laid down, no feller is
come up against us.* To make the discourse more energetic, he adds a
personification, in which he introduces the trees as speaking and
congratulating themselves that, since the tyrant is dead, they will now
stand gladly and at ease. The design of the Prophet is to show, that the
Heavenly Judge cannot endure tyrants, who are abhorred by the whole
world. Hence, we ought to conclude that, though under the sway of
tyrants unhappy men are silent, and do not venture to open their mouths,
yet the Lord listens to their secret groans. Let us not wonder therefore
that tyrants come to such a dismal end; for God, who is a witness of the
injuries which they have inflicted, must in the exercise of his justice
assist the innocent.

<span id="xxi.i-p104"></span><span id="xxi.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p105"></span>**9.** *Hell from beneath is moved for
thee.*  <span id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) As he had formerly
attributed gladness to the trees, so now, by a similar figure, he
attributes speech to *the dead*  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md)
He arouses them, as it were, from their *graves*, to mock at the pride
of this tyrant. The whole passage is ironical, and full of keen sarcasm.
At the approach of kings, the people tremble, and come forth to meet and
receive them with pompous display. The Prophet makes a fictitious
representation, that when this tyrant shall die and go down to *the
grave, the dead* will go forth to meet and honor him, but with such
honor as he deserves. As if he had said, “Not only the living, but also
*the dead* will rejoice at his death. *The dead* also will treat him
respectfully according to his deserts.”

<span id="xxi.i-p108"></span><span id="xxi.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p109"></span>**10.** *All shall speak and say to thee.*
These are taunts with which the dead jeer the tyrant who has joined
them, as if they asked him what is the reason why he too is dead like
other men. Struck with the singularity of the event, Isaiah pretends
that they inquire with astonishment about it as something that could not
be believed.

<span id="xxi.i-p110"></span>*Art thou become like unto us?* Tyrants are
blinded by their greatness, and do not think that they are mortal, and
even make themselves to be half-gods and adore themselves. On this
account it is made known after their death that they shared in the
condition of all mortals, to which they did not think that they were
liable. It is in this sense that the dead, not without bitter scorn,
reproach him for having *become like unto themselves;* for “death
alone,” as the poet says, “acknowledges how small are the dimensions of
the bodies of men.”  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md) David also,
speaking of princes and their high rank, says,

<span id="xxi.i-p112"></span>I have said, ye are gods; but you shall die
like men, and fall like one of the common people. (<span
id="xxi.i-p112.1"></span>[Ps. 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)<span id="xxi.i-p112.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p113"></span>The bodies of princes, like those of the
common people, must at length become corrupted and be devoured by worms,
even though costly and splendid sepulchres be built for them.

<span id="xxi.i-p114"></span><span id="xxi.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p115"></span>**11.** *Thy pomp is laid down in the
grave.* He mentions royal pomp, that this change may be more attentively
considered by comparing the latter with the former; and he shows that
that pomp could not prevent him from being reduced to the same level
with other men. Under the term *musical instruments*, he includes all
the luxuries and enjoyments in which kings are wont to indulge; because
not only does the sweetness of music cause them to forget death, but the
mad *sound* of them drives away all sadness, and in some respects
stupifies the minds of men.

<span id="xxi.i-p116"></span>*The worm is spread under thee, and the
worms cover thee.* In this second clause, the dead say jestingly, “Thou
hast obtained a bed worthy of thee; for *the worms* serve thee for
tapestry or a soft couch, and *the worm* serves for a splendid
coverlet.” In a word, there is here exhibited to us a lively painting of
the foolish confidence of men, who, intoxicated with their present
enjoyments and prosperity, flatter themselves. This doctrine ought to be
carefully pondered; for though men be well aware of their condition, and
have death before their eyes, yet overrun by ambition, and soothed by
pleasures, and even fascinated by empty show, they forget themselves.

<span id="xxi.i-p117"></span><span id="xxi.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p118"></span>**12.** *How art thou fallen from heaven!*
Isaiah proceeds with the discourse which he had formerly begun as
personating the dead, and concludes that the tyrant differs in no
respect from other men, though his object was to lead men to believe
that he was some god. He employs an elegant metaphor, by comparing him
to *Lucifer*, and calls him the *Son of the Dawn*;  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) and that on account of his splendor
and brightness with which he shone above others. The exposition of this
passage, which some have given, as if it referred to Satan, has arisen
from ignorance; for the context plainly shows that these statements must
be understood in reference to the king of the Babylonians. But when
passages of Scripture are taken up at random, and no attention is paid
to the context, we need not wonder that mistakes of this kind frequently
arise. Yet it was an instance of very gross ignorance, to imagine that
*Lucifer* was the king of devils, and that the Prophet gave him this
name. But as these inventions have no probability whatever, let us pass
by them as useless fables.

<span id="xxi.i-p135"></span>*Casting the lot upon the nations,* or
*weakening the nations.*  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md)
Translators have mistaken the meaning of this clause, by rendering the
participle <span id="xxi.i-p136.1"></span>הולש (*holesh*) passively,
*Thou art become weak*, for its signification is active. But as the verb
from which it is derived signifies *to cast a lot*, and as the
preposition <span id="xxi.i-p136.2"></span>על, (*gnal*,) *upon*, is here
added, it is best to take it in this meaning, that, as the ruler and
disposer of all countries, he directed them by lot, or held them as his
own possessions. And yet I do not reject the other meaning, that he
*weakened the nations*

<span id="xxi.i-p137"></span><span id="xxi.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p138"></span>**13.** *Yet thou saidst in thy heart.*
These words must be connected with what goes before. *To say* means
here, according to the custom of the Hebrew language, *to resolve in
one’s own mind.* The Prophet ridicules the pride of the Babylonian
monarch, who, relying on his greatness, ventured to promise to himself
uninterrupted success, as if he had the power of determining the events
of his life. In him there is exhibited to us a mirror of the madness of
pride with which ungodly men are swelled, and which sometimes they even
vomit out. Nor ought we only to behold here the person of a single
tyrant, but the blasphemous rage of all the ungodly, who form their
resolutions as if they could dispose of everything according to their
pleasure; as their plans are also beautifully described by James,

<span id="xxi.i-p139"></span>We shall go into that city, we shall
transact business, we shall make gain, though at the same time they know
not what to-morrow shall bring. (<span id="xxi.i-p139.1"></span>[Jas
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013)<span id="xxi.i-p139.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p140"></span>They do not consider that they are in the
hands of God, but believe that they will do everything by their own
ability.

<span id="xxi.i-p141"></span>*I will ascend into heaven.* In these
words, and those which immediately follow, the boasting is so absurd
that it is impossible to believe that they proceeded from the lips of a
mortal man; but as the Prophet did not intend to quote the very words
which Nebuchadnezzar employed, let us be satisfied with examining the
subject itself. Undoubtedly, all who claim for themselves more than
human nature will allow, may be said to “attack heaven itself after the
manner of the giants,” as the proverb runs.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md) Hence it follows that whatever they
undertake will be destructive to them; more especially every one who
goes beyond the limits of his calling provokes the wrath of God against
himself by his rashness. Let every one therefore be satisfied with his
lot, and learn not to aim at anything higher, but, on the contrary, to
remain in his own rank in which God has placed him. If God stretch out
his hand, and lift us up higher, we ought to go forward; but no one
ought to take it on himself, or to strive for it from his own choice.
And even those who are raised to a higher rank of honor ought to conduct
themselves humbly and submissively, not with any pretended modesty, but
with minds so thoroughly depressed that nothing can lift them up.

<span id="xxi.i-p143"></span>*I will sit on the mountain of the
testimony,*  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) *on the sides of
the north.* This plainly shows the reason why the Prophet especially
accuses the Babylonian tyrant of so great madness, and what the Prophet
means by such figures. He desired to *sit on the mountain of the
testimony*. By this effrontery he attempted to make himself equal to
God. Though he reasoned, after the manner of men, that he could obtain a
victory over the Jews, yet, reckoning as nothing the assistance of God,
by whom he had often heard that they were protected, it was as if he had
endeavored to destroy the very heavens. For Mount Zion he uses the
expression *the sides of the north*, according to the description,

<span id="xxi.i-p145"></span>Mount Zion, on the sides of the north,
 <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md)  
the city of the great King. (<span id="xxi.i-p146.2"></span>[Ps
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span id="xxi.i-p146.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p147"></span>He had formerly called it *the mountain of
the testimony*. This word is derived from <span
id="xxi.i-p147.1"></span>יעד, (*yagnad*;), which signifies to *unite*,
to *assemble*, and *to be agreed*. On this account <span
id="xxi.i-p147.2"></span>מועד (*mogned*) signifies both an *assembly*
and an *appointed day*; and, in a word, it may relate to time, place,
and persons. But here I prefer to view it as a *Covenant*; for the Lord,
speaking by Moses, calls the Tabernacle <span
id="xxi.i-p147.3"></span>מועד, (*mogned*,) and says, *I will meet* *with
you there*. (<span id="xxi.i-p147.4"></span>[Exod.
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022.md), [Exod.
29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042)<span id="xxi.i-p147.4"></span>..md)
Let us not think, therefore, that it means an assembly of men, as when
irreligious persons assemble to their fairs or festivals, but that the
Lord intended to give a token of his presence, and there to ratify his
covenant. This ought to be carefully observed; for the blasphemy of the
wicked king is proved by this, that he attacked heaven itself rather
than an earthly place.

<span id="xxi.i-p148"></span><span id="xxi.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p149"></span>**14.** *I will ascend above the heights of
the clouds.*  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) It might certainly
be thought strange that the Prophet thus accuses the Babylonian monarch,
as if he wished to make himself equal to God, since, as we have said,
this thought could scarcely enter into the mind of a man without making
him absolutely shudder. As there is a seed of religion implanted in us
by nature, so we are constrained, even against our will, to entertain
the belief of some superior being who excells all things; and no man is
so mad as to wish to cast down God from his throne; for we are
instructed by nature that we ought to worship and adore God. Hence also
the Gentiles, though they were ignorant of God, rendered worship to
their idols; and therefore it may be thought improbable that the king of
Babylon wished to drive out God, and to reign in heaven.

<span id="xxi.i-p151"></span>And yet the Prophet does not accuse him
falsely. Though the ungodly do not believe that they ought to reign
instead of God, yet, when they exalt themselves more than is proper,
they take away a portion of what belongs to him, and claim it for
themselves, which is the same as if they wished to pull him down from
his throne. And what did Satan say when he deceived our first parent?
*Ye shall be as gods*. (<span id="xxi.i-p151.1"></span>[Ge
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005)<span id="xxi.i-p151.1"></span>..md)
Consequently, all who dare to ascribe more to themselves than God allows
are chargeable with exalting themselves against God, as if they declared
war against him; for where pride is, contempt of God must be there.

<span id="xxi.i-p152"></span>We ought also to observe that argument
which we lately noticed, that the tyrant, by assailing the Church, which
was God’s holy heritage, might be said intentionally to attack God.
Since, therefore, he profaned the heavenly sanctuary, the language ought
not to be thought exaggerated. Hence also we obtain a doctrine full of
most valuable consolation, for we are taught that the ungodly exalt
themselves against God whenever they attack his Church. He is not
accused of exalting himself above angels, but of endeavoring to crush
the Church of God. The worship of God is not now confined to one place,
but is as extensive as the whole world. Whenever, therefore, men call on
the name of God, if any tyrant rise up to oppress the godly, let us know
that he attacks not men, but God himself, who at length will not endure
to be insulted.

<span id="xxi.i-p153"></span>We shall afterwards meet with a similar
example in Sennacherib, of whom Isaiah declares that, while he
threatened and reproached Zion, he threatened and reproached God
himself. Let us therefore know that we are under the protection of God
in such a manner, that any one who gives us trouble will also have God
for his enemy.

<span id="xxi.i-p154"></span>He that hurteth you, says he, hurteth the
apple of mine eye. (<span id="xxi.i-p154.1"></span>[Zec
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)<span id="xxi.i-p154.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p155"></span>He likewise testifies that he *dwells in
the midst of* the Church, (<span id="xxi.i-p155.1"></span>[Ps
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)<span id="xxi.i-p155.1"></span>,.md)
so that no one can attack the Church without receiving the first
strokes; and therefore he will avenge the injuries which the Church
endures, though he may permit her to be afflicted for a time.

<span id="xxi.i-p156"></span><span id="xxi.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p157"></span>**15.** *But thou shalt be brought down to
the grave.* He formerly explained the intention of the king of Babylon,
which was, that he should place his throne above the clouds; but he now
contrasts with it an opposite event, namely, *the sides of the pit* or
*ditch*, that is, some corner of a sepulcher into which he shall be
thrown. He had formerly said that the king of Babylon wished to be
carried up *to Mount Zion, to the sides of the north*, because that was
a very lofty situation, and widely seen. He now uses the word *sides* in
an opposite sense, as if he had said that he would have an abode in the
most contemptible part of a sepulcher, as when one is thrust into a mean
and despicable corner. In a wide and large sepulcher they place the dead
bodies of honorable men in the middle; but the Prophet means that he
will be thrown into a corner, or into the outer edges. Thus the Lord
from on high laughs at the pride of the ungodly, so that, when they
shall have swallowed up everything by their covetousness, and shall have
burst through the clouds and heaven itself by their effrontery, he will
at length expose them to the mockery of all, after having, in the
twinkling of an eye, overturned their schemes.

<span id="xxi.i-p158"></span><span id="xxi.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p159"></span>**16.** *They that see thee.* The Prophet
again, personating the dead, mocks at that wicked king. It might also be
viewed as relating to the living; but it is better to apply the whole of
this discourse to the dead, if we would not rather refer it to the grave
itself, which amounts nearly to the same thing. We are wont to stretch
out our neck when we meet with anything that is strange, or that
deserves our attention. Thus, when it was thought to be a kind of
prodigy that this king, who possessed so great power, had died, the
Prophet says that the eyes of all men were directed towards him, to look
at him earnestly, as if they scarcely believed their own eyes.

<span id="xxi.i-p160"></span>*Is this the man that made the earth to
tremble, that shook kingdoms?* They first ask, if it be possible that he
who, by the slightest expression of his will, *made the earth to
tremble*, should be so quickly and easily laid low. Next, he mentions
that this man was eager, but is unable, to destroy everything, and shows
that tyrants, with all their cruelty, are like clouds, which pour down a
sudden shower of rain or hail, as if they would destroy everything, but
are scattered in a moment. This comparison was also employed by the good
old Athanasius, when some one threatened him with the rage of the
Emperor Julian. Isaiah shows that this change proceeds from the hand of
God, who, by the slightest expression of his will, can overturn the
whole world.

<span id="xxi.i-p161"></span><span id="xxi.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p162"></span>**17.** *He made the world as a
wilderness.* He expresses the cruel and savage disposition of the
tyrant, by saying that he *brought desolation on the world*, that he
*overthrew cities*, that he *did not release prisoners*. It is sometimes
the custom of conquerors to release prisoners, in order to win their
hearts by kindness; but tyrants choose rather to be feared than to be
loved. They think that the only way to reign is to strike terror into
all by inexorable cruelty. There is no reason to wonder, therefore, that
their end is so wretched and dismal; for it is impossible that the Lord
should not, after having chastised his Church by their cruelty, give
them like for like, and withhold all compassion from those who failed to
exercise compassion to others. He therefore shows how wretched tyrants
are, for they have God for their enemy, and are hated by men.

<span id="xxi.i-p163"></span><span id="xxi.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p164"></span>**18.** *All the kings of the nations.* He
contrasts the king of Babylon with other kings, in order to show that,
after his death, he will be more wretched than all the rest. And thus by
comparison he gives a more enlarged view of the judgment of God, by
which he would avenge the injuries done to his Church. This passage is
the reason why I do not venture to limit, what Isaiah here foretells
about the king of Babylon, to the person of Nebuchadnezzar alone;
because it does not appear from history that he was denied burial. The
Jews, indeed, relate that Evil-merodach gave orders that he should be
dug out of his grave, because the nobles of the kingdom would not
venture to pay homage to him, unless there were evidence that his father
was dead; but Jerome, though otherwise credulous enough, treats this as
a fable.

<span id="xxi.i-p165"></span>He therefore describes, not a single man,
but a whole dynasty; and, in like manner, when Scripture speaks of
Antichrist, it includes the whole duration of his reign. Consequently,
as if in the person of one man, the Prophet ridicules the pride of all
those tyrants, and threatens what shall be their end, namely this, that
they shall not have a spot of earth to bury them, though formerly they
were insatiable whirlpools, and could not be satisfied with any
possessions. They who have scarcely a foot of earth still retain their
right to have a grave, which was also highly prized by the patriarchs;
for it was reckoned disgraceful to be deprived of it.

<span id="xxi.i-p166"></span><span id="xxi.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p167"></span>**19.** *But thou art cast out of thy grave
like an abominable branch.* He shows that the kings of Babylon will be
loaded with such disgrace, that they will even be cast out of the
sepulcher which they possessed by inheritance, and will exhibit a
disgraceful spectacle. It may be asked, Is it of so great value in the
sight of God to be buried with our fathers, that to be deprived of it
should be reckoned a punishment and a curse? I answer, he does not here
speak of the grave, as if it were necessary for salvation; but it ought
justly to be reckoned disgraceful to be denied burial. And first, we
ought to consider why burial has been so highly valued among all
nations. This undoubtedly arose from the patriarchs, whose bodies the
Lord commanded to be buried in the hope of the last resurrection. The
carcases of beasts are cast out, because they are only fit for rotting;
but ours are laid in the earth, that being kept there, they may await
the last day, when they shall rise to enjoy a blessed and immortal life
in union with the soul.

<span id="xxi.i-p168"></span>Various superstitions have arisen as to the
interment of bodies. This has undoubtedly been occasioned by the
craftiness of Satan, who usually corrupts and perverts everything that
is good and useful, for he devised innumerable contrivances by which he
might dazzle the eyes of men. We need not wonder that the Jews had a
great variety of ceremonies connected with this subject, and they cannot
be blamed on account of it, for Christ had not yet been revealed, and
consequently they had not so clear a revelation of the resurrection. But
in our time the case is very different, for we plainly see the
resurrection in Christ, and, every vail having now been removed, we
behold clear promises which were more obscure to the Jews. If any one,
therefore, were again to introduce and renew those ancient rites, he
would undoubtedly darken the light, and, by putting a vail on Christ who
has been revealed to us, would offer to him a high insult. Yet it is not
useless to pay attention to burial, for it is the symbol of the last
resurrection, which we still look for; but let there be no superstition
and ostentatious display in funerals, which all godly persons ought to
detest.

<span id="xxi.i-p169"></span>Now, if any one has been entirely deprived
of burial, we must examine the cause. Many of the prophets, martyrs, and
holy men have been deprived of it. We hear the Church bewailing that

<span id="xxi.i-p170"></span>the dead bodies of the servants of God have
been thrown down to wild beasts and to the fowls of heaven, and that
there is none to bury them, (<span id="xxi.i-p170.1"></span>[Ps.
79:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#003)<span id="xxi.i-p170.1"></span>;.md)

<span id="xxi.i-p171"></span>and every day we see the servants of Christ
burned, or drowned, or hanged; and yet their death is glorious and
blessed in the sight of God. As the cross of Christ was blessed, so
crosses, chains, prisons, and deaths, which are endured by his members,
share in the same blessing, and far exceed the prosperity and trappings
and splendor and majesty of kings, so that, following the example of
Paul, they boldly venture even to glory in them. (<span
id="xxi.i-p171.1"></span>[Ro 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p171.1"></span>; <span id="xxi.i-p171.2"></span>[2Co
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#005.md)<span id="xxi.i-p171.2"></span>;
<span id="xxi.i-p171.3"></span>[Ga
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="xxi.i-p171.3"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p172"></span>But as to those whom the Lord permits to
remain unburied, when we see nothing else than a token of his anger, we
must fall back on this statement and others of the same kind. For
example, Jeremiah threatened Jehoiakim with *the burial of an ass*,
because he deserved to be ranked with beasts rather than with men, who,
even after death, are distinguished from beasts by being buried. Thus it
was proper that the king of Babylon, who had exalted himself above all
men, should be cast down below all men, so as even to be deprived of
ordinary burial. Isaiah, therefore, foretells that he will not be buried
*in his own house,* that is, in the sepulcher of his fathers, which came
to him by inheritance; for we must not suppose that sepulchres were
within houses.  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md) The comparisons
which are added express more strongly the disgrace which was due to that
tyrant. As hurtful or useless trees are rooted out, so he shows that the
king of Babylon does not deserve to have any place among men.

<span id="xxi.i-p174"></span>*As the garments of those who are slain.*
They who fall in the field of battle are not buried in the ordinary way,
but their bloody and stinking bodies are trodden down, and are thrown
into a ditch along with their rotten *garments*, that they may not
infect the air with their offensive smell; and no one deigns to touch
the very *garments* defiled by mire and blood, lest he should be
polluted by them. Which of the kings of Babylon it was that suffered
this we cannot tell; but undoubtedly it was fulfilled.

<span id="xxi.i-p175"></span><span id="xxi.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p176"></span>**20.** *For thou hast laid thy land
desolate.* This is the reason why he says that the king of Babylon did
not deserve burial. He who has laid the *earth* desolate does not
deserve that *the earth* shall receive him into its bosom and cover him.
As *the earth* supports the living, so it covers the dead, and keeps
them till the coming of Christ. It is therefore a just punishment of
cruelty, when the *earth* refuses to receive into her bosom those who
have dishonored her. There is added a threatening still more severe,
that the Lord will also inflict on posterity the remainder of the
punishment.

<span id="xxi.i-p177"></span>*The seed of the wicked shall not be
continually remembered.* There are two ways in which we may explain this
clause, either that *the* *remembrance of the seed of the wicked* will
not be of long duration, or that it will be altogether extinguished. The
word <span id="xxi.i-p177.1"></span> לעולם  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) (*legnolam*.md) may be translated in
various ways, for it may refer either to the past or to the future. If
we refer it to the past, the meaning will be, “Although *the seed of the
wicked* be renowned, <span id="xxi.i-p178.1"></span>לעולם, (*legnolam*,)
*for a time*, yet the remembrance of it will at length pass away.” If we
refer it to the future, the meaning will be, “God will extinguish the
seed of the wicked, so that it shall never again be mentioned.” It
usually happens that the Lord curses *the seed of the* *wicked*, as, on
the other hand, he blesses *the seed* of the godly, (<span
id="xxi.i-p178.2"></span>[Pr 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p178.2"></span>;) and as *the righteous shall be held in
perpetual* *remembrance*, (<span id="xxi.i-p178.3"></span>[Ps
112:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#006)<span id="xxi.i-p178.3"></span>,.md)
so *the remembrance of the wicked* must be destroyed and *cut off*.
(<span id="xxi.i-p178.4"></span>[Ps
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)<span id="xxi.i-p178.4"></span>..md)
Though we do not always behold these things with our eyes, yet there are
abundant and clear proofs of the fact, by which it is fully confirmed.

<span id="xxi.i-p179"></span>But we must attend to the reason of this
vengeance. The Lord punishes the pride of wicked men, who wish to spread
their name, and to leave a perpetual remembrance of them; for all
irreligious men have this for the object of their labors and exertions.
On the other hand, the Lord blots out their name and remembrance, which
appeared to be inscribed on lasting records; and the result is, that
they are not only despised but even abhorred by all men. This happens to
all tyrants, that though, while they live, they are universally
applauded and flattered, yet after they are dead, they and their
posterity are universally abhorred. It is therefore evident that they
are detested by God, by angels, and by men.

<span id="xxi.i-p180"></span><span id="xxi.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p181"></span>**21.** *Prepare slaughter for his
children.* Here Isaiah prophesies more plainly than before against the
king of Babylon. He speaks of the whole of his descendants, to whom he
intimates that this destruction extends. We must keep in mind what we
formerly said, that hitherto the Prophet has spoken not of a single man,
but of a whole dynasty; and now he removes all doubt as to the
metaphorical language. The rendering given by the old translation,
*Prepare his children for the slaughter,* does not agree well; for the
preposition <span id="xxi.i-p181.1"></span>ל, (*lamed*,) which is
prefixed, evidently shows that it ought to be translated *to* or *for
the children.*

<span id="xxi.i-p182"></span>We must see to whom this discourse relates.
It must be understood that reference is made, though not directly
expressed, to some servants as officers or executioners, whom the Lord
orders to be in a state of *preparation* for executing his judgments.
And who were they? Partly the Medes and Persians, and partly others by
whom Babylon was completely overthrown; for, as we have formerly said,
Babylon was not entirely destroyed when the Persians subdued it. He
therefore addresses those whom the Lord, by his eternal decree, had
appointed to destroy Babylon. This mode of expression is more energetic
than if he had merely said that *slaughter was prepared*; for he shows
that he not only disposes of wicked men according to his pleasure, but
that he has servants at hand to punish their sins.

<span id="xxi.i-p183"></span>*For the iniquity of their fathers.* When
he says that in this manner *the iniquity of the fathers* is punished,
it may at first sight appear to be excessively harsh to include the
children along with the *fathers* in what relates to the infliction of
punishment on them, and still more harsh, that the punishment due to the
*fathers* should be extended even to their children and grandchildren.
This inconsistency may easily be avoided if the word <span
id="xxi.i-p183.1"></span>עון (*gnavon*) be translated *misery*; for it
denotes the punishment of sin as well as sin itself. (<span
id="xxi.i-p183.2"></span>[Exod. 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005.md),
[Exod. 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p183.2"></span>; <span id="xxi.i-p183.3"></span>[De
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#009.md)<span id="xxi.i-p183.3"></span>;
<span id="xxi.i-p183.4"></span>[Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018)<span id="xxi.i-p183.4"></span>..md)
But as it is frequently stated in Scripture, that God recompenses the
sins of the parents into the bosom of the children, there is no
necessity for evading it in this manner.

<span id="xxi.i-p184"></span>Nor is this inconsistent with what is said
by Ezekiel,

<span id="xxi.i-p185"></span>The son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father.  
(<span id="xxi.i-p185.2"></span>[Eze
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="xxi.i-p185.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p186"></span>God does not punish any innocent person;
and this passage ought not to be understood as if the punishment due to
ancestors were transferred by God to children who in other respects
deserved no such punishment; for the guilt of the children is connected
with the guilt of the fathers. Not to mention the universal curse of the
human race, to which all are subject from the womb, let us take the
example of some wicked man. When the Lord casts away that man and his
posterity, we certainly have no right to remonstrate with him. If his
blessing is free and undeserved, we have no right to constrain him,
because he does not bestow it equally on all. His grace is free; and
each of us ought to reflect, that anything good which we have, does not
naturally belong to us, but, on the contrary, comes from another
quarter, and has proceeded from the undeserved goodness of God. If,
therefore, he cast off any one, must not that man’s seed also be
accursed? When we are destitute of his grace, what remains but iniquity?
And if they are liable to eternal death, much more to temporal
punishments; for he who has been condemned to undergo capital
punishment, deserves much more to endure imprisonment and scourging.

<span id="xxi.i-p187"></span>This ought to be carefully observed. I
consider it to be a childish reply that is given by those who think that
the Lord inflicts temporal punishments on the children of wicked men for
the sins of their parents, and who do not look upon it as unworthy of
God to inflict punishments of this nature even on innocent persons; for
God never punishes those who do not deserve it, and he is by nature
inclined to compassion; and how would he spare wicked men if he
exercised his wrath against the innocent? We ought, therefore, to hold
it as a settled point, that all who are destitute of the grace of God
are involved in the sentence of eternal death. Hence it follows, that
the children of the reprobate, whom the curse of God pursues, are liable
to the same sentence. Isaiah, therefore, does not speak of innocent
children, but of flagitious and unprincipled children, who perhaps even
exceeded their parents in wickedness; in consequence of which they were
justly associated with their parents, and subjected to the same
punishment, seeing that they have followed the same manner of life.

<span id="xxi.i-p188"></span>It will be said, that in that case they
suffer the punishment of their own sin and not of their parents. This, I
acknowledge, is partly true; but it was with their parents that the
rejection began, on account of which they also have been forsaken and
rejected by God. Their own guilt is not set aside as if they had been
innocent; but, having been involved in the same sins as to reprobation,
they are also liable to the same punishments and miseries. I am aware
that this solution does not satisfy those who never cease to quarrel
with God; but I give myself little concern about them, provided that I
satisfy godly persons and those who are not fond of disputing; and
these, I hope and trust, will be well satisfied with this reply, which
is true.

<span id="xxi.i-p189"></span>*That they may not fill the face of the
world with cities.* Some render it, *that they may not fill the face of
the earth with enemies*; as if the Prophet meant that all wicked men are
*enemies* of the human race, or rather of the whole earth; and,
therefore, that the Lord provides for the safety of all, when he takes
them out of the midst; for the earth would otherwise be choked by them
as by thorns and briers. But this signification appears to express
something more; for the earth receives us into her bosom, if we do our
duty; and if we be despisers of God, the earth, even against her will,
nourishes and supports us as enemies.

<span id="xxi.i-p190"></span>But I would rather follow another
signification, which is more commonly received. I think that the Prophet
intimates that wicked men have a numerous progeny, and that they surpass
others both in numbers and in display, which we also see taking place
every day, and which has originated the proverb, that “a bad reed grows
quickly.” The Prophet, therefore, insinuates, that wicked men would fill
the whole earth not only with men, but also with towns, if the Lord did
not beforehand perceive and guard against this evil, and diminish their
number. When we everywhere see a vast multitude of wicked men, by whom
the earth is almost overwhelmed, it is what we richly deserve; but the
Lord never deals so harshly with us as not to leave some remnant of good
seed, however small, and likewise to reserve some corners of the earth
in which godly men shall have a little breathing. And if the Lord did
not cut off a large proportion of wicked men, the earth would
undoubtedly be soon overwhelmed by them.

<span id="xxi.i-p191"></span>This confirms what we have already said,
that the children of the Babylonians who were slain were not innocent,
for here the cause is assigned, *that they may not fill the earth with
cities.* It follows, therefore, that they were wicked, and are taken
away by a righteous judgment, that provision may be made for the
salvation of men, and that the Lord cannot be accused of harshness and
cruelty.

<span id="xxi.i-p192"></span><span id="xxi.i-p192.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p193"></span>**22.** *For I will rise up against them.*
The Lord now declares that he will do what he had formerly, by the
Prophet, commanded others to do. Both statements ought to be observed,
that it is the work of God, when wicked men are ruined, though he may
employ the agency of men in executing his judgments. He formerly
addressed them, saying, *Prepare*. (Verse. 21.) This should lead us to
observe not only the power of God, but likewise the efficacy of
prophecy, in consequence of which the prophets, by the appointment of
God, command all nations to do this or that; and next, that men are so
far from being able to hinder the accomplishment that they are even
constrained to yield obedience to God. As we usually rely on men, and,
by neglecting God, attribute to them the power of doing everything, we
ought to hold by this principle, that since God acts by means of them,
he is, strictly speaking, the Author of the work, and that they are only
servants or instruments. This is clearly enough shown by the connection
of what immediately follows.

<span id="xxi.i-p194"></span>I have thought it best to view the particle
<span id="xxi.i-p194.1"></span>ו (*vau*) as meaning *for*. He assigns
the reason why he enjoins the Medes and others to *prepare* destruction
to the Babylonians, *For I will rise up against them*. This mode of
expression, by which the Lord says that he *riseth up*, is sufficiently
common. By means of it, the Prophet accommodates himself to our
capacity, for the majesty of God is so high that we cannot conceive of
it. We think that God is idle and unoccupied, so long as he winks at
men; and therefore he says that he *riseth up*, when he exerts his
power, and manifests it by some visible act.

<span id="xxi.i-p195"></span>*Saith the Lord of hosts.* This title
serves to confirm the statement; as if he had said that he did not,
without good grounds, claim the government over the nations; for God
governs all armies by his own hand. Since, therefore, he has been
appointed to make known the purpose of God, it belongs to him to command
men, that they may yield obedience to him. By the words *saith the
Lord*, which he twice repeats in this verse, he affirms that he utters
nothing but what has been commanded by God, that this prophecy may carry
greater weight.

<span id="xxi.i-p196"></span>*And I will cut off from Babylon the name
and remnant, son and grandson.* It has been often enough mentioned
before, that this destruction did not overtake Babylon till after the
death of Alexander the Great. By the phrase *sons and grandsons*, he
means not only the posterity but the remembrance, which wicked men are
so desirous to obtain, in order that they may be applauded for many ages
after their death. This also the Lord took away from Babylon, that no
remembrance of it might remain, but what was accompanied by dishonor and
reproach.

<span id="xxi.i-p197"></span><span id="xxi.i-p197.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p198"></span>**23.** *And I will make it to be a
possession of the hedgehog.*  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md) He
again confirms the same things which he formerly predicted, namely, that
henceforth it will not be a habitation of men, but will resemble a
hideous cavern, in which wild beasts shall lurk. <span
id="xxi.i-p199.1"></span>קפד (*kippod*) is rendered by some *a beaver*,
by some *a tortoise*, and by others *a hedgehog*. From the connection of
the passage, it is probable that the Prophet spoke of an animal that is
found near the water; for he afterwards mentions *pools of water*. This
applies strictly to the situation of the place, for though Babylon did
not lie in a marsh, yet it lay in a moist place, the country around it
being watered on one side by the Euphrates, and on the other by the
Tigris. Hence the Lord threatens to bring a deluge upon it.  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md)

<span id="xxi.i-p201"></span><span id="xxi.i-p201.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p202"></span>**24.** *The Lord of hosts hath sworn.* For
more full confirmation an oath was necessary. There is nothing of which
it is more difficult to convince us than that wicked men will
immediately be ruined, when we see them flourishing, and furnished with
all means of defense, and seemingly placed out of danger, and free from
all fear. We are therefore stunned by beholding them, and are dazzled by
their brightness, so that we can scarcely believe God when he foretells
their ruin and destruction. On this account he employs an oath, that he
may leave no room for doubt. Hence we learn how great is his forbearance
towards us, when he aids our weakness by applying this remedy, for
otherwise he might have been satisfied with simply declaring it. This
tends to the consolation of the godly, as we shall afterwards see.
(<span id="xxi.i-p202.1"></span>[Isa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#014)<span id="xxi.i-p202.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p203"></span>*If it hath not been as I thought.* The
elliptical form of an oath which he employs must be well known, for it
occurs frequently in Scripture. The Lord purposely used this guarded
language, that we might not be too free in the use of oaths, which burst
from us daringly and at random. He suppresses the greater part of the
oath. “If I shall not do what I have decreed, let men think that I am a
liar, and let them not think that I am God;” or something of this kind
(which we shudder to express) is left to be supplied. Men ought,
therefore, to lay a bridle on themselves, so as not to break out at
random into imprecations, or to pronounce shocking curses against
themselves; but let them learn from this to restrain their insolence.

<span id="xxi.i-p204"></span><span id="xxi.i-p204.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p205"></span>**25.** *That I may bruise the Assyrian in
my land.* Some think that this relates to Sennacherib’s army, which the
hand of God destroyed by means of an angel, when he besieged Jerusalem.
(<span id="xxi.i-p205.1"></span>[2Ki
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035.md)<span id="xxi.i-p205.1"></span>;
<span id="xxi.i-p205.2"></span>[Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)<span id="xxi.i-p205.2"></span>..md)
If this interpretation be preferred, the meaning will be, that the Lord
will shortly give some evidence of that destruction which he has
threatened against the Babylonians. Those who heard these predictions
might have brought this objection: “Of what avail will it be to us that
Babylon is destroyed, after Babylon has ruined us? Would it not have
been better that both Babylon and we had remained uninjured? What
consolation will be yielded to us by its destruction, when we, too,
shall have been destroyed?” And, indeed, I have no doubt that he holds
out a proof of God’s favor in destroying their enemies, which either had
been already manifested, or would be manifested soon afterwards.

<span id="xxi.i-p206"></span>I dare not affirm at what time this
prediction was uttered by the Prophet, but it may be conjectured with
some probability that the slaughter of Sennacherib’s army by the angel
had already taken place. In this way, from a striking event which they
had known, the Prophet would lead them to expect a future redemption; as
if he had said, “You have already perceived how wonderfully God assists
his people at the very hour of danger.” I am thus prepared to assign a
reason for thinking that Sennacherib’s army had been already slain.
Undoubtedly this instruction must have been of some use.

<span id="xxi.i-p207"></span>But Babylon did not begin to give any
annoyance to the Jews before she had subdued the Assyrians and renewed
the monarchy. So long, therefore, as the Jews had nothing to do with
Babylon, why did the Prophet speak of the judgment of God, by which he
would avenge his people? There is no absurdity in supposing that the
record of a past event is confounded with a prediction. And yet it will
not be inadmissible to say that the *Assyrians* are here put for the
*Chaldeans*; for though they had been deprived of the government, yet it
is probable that they were always first in a state of readiness whenever
there was an opportunity of attacking the Jews, and that, while they
fought under foreign leaders, they formed the greater part of the army.
Not only were they nearer than the Chaldeans, but those who at that time
held the sway were aware that their inveterate hostility against the
Jews would make them loyal and obedient in that war. Besides, it was
advantageous to the conquerors to weaken the vanquished by continual
wars, till they had been accustomed to bear the yoke.

<span id="xxi.i-p208"></span>Most appropriately, therefore, by a figure
of speech in which a part is taken for the whole, Isaiah, though he is
speaking of *Babylon*, describes the whole of its forces under the name
of *Assyria*. There will thus be no argument which lays us under the
necessity of explaining this passage as relating to the slaughter
effected by the angel in Sennacherib’s army. The Prophet merely affirms,
so far as my judgment goes, that the Lord will put an end to the tyranny
of the Assyrians, so that they shall not always enjoy their present
superiority. As if he had said, “Though for a time God permits wicked
men to rule over you, this power will not always last; for one day he
will, as it were, *break* *the yoke*, and deliver this people from this
bondage under which they groan.” The Assyrians, though they were
vanquished by the Chaldeans, did not on that account, as we have said,
cease to be enemies of the Church; but Babylon, which had succeeded in
the room of Nineveh, began at that time, by a kind of transferred right,
to carry on war with the Jews.

<span id="xxi.i-p209"></span>*And his yoke shall depart from them, and
his burden shall be taken from their shoulder.* When he says that the
Assyrian will be *broken* in Judea, this must not be understood as if
they would be slain there, or that they would be instantly crushed by
some calamity; but that the chosen people would be delivered from their
tyranny, and that their authority would thus be taken away. The
*breaking*, therefore, does not refer so much to persons as to the
empire. What he says about the *yoke* and the *burden* would not apply
strictly to the Assyrians alone, who at least never were masters of the
city of Jerusalem; and therefore we must attend to the succession which
I mentioned, for the Chaldeans had no right to carry on war except that
right which they boasted of as having been conveyed to them by the
Assyrians. Thus I think that I am justified in extending this prophecy
to that deliverance by which the Lord showed that he would avenge his
people against the Chaldeans and Assyrians; for at that time the *yoke*
was shaken off by which the Jews were miserably held bound, and it even
includes the redemption obtained through Christ, of which that
deliverance was a forerunner.

<span id="xxi.i-p210"></span>*And upon my mountains I will tread him
under feet.* Some think that the word *mountains* is put in the plural
number for Mount Zion; but I prefer a different interpretation.
Jerusalem being situated among the *mountains*, the whole country around
was despised for that reason. The Prophet therefore speaks
contemptuously, as if he admitted that the country was regarded by the
enemies as of little value because it was mountainous. But this very
contempt serves to magnify the power of God; for he shakes off from his
*mountains* the dominion of this powerful monarchy. This refers to the
narrative contained in <span id="xxi.i-p210.1"></span>[1 Kings
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#028.md)<span id="xxi.i-p210.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p211"></span><span id="xxi.i-p211.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p212"></span>**26.** *This purpose which is purposed
upon the whole earth.* The Lord is not satisfied with one or two
confirmations, and can scarcely refrain from proclaiming it more and
more abundantly, because he knows well that our minds are naturally
prone to distrust. No confirmation suffices for us, even though his
promises be frequent and copious and solemn. God therefore wishes to
remedy this disease, and that is the design of the repetition, so that
we must not think that it is superfluous. They who suppose that the
Prophet, or rather the Spirit of God, uses too many words, are not well
acquainted with themselves.

<span id="xxi.i-p213"></span>He declares, first, the will and purpose of
God, and, secondly, his power. How comes it that we have any doubts
about the word, but because we do not ascribe to God that power which
belongs to him, or because we are not convinced of his power? These are
the only two causes of our unbelief, with which, on the other hand, we
ought to contrast the two things which Isaiah recommends to our notice,
namely, the *purpose* and the *power* of God. We ought to believe,
first, that God is *true*, for he declares nothing that is not fixed and
unchangeable; and, secondly, that he is *powerful*, and that nothing can
withstand his arm. Again, we must not inquire about the secret purpose
of God: for the Prophet here enjoins us to rest satisfied with the
decree which has been manifested in the word of God. We must not rise
any higher, therefore, so as to penetrate into the secrets of God; but
we ought to be satisfied with undoubted proofs which he declares by the
mouth of the prophets. Let us therefore embrace all the promises of God
with our whole heart, and let us also add to them his power; for his
hand ought never to be separated from his mouth. We must not imagine his
power to be, as philosophers talk, a power that is unemployed, but, as
the Scriptures teach us, powerful and active.

<span id="xxi.i-p214"></span>A question may here arise, Why does he
mention *the whole earth* and *all the nations*, when he is only
speaking about Babylon? But we must keep in remembrance what we formerly
said, that the Babylonian empire, after having swallowed up Nineveh,
extended nearly through the whole of the east, and that various nations
were subject to it. The consequence was, that the devastation of that
empire was also the destruction of the whole world; for such great
monarchies cannot fall without involving many in an extensive ruin.
Accordingly, as the extent of that empire might lead men to call in
question this prophecy, Isaiah shows that, though it be spread far and
wide, and includes a boundless multitude of nations, that does not
prevent God from executing his decree.

<span id="xxi.i-p215"></span><span id="xxi.i-p215.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p216"></span>**27.** *For the Lord of hosts hath
decreed.* Isaiah here employs what may be regarded as a concluding
exclamation, to confirm more fully the preceding statement. Having said
that it is the purpose of the Lord, in order to show that it cannot be
broken or made void, (<span id="xxi.i-p216.1"></span>[Ps
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#011)<span id="xxi.i-p216.1"></span>,.md)
he puts a question as if about a thing impossible, *Who shall disannul
his purpose*? or, *who shall turn back his hand*? By this exclamation he
speaks disdainfully of all the creatures; for as soon as the Lord has
*decreed*, he *stretches out his hand,* and when *his hand is stretched
out*, the execution of the work must undoubtedly follow. Nor is it only
men whom he declares to be incapable, but he also declares everything
else to be incapable of preventing the decree of God; at least if there
be anything but man and Satan that opposes his will. In short, he
intimates that there can be no repentance or change in God, (<span
id="xxi.i-p216.2"></span>[Nu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)<span id="xxi.i-p216.2"></span>,.md)
but that whatever may happen, even amidst an endless diversity of
events, he continues always to be like himself, and that no occurrence
can thwart his purpose.

<span id="xxi.i-p217"></span>If it be objected that God sometimes
changed his purpose, as when he spared the Ninevites, (<span
id="xxi.i-p217.1"></span>[Jonah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002.md),
[Jonah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p217.1"></span>,) Abimelech, (<span
id="xxi.i-p217.2"></span>[Gen. 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017)<span id="xxi.i-p217.2"></span>,.md)
or Pharaoh, (<span id="xxi.i-p217.3"></span>[Ge
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#017)<span id="xxi.i-p217.3"></span>,.md)
the answer is easy. When the Lord sent Jonah to the Ninevites, he did
not reveal what had been decreed in his secret purpose, but wished to
arouse their minds by the preaching of Jonah, that he might have
compassion on them. The same thing might be said, when he threatened
Abimelech and Pharaoh, because they wished to lay hands on Abraham’s
wife; for thus the Lord, by terrifying them, intended to keep them back,
that they might not suffer the punishment of their obstinacy.

<span id="xxi.i-p218"></span><span id="xxi.i-p218.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p219"></span>**28.** *In the year that King Ahaz died.*
Here the fifteenth chapter ought to have begun, for the Prophet enters
on a new subject; and this plainly shows how absurdly the chapters are
divided, or rather torn asunder. Having spoken of the Babylonians, he
passes to the Philistines;  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) or,
perhaps, before speaking of the Babylonians, he addressed the
Philistines, who, being the near neighbors of the Jews, cherished deadly
hostility against them. They were the remainder of those nations whom
the Israelites spared, though the Lord had commanded that they should be
removed out of the midst of them. (<span id="xxi.i-p220.1"></span>[Nu
33:52](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#052.md)<span id="xxi.i-p220.1"></span>;
<span id="xxi.i-p220.2"></span>[De
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016)<span id="xxi.i-p220.2"></span>..md)
Their unbelief in this matter was the reason why the Lord left these
nations to be *thorns*, that they might *prick their eyes*; as the
Scripture shows that the Lord had formerly threatened against them.
(<span id="xxi.i-p220.3"></span>[Nu
33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055)<span id="xxi.i-p220.3"></span>..md)
In consequence of the deadly animosities which existed between these two
nations, whenever the Jews sustained any defeat, the Philistines
reckoned it to be so much gain to themselves; for they wished the ruin
of the Jews, and no occurrence could give them greater delight than when
the Jews were reduced to the deepest adversity and distress. The Prophet
therefore prophesies against them as against the constant enemies of the
Church.

<span id="xxi.i-p221"></span>It is proper to attend to the time when
this vision was exhibited to the Prophet. So long as Ahaz lived, the
Philistines were victorious. That wicked hypocrite, who had forsaken
God, and eagerly sought the outward assistance of man, was punished for
his treachery. During his reign the Philistines (<span
id="xxi.i-p221.1"></span>[2Ch
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)<span id="xxi.i-p221.1"></span>.md)
recovered those towns which Uzziah (<span id="xxi.i-p221.2"></span>[2
Chr. 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#007)<span id="xxi.i-p221.2"></span>.md) had
taken out of their hands; but after his death, they became still more
courageous, for they expected that they would then gain all that they
desired, because he who had been left as his heir was still a child; for
Hezekiah, the new king, had neither shrewdness, nor authority, nor
wisdom. These circumstances, therefore, ought to be carefully observed;
for Isaiah has not the Philistines so much in his view, though he speaks
to them, as the godly, whom he wishes to comfort and strengthen with
good hope by this prophecy, who would otherwise have thought that the
condition of Judea was entirely ruined, because they were attacked by
enemies on all sides, and no assistance of any kind could be seen. To
those persons, therefore, in their distressed and forlorn condition,
Isaiah stretches out his hand, and bids them be of good courage, because
the Lord would undoubtedly assist them.

<span id="xxi.i-p222"></span>*This burden.* He calls this prophecy a
*burden*, because it would be disagreeable and painful to the
Philistines, who thought that they had got rid of every annoyance,
because the Jews were hard pressed, and had no hope of bettering their
condition; and therefore he threatens that the destruction of the
Philistines also is at hand.

<span id="xxi.i-p223"></span><span id="xxi.i-p223.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p224"></span>**29.** *Rejoice not, thou whole
Philistia.*  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) He begins by
checking the vain and groundless confidence with which the *Philistines*
were puffed up, and, by adding *Thou whole*, he intimates that all of
them would feel a portion of this calamity; as if he had said that not
only would that country be laid waste in some part, but that there would
not be a corner of it exempted from the stroke, and that, in all its
length and breadth, it would immediately and universally be visited with
destruction.

<span id="xxi.i-p226"></span>*Because the rod of him that smote thee is
broken.* Some think that by the *broken rod* is meant King Ahaz, but
that view is unfounded; for in all his battles with the *Philistines* he
was vanquished. (<span id="xxi.i-p226.1"></span>[2Ch
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)<span id="xxi.i-p226.1"></span>..md)
It must therefore be referred to Uzziah, (<span
id="xxi.i-p226.2"></span>[2Ch
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006)<span id="xxi.i-p226.2"></span>,.md)
and yet I would not choose to limit it even to him, but would at the
same time refer it to the whole body of the Jewish people. It is as if
he had said to *Palestina*, “Thinkest thou that thou art safe, when the
Jews, who formerly distressed thee, have been subdued? Thou art greatly
deceived; for very soon shalt thou be more severely distressed.” For
this reason, as I have said, I do not limit it to any one person, but
think that in the person of one man is described the whole body of the
Jews.

<span id="xxi.i-p227"></span>*For out of the adder’s root shall spring a
cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery serpent.* He now assigns the
reason why *Palestina ought not to rejoice*; namely, that the Jews would
have more power than ever to do injury; that if the Philistines had
formerly sustained damage from them, they would afterwards sustain
greater and heavier damage. The metaphor which he employs is highly
appropriate; for the *cockatrice* is more hurtful than the *adder*, and
the *fiery* *serpent* is more hurtful than the *cockatrice*. Through the
kindness of God we have no animals so destructive in the countries which
we inhabit. But the Prophet means nothing else than that the power of
doing them injury has been taken away from the Jews; and therefore I
differ from others who view the name of the *adder* and of the *fiery
serpent* as applying to Hezekiah only. Though that opinion derives great
plausibility from the circumstance that Hezekiah held all that belonged
to *the Philistines, as far as Gaza*, (<span
id="xxi.i-p227.1"></span>[2Ki
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008)<span id="xxi.i-p227.1"></span>,.md)
yet the Prophet intended that this promise should extend farther. Let us
therefore know that the favor of which the Prophet now speaks, though it
began with Hezekiah, belongs to the Jews as to one body.

<span id="xxi.i-p228"></span>We ought to draw from it a general
statement, that when we are weighed down by adversity, and when the
ungodly *rejoice* as if we were ruined, and as if they alone were
prosperous, God declares that their *joy* is without foundation. The
Church will always rise again, and be restored to her former and
prosperous condition, though all conclude that she is ruined. The
children of God shall acquire new vigor, that they may pierce the eyes
of the ungodly; not that they wish this, or have any such intention, but
because the decree of God makes it necessary that this shall take place.

<span id="xxi.i-p229"></span>The names of *cockatrice* and *fiery
serpent* do not imply reproach. In their own nature the godly are not
such, but they are so called, because they are hurtful to the wicked,
though in themselves harmless; for it is through the fault and the
malice of the wicked that what ought to have been useful and profitable
is hurtful to them. Such is also the nature of God himself, (<span
id="xxi.i-p229.1"></span>[Ps
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)<span id="xxi.i-p229.1"></span>,.md)
and of the gospel, (<span id="xxi.i-p229.2"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="xxi.i-p229.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xxi.i-p230"></span><span id="xxi.i-p230.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p231"></span>**30.** *And the first-born of the poor
shall feed.* The Prophet, as has been already said, has not so much in
view the Philistines, to whom his threatenings were of no avail, as the
Jews, whom he wished to comfort in their affliction; for they were so
grievously afflicted that they were not far from despair. He therefore
calls them *the first-born of the poor*, as being eminent for their
wretchedness; for, being reduced to extremities, they held the first
rank among the wretched. Now, he promises that the Lord will deliver
them from such misery, and will again *feed* and nourish them. Hence we
perceive that the Philistines were cut down and destroyed for the
benefit of the people of God. In like manner, also, the Lord promised to
Abraham and his posterity, *I will* *bless them that bless thee, and I
will curse them that curse thee*; for those who are hostile to the
children of God must find that God is hostile to them. (<span
id="xxi.i-p231.1"></span>[Ge 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p231.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p232"></span>*And the needy shall lie down in safety.*
The Prophet compares his people to sheep, whom we must resemble, if we
wish to have God for our keeper. No metaphor is more frequently employed
in Scripture than this. When the Lord chastises us, we are like sheep
that are scattered, and exposed to wolves and robbers; but when he
punishes our enemies, he intends to gather us together again, that we
may dwell in a safe and quiet place. This is what Isaiah means when he
says, *in safety*. There are therefore two things which the Lord here
promises; first, pastures, that is, everything that is necessary for
food and raiment; and, secondly, safety and protection, that we may be
protected and defended from every injury. These two things belong to the
duty of a shepherd, and they include all that is necessary for our
salvation.

<span id="xxi.i-p233"></span>*And I will kill thy root with famine.* He
now turns to the Philistines, whom he compares to a tree which strikes
its *roots* so deep that we would be apt to think that it cannot in any
way be rooted out. But if the *root* be dried up, the tree also, however
deeply laid, must decay. Hence we ought to infer that the condition of
the wicked is never so firmly established that the Lord cannot easily
overturn it; for not only will he cut off branches, but he will also dry
up and destroy the root which is hidden under ground.

<span id="xxi.i-p234"></span>*And he will slay thy remnant.* This is
commonly viewed as referring to Hezekiah; but I prefer, as I have
already explained, to extend it to the whole body, of which he speaks as
of one man, and of which the king was the head, and represented Christ
himself. We might also refer it to the Assyrians, and to any others,
whose agency the Lord employed in destroying the Philistines; for it is
customary with the Jews to employ indefinite language when they speak of
the agents by means of whom God executes his judgments.

<span id="xxi.i-p235"></span><span id="xxi.i-p235.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p236"></span>**31.** *Howl, O gate.* Here the Prophet
makes use of amplifications, that by means of them he may seal his
predictions on the hearts of the godly, and may press with greater
earnestness those things of which they might otherwise have entertained
doubts. In explaining another passage, where it is said that *her gates
shall mourn and lament*, (<span id="xxi.i-p236.1"></span>[Isa
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#026)<span id="xxi.i-p236.1"></span>,.md)
we have stated that *the gates* mean crowded places, in which public
meetings were held.  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) He
threatens that there will be *mourning* in each of the cities, and
mourning of no ordinary kind, for it will be spread through every one of
the most crowded assemblies.

<span id="xxi.i-p238"></span>*For a smoke cometh from the north.* We may
understand *Smoke* to mean *Fire*, so that the sign will denote the
thing signified; for the *smoke* appears before the *fire* burns. By
*the north* we may understand the Assyrians as well as the Jews, for
both of them lay to *the north* with respect to the land of the
Philistines. Yet I prefer to interpret it as referring to the Jews
themselves, though I would not argue against the opposite exposition.
The Philistines thought, as we have already said, that they were gainers
by what the Jews suffered, as, for instance, when they sustained any
defeat from the Assyrians; but they at length found that they suffered
along with the Jews in such a defeat. Something of this kind happened,
not long ago, to many nations who had taken great delight in seeing
their enemies vanquished by the Turk: they found that such victories
were destructive and *mournful* to themselves; for, after the defeat of
those whom they wished to see destroyed, the road to themselves was
likewise thrown open, and they also were defeated.

<span id="xxi.i-p239"></span>*And no one shall be alone on his appointed
day.*  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232.md) When he adds, that at
that time *no one shall be solitary*,  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) this relates to the enemies; and he
says, that *on an appointed day*, that is, when God shall have
determined to ruin the land of the Philistines, the enemies shall be
endued with such power and authority, that no one will remain unemployed
at home, but all will be ready for battle; as if one who intended to
applaud the authority of some prince should say that his subjects, if he
but lift up his finger, assemble and give their attendance.

<span id="xxi.i-p242"></span><span id="xxi.i-p242.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p243"></span>**32.** *And what shall be answered to the
messengers of the nation?* I choose to interpret this of any *nations*
whatever, and not of a single *nation*; for strangers, as soon as they
enter into any city, are wont to ask what is done, that they may hear
some news. It is as if he had said, “*What shall be answered* to
strangers when they shall inquire? And what report shall be spread when
the Philistines shall have been vanquished?”

<span id="xxi.i-p244"></span>*That the Lord hath founded Zion.* By this
he means that the destruction of the land of the Philistines will be a
signal proof of God’s compassion towards his people, that all may
understand *that the* Lord is the guardian and protector of Judea, which
he had chosen to be his own. The *foundation* is nothing else than God’s
gracious adoption, by which he promised to Abraham (<span
id="xxi.i-p244.1"></span>[Ge 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p244.1"></span>) and his posterity that *he would be a God to
them*; and next, when he determined that a temple should be built on
*Zion*, (<span id="xxi.i-p244.2"></span>[2 Chr.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001.md), [Ps.
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001.md), [Ps.
84:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007)<span id="xxi.i-p244.2"></span>,.md)
that the remembrance of his name might there be preserved. That
*foundation* does not consist of lime or stones, but of the gracious
promises of eternal life, by which his grace was always known to all the
godly. The Prophet therefore shows that this destruction of the
Philistines will be a signal proof, by means of which the most distant
nations will learn that God preserves and guards his people whom he hath
chosen.

<span id="xxi.i-p245"></span>*And the poor of his people will have
confidence in it.*  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) He does not
mean that the hope of believers will be placed in *Zion*, as when we say
that we ought to hope in God, but that the inhabitants of *Zion* shall
dwell in a safe and quiet place, as the prophets often teach, in other
passages, that *salvation is in Zion*. (<span
id="xxi.i-p246.1"></span>[Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span id="xxi.i-p246.1"></span>..md)
Isaiah, therefore, does not mean that the *confidence* of the godly is
placed in the Church, but he shows that the godly are preserved in it,
because the Lord defends it.

<span id="xxi.i-p247"></span>Yet the Lord intends to make trial of our
faith, that we may not think that we are in every respect happy; and
therefore he calls them *poor*, that we may not think that we are
exempted from ordinary calamities, though we are under God’s protection.
Can any higher consolation be brought to us, than to learn that the
inhabitants of the Church of God, though they are liable to a great
variety of afflictions, are out of all danger? Let us therefore apply
that consolation to our calamities, and not faint through impatience,
when we are informed that God takes care of us, and when we absolutely
know that we are in safety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc13020.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p84"></span> *That thou shalt take up this proverb*,
(or, *taunting* *speech*.) — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p85"></span> FT205 *The golden city ceased*! — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p86"></span> FT206 “<span id="xxi.i-p86.1"></span>מדהבה,
(*madhebah*,) being a Chaldee word, was probably the epithet by which
that people distinguished their capital, as the Italians say, Florence
the fair, Padua the learned, etc.” — *Stock*

<span id="xxi.i-p87"></span> FT207 *With a continued stroke*. (Heb. *a
stroke without removing*.) — Eng Ver. *A stroke without intermission*. —
*Stock* *With a stroke unremitted*. — *Lowth*

<span id="xxi.i-p88"></span> FT208 *Hell from beneath* (or, *the grave*)
*is moved for* *thee*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p89"></span> FT209 *The dead*. — Eng. Ver. *The mighty
dead*. — *Stock*. “*Rephaim*, the gigantic spectres. Ghosts are commonly
magnified by vulgar terror to a stature superior to the human.” —
*Rosenmuller*

<span id="xxi.i-p90"></span> FT210 The allusion is obviously to a
passage from Juvenal which the author, on a former occasion (See page
174), quoted at greater length. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p91"></span><span id="xxi.i-p91.1"></span>*Mors sola
fatetur,  
Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.  
*Juven. Sat. *10:172,173.*

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc13020.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p95"></span>

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc13020.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p95.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p96"></span>

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc13020.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p99.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p100"></span>

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc13020.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p106"></span>

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc13020.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p107"></span>

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc13020.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p111"></span>

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc13020.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p119"></span> *Son of the morning*. — Eng. Ver

<span id="xxi.i-p120"></span> FT212 *Which didst weaken the nations*. —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p121"></span> FT213 For the origin and application of
this “proverb,” see *Com. on the Gospel according to John*, vol. 1 p.
223, note 1: — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p122"></span> FT214 *Upon the mountain of the
congregation*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p123"></span> FT215 “In the outer court, that is, in the
part which was chosen for *the north side*; as it is said, (<span
id="xxi.i-p123.1"></span>[Le 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011.md)<span
id="xxi.i-p123.1"></span>,) *on the side* *of the altar northward*.” —
*Jarchi*

<span id="xxi.i-p124"></span> FT216 “*I will ascend above the heights of
the thick cloud*. My lofty rank does not permit me to dwell with men. I
will make for me a small cloud in the air, and will dwell in it.” —
*Jarchi*

<span id="xxi.i-p125"></span> FT217 “It is curious that the Welsh
language still preserves this meaning of the word *beth*, a *last home*;
for it is the appropriate term in that language for *a grave*.” —
*Stock*

<span id="xxi.i-p126"></span> FT218 <span id="xxi.i-p126.1"></span>עולם
(*gnolam*) is derived from <span id="xxi.i-p126.2"></span>עלם,
(*gnalam*,) *to* *hide*, and is defined by the lexicographers to mean
“an age, a time *hidden* from men, either unlimited and eternal or
limited.” Our author treats it as capable of meaning either *time past*
or *time to come*. — *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p127"></span> FT219 *For the bittern*. — Eng. Ver. <span
id="xxi.i-p127.1"></span>ὥστε κατοικεῖν ἐχίνους, *so* *that hedgehogs
shall dwell in it*. — *Sept*

<span id="xxi.i-p128"></span> FT220 *And I will make it an iheritance
for the porcupine*. — *Lowth*. “*The porcupine*, which grows to a great
size in the islands at the mouth of the Euphrates, as Strabo remarks, b.
16.” — *Rosenmuller*

<span id="xxi.i-p129"></span> FT221 The Hebrew word here used by Isaiah
is <span id="xxi.i-p129.1"></span>פלשת (*Phelesheth*,) from which was
derived the word *Philistia*, afterwards changed to *Palestina*. An
early genealogy informs us that the *Philistim*, or *Philistines*, were
descendants of Mizraim, a son of Ham. (<span
id="xxi.i-p129.2"></span>[Ge
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014)<span id="xxi.i-p129.2"></span>..md)
— *Ed*

<span id="xxi.i-p130"></span> FT222 *Palestina*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p131"></span> FT223 See page 148

<span id="xxi.i-p132"></span> FT224 *And none* shall be *alone* (or, he
shall *not* be *alone*) *in his appointed times*, (or, *assemblies*.) —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="xxi.i-p133"></span> FT225 “Jonathan interprets it thus: *There
will be no one* to cause delay *in his time* in the military forces whom
God will assemble to come against you; *there will be no one* to retard
their progress, that he may be *solitary*, that he may come *alone*; but
all will come at once with prodigious violence.” — *Jarchi*

<span id="xxi.i-p134"></span> FT226 *Shall trust in it*, (or, *betake
themselves unto* *it*.) — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc13020.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p136"></span>

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc13020.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p141.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p142"></span>

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc13020.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p143.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p144"></span>

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc13020.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p146"></span>

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc13020.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p150"></span>

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc13020.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p173"></span>

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc13020.htm#fr_226.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p177.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p178"></span>

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc13020.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p198.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p199"></span>

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc13020.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p199.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p200"></span>

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc13020.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p219.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p220"></span>

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc13020.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p224.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p225"></span>

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc13020.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p236.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p237"></span>

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc13020.htm#fr_232.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p239.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p240"></span>

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc13020.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p240.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p241"></span>

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc13020.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="xxi.i-p245.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p246"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](cc13021.md)
