[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13005)  [Next](cc13007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>THE PREFACE TO THE PROPHET ISAIAH

<span id="vii-p2"></span>BY JOHN CALVIN

<span id="vii-p3"></span>It is customary to make a great number of
statements and dissertations about the office of the Prophets. But, in
my opinion, the shortest way of treating this subject is to trace the
Prophets to the Law, from which they derived their doctrine, like
streams from a fountain; for they placed it before them as their rule,
so that they may be justly held and declared to be its interpreters, who
utter nothing but what is connected with the Law. Now, the Law consists
chiefly of three parts: first, the doctrine of life; secondly,
threatenings and promises; thirdly, the covenant of grace, which, being
founded on Christ, contains within itself all the special promises. As
to ceremonies, they were religious exercises which strengthened the
attachment of the people to the worship of God and to godliness, and
consequently were added to the First Table. The Prophets, therefore,
enter more largely into the illustration of doctrine, and explain more
fully what is briefly stated in the Two Tables, and lay down what the
Lord chiefly requires from us. Next, the threatenings and promises,
which Moses had proclaimed in general terms, are applied by them to
their own time and minutely described. Lastly, they express more clearly
what Moses says more obscurely about Christ and his grace, and bring
forward more copious and more abundant proofs of the free covenant.

<span id="vii-p4"></span>To make this matter still more clear, we must
go a little farther back, to the Law itself, which the Lord prescribed
as a perpetual rule for the Church, to be always in the hands of men,
and to be observed by every succeeding age. Perceiving that there was
danger lest an ignorant and undisciplined nation should need something
more than the doctrine delivered by Moses, and that the nation could
scarcely be restrained without the use of a tighter rein, God forbids
them to consult magicians or soothsayers, augurs or diviners; enjoins
them to be satisfied with his doctrine alone; but at the same time he
likewise adds that he will take care that there shall never be wanting a
Prophet in Israel. He does this purposely, with the view of meeting an
objection which the people might have brought forward, that their
condition would be worse than that of the infidels, all of whom had
their priests of various orders, their soothsayers, augurs, astrologers,
Chaldeans, and such like, whom they had it in their power to visit and
consult, but that they would have no one to aid them by his advice in
intricate and difficult matters. In order, therefore, to deprive them of
every pretense, and to hinder them from polluting themselves by the
abominable practices of the Gentiles, God promises that *he will raise
up Prophets*, (<span id="vii-p4.1"></span>[De
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span id="vii-p4.1"></span>,.md) by
whom he will make known his will, and who shall faithfully convey the
message which he has entrusted to them; so that in future there will be
no reason to complain that they are in want of anything. There is an
exchange (<span id="vii-p4.2"></span>ἑτέρωσις) of the plural for the
singular number, when he uses the word *Prophet*; for although, as it is
expressly interpreted by Peter, (<span id="vii-p4.3"></span>[Ac
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022)<span id="vii-p4.3"></span>,.md) that
passage relates literally and chiefly to Christ, (because he is the head
of the Prophets, and all of them depend on him for their doctrine, and
with one consent point to him,) yet it relates also to the rest of the
Prophets, and includes them under a collective name.

<span id="vii-p5"></span>When he promised to give them Prophets, by whom
he would make known his will and purpose, the Lord commanded the people
to rely on their interpretations and doctrine. And yet it was not
intended to make any addition to the Law, but to interpret it
faithfully, and to sanction its authority. Hence also, when Malachi
exhorts the people to adhere to the purity of faith and to be steadfast
in the doctrine of religion, he says,

<span id="vii-p6"></span>Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I
commanded him in Horeb, for all Israel. (<span id="vii-p6.1"></span>[Mal
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)<span id="vii-p6.1"></span>..md)
 <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

<span id="vii-p8"></span>He reminds them of the Law of God alone, and
enjoins them to be satisfied with it. Does Malachi therefore mean that
Prophecies should be despised? By no means; but as the Prophecies are
appendages of the Law, and are all briefly summed up in the Law, that
exhortation was sufficient; for they who understand that summary of
doctrine, and its leading points, and carefully observe them, assuredly
will not neglect the Prophecies. It would be absurd to boast of
attending to the word, were we to disregard the divine interpretations
of it; as many persons at the present day impudently boast of attending
to the word, while they cannot at all endure the godly admonitions and
reproofs which proceed from the doctrine of the word.

<span id="vii-p9"></span>Thus when the Prophets inculcate moral duties,
they bring forward nothing new, but only explain those parts of the Law
which had been misunderstood. For instance, the people thought that they
had discharged their duty admirably, when they offered sacrifices and
performed the outward services of religion; for the world measures God
by its own standard, and renders to him a carnal and counterfeited
worship. The Prophets sharply reprove this, and show that all ceremonies
are of no avail, when sincerity of heart is wanting, and that God is
worshipped by believing on him, and by actually calling on his name.
This had indeed been plainly enough declared by the Law; but it was
necessary that it should be earnestly inculcated and frequently brought
to their remembrance, and likewise that there should be an exposure of
that hypocrisy with which men cloak themselves under the guise of
ceremonies. As to the Second Table, the Prophets drew their exhortations
from it, for the purpose of showing that men ought to refrain from all
injustice, violence, and deceit. All that they do, therefore, is nothing
else than keeping up the people’s obedience to the Law.

<span id="vii-p10"></span>In threatenings and promises, the Prophets
have something peculiar; for what Moses had stated in general terms they
minutely describe. They have likewise visions which peculiarly belong to
them, by which the Lord revealed future events, in order to apply the
promises and threatenings to the use of the people, and to declare more
fully the will of God. Moses threatens, “God will pursue thee in battle;
thou shalt be harassed by enemies abroad and by internal quarrels at
home. Thy life shall hang as it were on a thread; thou shalt *tremble at
the rustling of a leaf,”* (<span id="vii-p10.2"></span>[Le
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036)<span id="vii-p10.2"></span>,.md)
and such like. On the other hand, the Prophets say, “God will arm the
Assyrians against thee, he will call for the Egyptians by a hiss, he
will raise up the Chaldeans, Israel shall be carried into captivity, the
kingdom of Israel shall be destroyed, the enemy shall lay waste
Jerusalem and burn the temple.” Similar observations might be made about
the promises. Moses says, “If thou keep the commandments, the Lord will
bless thee;” and then gives a general description of blessings. But the
Prophets enter into detail. “This is the blessing which the Lord will
bestow upon thee.” Again, by Moses the Lord promises in this manner, —

<span id="vii-p11"></span>“Though thou be scattered and driven to the
utmost parts of the world, yet will I bring thee back.” (<span
id="vii-p11.1"></span>[De 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii-p12"></span>But by the Prophets he says, “Though I drive
thee into Babylon, yet after seventy years will I restore thee.”  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md)

<span id="vii-p14"></span>As to the free covenant which God established
with the Patriarchs in ancient times, the Prophets are much more
distinct, and contribute more to strengthen the people’s attachment to
it; for when they wish to comfort the godly, they always remind them of
that covenant, and represent to them the coming of Christ, who was both
the foundation of the covenant and the bond of the mutual relation
between God and the people, and to whom therefore the whole extent of
the promises must be understood to refer. Whoever understands this will
easily learn what we ought to seek in the Prophets, and what is the
purpose of their writings; and this is all that seemed necessary to be
stated here on that subject.

<span id="vii-p15"></span>Hence we may learn in what manner the doctrine
of the word should be handled, and that we ought to imitate the
Prophets, who conveyed the doctrine of the Law in such a manner as to
draw from it advices, reproofs, threatenings, and consolations, which
they applied to the present condition of the people. For although we do
not daily receive a revelation of what we are to utter as a prediction,
yet it is of high importance to us to compare the behavior of the men of
our own age with the behavior of that ancient people; and from their
histories and examples we ought to make known the judgments of God; such
as, that what he formerly punished he will also punish with equal
severity in our own day, for he is always like himself. Such wisdom let
godly teachers acquire, if they would wish to handle the doctrine of the
Prophets with any good result.

<span id="vii-p16"></span>So much for the Prophets in general. To come
to the Prophet Isaiah, the inscription plainly shows who he was, and at
what time he uttered those prophecies; for it mentions the name of his
father, Amoz, who is supposed to have been the brother of Azariah, king
of Judah. Hence it is evident that Isaiah was of royal descent, and on
this point all the ancients are agreed; and yet neither his birth nor
his near relationship to the king, (for the Jews assert that he was the
father-in-law of Manasseh,) could prevent him from being slain through
dislike of the word; and no greater regard was paid to him than if he
had been a person of humble rank, or had belonged to the lowest
condition of society.

<span id="vii-p17"></span>The time when he prophesied is here pointed
out by mentioning the names of the kings. Some think that he began to
prophesy towards the end of the reign of King Uzziah. They found their
conjecture on the vision related in the sixth chapter, by which, Isaiah
tells us, he was confirmed in his office. But that conjecture rests on
very slight grounds, as will be shown at the proper place. From this
description it plainly appears that he prophesied during the reign of
Uzziah; and on that point I cannot entertain any doubt.

<span id="vii-p18"></span>However this may be, it is evident that, at
the very least, he prophesied more than sixty-four years; for Jotham
reigned sixteen years, (<span id="vii-p18.1"></span>[2Ki
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#033)<span id="vii-p18.1"></span>;.md)
Ahaz as many, (<span id="vii-p18.2"></span>[2Ki
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002)<span id="vii-p18.2"></span>;.md)
 <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) Hezekiah twenty-nine, (<span
id="vii-p19.2"></span>[2Ki 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii-p19.2"></span>.) This amounts to sixty-one years. Add the years
that he prophesied during the reign of Uzziah, and afterwards during the
reign of Manasseh, by whom he was put to death; and there will be, at
least, sixty-four years during which Isaiah continued, without
interruption, to discharge the office of a Prophet. There is indeed a
highly probable conjecture, amounting almost to certainty, that he
prophesied ten years beyond the period which has now been stated; but as
this does not clearly rest on historical proof, I shall not debate the
matter any farther.

<span id="vii-p20"></span>All the servants of God ought carefully to
observe this, that they may consider how patiently they ought to submit
to their condition, how hard and difficult soever it may be, and ought
not to reckon it a disgrace that they must endure many and severe
trials, while they have before their eyes examples of such patience. It
is indeed a very severe trial when they perceive that by their manifold
exertions they are doing no good, and imagine that it would be a
thousand times better to relinquish their post than to labor so long in
vain. Such examples, therefore, they ought frequently to set before them
and call to remembrance; how Isaiah, whose labors were numerous and
extensive, had little success, and how Jeremiah continued for fifty
years to cry aloud to the people, though the result was that they became
more and more rebellious, and how no difficulties could turn them aside
from their course. We, too, ought to proceed in the discharge of our
duty, and patiently to endure every kind of annoyances.

<span id="vii-p21"></span>It is proper to observe also the succession of
kings, who are here enumerated; for amidst so great a diversity, it is
impossible that the state of public affairs could remain unchanged, as
we know that, whenever any change takes place in a public station, the
greater part of men immediately adopt a new manner of life; and from
this source many vexations must have arisen. The unshaken firmness and
unbroken courage with which he persevered ought to excite all the
servants of God to imitation, that they may never bend or turn aside
from the right path.

<span id="vii-p22"></span>A question may arise, Was it Isaiah himself,
or some other person, that wrote this inscription to his Prophecy? Not
one of the commentators whose writings I have hitherto perused answers
this question. For my own part, though I cannot fully satisfy my mind,
yet I shall tell what I think. The Prophets, after having publicly
addressed the people, drew up a brief abstract of their discourse, and
placed it on the gates of the temple, that all might see and become more
fully acquainted with the prophecy. When it had been exposed for a
sufficient number of days, it was removed by the ministers of the
temple, and placed in the Treasury, that it might remain as a permanent
record. In this way, it is probable, the books of the Prophets were
compiled; and this may be inferred from the second chapter of the book
of Habakkuk, if it be properly examined, and likewise from the eighth
chapter of this Prophecy. (<span id="vii-p22.2"></span>[Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002.md)<span id="vii-p22.2"></span>; <span
id="vii-p22.3"></span>[Isa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii-p22.3"></span>.) Those who have carefully and judiciously
perused the Prophets will agree with me in thinking that their
discourses have not always been arranged in a regular order, but that
the roll was made up as occasion served. That these writings have come
down to us through the agency of the Priests, whose duty it was to
transmit the prophecies to posterity, (though the Priests were often the
bitterest enemies of the Prophets,) is a remarkable instance of the
providence of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc13006.htm#fr_3.md) <span id="vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii-p7"></span> Original text has:<span
id="vii-p7.1"></span>[Mal 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii-p7.1"></span> — *fj*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc13006.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p13"></span> In this comprehensive view of the writings of
Moses, as compared with those of the later Prophets, our author does not
quote the exact words of the sacred writers. More than one phrase shows
that he had chiefly in his eye the promises and threatenings detailed in
<span id="vii-p13.1"></span>[Le
26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#000.md)<span id="vii-p13.1"></span> and
<span id="vii-p13.2"></span>[De
28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#000.md)<span id="vii-p13.2"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc13006.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="vii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="vii-p19"></span> Original text has:<span
id="vii-p19.1"></span>[2Ki 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii-p19.1"></span> — *fj*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc13007.md)
