[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13012)  [Next](cc13014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 7:1-25

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass, in the days of
Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, *that* Rezin
the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went
up toward Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Accidit in diebus Achaz filii Iotham,
filii Usiae regis Iuda, ut ascenderet Rezin rex Syriae, et Pecah filius
Romeliae rex Israel, contra Ierusalem, ad oppugnandum eam; sed non
potuit expugnare.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And it was told the house of David,
saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim: and his heart was moved, and
the heart of his people, as the trees of the wood are moved with the
wind.

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Nuntiatum est autem domui David,
dicendo, Sociata est Syria cum Ephraim; et commotum est cor ejus, sicuti
cum ligna sylvae moventur a vento.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** Then said the Lord unto Isaiah, Go
forth now to meet Ahaz, thou and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the
conduit of the upper pool, in the highway of the fuller’s field;

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Tunc dixit Iehova ad Isaiam, Egredere
in occursum Achaz, tu et Sear-jasub filius tuus ad finem aquaeductus
piscinae superioris, ad viam agri fullonis.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And say unto him, Take heed, and be
quiet; fear not, neither be faint-hearted for the two tails of these
smoking firebands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the
son of Remaliah.

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et dices ad eum, Contine et quiesce;
non formides, neque mollescat cor tuum propter duas caudas istorum
titionum fumigantium, in furore irae Rezin, et Syri, et filii Romeliae.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>**5.** Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son
of Remaliah, have taken evil counsel against thee, saying,

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Eo quod consilium contra te iniit
Syrus malignum cum Ephraim et filio Romeliae, dicendo:

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** Let us go up against Judah, and vex
it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the midst
of it, *even* the son of Tabeal:

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ascendamus contra Iudam, et excitemus
eum, et aperiamus eum nobis; constituamusque in medio ejus Regem, filium
Tabeal.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** Thus saith the Lord God, It shall not
stand, neither shall it come to pass.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Sic dixit Dominus Iehova, Non
consistet, et non erit.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**8.** For the head of Syria *is* Damascus,
and the head of Damascus *is* Rezin; and within threescore and five
years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be not a people.

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quoniam caput Syriae, Damascus; et
caput Damasci, Rezin. Et quidem adhuc sexaginta quinque anni, et
frangetur Ephraim, ut non sit populus.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the head of Ephraim *is* Samaria,
and the head of Samaria *is* Remaliah’s son. If ye will not believe,
surely ye shall not be established.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Interea caput Ephriam, Samaria; et
caput Samariae, filius Romeliae. Si non creditis, profecto neque
stabitis.

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**10.** Moreover, the Lord spake again unto
Ahaz, saying,

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et adjecit Iehova loqui ad Achaz,
dicendo;

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span>**11.** Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God;
ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Pete tibi signum a Iehova Deo tuo,
petendo in profundo, vel sursum in excelso.

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span>**12.** But Ahaz said, I will not ask,
neither will I tempt the Lord.

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et ait Achaz, Non petam; et non
tentabo Iehovam.

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span>**13.** And he said, Hear ye now, O house of
David; *Is it* a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my
God also?

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et dixit, Audite nunc domus David;
An parum est vobis, hominibus molestos esse, nisi Deo quoque meo sitis
molesti?

<span id="xiv.i-p28"></span>**14.** Therefore the Lord himself shall
give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and
shall call his name Immanuel.

<span id="xiv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Propterea dabit vobis Dominus ipse
signum: Ecce virgo concipiet, et pariet filium; et vocabit nomen ejus
Immanuel.

<span id="xiv.i-p30"></span>**15.** Butter and honey shall he eat, that
he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.

<span id="xiv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Butyrum et mel comedet, donec sciat
reprobare malum, et eligere bonum.

<span id="xiv.i-p32"></span>**16.** For before the child shall know to
refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall
be forsaken of both her kings.

<span id="xiv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et quidem antequam sciat puer
rejicere malum et eligere bonum, relinquetur terra quam odisti, a duobus
Regibus suis.

<span id="xiv.i-p34"></span>**17.** The Lord shall bring upon thee, and
upon thy people, and upon thy father’s house, days that have not come,
from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah; *even* the king of
Assyria.

<span id="xiv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Adducet Iehova super te, et super
populum tuum, et super domum patris tui, dies qui non venerunt a die
defectionis Ephraim a Iuda: nempe, Regem Assur.

<span id="xiv.i-p36"></span>**18.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, *that* the Lord shall hiss for the fly that *is* in the uttermost
part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that *is* in the land of
Assyria.

<span id="xiv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Erit in die illa: sibilabit Iehova
muscae, quae est in extremitate fluminum AEgypti, et api quae est in
terra Assur.

<span id="xiv.i-p38"></span>**19.** And they shall come, and shall rest
all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and
upon all thorns, and upon all bushes.

<span id="xiv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Venientque, et quiescent omnes in
vallibus desertis, et in cavernis petrarum, et in omnibus spinetis, et
in omnibus dumetis.

<span id="xiv.i-p40"></span>**20.** In the same day shall the Lord shave
with a razor that is hired, *namely*, by them beyond the river, by the
king of Assyria, the head, and the hair of the feet: and it shall also
consume the beard.

<span id="xiv.i-p41"></span>**20.** In die illa radet Dominus novacula
conducta, per hos qui trans fluvium sunt, per Regem Assur, caput et
pilos pedum; quin et barbam tollet.

<span id="xiv.i-p42"></span>**21.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, *that* a man shall nourish a young cow and two sheep;

<span id="xiv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Fietque in die illa, ut homo nutriat
vaccam armenti et duas oves.

<span id="xiv.i-p44"></span>**22.** And it shall come to pass, for the
abundance of milk *that* they shall give, that he shall eat butter: for
butter and honey shall every one eat *that is* left in the land.

<span id="xiv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Et eveniet, ut propter copiam lactis
quam proferent, comedet butyrum. Butyrum certe et mel comedet quisquis
residuus fuerit in medio terrae.

<span id="xiv.i-p46"></span>**23.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, *that* every place shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a
thousand silverlings, it shall *even* be for briers and thorns.

<span id="xiv.i-p47"></span>**23.** Erit etiam in die illa, ut quocunque
in loco fuerint mille vites, prostent mille argenteis propter spinas et
vepres.

<span id="xiv.i-p48"></span>**24.** With arrows and with bows shall
*men* come thither; because all the land shall become briers and thorns.

<span id="xiv.i-p49"></span>**24.** Cum sagittis et arcu venient illuc;
quoniam spinae et vepres erunt per universam terram.

<span id="xiv.i-p50"></span>**25.** And *on* all hills that shall be
digged with the mattock, there shall not come thither the fear of briers
and thorns: but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the
treading of lesser cattle.

<span id="xiv.i-p51"></span>**25.** Porro quod ad omnes montes qui
sarculo fodiuntur, non veniet illuc timor spinarum et veprium; sed
expositi erunt bobus, et conculcabuntur a pecoribus.

<span id="xiv.i-p52"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p53"></span><span id="xiv.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p54"></span>**1.** *And it came to pass.* Here is
related a remarkable prophecy about the wonderful deliverance of
Jerusalem, when it appeared to have been utterly ruined. Now the Prophet
explains all the circumstances, that by means of them the miracle may be
more fully displayed, and to make it manifest, that not by the wisdom or
power of man, but by the favor of God, the city has been preserved. For
so ungrateful were the people, that, at the close of this transaction,
they would not have understood that they had been delivered by the hand
of the Lord, if all the circumstances had not been expressly brought to
their remembrance. And, indeed, there were very few persons who, in the
hour of danger, ventured to hope what Isaiah promised; because they
judged of themselves and of the state of public affairs from present
appearances. In order, therefore, to make known the remarkable kindness
of God, he enters into all the details, that they may perceive from what
danger and from whose hand they have been delivered. Let us also
understand that this kindness was conferred on ungrateful men, that the
Church might be preserved, and that Christ might afterwards appear.

<span id="xiv.i-p55"></span>It ought to be observed that the Prophet
speaks of the second war which was fought by *Rezin and Pekah*; and this
may easily be inferred from the sacred history; for in the former war
Ahaz was vanquished, and a vast multitude were carried into captivity,
who were at length restored by the Israelites, when the Prophet, in the
name of God, commanded that it should be done. Having again collected an
army, (<span id="xiv.i-p55.1"></span>[2Ki
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005)<span id="xiv.i-p55.1"></span>,.md)
the kings of Israel and Syria attacked Ahaz, because they thought that
he had been worn out by the former war, and had no power to resist. The
mention of this second war is intended to show the greatness of the
miracle; for Ahaz had not strength left to resist so great a multitude,
the flower of the whole nation having been swept away by the former war,
and such of the people as remained being quite dispirited, and not yet
recovered from the terror arising out of their recent defeat. So much
the more, therefore, are the goodness and power of God displayed, that,
pitying so great distress, he gave assistance to his people, and in a
moment rescued them from the jaws of death, when all regarded their
condition as hopeless.

<span id="xiv.i-p56"></span>*Went up.* This may be regarded as a
statement and summary of the whole transaction; for he mentions the
subjects on which he is about to speak, and in the Hebrew modes of
expression briefly glances at those matters which he will afterwards
explain more fully and at large. From the first he tells the result,
that the expedition of the two kings was unsuccessful, and afterwards he
will assign the reasons why Jerusalem could not be stormed; but before
coming to that, he briefly notices the plan or design of King Ahaz.

<span id="xiv.i-p57"></span><span id="xiv.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p58"></span>**2.** *And it was told the house of David.*
He does not mean that, at the very time when the two kings were
approaching to the city, the king received intelligence about the
league; for it would not have been safe for Ahaz to go out, when the
invading army was spread over the country; but before they had collected
their forces, it is said that King Ahaz trembled. Hence there is reason
to believe that his consternation became greater when he saw the danger
nearer. *The house of David* means the king’s palace and court; as if
the Prophet had said that Ahaz and his counsellors had been informed
about the conspiracy which had been formed against Judea.

<span id="xiv.i-p59"></span>As to the words, <span
id="xiv.i-p59.1"></span>נחה (*nachah*) is variously rendered by
interpreters. The signification of this Hebrew word being *to lead*,
some draw from it this meaning, “The King of Syria *led* his soldiers to
aid the army;” and they think that <span id="xiv.i-p59.2"></span>על
(*al*) with <span id="xiv.i-p59.3"></span>ע (*ain*) is put for <span
id="xiv.i-p59.4"></span>אל (*al*) with <span id="xiv.i-p59.5"></span>א
(*aleph*). Others derive it from <span id="xiv.i-p59.6"></span>נוח
(*nuach*), as if the letter <span id="xiv.i-p59.7"></span>ו (*vau*) were
wanting, and render it, *he rested*. According to others, it is rather
an inversion of the letters, and <span id="xiv.i-p59.8"></span>נחה
(*nahah*) is put for <span id="xiv.i-p59.9"></span>חנה (*chanah*), which
means *to pitch a camp*; and, therefore, they choose to render it,
*Syria is confederate*  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) Nothing
else was meant by the Prophet than that a league in war hath been formed
between the Israelites and the Syrians, that with their united forces
they might attack Jerusalem. In the use of the word *Ephraim* there is a
figure of speech (synecdoche) very frequent in the Prophets, by which a
part is taken for the whole. Under *Ephraim* the whole kingdom of Israel
is included, not only because that tribe was superior to the rest in
numbers and wealth, but because their first king, Jeroboam, was
descended from it. (<span id="xiv.i-p60.1"></span>[1Ki
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026)<span id="xiv.i-p60.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p61"></span>*And his heart was moved.* We see that by
*the house of David* is here meant nothing else than “the king’s
palace,” from which the terror spread to the whole nation; and indeed it
was impossible but that, when they heard of the alarm of the king and
the princes, the body of the people should be moved by the same kind of
terror. As soon as this intelligence was received, all were struck with
such dread that no man was master of himself. He expresses their
trembling by an appropriate metaphor, which is also frequently employed
by ourselves, (<span id="xiv.i-p61.1"></span>*Il tremble* *comme la
fueille en l’arbre*,) *he trembles like the leaf of a* *tree*. The
design of this is to heighten the miracle; for we learn from it that not
only in the opinion of others, but likewise in their own opinion, their
case was desperate. They would therefore have been utterly ruined if the
Lord had not seasonably interposed.

<span id="xiv.i-p62"></span>This passage sets before us a very bright
mirror, in which we may behold the thoughtlessness of the ungodly, when
they do not feel the hand of God; and, on the other hand, the fearful
trembling with which they are suddenly seized, when the Lord presents to
them any danger. In the midst of their prosperity they are so much at
their ease that they hardly believe that they are subject to the
government of God, and undoubtedly imagine that they are placed beyond
the reach of all danger. Adversity stuns them in such a manner that they
suddenly fall down, and their senses are so entirely overpowered by
terror that they lie like people who are lifeless or bereft of their
senses. Such is the punishment by which the Lord arouses them from their
deep slumber. At first they appear to be firm and immovable, as if
nothing could throw them down from their rank; but now, at the slightest
noise, they are suddenly seized with trembling. That terror is the
righteous vengeance of God, to whom they never do homage until they are
compelled.

<span id="xiv.i-p63"></span>Let us learn, that if we have any spark of
faith, we ought not to distrust God when we are in any danger. It is
indeed impossible that we should not be agitated and alarmed when
dangers press upon us; but we ought not to tremble so as to be tossed
about by our anxiety in every direction, and unable to see a harbour to
which we may safely direct our course. There must always be this
difference between the fear of the godly and of the ungodly, that the
ungodly find no remedy for composing their minds; but the godly
immediately betake themselves to God, in whom, knowing that they have a
very safe harbour, though they be harassed by uneasiness, still they
remain calm.

<span id="xiv.i-p64"></span><span id="xiv.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p65"></span>**3.** *Then said the LORD.* First, we see
how God, remembering his covenant, anticipates this wicked king by
sending the Prophet to meet him; for he does not wait for his prayers,
but of his own accord promises that he will grant deliverance. *His son
Shear-jashub* is joined with the Prophet as a witness of the prediction,
and there is reason to believe that his name, *Shear-jashub*, was not
given at random, but by the secret inspiration of the Spirit, or by an
immediate command of God, and in order to point out the future
deliverance of the people. He, therefore, carried in his name what might
be regarded as an engraven seal, both of the approaching captivity and
of the return. It is also probable that this symbol of the prediction
was generally known, for he would not have been joined with his father
on any other account than because he bore in his person some authority.

<span id="xiv.i-p66"></span>*To the way of the fuller’s field.* The
place is mentioned in order to give authenticity to the history. It is
possible that the king, for the purpose of repelling the enemy, may have
set out to watch his approach, which appears more clearly from the
sacred history. (<span id="xiv.i-p66.1"></span>[2Ki
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017)<span id="xiv.i-p66.1"></span>..md)
It is called *the way of the fuller’s field*, perhaps because it was
customary to wash clothes there, or because the name arose out of some
ancient occurrence. However that may be, it was an evidence of anxiety
and dread, that this wretched hypocrite was running about in all
directions, when Isaiah came forth to meet him and to soothe his mind.

<span id="xiv.i-p67"></span><span id="xiv.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p68"></span>**4.** *And thou shalt say to him*  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) The Hebrew word <span
id="xiv.i-p69.1"></span>שמר (*shamar*,) which signifies *to keep*, is
here put in the Hiphil;  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md) and the
greater part of interpreters take it for *beware*; but they erroneously
apply this to an unnatural and far-fetched meaning, that Ahaz should
*beware* of carrying on war. A more natural meaning is, that he ought
not to waver or wander about in uncertainty, but to remain calm and
serene. Accordingly, I have rendered it *refrain*. The meaning therefore
is, that Ahab should be composed, and should not be agitated or harass
his mind by uneasiness, as fickle and unsteady persons are wont to do
when they are struck with terror.

<span id="xiv.i-p71"></span>This interpretation is confirmed by the word
which follows, *Be* *quiet*; for these two are connected, first, to keep
quiet *watch*, so as not to be distracted by a variety of opinions, or
gaze around in all directions; and, secondly, to have a calm and
composed mind. Such are the highly delightful fruits which are yielded
by faith; for through a variety of attacks unbelievers give way, and
wander in uncertainty, and know not to which hand they ought to turn,
while believers keep themselves under restraint, and *quietly* betake
themselves to God. Ungodliness is never at rest; but where faith exists,
there the mind is composed, and does not tremble to an immoderate
degree. These words very fitly express the power of faith.

<span id="xiv.i-p72"></span>*Fear not.* After having pointed out the
remedy for allaying the distresses of the mind, he likewise bids them
*not fear*; for faith, which places our salvation in the hand of God, is
not more opposite to anything than to *fear*. It is impossible, I
acknowledge, not to *fear* when dangers threaten, for faith does not
deprive us of all feeling. On the contrary, the children of God are
undoubtedly moved by two kinds of *fear*, one of which arises from the
feeling of human nature, even though they be endued with perfect faith.
The other arises from the weakness of faith; for no man has made such
proficiency as not to have any remains of that distrust against which we
ought continually to strive. We must not, therefore, understand the
exhortation of the Prophet to mean that the Lord forbids every kind of
*fear*, but he enjoins believers to be armed with such firmness as to
overcome *fear*. As if he had said, “Do not suffer yourselves to be
discouraged; and if you are assailed by fierce and severe attacks,
maintain unshaken resolution, that you may not be overpowered by
dangers, but, on the contrary, live to God and overcome all your
distresses.” For the same reason he immediately adds, —

<span id="xiv.i-p73"></span>*And let not thy heart be faint.* To be
*faint* means “to melt away,” for not without reason does the Apostle
exhort us to strengthen our hearts by faith. (<span
id="xiv.i-p73.1"></span>[Heb. 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027.md),
[Heb. 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#009.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p73.1"></span>.) It is the softness of indolence, when we
forget God and melt away, as it were, through our unbelief. You would
not call that man soft or effeminate who relies on the Spirit of God and
steadfastly resists adversity. Hence we infer that the Prophet meant
nothing else than that Ahaz should undauntedly await the accomplishment
of what the Lord had promised to him.

<span id="xiv.i-p74"></span>*For the two tails.* Isaiah employs an
elegant metaphor to lessen the conception which the Jews had formed
about those two very powerful kings which had filled their minds with
terror. Their rage and cruelty appeared to be a devouring fire, which
was sufficient to consume the whole of Judea, and could not be quenched.
Isaiah, on the other hand, calls them not *firebrands*, (for that might
have been thought to be something great,) but *tails*, that is, some
fragments or ends of *firebrands*, and these, too, not burning, but only
*smoking*, as if some *firebrand* snatched from the fire were going out,
and gave out nothing else than a slight smoke. This metaphor yields high
consolation, for it warns us to form a very different opinion about the
violence of the ungodly from what it appears to be. One would think that
they are endued with so great power that they could burn and destroy the
whole world. To put down the excess of terror, the Lord declares that
what we imagined to be a burning, and a perpetual burning, is but a
slight smoke and of short duration.

<span id="xiv.i-p75"></span><span id="xiv.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p76"></span>**5.** *The king of Syria hath taken evil
counsel against thee.* Though he foretold that empty would be the
threats, and vain the attempts of the enemies of the people of God, yet
he does not conceal that their devices are cruel, if the Lord do not
restrain them. By *evil counsel* he means *destructive counsel*, for
these two kings had leagued together to destroy Judea. To express it
more fully, and to place it as it were before their eyes, he relates
their very words.

<span id="xiv.i-p77"></span><span id="xiv.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p78"></span>**6.** *Let us go up*. That is, *Let us make
an invasion* <span id="xiv.i-p78.1"></span>נקיצנה (*nekitzennah*) is
rendered by some, *Let us distress* or *afflict*; which is also
expressed by the derivation of the word. But in this conjugation it
rather signifies “to stir up and arouse.” Though I do not reject the
former interpretation, yet I prefer the latter, because it agrees better
with the scope of the passage. Again, I understand the word *arouse* as
meaning to *disturb*, and to cause revolutions; as we commonly say, *to
raise disturbances*,  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) so as not
to allow the tranquillity of that kingdom to be preserved.

<span id="xiv.i-p80"></span>*Let us open it to us.* The following word,
<span id="xiv.i-p80.1"></span>נבקיענה, (*nabkignennah*,) is interpreted
by some, *Let us break into it*  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md)
Others render it, *Let us cause it to break up to us*. I have rendered
it, *Let us open*; for <span id="xiv.i-p81.1"></span>בקע (*bakang*) also
signifies what we commonly express by the phrase, *to make a breach or
opening*  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) Now, the way to *open*
up the entrance to Judea was to rush through its fortifications by the
force of arms, or, through the influence of fear, to induce timid and
fickle persons to revolt; for so long as they continue to be loyal,
entrance cannot be obtained; but when everything is disturbed by
insurrections, an entrance is made, so that it becomes easy to break
through into the strongest and best fortified places.

<span id="xiv.i-p83"></span>Thus, these two kings hoped that, as soon as
they came into Judea, they would immediately terrify the whole nation by
the extent and power of the army, so that there would be no ability or
inclination to resist. When they brought together an army so
prodigiously numerous, it is not probable that they placed any
dependence on a long siege; for Jerusalem was strongly fortified; but
they thought that the inhabitants of Jerusalem would be terrified and
alarmed at the sight of their forces, and would be induced to make an
immediate surrender. Yet I leave it to every person to adopt any
interpretation of these words that he pleases, for whatever sense be put
upon them, the meaning of the Prophet is not doubtful.

<span id="xiv.i-p84"></span>*The son of Tabeal.* Who this *Tabeal* was
cannot easily be learned from history. Probably he was some Israelite,
an enemy of the house of David, whom those kings were desirous to set up
as one of their own dependents.

<span id="xiv.i-p85"></span><span id="xiv.i-p85.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p86"></span>**7.** *It shall not stand.* What he had
formerly stated was intended to show more fully that the deliverance was
great and uncommon; for when the Lord intends to assist us in our
trials, he represents the greatness of the danger, that we may not think
that he promises less than the necessity requires. He does not usually
give a mitigated view of the evils which press upon us, but rather holds
out their full extent, and afterwards makes a promise, and shows that he
is able to deliver us, though we may appear to be ruined. Such was the
method adopted by the Prophet; for he might have told them in plain
terms what would happen, and might have encouraged the king and the
nation not to be terrified or discouraged at the sight of those armies.
But he opened up the scheme and design of those kings, with which he now
contrasts the promise and decree of God, that his wonderful assistance
may be more strikingly displayed.

<span id="xiv.i-p87"></span>This is the sacred anchor which alone
upholds us amidst the billows of temptations; for in adversity we shall
never be able to stand if God take away his word from us. Although,
therefore, the king was almost overwhelmed with despair, Isaiah shows
that there is nothing so dreadful that it may not be despised, provided
that he fortify himself by the promise of God, and patiently look for
that which is not yet seen, and which even appears to be incredible. He
affirms, that whatever men attempt, after the manner of the giants, in
rising up against God, *it* *shall not stand*. He uses the word <span
id="xiv.i-p87.1"></span>תקים, (*thakum*,) *shall* *arise*, in the same
sense in which that metaphor is employed in the Latin language, that a
work is making progress; and, in a word, he declares that such daring
sacrilege *shall not stand*

<span id="xiv.i-p88"></span>Still more emphatic is that which he adds,
<span id="xiv.i-p88.1"></span>לא תהיה, (*lo* *thihyeh*,) *it shall not
be*; that is, it shall be reduced to nothing, as if it had never
existed. This mode of expression deserves notice, for it was the bare
and naked word of God which was contrasted with the vast army and scheme
of the kings.

<span id="xiv.i-p89"></span><span id="xiv.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p90"></span>**8.** *For the head of Syria is Damascus.*
As if he had said, “Those two kings shall have their limits, such as
they have them now. They aspire to thy kingdom; but I have set bounds to
them which they shall not pass.” *Damascus* was the metropolis of
*Syria*, as Paris is of France. He says, therefore, that those kings
ought to be satisfied with their possessions, and that their future
condition would be the same as it then was.

<span id="xiv.i-p91"></span>*And Ephraim shall be broken*. After having
said that it is now useless to attempt to extend their boundaries, he
foretells the calamity of the kingdom of Israel; for by the word
*broken* he means that the kingdom of Israel shall be annihilated, so
that it shall no longer exist. The Israelites were carried into
captivity, and incorporated with another nation, just as in our own time
a part of Savoy has passed under the government of France, and has lost
its name. This is what the Prophet means, when he says <span
id="xiv.i-p91.1"></span>מעם, (*megnam*,) *that it be not a people*; for
at that time Israel was mixed with foreign nations, and its peculiar
name was blotted out.

<span id="xiv.i-p92"></span>*Within sixty-five years.* The Israelites
were led into captivity in the sixth year of King Hezekiah, and Ahaz
reigned not more than sixteen years; and, therefore, it is certain that
this calculation ought not to be made from the day on which Isaiah was
sent to deliver this message, for it was only twenty years to the time
when the ten tribes were carried into captivity. Amoz had prophesied of
that captivity; and there can be no doubt that this prophecy of Amoz,
(<span id="xiv.i-p92.1"></span>[Am
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#011)<span id="xiv.i-p92.1"></span>,.md)
and the time specified in it were generally known, and that all
understood the reckoning of the number of years. If, therefore, we
reckon from the time when Amoz makes this prediction, we shall find it
to be *sixty-five* *years*; for Jotham reigned sixteen years, (<span
id="xiv.i-p92.2"></span>[2Ki
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#033)<span id="xiv.i-p92.2"></span>;.md)
Ahaz as many, (<span id="xiv.i-p92.3"></span>[2Ki
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p92.3"></span>;.md)
to those must be added six years of King Hezekiah, which brings us down
to the year when the ten tribes were carried into captivity; and if we
afterwards add twenty-seven years, during which Uzziah reigned after the
publication of the prophecy, there will be *sixty-five years* This
conjecture is highly probable; and there ought not to be any doubt that
this was Isaiah’s meaning; for there is a prediction of the Prophet
Amoz, in which the Lord warned the people that they might not meet with
anything unexpected, and complain that they had been overtaken suddenly.
Isaiah confirms that prediction, and announces the same time which
already was universally known.

<span id="xiv.i-p93"></span>Moreover, by these words he sharply reproves
the thoughtlessness of the Israelitish nation, that, when they had been
warned of the destruction of their country and their name, not only did
they freely indulge in despising the judgment of God, but as if they had
purposely intended to mock at the heavenly predictions, they opened
their mouth to devour Judea; for a long period was already past, and
they thought that they had escaped. The Prophet ridicules this madness,
in imagining that the word of God grew old in so small a number of
years. But because the Israelites were deaf, Isaiah assigns to the Jews
a time when they may look for the destruction of their enemies. Now,
this passage shows that the Prophets faithfully assisted each other,
that by their united labors they might serve God.

<span id="xiv.i-p94"></span><span id="xiv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p95"></span>**9.** *Meanwhile*  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) *the head of Ephraim is Samaria.* As
it is a repetition by which he confirms what he formerly said, that God
had set bounds to the kingdom of Israel for an appointed time, I have
rendered the copulative <span id="xiv.i-p96.1"></span>ו, (*vau*,)
*meanwhile*. Otherwise, it would have been absurd to say that the
metropolis of the kingdom would be preserved, after that the kingdom had
been destroyed, as he lately foretold. The meaning therefore is, “In the
meantime, till the *sixty-five years* are fulfilled, Israel enjoys a
kind of truce. His *head* shall be *Samaria*. Let him be satisfied with
his boundaries, and not aim at anything beyond them; for such shall be
his condition, until he be utterly destroyed, and be no longer reckoned
to be *a people*.”

<span id="xiv.i-p97"></span>*If you do not believe.* The particle <span
id="xiv.i-p97.1"></span>כי (*ki*) is placed in the middle of the
sentence, to mark the reason or cause; and, therefore, some render it,
“If you do not believe, the reason is, that you are not believers.” They
limit the former clause to the prophecy of Isaiah, but extend the latter
to any part of the word of God, as if he had said, “If you have no faith
in my sayings, this gives a general proof of your unbelief.” But in that
way, the verb <span id="xiv.i-p97.2"></span>תאמינו, (*thaaminu*,) which
is in Hiphil conjugation, will not differ from the verb <span
id="xiv.i-p97.3"></span>תאמנו, (*theamenu*,) which is in the Niphal. It
is not without reason, however, that the Prophet has changed the
termination; and, from many passages of Scripture, it is abundantly
evident that the Hebrew verb <span id="xiv.i-p97.4"></span>אמן,
(*aman*,) in the Niphal conjugation, signifies *to stand*, or, *to
remain fixed in its condition*. I interpret it, therefore, as if he had
said, “This is the only support on which you can rely. Wait calmly and
without uneasiness of mind for what the Lord has promised, that is,
deliverance. If you do not wait for it, what else remains for you than
destruction?”

<span id="xiv.i-p98"></span>The particle <span
id="xiv.i-p98.1"></span>כי, (*ki*,) therefore, as in many other
instances, means *truly*; for he declares that they cannot stand, if
they do not rely on the promise; and indirectly he expresses still more,
that God will stand, though they disbelieve his word, and, as far as
lies in their power, endeavor to destroy its stability; but that they
will not stand, unless they rely on the promise which has been made to
them.

<span id="xiv.i-p99"></span>Hence we ought to draw a universal doctrine,
that, when we have departed from the word of God, though we may suppose
that we are firmly established, still ruin is at hand. For our salvation
is bound up with the word of God, and, when this is rejected, the insult
offered to it is justly punished by him who was ready to uphold men by
his power, if they had not of their own accord rushed headlong to ruin.
The consequence is, that either we must believe the promises of God, or
it is in vain for us to expect salvation.

<span id="xiv.i-p100"></span><span id="xiv.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p101"></span>**10.** *And Jehovah added to speak to
Ahaz.*  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) As the Lord knew that
King Ahaz was so wicked as not to believe the promise, so he enjoins
Isaiah to confirm him by adding a sign; for when God sees that his
promises do not satisfy us, he makes additions to them suitable to our
weakness; so that we not only hear him speak, but likewise behold his
hand displayed, and thus are confirmed by an evident proof of the fact.
Here we ought carefully to observe the use of signs, that is, the reason
why God performs miracles, namely, to confirm us in the belief of his
word; for when we see his power, if we have any hesitation about what he
says to us, our doubt is removed by beholding the thing itself; for
miracles added to the word are seals.

<span id="xiv.i-p103"></span><span id="xiv.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p104"></span>**11.** *Either in the deep.* I understand
it simply to mean *Either* *above or below*. He allows him an
unrestricted choice of a miracle, to demand either what belongs to earth
or what belongs to heaven. But perhaps in the word *deep* there is
something still more emphatic; as if he had said, “It belongs to you to
choose. God will immediately show that his dominion is *higher* than
this world, and that it likewise extends to all *depths*, so that at his
pleasure he can raise the dead from their graves.” It was undoubtedly
astonishing forbearance towards this wicked king and people of God, that
not only did he patiently bear their distrust for a time, but so
graciously condescended to them that he was willing to give them any
pledge of his power which they chose. Yet he had in his eye not
unbelievers only, but he intended likewise to provide for the benefit of
the weak, in whom there was a seed of godliness; that they might be
fully convinced that Isaiah did not speak at random, for he could easily
give a proof of the power of God in confirmation of what he had said.

<span id="xiv.i-p105"></span>The same goodness of God is now also
displayed towards men, to whom he exercises such forbearance, when he
might justly have been offended at them; for how shockingly do they
insult God, when they doubt his truth? What do you leave to God, if you
take that from him? And whatever may be our doubts, not only does he
pardon us, but even aids our distrust, and not only by his word, but by
adding miracles; and he exhibits them not only to believers, but also to
the ungodly, which we may behold in this king. And if he was at that
time so kind to strangers, what ought not his own people to expect from
him?

<span id="xiv.i-p106"></span><span id="xiv.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p107"></span>**12.** *And Ahaz said.* By a plausible
excuse he refuses the sign which the Lord offered to him. That excuse
is, that he is unwilling *to* *tempt the LORD*; for he pretends to
believe the words of the Prophet, and to ask nothing more from God than
his word. Ungodliness is certainly detestable in the sight of God, and
in like manner God unquestionably sets a high value on faith.
Accordingly, if a man rely on his word alone, and disregard everything
else, it might be thought that he deserves the highest praise; for there
can be no greater perfection than to yield full submission and obedience
to God.

<span id="xiv.i-p108"></span>But a question arises. Do we *tempt* God,
when we accept what he offers to us? Certainly not. *Ahaz* therefore
speaks falsehood, when he pretends that he refuses the sign, because he
is unwilling to *tempt God*; for there can be nothing fitter or more
excellent than to obey God, and indeed it is the highest virtue to ask
nothing beyond the word of God; and yet if God choose to add anything to
his word, it ought not to be regarded as a virtue to reject this
addition as superfluous. It is no small insult offered to God, when his
goodness is despised in such a manner as if his proceedings towards us
were of no advantage, and as if he did not know what it is that we
chiefly need. We know that faith is chiefly commended on this ground,
that it maintains obedience to him; but when we wish to be too wise, and
despise anything that belongs to God, we are undoubtedly abominable
before God, whatever excuse we may plead before men. While we believe
the word of God, we ought not to despise the aids which he has been
pleased to add for the purpose of strengthening our faith.

<span id="xiv.i-p109"></span>For instance, the Lord offers to us in the
gospel everything necessary for salvation; for when he brings us into a
state of fellowship with Christ, the sum of all blessings is truly
contained in him. What then is the use of Baptism and the Lord’s Supper?
Must they be regarded as superfluous? Not at all; for any one who shall
actually, and without flattery, acknowledge his weakness, of which all
from the least to the greatest are conscious, will gladly avail himself
of those aids for his support. We ought indeed to grieve and lament,
that the sacred truth of God needs assistance on account of the defect
of our flesh; but since we cannot all at once remove this defect, any
one who, according to his capacity shall believe the word, will
immediately render full obedience to God. Let us therefore learn to
embrace the signs along with the word, since it is not in the power of
man to separate them.

<span id="xiv.i-p110"></span>When *Ahaz* refuses the *sign* offered to
him, by doing so he displays both his obstinacy and his ingratitude; for
he despises what God had offered for the highest advantage. Hence also
it is evident how far we ought to *ask signs*, namely, when God offers
them to us; and therefore he who shall reject them when offered, must
also reject the grace of God. In like manner fanatics of the present day
disregard Baptism and the Lord’s Supper, and consider them to be
childish elements. They cannot do this without at the same time
rejecting the whole gospel; for we must not separate those things which
the Lord has commanded us to join.

<span id="xiv.i-p111"></span>But a question may be asked, Is it not
sometimes lawful to *ask signs* from the Lord? For we have an instance
of this in Gideon, who wished to have his calling confirmed by some
*sign*. (<span id="xiv.i-p111.1"></span>[Jud
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#017)<span id="xiv.i-p111.1"></span>..md)
The Lord granted his prayer, and did not disapprove of such a desire. I
answer, though Gideon was not commanded by God to ask a sign, yet he did
so, not at his own suggestion, but by an operation of the Holy Spirit.
We must not abuse his example, therefore, so that each of us may freely
allow himself that liberty; for so great is the forwardness of men that
they do not hesitate to ask innumerable signs from God without any
proper reason. Such effrontery ought therefore to be restrained, that we
may be satisfied with those signs which the Lord offers to us.

<span id="xiv.i-p112"></span>Now, there are two kinds of *signs*; for
some are extraordinary, and may be called supernatural; such as that
which the Prophet will immediately add, and that which, we shall
afterwards see, was offered to Hezekiah. (<span
id="xiv.i-p112.1"></span>[Isa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p112.1"></span>..md)
Some are ordinary, and in daily use among believers, such as Baptism and
the Lord’s Supper, which contain no miracle, or at least may be
perceived by the eye or by some of the senses. What the Lord
miraculously performs by his Spirit is unseen, but in those which are
extraordinary the miracle itself is seen. Such is also the end and use
of all *signs*; for as Gideon was confirmed by an astonishing miracle,
so we are confirmed by Baptism and the Lord’s Supper, though our eyes
behold no miracle.

<span id="xiv.i-p113"></span><span id="xiv.i-p113.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p114"></span>**13.** *And he said, Hear now, O house of
David.* Under the pretense of honor to exclude the power of God, which
would maintain the truth of the promise, was intolerable wickedness; and
therefore the Prophet kindles into warmer indignation, and more sharply
rebukes wicked hypocrites. Though it would have been honorable to them
to be reckoned the descendants of David, provided that they imitated his
piety, yet it is rather for the sake of reproach that he calls them the
*posterity* or *family of David*. It was indeed no small aggravation of
the baseness, that the grace of God was rejected by that family from
which the salvation of the whole world would proceed. Grievous disgrace
must have been brought on them, by naming their ancestry, from which
they had so basely and shamefully degenerated.

<span id="xiv.i-p115"></span>This order ought to be carefully observed;
for we ought not to begin with severe reproof, but with doctrine, that
men may be gently drawn by it. When plain and simple doctrine is not
sufficient, proofs must be added. But if even this method produce no
good effect, it then becomes necessary to employ greater vehemence. Such
is the manner in which we hear Isaiah thundering on the present
occasion. After having exhibited to the king both doctrine and signs, he
now resorts to the last remedy, and sharply and severely reproves an
obstinate man; and not him only, but the whole royal family which was
guilty of the same kind of impiety.

<span id="xiv.i-p116"></span>*Is it a small thing for you to weary men?*
He makes a comparison between *God* and *men*; not that it is possible
to make an actual separation between *God* and the prophets and holy
teachers of whom he speaks, who are nothing else than God’s instruments,
and make common cause with him, when they discharge their duty; for of
them the Lord testifies,

<span id="xiv.i-p117"></span>He who despiseth you despiseth me.  
He who heareth you heareth me. (<span id="xiv.i-p117.2"></span>[Lu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p117.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p118"></span>The Prophet therefore adapts his discourse
to the impiety of Ahaz, and of those who resembled him; for they thought
that they had to deal with *men*. Those very words were undoubtedly
spoken in ancient times which we hear at the present day from the mouths
of the ungodly: “Are they not men that speak to us?” And thus they
endeavor to disparage the doctrine which comes from God. As it was
customary at that time for irreligious despisers of doctrine to use the
same kind of language, the Prophet, by way of admission, says that those
who performed the sacred office of teaching the word were *men*. “Be it
so. You tell me that I am a mortal man. That is the light in which you
view the prophets of God. *But is it a small thing to weary* us, if you
do not also *weary God*? Now, you despise God, by rejecting the sign of
his astonishing power which he was willing to give to you. In vain
therefore do you boast that you do not despise him, and that you have to
do with *men*, and not with *God*.” This then is the reason why the
Prophet was so greatly enraged. Hence we see more clearly what I
mentioned a little before, that the proper season for giving reproofs
is, when we have attempted everything that God enjoined, and have
neglected no part of our duty. We ought then to break out with greater
vehemence, and to expose the ungodliness which lurked under those cloaks
of hypocrisy.

<span id="xiv.i-p119"></span>*My God.* He formerly said, *Ask a sign for
thee from the* Lord thy God; for at that time his obstinacy and
rebellion had not been manifestly proved. But now he claims it as
peculiar to himself; for *Ahaz*, and those who resembled him, had no
right to boast of the name of God. He therefore intimates that God is on
his side, and is not on the side of those hypocrites: and in this way he
testifies his confidence; for he shows how conscientiously he promised
deliverance to the king; as if he had said, that he did not come but
when God sent him, and that he said nothing but what he was commanded to
say. With the same boldness ought all ministers to be endued, not only
so as to profess it, but to have it deeply rooted in their hearts. The
false prophets also boast of it loudly, but it is empty and unmeaning
talk, or a blind confidence arising from rashness.

<span id="xiv.i-p120"></span><span id="xiv.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p121"></span>**14.** *Therefore the* Lord *himself shall
give you a sign.* Ahaz had already refused the sign which the Lord
offered to him, when the Prophet remonstrated against his rebellion and
ingratitude; yet the Prophet declares that this will not prevent God
from *giving the sign* which he had promised and appointed for the Jews.
But what sign?

<span id="xiv.i-p122"></span>*Behold, a virgin shall conceive.* This
passage is obscure; but the blame lies partly on the Jews, who, by much
cavilling, have labored, as far as lay in their power, to pervert the
true exposition. They are hard pressed by this passage; for it contains
an illustrious prediction concerning the Messiah, who is here called
*Immanuel*; and therefore they have labored, by all possible means, to
torture the Prophet’s meaning to another sense. Some allege that the
person here mentioned is Hezekiah; and others, that it is the son of
Isaiah.

<span id="xiv.i-p123"></span>Those who apply this passage to Hezekiah
are excessively impudent; for he must have been a full-grown man when
Jerusalem was besieged. Thus they show that they are grossly ignorant of
history. But it is a just reward of their malice, that God hath blinded
them in such a manner as to be deprived of all judgment. This happens in
the present day to the papists, who often expose themselves to ridicule
by their mad eagerness to pervert the Scriptures.

<span id="xiv.i-p124"></span>As to those who think that it was Isaiah’s
son, it is an utterly frivolous conjecture; for we do not read that a
deliverer would be raised up from the seed of Isaiah, who should be
called *Immanuel*; for this title is far too illustrious to admit of
being applied to any man.

<span id="xiv.i-p125"></span>Others think, or, at least, (being
unwilling to contend with the Jews more than was necessary,) admit that
the Prophet spoke of some child who was born at that time, by whom, as
by an obscure picture, Christ was foreshadowed. But they produce no
strong arguments, and do not show who that child was, or bring forward
any proofs. Now, it is certain, as we have already said, that this name
*Immanuel* could not be literally applied to a mere man; and, therefore,
there can be no doubt that the Prophet referred to Christ.

<span id="xiv.i-p126"></span>But all writers, both Greek and Latin, are
too much at their ease in handling this passage; for, as if there were
no difficulty in it, they merely assert that Christ is here promised
from the Virgin Mary. Now, there is no small difficulty in the objection
which the Jews bring against us, that Christ is here mentioned without
any sufficient reason; for thus they argue, and demand that the scope of
the passage be examined: “Jerusalem was besieged. The Prophet was about
to give them a sign of deliverance. Why should he promise the Messiah,
who was to be born five hundred years afterwards?” By this argument they
think that they have gained the victory, because the promise concerning
Christ had nothing to do with assuring Ahaz of the deliverance of
Jerusalem. And then they boast as if they had gained the day, chiefly
because scarcely any one replies to them. That is the reason why I said
that commentators have been too much at their ease in this matter; for
it is of no small importance to show why the Redeemer is here mentioned.

<span id="xiv.i-p127"></span>Now, the matter stands thus. King Ahaz
having rejected the sign which God had offered to him, the Prophet
reminds him of the foundation of the covenant, which even the ungodly
did not venture openly to reject. The Messiah must be born; and this was
expected by all, because the salvation of the whole nation depended on
it. The Prophet, therefore, after having expressed his indignation
against the king, again argues in this manner: “By rejecting the
promise, thou wouldest endeavor to overturn the decree of God; but it
shall remain inviolable, and thy treachery and ingratitude will not
hinder God from being, continually the Deliverer of his people; for he
will at length raise up his Messiah.”

<span id="xiv.i-p128"></span>To make these things more plain, we must
attend to the custom of the Prophets, who, in establishing special
promises, lay down this as the foundation, that God will send a
Redeemer. On this general foundation God everywhere builds all the
special promises which he makes to his people; and certainly every one
who expects aid and assistance from him must be convinced of his
fatherly love. And how could he be reconciled to us but through Christ,
in whom he has freely adopted the elect, and continues to pardon them to
the end? Hence comes that saying of Paul, that

<span id="xiv.i-p129"></span>all the promises of God in Christ are Yea
and Amen.  
(<span id="xiv.i-p129.2"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="xiv.i-p129.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p130"></span>Whenever, therefore, God assisted his
ancient people, he at the same time reconciled them to himself through
Christ; and accordingly, whenever famine, pestilence, and war are
mentioned, in order to hold out a hope of deliverance, he places the
Messiah before their eyes. This being exceedingly clear, the Jews have
no right to make a noise, as if the Prophet made an unseasonable
transition to a very remote subject. For on what did the deliverance of
Jerusalem depend, but on the manifestation of Christ? This was, indeed,
the only foundation on which the salvation of the Church always rested.

<span id="xiv.i-p131"></span>Most appropriately, therefore, did Isaiah
say, “True, thou dost not believe the promises of God, but yet God will
fulfill them; for he will at length send his Christ, for whose sake he
determines to preserve this city. Though thou art unworthy, yet God will
have regard to his own honor.” King Ahaz is therefore deprived of that
sign which he formerly rejected, and loses the benefit of which he
proved himself to be unworthy; but still God’s inviolable promise is
still held out to him. This is plainly enough intimated by the particle
<span id="xiv.i-p131.1"></span>לכן, (*lachen*,) *therefore*; that is,
because thou disdainest that particular sign which God offered to thee,
<span id="xiv.i-p131.2"></span>הוא, (*hu*,) *He*, that is, God himself,
who was so gracious as to offer it freely to thee, he whom thou
*weariest* will not fail to hold out *a sign*. When I say that the
coming of Christ is promised to Ahaz, I do not mean that God includes
him among the chosen people, to whom he had appointed his Son to be the
Author of salvation; but because the discourse is directed to the whole
body of the people.

<span id="xiv.i-p132"></span>*Will give you a sign.* The word <span
id="xiv.i-p132.1"></span>לכם, (*lachem*,) *to you*, is interpreted by
some as meaning *to your children*; but this is forced. So far as
relates to the persons addressed, the Prophet leaves the wicked king and
looks to the nation, so far as it had been adopted by God. He will
therefore give, not *to thee* a wicked king, and to those who are like
thee, but *to you* whom he has adopted; for the covenant which he made
with Abraham continues to be firm and inviolable. And the Lord always
has some remnant to whom the advantage of the covenant belongs; though
the rulers and governors of his people may be hypocrites.

<span id="xiv.i-p133"></span>*Behold, a virgin shall conceive.* The word
*Behold* is used emphatically, to denote the greatness of the event; for
this is the manner in which the Spirit usually speaks of great and
remarkable events, in order to elevate the minds of men. The Prophet,
therefore, enjoins his hearers to be attentive, and to consider this
extraordinary work of God; as if he had said, “Be not slothful, but
consider this singular grace of God, which ought of itself to have drawn
your attention, but is concealed from you on account of your stupidity.”

<span id="xiv.i-p134"></span>Although the word <span
id="xiv.i-p134.1"></span>עלמה, (*gnalmah*,) *a virgin*, is derived from
<span id="xiv.i-p134.2"></span>עלם, (*gnalam*,) which signifies *to
hide*, because the shame and modesty of *virgins* does not allow them to
appear in public; yet as the Jews dispute much about that word, and
assert that it does not signify *virgin*, because Solomon used it to
denote a young woman who was betrothed, it is unnecessary to contend
about the word. Though we should admit what they say, that <span
id="xiv.i-p134.3"></span>עלמה (*gnalmah*) sometimes denotes *a young
woman*, and that the name refers, as they would have it, to the age,
(yet it is frequently used in Scripture when the subject relates to *a
virgin*,) the nature of the case sufficiently refutes all their
slanders. For what wonderful thing did the Prophet say, if he spoke of
*a young woman* who *conceived* through intercourse with a man? It would
certainly have been absurd to hold out this as a *sign* or a miracle.
Let us suppose that it denotes a young woman who should become pregnant
in the ordinary course of nature;  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) everybody sees that it would have been
silly and contemptible for the Prophet, after having said that he was
about to speak of something strange and uncommon, to add, *A young woman
shall conceive*. It is, therefore, plain enough that he speaks of *a
virgin* who should conceive, not by the ordinary course of nature, but
by the gracious influence of the Holy Spirit. And this is the mystery
which Paul extols in lofty terms, that

<span id="xiv.i-p136"></span>God was manifested in the flesh. (<span
id="xiv.i-p136.1"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p136.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p137"></span>*And shall call.* The Hebrew verb is in the
feminine gender, *She* *shall call*; for as to those who read it in the
masculine gender, I know not on what they found their opinion. The
copies which we use certainly do not differ. If you apply it to the
mother, it certainly expresses something different from the ordinary
custom. We know that to the father is always assigned the right of
giving a name to a child; for it is a sign of the power and authority of
fathers over children; and the same authority does not belong to women.
But here it is conveyed to the mother; and therefore it follows that he
is conceived by the mother in such a manner as not to have a father on
earth; otherwise the Prophet would pervert the ordinary custom of
Scripture, which ascribes this office to men only. Yet it ought to be
observed that the name was not given to Christ at the suggestion of his
mother, and in such a case it would have had no weight; but the Prophet
means that, in publishing the name, *the virgin* will occupy the place
of a herald, because there will be no earthly father to perform that
office.

<span id="xiv.i-p138"></span>*Immanuel.* This name was unquestionably
bestowed on Christ on account of the actual fact; for the only-begotten
Son of God clothed himself with our flesh, and united himself to us by
partaking of our nature. He is, therefore, called *God with us*, or
*united to us*; which cannot apply to a man who is not God. The Jews in
their sophistry tell us that this name was given to Hezekiah; because by
the hand of Hezekiah God delivered his people; and they add, “He who is
the servant of God represents his person.” But neither Moses nor Joshua,
who were deliverers of the nation, were so denominated; and therefore
this *Immanuel* is preferred to Moses and Joshua, and all the others;
for by this name he excels all that ever were before, and all that shall
come after him; and it is a title expressive of some extraordinary
excellence and authority which he possesses above others. It is
therefore evident that it denotes not only the power of God, such as he
usually displays by his servant, but a union of person, by which Christ
became God-man. Hence it is also evident that Isaiah here relates no
common event, but points out that unparalleled mystery which the Jews
labor in vain to conceal.

<span id="xiv.i-p139"></span><span id="xiv.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p140"></span>**15.** *Butter and honey shall he eat.*
Here the Prophet proves the true human nature of Christ; for it was
altogether incredible that he who was God should be born of *a virgin*.
Such a prodigy was revolting to the ordinary judgment of men. To hinder
us from thinking that his fancy now presents to us some apparition, he
describes the marks of human nature, in order to show, by means of them,
that Christ will actually appear in flesh, or in the nature of man; that
is, that he will be reared in the same manner that children commonly
are. The Jews had a different way of rearing children from what is
followed by us; for they used *honey*, which is not so customary among
us; and to this day they still retain the custom of causing a child to
taste *butter and honey*, as soon as it is born, before receiving suck.

<span id="xiv.i-p141"></span>*That he may know.* That is, until he
arrive at that age when he can distinguish between good and evil, or, as
we commonly say, *till the years of discretion*; <span
id="xiv.i-p141.1"></span>ל (*lamed*) denotes the term and period up to
which he shall be reared after the manner of a child; and this
contributes still more to prove the reality of his nature. He therefore
means *understanding* and *judgment*, such as is obtained when the
period of childhood is past. Thus we see how far the Son of God
condescended on our account, so that he not only was willing to be fed
on our food, but also, for a time, to be deprived of *understanding*,
and to endure all our weaknesses. (<span id="xiv.i-p141.2"></span>[Heb
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="xiv.i-p141.2"></span>..md)
This relates to his human nature, for it cannot apply to his Divinity.
Of this state of ignorance, in which Christ was for a time, Luke
testifies when he says,

<span id="xiv.i-p142"></span>And he grew in wisdom, and in stature,  
and in favor with God and with man. (<span id="xiv.i-p142.2"></span>[Lu
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span id="xiv.i-p142.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiv.i-p143"></span>If Luke had merely said that Christ *grew*,
he might have been supposed to mean *with men*; but he expressly adds,
*with God*. Christ must therefore have been, for a time, like little
children, so that, so far as relates to his human nature, he was
deficient in understanding.

<span id="xiv.i-p144"></span><span id="xiv.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p145"></span>**16.** *Before the child shall know.* Many
have been led into a mistake by connecting this verse with the preceding
one, as if it had been the same child that was mentioned. They suppose
that it assigns the reason, and that the particle <span
id="xiv.i-p145.1"></span>כי (*ki*) means *for*  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109.md) But if we carefully examine the
Prophet’s meaning, it will quickly be apparent that he leaves the
general doctrine, to which he had made a short digression, and returns
to his immediate subject. After having founded the hope of the
preservation of the city on the promised Mediator, he now shows in what
way it will be preserved.

<span id="xiv.i-p147"></span>*The child.* I interpret this word as
referring, not to Christ, but to all children in general. Here I differ
from all the commentators; for they think that the demonstrative <span
id="xiv.i-p147.1"></span>ה points out a particular child. But I view
<span id="xiv.i-p147.2"></span>הנער, (*hannagnar*,) so that <span
id="xiv.i-p147.3"></span>ה is indeed added for the purpose of making it
more definite, but is intended to point out the age, and not any
particular child; as when we say, *The child*,  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) and add the article *The*  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) for the purpose of giving greater
definiteness. This is very customary in Scripture. If he had pointed out
a particular child, he would have added <span
id="xiv.i-p149.2"></span>הזה, (*hazzeh*,) as is frequently done in other
passages. It is not probable that this promise of the overturn of the
kingdoms of Syria and Samaria, which immediately followed, would be
deferred for five hundred years, that is, till the coming of Christ;
and, indeed, it would have been altogether absurd. The meaning therefore
is, “Before the children, who shall be born hereafter, can distinguish
between good and evil, the land which thou hatest shall be forsaken.”

<span id="xiv.i-p150"></span>*The land.* By *the land* I understand
Israel and Syria; for though they were two, yet on account of the league
which had been formed between the two kings, they are accounted one.
Some understand by it Judea; but that cannot agree on account of the
plural noun which follows, *her* *kings*. That these things happened as
they are written may be easily inferred from the sacred history; for
when Ahaz called the Assyrians to aid him, *Rezin* was slain by them.
(<span id="xiv.i-p150.1"></span>[2Ki
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009)<span id="xiv.i-p150.1"></span>..md)
Not long afterwards, Pekah, king of Israel, died, in the twelfth year of
King Ahaz, and was succeeded by Hoshea, the son of Elah. (<span
id="xiv.i-p150.2"></span>[2 Kings
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030.md), [2 Kings
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p150.2"></span>..md)
Thus, before the children who should afterwards be born were grown up,
both countries would be deprived of their kings; for before that time
both Rezin and Pekah were removed out of the land of the living. Now the
discourse is addressed to Ahaz, and God promises to him, by way of
consolation, that he will inflict punishment on the enemies of Ahaz, but
for no other purpose than to render him more inexcusable.

<span id="xiv.i-p151"></span>*Which thou hatest.* As to the word
*hatest*, Syria and the land of Israel are said to be *hated* or
*abhorred* by King Ahaz, because from that quarter he was attacked by
invading armies. He therefore promises that those kings will soon
perish. Some render <span id="xiv.i-p151.1"></span>מפני, (*mippenei*,)
*on account of*;  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) and I admit
that this word is generally used in this sense. But I adopt here a more
natural rendering, as if he had said, *It shall be forsaken from the
face or from the presence of the two kings,* and shall be left by them,
so that they shall no more be seen. And by these words it is
sufficiently evident that this must be understood as referring to both
kingdoms.

<span id="xiv.i-p153"></span><span id="xiv.i-p153.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p154"></span>**17.** *The* Lord *shall bring upon thee.*
Here the Prophet, on the other hand, threatens the wicked hypocrite, who
pretended that he was unwilling *to tempt God*, and yet called for those
whom the Lord had forbidden him to call to his aid. (<span
id="xiv.i-p154.1"></span>[Ex
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#032)<span id="xiv.i-p154.1"></span>..md)
That he might not indulge in undue exultation and insolence on account
of the former promise, he likewise threatens his destruction, and
declares that what he hopes to be his preservation, that is, the aid of
the Assyrians, will be utterly destructive to him. (<span
id="xiv.i-p154.2"></span>[2Ki
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007.md)<span id="xiv.i-p154.2"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p154.3"></span>[2Ch
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p154.3"></span>..md)
As if he had said, “Thou promisest everything to thyself from the king
of Assyria, and thinkest that he will be faithful to thee, because thou
hast entered into a league and covenant with him, which God had
forbidden; but thou shalt quickly understand of what advantage it will
be to thee to have *tempted God*. Thou mightest have remained at home
and at ease, and mightest have received the assistance of God; but thou
choosest rather to call in the Assyrians. Thou shalt find them to be
worse than thine own enemies;”

<span id="xiv.i-p155"></span>This discourse, therefore, agrees with what
goes before; for he presses more closely the treachery and ingratitude
of the king, who had rejected both the word of God and the sign, and had
rendered himself unworthy of every promise. And as it is customary with
hypocrites, when they have escaped from any danger and fear, immediately
to return to their natural disposition, he affirms that nothing shall
protect the Jews from being likewise involved in just punishments. He
expressly declares that *the family of David*, which might have claimed
exemption on the ground of its peculiar privilege, will be exposed to
the same kind of calamities; for God regulates his judgments in such a
manner, that while he spares his Church and provides for her permanent
existence, he does not permit the wicked, who are mingled with the good,
to escape unpunished.

<span id="xiv.i-p156"></span>*From the day that Ephraim departed from
Judah.* In this manner does Scripture speak when it describes any
serious calamity; for the Jews could not have received a severer
chastisement than when, by the withdrawing of the ten tribes, (<span
id="xiv.i-p156.1"></span>[1Ki
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p156.1"></span>,.md)
not only was the kingdom wretchedly divided, but the body of the nation
was rent and torn. The revolt of *Ephraim from Judah* was, therefore, an
indication of the worst kind of calamity; for the resources of the
kingdom of Judah being more seriously affected by that division than it
could have been by any defeat by a foreign enemy, he says that since
that time the Jews had not sustained a greater calamity.

<span id="xiv.i-p157"></span>Hence, as I have already said, we see how
God, while he punishes hypocrites, at the same time remembers believers,
and opens the way for his mercy. We ought to observe this wonderful
arrangement, that amidst the most dreadful deaths still the Church
remains safe. Who would ever have thought that Jerusalem would be
delivered from the vast army of the two kings? Or, that the kingdom of
Syria, which was then in a flourishing condition, would quickly be
overturned? Or, that Samaria was not far from destruction? And in the
mean time, that the Assyrians, on whom the Jews relied, would do them
more injury than the Israelites and Syrians had ever done? All these
things the Lord did for the sake of preserving his Church, but at the
same time in such a manner that he likewise took vengeance on the
wickedness of King Ahaz.

<span id="xiv.i-p158"></span><span id="xiv.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p159"></span>**18.** *And it shall be in that day.* The
Jews thought that the Assyrians were bound by their league with them;
but the Prophet ridicules this folly, and declares that they will be
ready at God’s bidding to drive them in any direction that he thinks
fit. Yet instead of command he employs the metaphor *hiss*, in allusion
to the climate of those kingdoms of which he speaks; for Egypt abounds
in flies, because the country is hot and marshy; and when the air is
both hot and moist, there must be produced a great abundance of flies.
Assyria, on the other hand, abounded in bees; and when he says that he
will bring them by a *hiss*, he alludes to the natural habits of bees
and flies, but he means that he will find no difficulty in sending them.
As if he had said, “There will be no need of great exertion; for as soon
as I shall give the sign, they will instantly run.” In this manner he
shows what efficacy belongs to his secret operation or design, that by a
*hiss* he compels the most powerful nations to yield obedience.

<span id="xiv.i-p160"></span><span id="xiv.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p161"></span>**19.** *And they shall come.* He follows
out the same metaphor; for bees commonly seek nests for themselves in
caverns, or valleys and bushes, and such like places; as if he had said
that there would not be a corner in which the enemy would not settle
down and dwell. It is unnecessary to give ourselves much trouble in
explaining why he speaks of *bushes* and *thorns* rather than of other
things, for the language is figurative. And yet I have no doubt that he
intended to state, that whether they hide themselves in caverns, or seek
concealment in valleys, there will be no escape; for the enemy will take
possession of the whole country.

<span id="xiv.i-p162"></span>Hence we again infer what has been formerly
observed, that nothing takes place at random or by chance, but that
everything is governed by the hand of God. Again, though wicked men may
rage and may be hurried forward in blind attack, still God puts a bridle
on them that they may promote his glory. Therefore, when we see that
wicked men throw everything into disorder, let us not think that God has
laid the bridle on their neck, that they may rush forward wherever they
please; but let us be fully convinced that their violent attacks are
under control. From this we ought to derive wonderful consolation amidst
those disturbances in which the Christian world is so deeply involved,
and by the violence of which it is so powerfully shaken, that almost
everything appears to be in a state of confusion. We should consider
that the Lord has a concealed bridle by which he restrains furious
beasts, so that they cannot break through wherever the madness of their
rage drives them, or go beyond the limits which the Lord prescribes to
them.

<span id="xiv.i-p163"></span><span id="xiv.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p164"></span>**20.** *The* Lord *will shave with a hired
razor.* He now employs a different metaphor, and compares those enemies
by whom the Lord had determined to afflict Judea at the appointed time,
to *a razor*, by which the *beard* and *hair* are shaved, and other
excrescences of the same kind are removed. <span
id="xiv.i-p164.1"></span>ב (*beth*) is here superfluous, and is only
employed in accordance with the Hebrew idiom, to denote an instrument,
and, therefore, I have merely rendered it *he will shave* *with a
razor*. What he means he immediately explains; namely, that *the
Assyrians* will serve for *a razor* in the hand of God, and that they
will come from a distant country.

<span id="xiv.i-p165"></span>*Who are beyond the river.* This means that
Euphrates will not hinder them from passing over to execute the commands
of God. He likewise adds, that it will not be some portion of that
nation rushing forward of its own accord into foreign territories, or
wandering without a settled leader; but that the king himself will lead
them, so that the nation and the king at the same time will overwhelm
Judea, and it will sink under such a burden.

<span id="xiv.i-p166"></span>*A hired razor.* It is not without reason
that he says that this *razor* is *hired*; for he expresses by it the
dreadful nature of the calamity which would be brought upon them by the
Assyrians. If a man make use of a *hired* horse or a *hired* sword, he
will use it the more freely, and will not spare or take care of it as he
would do with his own, for men wish to gain advantage from what they
have *hired* to the full value of the *hire*. Thus the Lord threatens
that he will not at all spare the *razor*, though he should be under the
necessity of blunting it, which means, that he will send the Assyrians
with mad violence and rage. If the Lord took such dreadful vengeance on
the Jews for those reasons which the Prophet formerly enumerated, we
ought to fear lest we be punished in the same manner; or rather, we
ought to dread the *razor* with which he has already begun to shave us.

<span id="xiv.i-p167"></span>*The head and the hair of the feet.* By
*the hair of the feet* he means the lower parts; for by *the feet* is
meant all that is below the belly, and it is a figure of speech, by
which a part is taken for the whole.  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) In short, he means that the whole
body, and even the beard, must be shaved. Now, if we set aside the
figures, and wish to get at the plain and natural meaning, it is as if
he had said, that this *shaving* will reach from the top of the head
down to the feet, and that kings and princes will not be exempted from
that calamity, but that they also must feel the edge of the *razor*

<span id="xiv.i-p169"></span><span id="xiv.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p170"></span>**21.** *And it shall come to pass on that
day.* In these verses, down to the end of the chapter, the Prophet
describes the state of a country torn and wasted; for he intends to
present a striking and lively picture of such overwhelming distress
that, wherever you turn your eyes, nothing is to be seen but the traces
of frightful desolation. Some think that a mitigation of punishment is
here promised, but we shall soon see that this does not agree with the
context. Though he employs the appellation, *a man*, without any
limitation, yet strictly it is of the richest men that he speaks; for he
does not say that every one will have so many; but they who formerly
were accustomed to rear a large number of *oxen* and *sheep* will be
satisfied with having a few. He means, therefore, that all will be
reduced to very deep poverty. Some think that the Hebrew word which the
Prophet employs, <span id="xiv.i-p170.1"></span>יחיה, (*yechaiyeh*,) *he
shall* *quicken*, means “to deliver from death;” but the meaning which I
have adopted is more natural and more generally approved.

<span id="xiv.i-p171"></span><span id="xiv.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p172"></span>**22.** *On account of the abundance of
milk.* Some explain it thus: “there will scarcely be as much obtained
from one cow as would be required for the food of a family;” for those
who rear cattle do not feed on milk alone, but likewise make cheeses,
and have butter to sell. When, therefore, he says, that out of all their
abundance nothing more would be produced than what was necessary for the
use of the family, in the opinion of those commentators it denotes
poverty. Others think that this is a promise of fertility, that however
small may be the number of their cows and sheep, still they will have
abundant means of support. A third exposition is preferable; for it
appears as if the Prophet intended to show that the *men* will be so few
in number that a small quantity of milk will be sufficient for them all;
and it is a far heavier affliction that a country should want
inhabitants than that it should have a small supply of herds and flocks.

<span id="xiv.i-p173"></span>In the preceding verse Isaiah declared,
that Judea would be so impoverished, that very few herds and flocks
would be left; but now he adds that the men will be still fewer, for a
very little milk will be sufficient for the inhabitants of the land. I
adopt this exposition the more readily, because here a promise would be
inappropriate. The former sense is forced; and he does not speak only of
cattle-feeders who had cows, but of all the inhabitants; for he
expressly says, *Every one that shall be left,* and by that expression
he again denotes the smallness of their number. His statement,
therefore, is intended to show, that the country will be so generally
forsaken and so miserably wasted, that no great supply of *milk* and
*butter* will be needed; for, when the devastation has taken place,
there will be few men left.

<span id="xiv.i-p174"></span><span id="xiv.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p175"></span>**23.** *A thousand vines.* As to the
opinion of those who think that Isaiah here comforts believers, I pass
it by without refutation; for it is sufficiently refuted by the context,
and the words plainly declare that Isaiah continues to threaten
destruction, and to describe the desolation of the land. Others think
that the meaning is this, “Where a thousand vines were, which were sold
for a thousand pieces of silver, there briers and thorns will be found.”
But it is plain that this would be far too low a price, if the statement
were applied to the whole country; for who would think of reckoning a
shekel to be the price of *a vine*, which is the most precious of all
possessions? It is of the same import with a common expression, “to sell
for a trifle,” *to give away for a piece of bread*;  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) when anything is sold at a very low
price. Any field, however barren or uncultivated, might be sold at a
higher price, if due attention were paid to the cultivation of land, as
is usually done where there is a crowded population.

<span id="xiv.i-p177"></span>*On account of briers and thorns.* He
assigns a reason for the alteration of the price, which makes it evident
that he speaks of desolation. *On account of briers and thorns*, says
he; for there will be none to cultivate the land, which usually happens
when a heavy calamity has been sustained. <span
id="xiv.i-p177.1"></span>ל, (*lamed*,) which some render *to* or *for*,
means, I think, *on account of*; for, everything having been thrown into
confusion by the fury of the invading army, there are no vinedressers or
laborers, and the most highly cultivated lands must have been covered
over and choked up by *briers and thorns.* The meaning therefore is,
that the inhabitants will be so few, that you will scarcely find and one
that would give the smallest coin to buy the most valuable estates.

<span id="xiv.i-p178"></span><span id="xiv.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p179"></span>**24.** *With arrows and bow shall they
come thither.* The verb <span id="xiv.i-p179.1"></span>יבא, (*yabo*,)
*he shall come*, is in the singular number; but it ought to be explained
by the plural, that the archers will march through Judea. Some think
that Isaiah speaks of *bows and arrows*, because such would be the dread
of enemies, that no man unarmed would venture to approach his
possessions. But I consider it to be more probable that the Prophet
means that, where the richest cultivation formerly existed, opportunity
for hunting will be found; for there the wild beasts have their dens.
Now, it is a most wretched change, when fields formerly cultivated and
fertile are turned into woods and thickets. By *bow and arrow* here,
therefore, I understand *hunting*, in this sense: “it shall not be
approached by husbandmen but by hunters, and they shall not plant or
dress vines, but chase wild beasts.” In short, it means nothing else
than frightful desolation, which shall change the aspect of the land.

<span id="xiv.i-p180"></span><span id="xiv.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p181"></span>**25.** *And on all the hills that are dug
with the hoe.* Here the Prophet appears to contradict himself; for,
having hitherto spoken of the desolation of the land, he now describes
what may be called a new condition, when he says that, where *thorns and
briers* were, there oxen will feed. The consequence has been, that some
have applied these words to the consolation of the people. But the
intention of the Prophet is totally different; for he means that
*hills*, which were at a great distance from a crowded population, and
which could not be approached without much difficulty, will be fit for
pasturage, on account of the great number of men who go thither; that
is, because men will betake themselves to desert mountains, which
formerly were inaccessible, there will be no need to be afraid of
*briers*,  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) for there will be
abundance of inhabitants. Now, this is a most wretched state of things,
when men cannot escape death but by resorting to *thorns and briers*;
for he means *hills* formerly desolate and uncultivated, in which men
shall seek a residence and abode, because no part of the country will be
safe. Thus he describes a distressful and melancholy condition of the
whole country, and destruction so awful that the aspect of the country
shall be altogether different from what it had formerly been.

<span id="xiv.i-p183"></span>When he foretold these things to King Ahaz,
there can be no doubt that Ahaz despised them; for that wicked king,
relying on his forces and on his league with the Assyrians, settled, as
it were, on his lees, as soon as the siege of the city was raised. But
Isaiah was bound to persevere in the discharge of his office, in order
to show that there was no help but from God, and to inform the wretched
hypocrite, that his destruction would come from that quarter from which
he expected his preservation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc13013.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p59.10"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p60"></span> “*Syria is arm in arm with Ephraim*; leans
on the arm of the king of Israel, as on that of a friend.” — *Stock*.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc13013.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p69"></span> *And say unto him*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc13013.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p70"></span> This is an oversight; for <span
id="xiv.i-p70.1"></span>השמר (*hishshamer*) is in the Niphal
conjugation. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc13013.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p79"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p79.1"></span>*Remuer les
affaires*.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc13013.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p80.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p81"></span> *Let us make a breach therein for us*. —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc13013.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p81.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p82"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p82.1"></span>*Faire
bresche ou overture*.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc13013.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p96"></span> *And the head of Ephraim*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc13013.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p102"></span> *Moreover, the LORD spake again to Ahaz*.
— Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc13013.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p134.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p135"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p135.1"></span>Quae ex
coitu viri gravida esset futura.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc13013.htm#fr_109.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p145.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p146"></span> Bishops Lowth and Stock concur in
rendering <span id="xiv.i-p146.1"></span>כי (*ki*) *for*, which indeed
is its ordinary meaning. FOR *before this* *child shall know to refuse
the evil, and choose the* *good*. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc13013.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p147.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p148"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p148.1"></span>*L’enfant*.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc13013.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p148.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p149"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p149.1"></span>*Le*.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc13013.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p151.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p152"></span> “*At whose kings thou dost fret* <span
id="xiv.i-p152.1"></span>אתה קץ מפני, (*attah kaz* *mippenei*,) thou art
fretting by reason of. See <span id="xiv.i-p152.2"></span>[Ex
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#012.md)<span id="xiv.i-p152.2"></span>.”
— *Bishop Stock*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc13013.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p168"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p168.1"></span>Unde et
aquam pedum urinam vocant; et pedes tegere pro alvum exonerare.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc13013.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p175.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p176"></span> <span id="xiv.i-p176.1"></span>*Bailler
pour une piece de pain*.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc13013.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p182"></span> “The shepherds shall be under no
apprehension of finding on those hills hedges of *briar and thorn*, to
interrupt the free range of their flock.” — *Rosenmuller*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](cc13014.md)
