[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc13011)  [Next](cc13013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 13: Isaiah, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6.

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span>Isaiah Chapter 6:1-13

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the year that king Uzziah died I
saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his
train filled the temple.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Anno mortis regis Usiae, vidi Dominum
sedentem super solium excelsum et elevatum, cujus extrema replebant
templum.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Above it stood the seraphims: each
one had six wings; with twain he covered his face, and with twain he
covered his feet, and with twain he did fly.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et seraphim stabant super ipsum:
erant singulis sex alae; duabus operiebant faciem suam; duabus tegebant
pedes suos; et duabus volabant.

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And one cried unto another, and said,
Holy, holy, holy *is* the Lord of hosts: the whole earth *is* full of
his glory.

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et clamabant alter alteri, dicentes,
Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Iehova exercituum; plena est omnis terra
gloriae ejus.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the posts of the door moved at
the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et commota sunt superliminaria
postium a voce clamantis; et domus impleta est fumo.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Then said I, Woe *is* me! for I am
undone; because I *am* a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst
of a people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of hosts.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tunc dixi, Vae mihi, quia excisus
sum (*vel in silentium redactus*); cum homo sim pollutis labiis, et in
medio populi habitem polluta labia habentis; et tamen regem Iehovam
exercituum viderunt oculi mei.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**6.** Then flew one of the seraphims unto
me, having a live coal in his hand, *which* he had taken with the tongs
from off the alter:

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Volavit autem ad me unus ex
seraphim; habens in manu sua carbonem ardentem, forcipe correptum ab
altari.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he laid *it* upon my mouth, and
said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away,
and thy sin purged.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et applicans super os meum, dixit,
Ecce, tetigit hoc labia tua, et expiabitur peccatum tuum.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Also I heard the voice of the Lord,
saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, Here
*am* I; send me.

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Postea audivi vocem Domini dicentis,
Quem mittam? et quis ibit nobis? Tum dixi, Ecce ego, mitte me.

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And he said, Go, and tell this
people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but
perceive not.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Tum dixit, Vade, et dic populo isti;
audiendo audite, et ne intelligatis; videndo videto, et nesciatis;

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>**10.** Make the heart of this people fat,
and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and
convert, and be healed.

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Obstina cor populi hujus, et aures
ejus aggrava, et oculos ejus obline; ne forte videat oculis suis, et
auribus suis audiat, et cor ejus intelligat, et ubi conversus fuerit,
sit illi sanatio.

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>**11.** Then said I, Lord, how long? And he
answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses
without man, and the land be utterly desolate,

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et dixi, Usque quo, Domine? et ait,
Dum fuerint vastatae civitates absque habitatore, et domus vacuatae
fuerint hominibus, et terra redacta fuerit in solitudinem;

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>**12.** And the Lord have removed men far
away, and *there be* a great forsaking in the midst of the land.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Donec procul amoverit Deus homines,
sitque multa vastitas in medio terrae;

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>**13.** But yet in it *shall be* a tenth,
and *it* shall return, and shall be eaten: as a teil-tree, and as an
oak, whose substance *is* in them, when they cast *their leaves, so* the
holy seed *shall be* the substance thereof.

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Donec in ea decima, et revertetur;
et erit in excidium sicut tilia et quercus, quibus in projectione est
subsistentia; ita in hac erit subsistentia, semen sanctum.

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span><span id="xiii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span>**1.** *In the year that king Uzziah died.*
This is usually the beginning of the sixth chapter; but some think that
it is the beginning of the book itself, and that in collecting the
prophecies of Isaiah an error was committed. The reason which they
assign is, that the Prophet here declines the office of a teacher, which
he would not have refused if he had hitherto discharged it; that he
appears to be a mere novice as yet unacquainted with his calling; and
besides, that he declares that he has now seen the Lord, and that he has
not seen him, before. But such arguments I consider, as I have already
noticed, to be too feeble and unsatisfactory; and I reply that it ought
not to be thought strange that he was so completely overpowered by this
extraordinary vision as to forget that he was a prophet. For there was
no feeling in him which was not overpowered by the presence of God, so
that, like one who had lost his senses, he willingly plunged himself in
darkness, or rather, like one who despaired of life, he of his own
accord chose to die. And it is necessary that the godly should be
affected in this manner, when the Lord gives them tokens of his
presence, that they may be brought low and utterly confounded. Besides,
in the person of his servant God intended to strike his rebellious
people with alarm; and therefore we need not wonder if he offers an
apology for himself under the overwhelming influence of fear, and
likewise because he had not felt the weight of his office, as he now
felt it, after having beheld an illustrious display of the majesty of
God.

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span>But why was not this vision exhibited to
him at the beginning? I answer, it was necessary in regard to the time,
that he might be more and more confirmed in the discharge of his office.
We have an instance of this in the Apostles themselves; for at first
they were sent out with an injunction not to pass beyond the limits of
Judea, (<span id="xiii.i-p31.1"></span>[Mt
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p31.1"></span>;.md)
but after that Christ had risen, he again set them *apart* in a new and
solemn manner, *breathed on them, bidding them receive the Holy Ghost*,
(<span id="xiii.i-p31.2"></span>[John
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p31.2"></span>;.md)
and not only so, but sending his Spirit from heaven *in the forms of
tongues of fire*, invested them with extraordinary power. (<span
id="xiii.i-p31.3"></span>[Ac 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p31.3"></span>.) Thus, on account of the various changes of
times and of kings, it was necessary that Isaiah should be encouraged
and again attested by a new vision; that he might be excited to
perseverance, and might afterwards proceed with greater cheerfulness in
his course; and also that the Jews might perceive his ministry to be
supported by heavenly authority.

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span>This appears to me to be a sufficient
reason why this vision was not exhibited to him at the very beginning,
but after that he had for some time discharged the office of a teacher.
That this was not the beginning of the prophecy is evident enough from
the consideration that the preface, which we have already examined, is
much better adapted for the commencement, and more appropriate than what
is contained in this chapter; and every approach having been shut up by
the hard-hearted obstinacy of the people, it was proper that he should
burst forth in this vehement manner. Besides, it is probable that he had
long performed the office of a teacher under King Uzziah, who, I think,
was dead before this prediction was published. In short, the Prophet
means that it was not till he had commenced his course that God appeared
to him.

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span>Some think that *death* here means
*leprosy*, which undoubtedly was a civil death, when the king was
compelled to withdraw from the society of men, and to lay down the reins
of government, (<span id="xiii.i-p33.1"></span>[2Ki
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p33.1"></span>;.md)
but I choose rather to take *death* in its literal sense. So then, I
think that Isaiah uttered the former predictions during the reign of
Uzziah, even after he had been struck with leprosy; and that when he had
died, and Jotham had succeeded him, this vision was presented to Isaiah.
We know what various commotions are produced by a change of kings, so
that we need not wonder that Isaiah had his calling again sealed. But
the prophecy itself, which follows, will sufficiently show that he had
been a public teacher for some time before he *saw the* Lord; for it
relates that the blinding of the people, whose obstinacy he had
experienced to such an extent that he might have been induced to cease
from his undertaking, for he saw that he was doing no good. The Lord,
therefore, confirms him by this vision, that the opposition may not
prevent him from boldly discharging his office, and performing what he
undertook at the commandment of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span>*I saw the* Lord It is asked, How could
Isaiah see God who *is a* *Spirit*, (<span id="xiii.i-p34.1"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="xiii.i-p34.1"></span>,.md)
and, therefore, cannot be seen with bodily eyes? Nay, more, since the
understandings of men cannot rise to his boundless height, how can he be
seen in a visible shape? But we ought to be aware that, when God
exhibited himself to the view of the Fathers, he never appeared such as
he actually is, but such as the capacity of men could receive. Though
men may be said to creep on the ground, or at least dwell far below the
heavens, there is no absurdity in supposing that God comes down to them
in such a manner as to cause some kind of mirror to reflect the rays of
his glory. There was, therefore, exhibited to Isaiah such a form as
enabled him, according to his capacity, to perceive the inconceivable
majesty of God; and thus he attributes to God a *throne*, a *robe*, and
a bodily appearance.

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span>Hence we learn a profitable doctrine, that
whenever God grants any token of his presence, he is undoubtedly present
with us, for he does not amuse us by unmeaning shapes, as men wickedly
disfigure him by their contrivances. since, therefore, that exhibition
was no deceitful representation of the presence of God, Isaiah justly
declares that he *saw him*. In like manner, when it is said that John

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span>saw the Holy Spirit in the shape of a dove,
(<span id="xiii.i-p36.1"></span>[Joh
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span id="xiii.i-p36.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>the name of the Holy Spirit is applied to
the outward sign, because in the representation there was no deception;
and yet he did not see the essence of the Spirit, but had a clear and
undoubted proof, so that he could not doubt that the Spirit of God
rested on Christ.

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span>Secondly, it is asked, Who was that Lord?
John tells us that it was Christ, (<span id="xiii.i-p38.1"></span>[Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)<span id="xiii.i-p38.1"></span>,.md)
and justly, for God never revealed himself to the Fathers but in his
eternal Word and only begotten Son. Yet it is wrong, I think, to limit
this, as some do, to the person of Christ; for it is indefinitely, on
the contrary, that the Prophet calls him God. Nor do their views derive
any support from the word <span id="xiii.i-p38.2"></span>אדוני,
(*adonai*,) which seems particularly to apply to Christ; for it is often
applied to God in an absolute and unrestricted manner. In this passage,
therefore, God is mentioned indefinitely, and yet it is correctly said
that Isaiah saw the glory of Christ, for at that very time he was *the
image of* *the invisible God*. (<span id="xiii.i-p38.3"></span>[Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="xiii.i-p38.3"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span>*Sitting upon a throne.* He could not have
given a better description of God, in regard to place, than in the
person of a Judge, that his majesty might strike greater terror into the
Jews; for we shall afterwards see the dreadful judgment which the Lord
pronounced from his judgment-seat. But lest we should suppose that the
Prophet contrived the manner in which he would paint God, we ought to
know that he faithfully describes the very form in which God was
represented and exhibited to him. It may be questioned whether the
Prophet was conducted into the temple, or saw this vision while he was
asleep. Though many things are frequently adduced on both sides, which
are fitted to leave the matter in doubt, yet it may be conjectured with
some probability, that even if he had not been within the temple, this
vision might have been presented to him, either in his own house or on a
field, in the same manner as to other prophets.

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span>*And his remotest parts filled the temple.*
 <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) Almost all the commentators
understand by this the fringes of his robe, though it may be understood
to refer to the extremities of the judgment-seat, giving us to
understand that its dimensions were so vast as to extend to every part
of *the temple*. He intends to ascribe to God a venerable aspect, and
far beyond any human form. There is great weight in the circumstance
that he appeared in *the temple*; for he had promised that he would meet
with his people there, and the people expected his answers from that
place, as Solomon had expressly stated at the dedication of it. (<span
id="xiii.i-p41.5"></span>[1Ki
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030)<span id="xiii.i-p41.5"></span>..md)
In order, therefore, that the people might understand that those things
came from God, on whom they called every day, and on whom they relied
with a vain confidence which puffed them up, this vision was exhibited
to the Prophet *in the temple*. To the certainty of what was said it
contributed not a little, that he openly proclaimed that the discourse
was not pronounced to him by any mortal man, but was a heavenly oracle,
uttered by that God whose name they were accustomed disdainfully to hold
out as a pretense, whenever they wished to make any extravagant claims;
for otherwise this prophecy would have been harsh and repulsive, and
needed great confirmation. It was also not uncommon with the Prophets to
say that the Lord spake to them *from his temple*, or *from his*
*sanctuary*

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span><span id="xiii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span>**2.** *And the seraphim stood upon it.*
Having declared that God appeared to him full of majesty and of glory,
he adds, that God was attended by angels, whom the Prophet calls
*seraphim* on account of their fervor. Though the etymology of this word
is well known, yet various reasons are adduced. Some think that they are
called *seraphim* because they burn with the love of God; others,
because they are swift like fire; others, because they are bright.
However that may be, this description holds out to us, as in sunbeams,
the brightness of God’s infinite majesty, that we may learn by it to
behold and adore his wonderful and overwhelming glory.

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span>Many think that there were two *seraphim*,
as there were two cherubim that encompassed the ark of the testimony.
This opinion I willingly adopt, though I do not venture to make any
assertion where Scripture is silent. As it is customary with the sacred
writers to accommodate their descriptions of God to those outward signs
which were commonly used and familiarly known among the godly, it is
possible that the Prophet saw a representation of this kind. While I
hold this to be a probable conjecture, I leave room for other
interpretations which some may be disposed to prefer; for Daniel saw not
two angels only, but thousands of thousands of angels. (<span
id="xiii.i-p44.1"></span>[Da 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p44.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span>*Each one had six wings.* This
representation is instructive; for those wings thus arranged contained
some mystery which it was the will of the Lord should not remain wholly
unknown. The *two wings* with which the angels *fly* mean nothing else
than their ready and cheerful performance of the commandments of God. On
this point the resemblance is so clear and manifest, that it will be at
once admitted by all who do not take delight in controversy. The *two
wings* with which they *cover their face* show plainly enough that even
angels cannot endure God’s brightness, and that they are dazzled by it
in the same manner as when we attempt to gaze upon the radiance of the
sun. And if angels are overwhelmed by the majesty of God, how great will
be the rashness of men if they venture to intrude so far! Let us,
therefore, learn that our inquiries concerning God ought never to go
beyond what is proper and lawful, that our knowledge may soberly and
modestly taste what is far above our capacity. And yet the angels do not
cover their face in such a manner as not to be favored with beholding
God in some degree; for their flight is not at random. In like manner we
too ought to look at God, but only so far as our capacity shall enable
us.

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span>As to the remaining *two wings,* which were
placed lower, the difficulty is somewhat greater. Some think that the
angels *covered their feet*, that they might not touch the earth, and
contract any defilement from it, as human beings like ourselves are wont
to do; for in walking we gather filth and dust, and accordingly, so long
as we dwell on earth, we are always tainted by some kind of contagion.
This reminds believers that they will have no intercourse with angels
till they raise themselves high, and are no longer fastened to the
earth.

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span>Such is the interpretation given by some
expositors. But I rather agree with those who think that the use of
those *wings* was opposite to that of the upper *wings*; for, as by the
upper wings they *cover their* *face*, that they may not be overpowered
by God’s brightness, so they have also lower wings to conceal them from
our view. Now, if it be true that we cannot behold the small and feeble
rays of the Divine brightness without being altogether overpowered, how
could we gaze upon that unspeakably bright and glorious majesty which
lays prostrate all our faculties? Let men learn, therefore, that they
are far distant from a perfect knowledge of God, since they cannot even
reach to the angels. The latter appears to me to be the more correct
exposition, but I do not disapprove of the former.

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span><span id="xiii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span>**3.** *And they cried one to another.* It
was necessary that all these things should be presented to the Prophet
in vision, in order to produce a stronger impression on the people, and
on Isaiah himself; for the vision was not less necessary to him than to
the whole nation, because sharp and painful struggles awaited him, and
he could not have boldly announced those events if he had not been
previously confirmed. The people also, being warned by this vision how
great and how dreadful was the majesty of God, by whom this condemnation
was pronounced, had good reason for being alarmed. He who now came forth
to public view is God, at the sight of whom the very angels tremble,
whose praises they continually and loudly utter, and whom, in a word,
they serve and obey; but men, whom he had been pleased to adopt as his
children, obstinately and rebelliously opposed him.

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span>Now, when we are informed that the angels
are employed in uttering the glory of God, let us know that their
example is set before us for imitation; for the most holy service that
we can render to him is, to be employed in praising his name. When he
associates us with angels, it is in order that, while we sojourn on
earth, we may resemble and be joined to the inhabitants of heaven. That
the harmony between us and the angels may be in every respect complete,
we must take care not only that the praises of God may be sounded by our
tongues, but likewise that all the actions of our life may correspond to
our professions; and this will only be done if the chief aim of our
actions be the glory of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span>*Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of hosts.*
The ancients quoted this passage when they wished to prove that there
are three persons in one essence of the Godhead. I do not disagree with
their opinion; but if I had to contend with heretics, I would rather
choose to employ stronger proofs; for they become more obstinate, and
assume an air of triumph, when inconclusive arguments are brought
against them; and they might easily and readily maintain that, in this
passage, as in other parts of Scripture, the number “three” denotes
perfection. Although, therefore, I have no doubt that the angels here
describe One God in Three Persons, (and, indeed, it is impossible to
praise God without also uttering the praises of the Father, of the Son,
and of the Spirit,) yet I think that it would be better to employ more
conclusive passages, lest, in proving an article of our faith, we should
expose ourselves to the scorn of heretics. And, indeed, this repetition
rather points out unwearied perseverance, as if the Prophet had said,
that the angels never cease from their melody in singing the praises of
God, as the holiness of God supplies us with inexhaustible reasons for
them.

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span>*The whole earth is full of his glory.*
Literally it is, *the* *fullness of the whole earth*, which might be
understood to refer to the fruits, and animals, and manifold riches with
which God has enriched the earth, and might convey this meaning, that in
the ornaments and great variety of furniture of the world the glory of
God shines, because they are so many proofs of a father’s love. But the
more simple and natural interpretation is, that *the glory of God fills
the whole world*, or is spread through every region of the earth. There
is also, I think, an implied contrast, by which he puts down the foolish
boasting of the Jews, who thought that the glory of God was nowhere to
be seen but among themselves, and wished to have it shut up within their
own temple. But Isaiah shows that it is so far from being confined to so
narrow limits, that it fills *the whole earth*. And to this agrees the
prophecy which immediately follows, (verse 10,) about the blinding of
the Jews, which opened up for the Gentiles admission into the Church of
God; for they occupied that place which the Jews had forsaken and left
empty.

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span><span id="xiii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span>**4.** *And the lintels of the posts were
moved.* This noise was an indication that it was not a human voice which
the Prophet had heard; for no mortal man has a voice so powerful as to
be capable of making the *lintels* and *posts* shake. Now, the Lord
intended not only to establish the authority of his voice over the
Prophet, but to confirm it to posterity in all ages, that it might never
be forgotten. Let us, therefore, know that this noise confirms at this
day the voice of God, that we may tremble whenever he speaks; for if
inanimate and dumb creatures are moved, what ought we to do, who feel,
smell, taste, and understand, for no other purpose than that we may obey
his word in a holy and reverent manner?

<span id="xiii.i-p55"></span>*And the house was filled with smoke.* This
was the common and ordinary sign which the Lord employed with his
ancient people; for we read that, whenever Moses entered into the
tabernacle, *smoke* was wont to be diffused through it in such a manner
that the people could not see either Moses or the tabernacle. (<span
id="xiii.i-p55.1"></span>[Ex 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#009.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p55.1"></span>.) The *smoke*, therefore, which Isaiah
describes was not an unusual occurrence; but in the ordinary way God
intended to demonstrate that he would display his power in executing
judgment on the people.

<span id="xiii.i-p56"></span>But it may be asked, Why did God manifest
his presence by this sign rather than by any other? This question may be
answered in two ways. First, it was always the will of God to repress
the insolence of men, in pushing their inquiries about his majesty
beyond what is proper; for on this point almost all men are too rash and
daring. They wish to rise above the clouds, and to penetrate into the
secrets of God, while they do not see what lies at their feet. Hence
arises a labyrinth of errors, and when the minds of men have been
entangled in it, they adopt false and pretended modes of worship; for
when men allow themselves to adopt any false notions about God, there is
nothing which they will not venture to attempt against him. It was not
without good reason, therefore, that he made use of *smoke*, in order to
remind men of their weakness; and yet he did not intend that they should
be blind or stupid, that is, that they should have the stupidity and
error which the papists disguise under the name of simplicity; but he
forbids us to inquire or search beyond what he has revealed to us in his
word; for, as Augustine says, “that is a learned ignorance.” Whenever,
therefore, *smoke* of this kind is mentioned, let us know that it lays a
restraint upon us from indulging curiosity in our researches into the
purpose of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p57"></span>Secondly, this *smoke* ought to strike
terror, as David, when describing an angry and terrible God, says that
*clouds and darkness* *are round about him*. (<span
id="xiii.i-p57.1"></span>[Ps 97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p57.1"></span>.) This also agrees well with the present
passage; for he pronounces a dreadful judgment, namely, the blinding of
the Jews. Others think that it indicated the burning by which he
consumed the temple; but the view which I have given is more probable.

<span id="xiii.i-p58"></span><span id="xiii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p59"></span>**5.** *Wo to me! for I am undone.* The
Prophet now relates how powerfully he was affected by that vision;
namely that he was so terrified by seeing God; that he expected
immediate destruction. He assigns the reason for believing that it is
all over with him; *because*, says he, *I am a man of unclean lips*

<span id="xiii.i-p60"></span>I wonder why Jerome renders it, *because I
was silent*; seeing that there is no ambiguity in the expression. <span
id="xiii.i-p60.1"></span>דמה (*damah*) does indeed signify *to be
silent*, but here the undoubted mark of a passive verb is added. This
passage may likewise be rendered, *Wo to me! for I* *have been reduced
to silence*. In the Scriptures *silence* is often taken for death and
those who have been buried are said to have been *reduced to silence*.
But as the meaning is the same, I will not dispute much about the
translation.

<span id="xiii.i-p61"></span>The Prophet therefore means, that he was so
terrified as to resemble a dead man. And certainly we need not wonder at
this; for the whole man, so far as relates to the flesh, must be reduced
to nothing, that it may be renewed according to God. Whence comes it
that men live, that is, imagine that they live, and are swelled with
vain confidence in their wisdom or strength, but because they know not
God? Accordingly, until God reveal himself to us, we do not think that
we are men, or rather, we think that we are gods; but when we have seen
God, we then begin to feel and know what we are. Hence springs true
humility, which consists in this, that a man makes no claims for
himself, and depends wholly on God; and therefore on this point the
present and similar passages ought to be carefully studied.

<span id="xiii.i-p62"></span>It was customary with the godly fathers,
whenever they saw God, to break out into these words:

<span id="xiii.i-p63"></span>I am gone; I am utterly undone. (<span
id="xiii.i-p63.1"></span>[Jud
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022)<span id="xiii.i-p63.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p64"></span>Our life, therefore, until our minds
earnestly draw near to God, is a vain delusion; we walk in darkness, and
can with difficulty distinguish truth from falsehood; but when we come
into the light it is easy to perceive the difference. So when God draws
near to us, he brings light with him, that we may perceive our
worthlessness, which we could not formerly see, while we entertained a
false opinion of ourselves.

<span id="xiii.i-p65"></span>*And yet mine eyes have seen the king,
Jehovah of hosts.*  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) But does the
sight of God bring death to men? For it appears strange that the sight
of God or approach to him should take away life, of which he is the
source and giver. I reply that this is an accidental result; for it
takes place through our fault, and not on account of the nature of God.
Death is within us; but we do not perceive it, unless when it is
compared with the life of God. This is unquestionably what the Prophet
means; for he does not merely say that he is dead, but assigns the
reason, *because he has unclean lips.*

<span id="xiii.i-p67"></span>But why does he confine the pollution to
the *lips*? Was he pure in understanding, or in the other parts of the
body? I answer: the Prophet mentions that which he regarded as the most
valuable, his tongue, which was consecrated to God; for God had
appointed him to be a Prophet. Even though he was in other respects a
sinner, yet because the office which he held was holy, this part of his
body was sacred; and as it does not correspond to the divine holiness,
he confesses that, even in that part which in itself is more holy, he is
*polluted*. Such appears to me to be the true and natural meaning of
this passage, in the explanation of which commentators have hitherto
been unsuccessful.

<span id="xiii.i-p68"></span>*And I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips.* This is added by way of explanation; for he includes
himself as an individual in the number of the common people, tainted
with that pollution which extends to the whole body, and forgets the
purity which he had received from God, because it cannot dwell in his
presence. Hence it is evident that they are mistaken who imagine that
the Prophet spoke under erroneous views; as the common people are wont
to contrive a variety of false notions concerning God. For, as I have
said, the presence of God and approach to him is the destruction of our
flesh; because it shows that we are nothing in ourselves. When he who is
conscious of his wretchedness sees God, what can he expect but
destruction? For God is our judge, to whom, we know, nothing is
concealed or unknown, in whose sight our purity is impure. And if this
happened to the Prophet, what ought we to think of ourselves? For what
are we in comparison of him? Even if the LORD hath begun to cleanse us,
yet we ought to acknowledge our pollution, the remains of which always
continue in our flesh. Hence also we ought to draw a universal doctrine,
that the *lips* of all men are impure and *polluted*, till the Lord has
cleansed them; from which it also follows, that human doctrines have an
uncleanness which betrays them, and that there is nothing pure but what
has come from God.

<span id="xiii.i-p69"></span><span id="xiii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p70"></span>**6.** *Then flew one of the seraphim to
me.* The Prophet shows what kind of relief was brought to him, when he
was so terrified as to think that he was a dead man; and this confirms
what we have already said, that purity of *lips* comes from God alone;
for men can produce nothing of themselves but what is filthy and
abominable. If it be objected that it is absurd to say that the Lord now
cleansed him, as if his tongue had formerly been impure and profane,
though it had been the instrument employed by the Holy Spirit, I have
already replied sufficiently to that objection. The Lord had already
cleansed him, but according to his degree. The cleansing which is now
added is greater; for it has its enlargements and additions, which no
man can obtain all at once.

<span id="xiii.i-p71"></span>We must not conclude, therefore, that
Isaiah’s lips were impure, because they are now cleansed; but we ought
to inquire why it is done. It was because the Lord intended to enlarge
and extend his favor towards him, and to raise him to higher dignity,
that he might have greater influence over the people; and this was
rendered necessary by the character of the times, and the change which
had taken place in the state.

<span id="xiii.i-p72"></span>The fire was *taken from the altar*, to
intimate that it was divine or heavenly; for the law forbade any
*strange fire* to be brought to it, (<span id="xiii.i-p72.1"></span>[Le
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p72.1"></span>,.md)
because in sacred things every human mixture is absolute profanation. By
this figure, therefore, Isaiah was taught that all purity flows from God
alone.

<span id="xiii.i-p73"></span><span id="xiii.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p74"></span>**7.** *And applying it to my mouth.*
 <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) We see how God condescends to meet
the weakness of human sense. He puts *the tongs* into the hand of a
seraph, that by means of it he may take *a coal from the altar* and
apply it to the Prophet’s mouth. This was, no doubt, done in vision; but
by the aid of the outward sign God assisted the Prophet’s understanding.
There is no reason to believe that the *coal* possessed any virtue, as
superstitious persons imagine that in the magical arts there is some
hidden power. Nothing of this sort is to be found here; for it is God
alone who can cleanse our pollution, in whatever part it exists.

<span id="xiii.i-p76"></span>Here the angel administered the cleansing,
but was not the author of it; so that we must not ascribe to another
what belongs to God alone. This is expressly stated by the angel
himself, who claims nothing as his own, but bringing forward the sacred
pledge which he had received from God, laid it as a sacrament on the
*lips* of the Prophet; not that he could not be cleansed without the
*coal*, but because the visible sign was useful for the confirmation and
proof of the fact. And such is the use of sacraments, to strengthen us
in proportion to our ignorance; for we are not angels, that can behold
the mysteries of God without any assistance, and therefore he raises us
to himself by gradual advances.

<span id="xiii.i-p77"></span>*Lo, this hath touched thy lips.* He shows
that the confirmation which was obtained by the sign was not without
effect, but that the blessing signified by it was at the same time
bestowed, so that Isaiah knew that he had not been deceived. Hence we
may infer, that in the sacraments the reality is given to us along with
the sign; for when the Lord holds out a sacrament, he does not feed our
eyes with an empty and unmeaning figure, but joins the truth with it, so
as to testify that by means of them he acts upon us efficaciously. And
this ought to be the more carefully observed, because there are few
persons in the present day who understand the true use of sacraments,
and because many godly and learned men are engaged in frequent disputes
respecting them.

<span id="xiii.i-p78"></span>First of all, we ought to believe that the
truth must never be separated from the signs, though it ought to be
distinguished from them. We perceive and feel a sign, such as the bread
which is put into our hands by the minister in the Lord’s Supper; and
because we ought to seek Christ in heaven, our thoughts ought to be
carried thither. By the hand of the minister he presents to us his body,
that it may be actually enjoyed by the godly, who rise by faith to
fellowship with him. He bestows it, therefore, on the godly, who raise
their thoughts to him by faith; for he cannot deceive.

<span id="xiii.i-p79"></span>Unbelievers indeed receive the sign; but
because they linger in the world, and do not arrive at Christ’s heavenly
kingdom, they have no experience of the truth; for he who has not faith
cannot raise his thoughts to God, and therefore cannot partake of
Christ. Faith alone opens for us the gate of the kingdom of God; and
therefore, whoever wishes to eat the flesh of Christ must be carried by
faith to heaven beyond human conception. In short, it is the Spirit of
God alone who can make us partakers of that fellowship. And yet it does
not follow that the unbelief of men takes anything away from the truth
of the sacrament, since God always presents to us a spiritual matter,
but wicked men treat it with scorn; just as the grace of God is offered
by the gospel, but all do not receive it, though they actually hear it,
and are compelled to yield assent to the truth.

<span id="xiii.i-p80"></span>Besides, we learn from this passage that
the sacraments are never separated from the word. The angel does not
here act the part of a dumb man, but, after having given the sign,
immediately adds the doctrine, in order to show what was intended by it;
for it would have been no sacrament, if doctrine had not been added,
from which Isaiah could learn for what purpose the *coal* was applied to
his mouth. Let us therefore learn that the chief part of the sacraments
consists in the word, and that without it they are absolute corruptions,
such as we see every day in popery, in which the sacraments are turned
into stage-plays. The amount of the whole is, that there is nothing to
prevent Isaiah, who has been perfectly cleansed, and is free from all
pollution, from appearing as God’s representative.

<span id="xiii.i-p81"></span><span id="xiii.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p82"></span>**8.** *Afterwards I heard the voice of the
Lord.* The Prophet now begins to discourse about the design of this
vision, why God appeared to him with such glorious majesty, in order to
ordain him anew as a prophet. It was because he was called to deliver an
incredible message about blinding the Jews. On this revolting occasion,
therefore, he is more fully assured of his calling, that he may lay
aside fear and obey the command of God; for nothing gives greater
confidence to pious minds than to know that they obey God. He had also
another proof, namely, that the Lord had cleansed him; and this was
sufficient to lead him to undertake any task, however difficult.

<span id="xiii.i-p83"></span>*Whom shall I send?* The Prophet represents
the Lord as speaking, as if he could not find a man qualified for such a
message. Some think that this is intended to reprove the ignorance of
the priests and prophets; because, though they are very numerous, still
not one of them was qualified to teach. This reason carries some
probability, but I would rather view it as referring to the certainty of
Isaiah’s calling, as implying that it was not at random, but from
choice, that the Lord appointed him. There is here, therefore, a weighty
deliberation whom the Lord will be pleased to send; not that he
hesitates, but such modes of expression are used on our account, just as
these words, *I will go* *down and see*. (<span
id="xiii.i-p83.1"></span>[Ge
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span id="xiii.i-p83.1"></span>..md)
For God, to whom all things are known, has no need to make any inquiry;
but, lest men should think that he acts with precipitation, he thus
accommodates himself to the ordinary modes of speaking among men. In
like manner, when he asks *whom he* *shall send*, the meaning is, that
he needs not an ordinary person, but a teacher of uncommon excellence on
a subject of the greatest importance. Hence we infer that the authority
of Isaiah was confirmed, so that he was reckoned to be not only a
prophet, but eminent among the prophets.

<span id="xiii.i-p84"></span>*Who will go for us?* I am rather favorable
to the opinion that this passage points to Three Persons in the Godhead,
just as we elsewhere read,

<span id="xiii.i-p85"></span>Let us create man in our likeness. (<span
id="xiii.i-p85.1"></span>[Ge 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p85.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.i-p86"></span>For God talks with himself, and in the
plural number; and unquestionably he now holds a consultation with his
eternal Wisdom and his eternal Power, that is, with the Son and the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="xiii.i-p87"></span>*Here am I.* So ready a reply shows how
great is that cheerfulness which springs from faith; for he who but
lately lay like a dead man dreads no difficulty. Hence we see that the
amazement of which we have formerly spoken did not spring from
rebellion, in wishing to flee from God, or to refuse the charge which
had been laid upon him; but because he needed new grace, that he might
know that he would be able to endure the burden. On this account it
ought to be observed, that we cannot undertake anything in a proper
manner without the evidence of our calling; otherwise we shall pause and
hesitate at every step.

<span id="xiii.i-p88"></span>Besides, it is a powerful aid to our
confidence, when we know that we are not destitute of the necessary
gifts, but that God has bestowed them on us, in order that we may be
better enabled to discharge our office. Now, this remarkable instance of
obedience ought to produce such an effect on our minds that we shall
readily and cheerfully undertake any task which he may be pleased to
enjoin, and shall never refuse any task, however difficult we may
imagine it to be. When the Prophet says, *Here am I,* the meaning is,
that he is ready to obey the commands of God; for this mode of
expression is frequently employed in Scripture to denote obedience.

<span id="xiii.i-p89"></span><span id="xiii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p90"></span>**9.** *Then he said, Go, and tell that
people.*  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) This shows still more
clearly how necessary the vision was, that Isaiah might not all at once
fail in his course. It was a grievous stumblingblock, that he must
endure such obstinacy and rebellion in the people of God, and that not
only for a year or two, but for more than sixty years. On this account
he needed to be fortified, that he might be like a brazen wall against
such stubbornness. The Lord, therefore, merely forewarns Isaiah that he
will have to do with obstinate men, on whom he will produce little
effect; but that so unusual an occurrence must not lead him to take
offense, and lose courage, or yield to the rebellion of men; that, on
the contrary, he must proceed with unshaken firmness, and rise superior
to temptations of this nature. For God gives him due warning beforehand
as to the result; as if he had said, “You will indeed teach without any
good effect; but do not regret your teaching, for I enjoin it upon you;
and do not refrain from teaching, because it yields no advantage; only
obey me, and leave to my disposal all the consequences of your labors. I
give you all this information in good time, that the event may not
terrify you, as if it had been strange and unexpected.” Besides, he is
commanded openly to reprove their blind obstinacy, as if he purposely
taunted them.

<span id="xiii.i-p92"></span>“My labors will do no good; but it matters
not to me: it is enough that what I do obtains the approbation of God,
to whom my preaching will be a sweet smell, though it bring death to
you.”  
(<span id="xiii.i-p92.2"></span>[2 Cor.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="xiii.i-p92.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.i-p93"></span><span id="xiii.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p94"></span>**10.** *Harden the heart of this people.*
 <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) Here the former statement is more
fully expressed; for God informs Isaiah beforehand, not only that his
labor in teaching will be fruitless, but that by his instruction he will
also blind the people, so as to be the occasion of producing greater
insensibility and stubbornness, and to end in their destruction. He
declares that the people, bereft of reason and understanding, will
perish, and there will be no means of obtaining relief; and yet he at
the same time affirms that the labors of the Prophet, though they bring
death and ruin on the Jews, will be to him an acceptable sacrifice.

<span id="xiii.i-p96"></span>This is a truly remarkable declaration; not
only because Isaiah here foretold what was afterwards fulfilled under
the reign of Christ, but also because it contains a most useful
doctrine, which will be of perpetual use in the Church of God; for all
who shall labor faithfully in the ministry of the word will be laid
under the necessity of meeting with the same result. We too have
experienced it more than we could have wished; but it has been shared by
all the servants of Christ, and therefore we ought to endure it with
greater patience, though it is a very grievous stumbling-block to those
who serve God with a pure conscience. Not only does it give great
offense, but Satan powerfully excites his followers to raise a dislike
of instruction on the pretense of its being not merely useless, but even
injurious; that it renders men more obstinate, and leads to their
destruction. At the present day, those who have no other reproach to
bring against the doctrine of the gospel maintain that the only effect
produced by the preaching of it has been, that the world has become
worse.

<span id="xiii.i-p97"></span>But whatever may be the result, still God
assures us that our ministrations are acceptable to him, because we obey
his command; and although our labor appear to be fruitless, and men rush
forward to their destruction, and become more rebellious, we must go
forward; for we do nothing at our own suggestion, and ought to be
satisfied with having the approbation of God. We ought, indeed, to be
deeply grieved when success does not attend our exertions; and we ought
to pray to God to give efficacy to his word. A part of the blame we
ought even to lay on ourselves, when the fruits are so scanty; and yet
we must not abandon our office, or throw away our weapons. The truth
must always be heard from our lips, even though there be no ears to
receive it, and though the world have neither sight nor feeling; for it
is enough for us that we labor faithfully for the glory of God, and that
our services are acceptable to him; and the sound of our voice is not
ineffectual, when it renders the world without excuse.

<span id="xiii.i-p98"></span>Hence arises a most excellent and
altogether invaluable consolation to godly teachers, for supporting
their minds against those grievous offenses which daily spring from the
obstinacy of men, that, instead of being retarded by it, they may
persevere in their duty with unshaken firmness. As it is also a general
offense, that the lively word of God, at the hearing of which the whole
world ought to tremble, strikes their ears to no purpose, and without
any advantage, let weak men learn to fortify themselves by this
declaration. We wonder how it is possible that the greater part of men
can furiously oppose God; and hence also arises a doubt if it be the
heavenly truth of God which is rejected without bringing punishment; for
it can hardly be believed that God addresses men for the purpose of
exciting their scorn. That our faith may not fail, we ought to employ
this support, that the office of teaching was enjoined on Isaiah, on the
condition that, in scattering the seed of life, it should yield nothing
but death; and that this is not merely a narrative of what once
happened, but a prediction of the future kingdom of Christ, as we shall
find to be stated shortly afterwards.

<span id="xiii.i-p99"></span>We ought also to attend to this
circumstance, that Isaiah was not sent to men indiscriminately, but to
the Jews. Accordingly, the demonstrative particle <span
id="xiii.i-p99.1"></span>הנה, (*hinneh*,) *behold*, is emphatic, and
implies that the people whom the Lord had peculiarly chosen for himself
do not hear the word, and shut their eyes amidst the clearest light. Let
us not wonder, therefore, if we appear to be like persons talking to the
deaf, when we address those who boast of the name of God. It is
undoubtedly a harsh saying, that God sends a prophet to *close the ears,
stop up the eyes, and harden the heart of the people*; because it
appears as if these things were inconsistent with the nature of God, and
therefore contradicted his word. But we ought not to think it strange if
God punishes the wickedness of men by blinding them in the highest
degree. Yet the Prophet shows, a little before, that the blame of this
blindness lies with the people; for when he bids them hear, he bears
witness that the doctrine is fitted for instructing the people, if they
choose to submit to it; that light is given to guide them, if they will
but open their eyes. The whole blame of the evil is laid on the people
for rejecting the amazing kindness of God; and hence is obtained a more
complete solution of that difficulty to which we formerly adverted.

<span id="xiii.i-p100"></span>At first sight it seems unreasonable that
the Prophets should be represented as making men’s hearts more hardened.
They carry in their mouth the word of God, by which, *as by a lamp, the
steps of men ought to be guided*; for this encomium, we know, has been
pronounced on it by David. (<span id="xiii.i-p100.1"></span>[Ps
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p100.1"></span>.) It is not the duty of the Prophets,
therefore, to blind the eyes, but rather to open them. Again, it is
called *perfect wisdom*, (<span id="xiii.i-p100.2"></span>[Ps
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)<span id="xiii.i-p100.2"></span>;.md)
how then does it stupify men and take away their reason? Those hearts
which formerly were of brass or iron ought to be softened by it; how
then is it possible that it can harden them, as I have already observed?
Such blinding and hardening influence does not arise out of the nature
of the word, but is accidental, and must be ascribed exclusively to the
depravity of man. As dim-sighted people cannot blame the sun for
dazzling their eyes with its brightness; and those whose hearing is weak
cannot complain of a clear and loud voice which the defect of their ears
hinders them from hearing; and, lastly, a man of weak intellect cannot
find fault with the difficulty of a subject which he is unable to
understand; so ungodly men have no right to blame the word for making
them worse after having heard it. The whole blame lies on themselves in
altogether refusing it admission; and we need not wonder if that which
ought to have led them to salvation become the cause of their
destruction. It is right that the treachery and unbelief of men should
be punished by meeting death where they might have received life,
darkness where they might have had light; and, in short, evils as
numerous as the blessings of salvation which they might have obtained.
This ought to be carefully observed; for nothing is more customary with
men than to abuse the gifts of God, and then not only to maintain that
they are innocent, but even to be proud of appearing in borrowed
feathers. But they are doubly wicked when they not only do not apply to
their proper use, but wickedly corrupt and profane, those gifts which
God had bestowed on them.

<span id="xiii.i-p101"></span>John quotes this passage as a clear
demonstration of the stubbornness of the Jews. He does not indeed
absolutely give the very words, but he states the meaning clearly
enough.

<span id="xiii.i-p102"></span>Therefore, says he, they could not
believe, because Isaiah said, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened
their heart.  
(<span id="xiii.i-p102.2"></span>[John
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039.md),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040.md)<span id="xiii.i-p102.2"></span>
 <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) .md)

<span id="xiii.i-p104"></span>True, this prediction was not the cause of
their unbelief, but the Lord foretold it, because he foresaw that they
would be such as they are here described. The Evangelist applies to the
Gospel what had already taken place under the law, and at the same time
shows that the Jews were deprived of reason and understanding, because
they were rebels against God. Yet if you inquire into the first cause,
we must come to the predestination of God. But as that purpose is hidden
from us, we must not too eagerly search into it; for the everlasting
scheme of the divine purpose is beyond our reach, but we ought to
consider the cause which lies plainly before our eyes, namely, the
rebellion by which they rendered themselves unworthy of blessings so
numerous and so great.

<span id="xiii.i-p105"></span>Paul, too, shows from this passage, on
more than one occasion, (<span id="xiii.i-p105.1"></span>[Ac
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#027.md)<span id="xiii.i-p105.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p105.2"></span>[Ro
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#008)<span id="xiii.i-p105.2"></span>,.md)
that the whole blame of blindness rests with themselves. *They have shut
their ears, says he, and closed their eyes.* What Isaiah here ascribes
to doctrine, Paul traces to the wicked disposition of the nation, which
was the cause of their own blindness; and accordingly, I have stated
that this was an accidental and not a natural result of the doctrine. In
that passage Paul introduces the Spirit as speaking, (<span
id="xiii.i-p105.3"></span>[Ac
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p105.3"></span>;) but John says that Isaiah spake thus of
Christ, *when he had beheld his glory*. (<span
id="xiii.i-p105.4"></span>[Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p105.4"></span>.) From this it is evident, as we formerly
said, that Christ was that God who filled the whole earth with his
majesty. Now, Christ is not separate from his Spirit, and therefore Paul
had good reason for applying this passage to the Holy Spirit; for
although God exhibited to the Prophet the lively image of himself in
Christ, still it is certain that whatever he communicated was wholly
breathed into him by the power of the Holy Spirit. Now, however ungodly
men may bark against us with their reproaches, that our doctrine ought
to bear the blame, because the world is made worse by the preaching of
it, they gain nothing at all, and take nothing away from the authority
of the doctrine; for they must at the same time condemn God himself and
the whole of his doctrine. But their calumnies will not hinder his
justice from being displayed, or hinder him from vindicating itself, and
at the same time vindicating us.

<span id="xiii.i-p106"></span>*And when they shall be converted*  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) Here he expressly declares that he did
not send the Prophet because he intended to save the people; but, on the
contrary, because he intended to destroy them. But the word of God
brings salvation; at least some benefit must arise from the preaching of
it, that it may do good to some, though many are deprived of the
advantage by their own unbelief. I answer, the subject treated of is the
whole body, which had already been condemned and devoted to destruction;
for there were always some whom the Lord exempted from the general ruin;
to them the word brought salvation, and on them it actually produced its
proper effect; but the great body of the people were cut off and
perished through obstinate unbelief and rebellion. So, then, we perceive
that the word of God is never so destructive that there are not a few
who perceive that it brings salvation to them, and feel that it does so
in reality.

<span id="xiii.i-p108"></span>*They shall be healed.* We ought also to
observe from the order and connection of the words, that the first step
of *healing* is repentance. But in the first place, we must understand
what he means by the word *healing*; for he uses it in reference to the
chastisements which had been inflicted on the people on account of their
sins. Now, the cause of all the evils which we endure is our rebellion
against God. When we repent, he is reconciled to us, and the rods with
which he chastised us are no longer employed. This is our *healing*. And
this order ought to be carefully observed, from which it is evident what
object the Lord has in view in inviting us to himself, and what is the
design of the heavenly doctrine, namely, that we may be *converted*

<span id="xiii.i-p109"></span>This is another part of the Gospel,
*Repent ye*. (<span id="xiii.i-p109.1"></span>[Mt
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002)<span id="xiii.i-p109.1"></span>..md)
Then, offering reconciliation he holds out remedies for all diseases,
not only of the body but of the soul. And such being the eminent
advantage derived from the word of God, if we are not reconciled to God
as soon as his word sounds in our ears, we have no right to lay the
blame on any other, for it rests wholly with ourselves. Indeed, the
Prophet here speaks of it as unnatural and monstrous, that, by the
doctrine of the word, the native tendency of which is to *heal* and
soften, men should become insolent and obstinate and altogether
incurable. It is undoubtedly true, that when we are drawn inwardly,
(<span id="xiii.i-p109.2"></span>[Joh
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span id="xiii.i-p109.2"></span>,.md)
it is an extraordinary gift of God, and that the arm of God is not
revealed to all, (<span id="xiii.i-p109.3"></span>[Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p109.3"></span>;.md)
but by this dreadful punishment of obstinate malice, Isaiah intended to
teach, that we ought earnestly to beware of despising when God calls.

<span id="xiii.i-p110"></span><span id="xiii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p111"></span>**11.** *And I said, How long, O LORD?*
Although the Prophets are severe in denouncing the wrath of God against
men, yet they do not lay aside human feelings. It is therefore necessary
that they sustain a twofold character; for they must proclaim the
judgment of God with high and unshaken courage, so that they would
rather choose that the world should be destroyed and utterly ruined than
that any part of His glory should be taken away. And yet they are not
devoid of feeling, so as to be unmoved by compassion for their brethren,
whose destruction their office lays them under the necessity of
foretelling. These two feelings, though they appear to be inconsistent,
are in full harmony, as appears from the instance of Jeremiah, who at
first complains of the hard task assigned him of proclaiming destruction
to the people, but afterwards revives his courage, and proceeds boldly
in discharging the duties of his office (<span
id="xiii.i-p111.1"></span>[Jer. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017)<span id="xiii.i-p111.1"></span>..md)
Such was also the state of Isaiah’s mind; for, being desirous to obey
God, he earnestly proclaimed His judgments; and yet he had some regard
to the people, which led him to entreat, that if this *blindness* must
come upon them, it might not be permanent. There can be no doubt, that
when he thus prayed to God, he was moved with compassion, and desired
that so dreadful a punishment should be mitigated.

<span id="xiii.i-p112"></span>Natural affections, (<span
id="xiii.i-p112.1"></span>στοργαὶ φυσικαὶ,) therefore, ought not to
prevent us from performing what is our duty. For instance, there is the
natural affection of a husband to a wife, and of a father to a son; but
it ought to be checked and restrained, so that we may chiefly consider
what is suitable to our calling, and what the Lord commands. This ought
to be carefully observed; for when we wish to give loose reins to
ourselves, we commonly plead this excuse, that we are willing and ready
to do what God requires, but are overpowered by natural affection. But
those feelings ought to be restrained in such a manner as not to
obstruct our calling; just as they did not hinder the Prophet from
proceeding in the discharge of his duty; for to such an extent ought we
to acknowledge the authority of the Lord over us, that when he orders
and commands, we should forget ourselves and all that belongs to us.

<span id="xiii.i-p113"></span>But although the godly anxiety of Isaiah
about the salvation of the people is here expressed, still the severity
of the punishment is likewise stated, that wicked men may not, as they
are wont to do, indulge the hope of some mitigation. Nor can it be
doubted that the Prophet was led by a secret impulse from God to ask
this, that the stern and dreadful reply which immediately follows might
be more fully brought out; from which it is evident what kind of
destruction awaits unbelievers, that they will receive no light or
moderate punishment, but will be utterly destroyed and cut off.

<span id="xiii.i-p114"></span>*Until the houses be without man, and the
land become a desolation.* This is an additional aggravation; for it is
possible that countries might be wasted, and yet that one city might
remain; that even cities might be stormed and laid desolate, and yet
very many houses be left. But here the slaughter, he tells us, will be
so great, that not only the cities, but even the very houses will be
thrown down, and the whole land will be reduced to frightful and
lamentable desolation; though even amidst the heaviest calamities some
remnant is still left. Though Isaiah said this but once, yet let us
understand that it is also spoken to us; for this punishment has been
pronounced against all who obstinately disobey God, or who with a stiff
neck struggle against his yoke. The more violent their opposition, the
more resolutely will the Lord pursue them till they are utterly
destroyed.

<span id="xiii.i-p115"></span><span id="xiii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p116"></span>**12.** *Till the Lord have removed men
far away.* These words contain nothing new, but merely an explanation of
the former verse, and a description by other words of the ruin that
shall overtake Judea; namely, that God will send the inhabitants *far
away*. He asserts that those who shall survive the war will not be
exempted from punishment, for they will be led into captivity. And next
he adds a general clause about the desolation of the land; as if he had
said that it would be desolate and bereft of inhabitants, because some
would flee away, others would be driven into banishment, and others
would perish by the sword. Such is the reward prepared for obstinate and
rebellious persons, who add crime to crime, till the indignation of God
rise to such a height that it cannot be appeased.

<span id="xiii.i-p117"></span><span id="xiii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p118"></span>**13.** *Till there shall be in it a
tenth*  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) There is some obscurity in
the words; but let us first ascertain the meaning, and then we shall
easily find out what is the signification of the words. There are two
ways of explaining this passage. Some explain <span
id="xiii.i-p119.1"></span>עשיריה (*asiriyah*) to mean *decimation*;
others make it to mean *a tenth part*, and consider it to be a
collective noun. Undoubtedly, the Hebrew word <span
id="xiii.i-p119.2"></span>עשירית, (*asirith*,) and not <span
id="xiii.i-p119.3"></span>עשיריה, (*asiriyah*,) denotes *a tenth part*,
though the difference between them is not great. Those who render it
*decimation* think that a truce is promised to the people, because from
the reign of Uzziah to the destruction of Jerusalem there would be ten
kings; and undoubtedly that is the number of kings, reckoning from
Uzziah to Zedekiah. His prophetical doctrine would derive no small
support from the circumstance, that he could tell the number of kings
who should reign even after his death, and that he described not only
the fact itself, but likewise the time, and the day.

<span id="xiii.i-p120"></span>Yet I know not if another meaning be not
somewhat more appropriate; for the Prophet appears to hold out to the
people this consolation, that they will retain some hidden vigor, and
will be capable of sprouting out, though they may appear for a time to
be entirely dead; just as, when the winter is past, the trees renew
their foliage. But as the former exposition carries sufficient
probability, I shall therefore explain the whole verse according to the
opinion of those who think that mention is here made of ten kings, so as
to mean that, when the ten kings shall have completed their reign, the
people will be carried into captivity, and then, as by a conflagration,
the whole land will be consumed.

<span id="xiii.i-p121"></span>At the same time, the reader ought to be
aware that whether <span id="xiii.i-p121.1"></span>עשיריה (*asiriyah*)
be rendered *a tenth part*, or *decimation*, it may with the utmost
propriety be viewed as referring to the people; and then the meaning
will be, *Till the people be diminished to a tenth part*. He had
formerly spoken of a *remnant*, and a *very small remnant*, (<span
id="xiii.i-p121.2"></span>[Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="xiii.i-p121.2"></span>,.md)
and afterwards he will speak of it again, (<span
id="xiii.i-p121.3"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p121.3"></span>;) for it was a very small number that
remained. It might therefore be naturally viewed as meaning, that out of
a thousand there would be left a hundred; out of a hundred, ten; and out
of ten, one.

<span id="xiii.i-p122"></span>*And shall return.* That is, a change will
take place for the better: the Jews will return from captivity to their
native country, and the land will assume a new aspect. But this may be
thought to be somewhat at variance with what follows; for the Prophet
immediately adds, *It shall be destruction*. How cold comfort will it
yield to the people to be restored, if shortly afterwards they shall be
again destroyed! Some commentators solve this difficulty, by supposing
that Isaiah spoke about the final destruction of the people. But in my
opinion he rather means that the destruction will not be complete, but
such as happens to trees, when their leaves fall off in the winter, and
nothing appears but dead timber; but when spring returns, they bud forth
anew: and so also will this people.

<span id="xiii.i-p123"></span><span id="xiii.i-p123.1"></span>לבער
(*lebaer*) means to *burn*,  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) and
therefore it means here that they will be *consumed* by a conflagration:
but we ought to read it in connection with the metaphor which
immediately follows; for Isaiah does not barely mean that it will be
*consumed*, but that it will be consumed *like the teil-tree*, that is,
with the hope of immediate recovery. When Jerome rendered it *for
exhibition*, I know not on what he supposed that opinion to be founded,
if it were not that he made a free translation, looking rather to the
meaning than to the etymology of the word; for when trees blossom or put
forth leaves, their life is again brought forth and displayed; and this
meaning will be very appropriate.

<span id="xiii.i-p125"></span>*As a teil-tree and an oak.* It appears
that Isaiah did not select at random those two kinds of trees; for one
of them puts forth its leaves, and likewise sheds them, sooner than the
other. So it happened to the tribe of Judah; for first the ten tribes,
with the half tribe of Benjamin, were carried into captivity; and thus
they who were the first to blossom were likewise the first to decay.
This tribe was the latest of all in decaying, not without high
expectation of blossoming again; for here the hope of deliverance is
held out, and this was different from the captivity of the Israelites.
There appears, therefore, to be some appropriateness in this metaphor of
the trees; but I would not choose to press it very far.

<span id="xiii.i-p126"></span>*When they cast their leaves.* By the
phrase, *casting of leaves*, must be understood that *throwing of them
down* which takes place when trees are stripped of their leaves as of
their garment; for trees, in that state of nakedness, appear to be dry
and withered; though there remains in them a hidden vigor, through which
they are at length quickened by the returning mildness of the season.

<span id="xiii.i-p127"></span>*So in it shall be substance.* This is the
application of the metaphor, which is exceedingly forcible; for when we
see the spiritual grace of God in the very order of nature, we are
strongly confirmed. As Paul holds out a likeness of the resurrection in
the sowing of corn, which is a daily occurrence, (<span
id="xiii.i-p127.1"></span>[1Co
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p127.1"></span>,) so in like manner Isaiah in this passage
describes the restoration of the Church, by taking a metaphor from
trees, which wither at the end of autumn, but again blossom at the
return of spring, and put forth new leaves; which could not happen, did
they not retain some vigor during the winter, though to outward
appearance they are dead. He foretells that a similar event will happen
to this people; so that, although during their hard and oppressive
captivity they resemble dry timber, and it may be thought that they can
never be delivered, still there will always be preserved in them some
vigor, by which they shall be supported amidst those calamities, and
shall at length come forth and blossom.

<span id="xiii.i-p128"></span>This doctrine, we have said, is not
peculiar to a single age, and therefore it ought to be carefully
observed; for it frequently happens that the Church, amidst the numerous
afflictions which she endures, appears to have no strength, and is
supposed to be utterly ruined. Whenever this takes place, let us fully
believe that, notwithstanding these appearances, there is still some
concealed energy, which, though it be not immediately manifest to our
eyes, will at length yield its fruit. That energy lies hidden in the
word of the Lord, by which alone the Church is sustained.

<span id="xiii.i-p129"></span>*The holy seed.* He shows what is that
*substance*, that it consists of a small number of the godly, whom he
calls *the holy seed*; for he means the elect, who would be preserved by
the free mercy of God, and thus would survive that captivity. That
banishment might be regarded as a cleansing of the Church, by which the
Lord took away the ungodly; and when they had been cut off, he collected
a people, small in number, but truly consecrated to himself. Some
commentators consider this phrase to refer to Christ; but the
interpretation appears to be too far-fetched, and it will be more
consistent to extend it to all the godly; for *the* *holy seed is the
substance* of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc13012.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span> *And his train filled the temple*. \[*Or,
the skirts thereof*.\] — Eng. Ver.  
*And the train of his robe filled the temple*. — Lowth.  
*And his flowing train filled the temple*. — Stock. That author adds in
a note: “I add the epithet *flowing*, to distinguish the train of a robe
from what the English word equally imports, a train of attendants; and
<span id="xiii.i-p41.3"></span>שול is from <span
id="xiii.i-p41.4"></span>של to loosen, to flow loosely.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc13012.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p66"></span> *For mine eyes have seen the king, the
LORD of hosts*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc13012.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p75"></span> *And he laid it upon* (marg., *caused it
to touch*) *my* *mouth*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc13012.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p91"></span> *And he said, Go, and tell this people*. —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc13012.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p95"></span> *Make the heart of this people fat*. —
Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc13012.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p102.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p103"></span> In the original text the reference reads:
<span id="xiii.i-p103.1"></span>[Joh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039.md)<span id="xiii.i-p103.1"></span>
I added the next verse to include the quoted text. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc13012.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p107"></span> *And convert*. — Eng. Ver.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc13012.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p118.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p119"></span> *But yet in it shall be a tenth*. — Eng.
Ver.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc13012.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p123.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p124"></span> Bishop Lowth’s rendering is, *And though
there be a tenth part* *remaining in it, even this shall undergo
repeated destruction*; which accords with Calvin’s view, that the
substance of the tree will be left. Bishop Stock renders it *for
pasture: But yet in* *it shall be left a tenth, and it shall recover,
and serve for* *pasture*. He reasons thus: “The verb <span
id="xiii.i-p124.1"></span>בער may either signify to *eat grass*, or to
*eat it down*. The question is, in which sense it is to be understood
here? whether the land is again to yield food to its inhabitants, or to
be laid bare and waste? That the former is the true meaning I think very
evident, as well from the tendency of the ensuing simile of the oak,
which is of the consolatory kind, as because it is the almost constant
practice of Isaiah to subjoin to denunciations of divine vengeance a
prediction of final reconcilement and happiness.” Jarchi, as interpreted
by Breithaupt, renders the word, <span id="xiii.i-p124.2"></span>*et
erunt in combustionem* (*sive depastionem*,) *and they shall be for
destruction*, (*or for pasture*;) leaving it doubtful which of the above
renderings ought to be preferred. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc13013.md)
