[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2313)  [Next](sbe2315) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185898/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part II (SBE23)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### IX. GÔ*S* YA*S*T.

Gô*s*, 'the cow,' κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν, is a personation of the animal kingdom
which she maintains and protects. She is also called Drvâspa and
Go*s*ûrûn: Drvâspa means 'she who keeps horses in health,' and is
nothing more than an epithet of Gô*s*: Gô*s*ûrûn (from the Zend G*e*u*s*
urvan) means 'the Soul of the Bull' (the primeval Bull). Although urvan
is a masculine noun in Zend, yet Gô*s*ûrûn is considered a female angel,
as this name is only a substitute for Gô*s*.

Gô*s* is the angel of the 14th day (Sîrôzah I, 14), and her Ya*s*t is
recited during the Gâh U*s*ahin, on the days of Gô*s*, Bahman, Mâh, and
Râm (the same days as those on which the Mâh Ya*s*t is recited; see
above, [p. 88](sbe2312.htm#page_88)).

Gô*s* is hardly described in this Ya*s*t (§§ 1-2); the greater part of
it being filled with the several prayers addressed to her by the Iranian
heroes, Haoshyangha (§ 3), Yima (§ 8), Thraêtaona (§ 13), Haoma (§ 17),
Husravah (§ 21), Zarathu*s*tra, and Vî*s*tâspa. Her worshippers and
their prayers to her are the same as in the case of Ashi Vanguhi (see
Yt. XVII).

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

0\. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! May Angra Mainyu be afflicted! . . . .

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good . . . .

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathu*s*tra, one
who hates the Daêvas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, satisfaction, and glorification unto Hâvani, the
holy and master of holiness.

Unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda and holy <span
id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_529),

Be propitiation, with sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and
glorification.

Yathâ ahû vairyô: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness. . . .

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

#### I.

1\. We sacrifice unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda and holy, who
keeps the flocks in health, the herds in health, the grown-up <span
id="fr_551"></span>[1](#fn_530) (cattle) in health, the young ones in
health; who watches well from afar, with a wide-spread and
long-continued welfare-giving friendship;

2\. Who yokes teams of horses, who makes her chariot turn and its wheels
sound, fat and glistening <span id="fr_552"></span>[2](#fn_531), strong,
tall-formed, weal-possessing, health-giving, powerful to stand and
powerful to turn for assistance to the faithful.

3\. To her did Haoshyangha, the Paradhâta <span
id="fr_553"></span>[3](#fn_532), offer up a sacrifice on the enclosure
of the Hara, the beautiful height, made by Mazda, with a hundred male
horses, a thousand oxen, and ten thousand lambs, and with an offering of
libations:

4\. 'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvâspa! that I may
overcome all the Daêvas of Mâzana <span id="fr_554"></span>[4](#fn_533);
that I may never fear and bow through terror before the Daêvas, but that
all the Daêvas may fear and bow in spite of themselves before me, that
they may fear and flee down to darkness <span
id="fr_555"></span>[5](#fn_534).'

5\. The powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvâspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering libations, giving
gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him that boon.

6\. For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth
being heard; I will offer her a sacrifice well performed, namely, unto
the powerful

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Drvâspa, made by
Mazda and holy. We offer up libations to the powerful Drvâspa, made by
Mazda and holy; we offer her the Haoma and meat, the baresma, the wisdom
of the tongue, the holy spells, the speech, the deeds, the libations,
and the rightly-spoken words.

Yê*n*hê hâtãm: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda . . . . <span
id="fr_556"></span>[1](#fn_535)

### II.

7\. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda and
holy, who keeps the flocks in health . . . .

Who yokes teams of horses . . . . for assistance to the faithful <span
id="fr_557"></span>[2](#fn_536).

8\. To her did Yima Khshaêta, the good shepherd, offer up a sacrifice
from the height Hukairya, with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen,
ten thousand lambs, and with an offering of libations:

9\. 'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvâspa! that I may
bring fatness and flocks down to the world created by Mazda; that I may
bring immortality down to the world created by Mazda;

10\. 'That I may take away both hunger and thirst, from the world
created by Mazda; that I may take away both old age and death, from the
world created by Mazda; that I may take away both hot wind and cold
wind, from the world created by Mazda, for a thousand years <span
id="fr_558"></span>[3](#fn_537).'

11\. The powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvâspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

as he was offering up libations, giving gifts, sacrificing, and
entreating that she would grant him that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

#### III.

12\. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda
and holy, who keeps the flocks in health . . . .

Who yokes teams of horses . . . . for assistance to the faithful.

13 <span id="fr_559"></span>[1](#fn_538). To her did Thraêtaona, the
heir of the valiant Âthwya clan, offer up a sacrifice in the
four-cornered Varena, with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten
thousand lambs, and with an offering of libations:

14\. 'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvâspa! that I may
overcome A*z*i Dahâka, the three-mouthed, the three-headed, the
six-eyed, who has a thousand senses, that most powerful, fiendish
Dru*g*, that demon, baleful to the world, the strongest Dru*g* that
Angra Mainyu created against the material world, to destroy the world of
the good principle; and that I may deliver his two wives, Savanghavâ*k*
and Erenavâ*k*, who are the fairest of body amongst women, and the most
wonderful creatures in the world <span id="fr_560"></span>[1](#fn_538).'

15\. The powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvâspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him that
boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

#### IV.

16\. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda
and holy, who keeps flocks in health . . . .

Who yokes teams of horses . . . . for assistance to the faithful.

17 <span id="fr_561"></span>[1](#fn_539). To her did Haoma <span
id="fr_562"></span>[2](#fn_540) offer up a sacrifice, Haoma, the
enlivening, the healing, the beautiful, the lordly, with golden eyes,
upon the highest height of the Haraiti Bareza. He begged of her a boon,
saying:

18\. 'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvâspa! that I may
bind the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan <span
id="fr_563"></span>[3](#fn_541) that I may drag him bound, that I may
bring him bound unto king Husravah, that king Husravah may kill him,
behind the *K*aê*k*asta lake <span id="fr_564"></span>[4](#fn_542), the
deep lake of salt <span id="fr_565"></span>[5](#fn_543) waters, to
avenge the murder of his father Syâvarshâna <span
id="fr_566"></span>[6](#fn_544), a man, and of Aghraêratha, a
semi-man <span id="fr_567"></span>[7](#fn_545).'

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

19\. The powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvâspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would give him that
boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

#### V.

20\. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda
and holy, who keeps the flocks in health . . . .

Who yokes teams of horses . . . . for assistance to the faithful.

21 <span id="fr_568"></span>[1](#fn_546). To her did the gallant
Husravah, he who united the Arya nations into one kingdom, offer up a
sacrifice, behind the *K*aê*k*asta lake, the deep lake of salt waters,
with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, and an
offering of libations:

22\. 'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvâspa! that I may
kill the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan, behind the *K*aê*k*asta lake,
the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge the murder of my father
Syâvarshâna, a man, and of Aghraêratha, a semi-man <span
id="fr_569"></span>[2](#fn_547).'

23\. The powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvâspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

and entreating that she would grant him that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

#### VI.

24\. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda
and holy, who keeps the flocks in health . . . .

Who yokes teams of horses . . . . for assistance to the faithful.

25 <span id="fr_570"></span>[1](#fn_548). To her did the holy
Zarathu*s*tra offer up a sacrifice in the Airyana Vaê*g*ah, by the good
river Dâitya, with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, with the wisdom
of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the speech, with the deeds,
with the libations, and with the rightly-spoken words. He begged of her
a boon, saying:

26\. 'O good, most beneficent Drvâspa! grant me this boon, that I may
bring the good and noble Hutaosa <span id="fr_571"></span>[2](#fn_549)
to think according to the law, to speak according to the law, to do
according to the law, that she may spread my Mazdean law and make it
known, and that she may bestow beautiful praises upon my deeds.'

27\. The strong Drvâspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvâspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him that
boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

### VII.

28\. We offer up a sacrifice unto the powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda
and holy, who keeps the flocks in health . . . .

Who yokes teams of horses . . . . for assistance to the faithful.

29 <span id="fr_572"></span>[1](#fn_550). To her did the tall Kavi
Vî*s*tâspa offer up a sacrifice behind the waters of the river Dâitya,
with a hundred male horses, a thousand oxen, ten thousand lambs, and
with an offering of libations:

30\. 'Grant me this boon, O good, most beneficent Drvâspa! that I may
put to flight A*s*ta-aurva*nt*, the son of Vîspa-thaurvô-asti, the
all-afflicting, of the brazen helmet, of the brazen armour, of the thick
neck, behind whom seven hundred camels . . . . <span
id="fr_573"></span>[2](#fn_551); that I may put to flight the *Hv*yaona
murderer, Are*g*a*t*-aspa <span id="fr_574"></span>[3](#fn_552); that I
may put to flight Dar*s*inika <span id="fr_575"></span>[4](#fn_553), the
worshipper of the Daêvas;

31\. And that I may smite Tãthrava*nt* <span
id="fr_576"></span>[5](#fn_554) of the bad law; that I may smite
Spin*g*auru*s*ka <span id="fr_577"></span>[4](#fn_553), the worshipper
of the Daêvas; and that I may bring unto the good law the nations of the
Varedhakas and of the *Hv*yaonas <span id="fr_578"></span>[6](#fn_555);
and that I may smite of the *Hv*yaona nations their fifties and their
hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands, their thousands and their

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

tens of thousands, their tens of thousands and their myriads of
myriads.'

32\. The strong Drvâspa, made by Mazda, the holy Drvâspa, the
maintainer, granted him that boon, as he was offering up libations,
giving gifts, sacrificing, and entreating that she would grant him that
boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard; I will offer her a sacrifice well performed, namely, unto the
powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda and holy. We offer up libations to the
powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda and holy; we offer her the Haoma and
meat, the baresma, the wisdom of the tongue, the holy spells, the
speech, the deeds, the libations, and the rightly-spoken words.

Yathâ ahû vairyô: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness . . . .

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour of the
powerful Drvâspa, made by Mazda and holy.

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good . . . .

\[Give\] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of body, .
. . . give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_529"></span>[110:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_550) Sîrôzah I, 14.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[111:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_551) Doubtful; possibly
'the friend in health, the child in health.'

<span id="fn_531"></span>[111:2](sbe2314.htm#fr_552) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[111:3](sbe2314.htm#fr_553) Cf. [p.
58](sbe2310.htm#page_58), note [1](sbe2310.htm#fn_294).

<span id="fn_533"></span>[111:4](sbe2314.htm#fr_554) Cf.
[59](sbe2310.htm#page_59), note [2](sbe2310.htm#fn_298).

<span id="fn_534"></span>[111:5](sbe2314.htm#fr_555) To hell.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[112:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_556) As above, [p.
30](sbe2306.htm#page_30).

<span id="fn_536"></span>[112:2](sbe2314.htm#fr_557) § 7 = §§ 1-2.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[112:3](sbe2314.htm#fr_558) §§ 8-10 = Yt. XVII,
28-30; cf. Yasna IX, 4 \[10-20\]; Yt. V, 25-27.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[113:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_560) Yt. V, 34; X, 24;
XVII, 34.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[114:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_561) §§ 17-19 = Yt.
XVII, 37-38.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[114:2](sbe2314.htm#fr_562) Cf. Yasna XI, 7
\[20-21\]. The destruction of the fiends, being one of the principal
effects of sacrifice, is ascribed to Haoma as the most powerful element
in the sacrifice. In the Shâh Nâmah, the god Haoma has been turned into
a hermit who, living near the cave in which Afrâsyâb had taken refuge
(see above, Yt. V, 41), overhears his lamentations, takes him by
surprise, binds him, and delivers him into the hands of Khosrav (Études
Iraniennes, II, 227).

<span id="fn_541"></span>[114:3](sbe2314.htm#fr_563) See [p.
64](sbe2310.htm#page_64), note [1](sbe2310.htm#fn_315).

<span id="fn_542"></span>[114:4](sbe2314.htm#fr_564) See above, [p.
66](sbe2310.htm#page_66), note [2](sbe2310.htm#fn_322).

<span id="fn_543"></span>[114:5](sbe2314.htm#fr_565) See [p.
66](sbe2310.htm#page_66), note [3](sbe2310.htm#fn_323).

<span id="fn_544"></span>[114:6](sbe2314.htm#fr_566) See [p.
64](sbe2310.htm#page_64), note [1](sbe2310.htm#fn_315).

<span id="fn_545"></span>[114:7](sbe2314.htm#fr_567) Doubtful (narava,
as opposed to nara). Aghraêratha (Aghrêrath) was a brother of
Afrâsyâb's; he was a righteous man, and Afrâsyâb killed him for his
having saved the Iranian king Mino*k*ihr with his army, when captive in
the Padashkhvâr mountains (Bundahi*s* XXXI, 21). Yet he is still living
as an immortal in the land of Saukavastân, under the name of Gôpatshâh
(the king of the bulls); 'from foot to mid-body he is a bull, and from
mid-body to <span id="page_115">p. 115</span> the top he is a man; at
all times he stays on the sea-shore, and always performs the worship of
God, and always pours holy-water into the sea' (Minokhired LXII, 31
seq., tr. West; Bund. XXIX, 5); according to Bund. XXXI, 20, Aghrêrath
was not Gôpatshâh, he was his father. Cf. Yt. XIX, 93.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[115:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_568) §§ 21-22 = Yt.
XVII, 41-42.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[115:2](sbe2314.htm#fr_569) See [p.
114](#page_114), note [7](#fn_545).

<span id="fn_548"></span>[116:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_570) §§ 25-26 = XVII,
44-45; cf. Yt. V, 104.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[116:2](sbe2314.htm#fr_571) Hutaosa was the
wife of king Vî*s*tâspa; cf. Yt. XV, 37.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[117:1](sbe2314.htm#fr_572) §§ 29-31-Yt. XVII,
49-51.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[117:2](sbe2314.htm#fr_573) ? *G*ainyâvara*t*.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[117:3](sbe2314.htm#fr_574) See above, [p.
79](sbe2310.htm#page_79), note [4](sbe2310.htm#fn_392).

<span id="fn_553"></span>[117:4](sbe2314.htm#fr_577) Ἅπαξ λεγόμενος.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[117:5](sbe2314.htm#fr_576) Mentioned Yt. V,
109 and XIX, 87.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[117:6](sbe2314.htm#fr_578) The *Hv*yaonas seem
to have been the Chionitae, a bellicose tribe, near the land of Gilan,
often at war with the first Sassanides (Amm. Marcellinus XVII, 5). The
name of the Varedhakas reminds one of the Vertae who are mentioned once
in company with the Chionitae (ibid. XIX, 1); but their geographical
situation is not ascertained. In any case the proximity of the Dâitya (§
29) shows that both people must have inhabited the western coast of the
Caspian sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. Mihir Ya*s*t](sbe2315)
