[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2320)  [Next](sbe2322) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185898/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part II (SBE23)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

#### XVI. DÎN YA*S*T.

Dîn (Daêna) presides over the 24th day of the month (Sîrôzah 24) and
gives it her name; she is invoked in company with *K*ista, and in fact
this Ya*s*t, though it bears the name of Daêna, is consecrated to Kista
(§§ 2, 7). These two Genii are, however, very closely connected in their
nature, as Daêna is the impersonation of the Zoroastrian Law or
Religion, and Kista is religious knowledge, the knowledge of what leads
to bliss (far*g*ânak, nirvâ*n*a*gñ*âna; the same as *K*isti).

The description of *K*ista is rather pallid, and does not rise above
abstractions (see, however, Mihir Ya*s*t, § 126). She was not worshipped
by the old epic heroes as Anâhita was, but by Zarathu*s*tra and his
wife, because she must have been, from her very name and nature, a
goddess of Zoroastrian origin and growth.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

0\. May Ahura Mazda be rejoiced! . . . .

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good . . . .

I confess myself a worshipper of Mazda, a follower of Zarathu*s*tra, one
who hates the Daêvas and obeys the laws of Ahura;

For sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and glorification unto \[Hâvani\],
the holy and master of holiness . . . .

To the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy, and to the good Law
of the worshippers of Mazda,

Be propitiation from me, for sacrifice, prayer, propitiation, and
glorification.

Yathâ ahû vairyô: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness . . . .

#### I.

1\. We sacrifice to the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy: we
sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda, the supplier of
good

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

stores, who runs quickly to the goal and frees one best from
dangers <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1](#fn_1140), who brings libations,
who is holy, clever, and renowned, speedy to work and quick of work; who
goes quickly and cleanses well; the good Law of the worshippers of
Mazda;

2\. To whom Zarathu*s*tra did sacrifice, saying: 'Rise up from thy seat,
come forward from the Abode <span id="fr_1203"></span>[2](#fn_1141),
thou most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy. If thou art before me,
stay for me; if thou art behind me, overtake me.

3\. 'Let everything be as friendly to us as anything can be: may we go
smoothly along the roads, find good pathways in the mountains, run
easily through the forests, and cross happily the rivers!'

4\. For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice
worth being heard, namely, unto the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda
and holy. I will offer up a sacrifice unto the most right *K*ista, made
by Mazda and holy, with the libations, with the Haoma and meat, with the
baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the
words and deeds, with the libations, with the well-spoken words.

Yê*n*hê hâtãm: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda . . . .

#### II.

5\. We sacrifice to the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy: we
sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda . . . . <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[3](#fn_1142)

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

6\. To whom Zarathu*s*tra did sacrifice for righteousness of thought,
for righteousness of speech, for righteousness of deed, and for this
boon,

7\. That the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy, would give him
the swiftness of the feet, the quick hearing of the ears, the strength
of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness of the whole
body, and the eye-sight of the Kara fish, that lives beneath the waters,
and can measure a rippling of the waters not thicker than a hair, in the
Rangha, whose ends lie afar and whose depth is a thousand times the
height of a man <span id="fr_1205"></span>[1](#fn_1143).

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice worth
being heard . . . .

#### III.

8\. We sacrifice to the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy: we
sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda . . . .

9\. To whom Zarathu*s*tra did sacrifice for righteousness of thought,
for righteousness of speech, for righteousness of deed, and for this
boon,

10\. That the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy, would give him
the swiftness of the feet, the quick hearing of the ears, the strength
of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness of the whole
body, and the eye-sight of the male horse, that, in the dark of the
night, through the rain, the snow, the hail, or the sleet, from as far
as nine districts, can perceive a horse's hair, mingled with the earth,
and knows whether it is from the head or from the tail <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[2](#fn_1144).

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice worth
being heard . . . .

#### IV.

11\. We sacrifice to the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy: we
sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda . . . .

12\. To whom Zarathu*s*tra did sacrifice for righteousness of thought,
for righteousness of speech, for righteousness of deed, and for this
boon,

13\. That the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy, would give him
the swiftness of the feet, the quick hearing of the ears, the strength
of the arms, the health of the whole body, the sturdiness of the whole
body, and the eye-sight of the vulture with a golden collar, that, from
as far as nine districts, can perceive a piece of flesh, not thicker
than a fist, giving just as much light as a needle gives, as the point
of a needle gives <span id="fr_1207"></span>[1](#fn_1145).

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice worth
being heard . . . .

#### V.

14\. We sacrifice to the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy: we
sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda . . . .

15\. To whom the holy Hvôvi <span id="fr_1208"></span>[2](#fn_1146) did
sacrifice with full knowledge, wishing that the holy Zarathu*s*tra would
give her his good narcotic <span id="fr_1209"></span>[3](#fn_1147), that
she might

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

think according to the law, speak according to the law, and do according
to the law.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice, worth
being heard . . . .

#### VI.

16\. We sacrifice to the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy: we
sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda . . . .

17\. To whom the Âthravans, sent afar <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1](#fn_1148), did sacrifice <span
id="fr_1211"></span>[2](#fn_1149), wishing a good memory to preach the
law, and wishing strength for their own body.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice worth
being heard . . . .

#### VII.

18\. We sacrifice to the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy: we
sacrifice to the good Law of the worshippers of Mazda . . . .

19\. To whom the king of the country, the lord of the country does
sacrifice, wishing peace for his country, wishing strength for his own
body.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer unto her a sacrifice worth
being heard . . . .

20\. Yathâ ahû vairyô: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness . . .
.

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

and vigour of the most right *K*ista, made by Mazda and holy, and of the
good Law of the worshippers of Mazda.

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good . . . .

\[Give\] unto that man brightness and glory, . . . . give him long, long
life, give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[265:1](sbe2321.htm#fr_1202) Reading
nimarezi*s*ta; cf. vîmarezi*s*tem, Yt. I, 2.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[265:2](sbe2321.htm#fr_1203) The heavenly
abode, the Garôthmân.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[265:3](sbe2321.htm#fr_1204) The rest as in §
1.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[266:1](sbe2321.htm#fr_1205) Cf. Yt. XIV, 29.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[266:2](sbe2321.htm#fr_1206) Cf. Yt. XIV, 31.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[267:1](sbe2321.htm#fr_1207) Cf. Yt. XIV, 33.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[267:2](sbe2321.htm#fr_1208) Zarathu*s*tra's
wife.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[267:3](sbe2321.htm#fr_1209) Bangha; the
so-called Bang of Zoroaster (Vend. XV, 14 \[44\]; Phl. tr.). What must
have been its virtue may be gathered from the legends of Gû*s*tâsp and
Ardâ Vîrâf, who are said to have been transported in soul to the
heavens, and to have had the higher <span id="page_268">p. 268</span>
mysteries revealed to them, on drinking from a cup prepared by the
prophet (Zardu*s*t Nâmah), or from a cup of Gû*s*tâsp-bang (Ardâ Vîrâf,
II, 29).

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[268:1](sbe2321.htm#fr_1210) The itinerant
priests, the ancestors of the modern dervishes.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[268:2](sbe2321.htm#fr_1211) Or better, do
sacrifice; cf. Yt. XIV, 39.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. Ashi Ya*s*t](sbe2322)
