[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe2321)  [Next](sbe2323) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402185898/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Zend Avesta, Part II (SBE23)*, James Darmesteter, tr. \[1882\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

### XVII. ASHI YA*S*T.

Ashi Vanguhi or 'the good Ashi <span id="fr_1212"></span>[1](#fn_1150)'
is a feminine impersonation of piety <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[2](#fn_1151), and she is, at the same time, the
source of all the good and riches that are connected with piety <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[3](#fn_1152). She is described, therefore, as a
goddess of Fortune and Wealth, and is invoked in company with Pâre*n*di,
the goddess of Treasures (Sîrôzah 25).

She appears in the latter character in the first part of the Ya*s*t (§§
1-14); she praises and loves Zarathu*s*tra (§§ 15-21). She is worshipped
by Hao*s*yangha (§ 26), Yima (§ 28), Thraêtaona (§33), Haoma (§ 37),
Husravah (§ 41), Zarathu*s*tra (§ 45), and Vî*s*tâspa (§ 49) <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[4](#fn_1153). She rejects the offerings of all
sterile people (old men, courtezans, and children, §§ 53-61).

#### I.

1\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall-formed,
well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, strong,
welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[5](#fn_1154), and powerful;

2\. The daughter of Ahura Mazda, the sister of the Amesha-Spe*n*tas, who
endows all the

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Saoshya*nt*s <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[1](#fn_1155) with the enlivening intelligence; she
also brings heavenly wisdom at her wish, and comes to help him who
invokes her from near and him who invokes her from afar, and worships
her with offerings of libations.

3 <span id="fr_1218"></span>[2](#fn_1156). For her brightness and glory,
I will offer her a sacrifice worth being heard; I will offer up unto
Ashi Vanguhi a good sacrifice with an offering of libations. We
sacrifice unto Ashi Vanguhi with the libations; with the Haoma and meat,
with the baresma, with the wisdom of the tongue, with the holy spells,
with the words, with the deeds, with the libations, and with the
rightly-spoken words.

Yê*n*hê hâtãm: All those beings of whom Ahura Mazda . . . .

#### II.

4\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall-formed,
well worthy of sacrifice, with a loud-sounding chariot, strong,
welfare-giving, healing, with fulness of intellect, and powerful.

5\. Homage unto Haoma, and unto the Mãthra <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[3](#fn_1157), and unto the holy Zarathu*s*tra!

Homage unto Haoma, because all other drinks are attended with
Aêshma <span id="fr_1220"></span>[4](#fn_1158), the fiend of the
wounding spear: but the drinking of Haoma is attended with Asha and with
Ashi Vanguhi herself <span id="fr_1221"></span>[5](#fn_1159).

6\. Ashi is fair; Ashi is radiant with joy; she is far-piercing with her
rays. Ashi gives good Glory

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

unto those men whom thou dost follow, O Ashi! Full of perfumes is the
house in which the good, powerful Ashi Vanguhi puts her . . . . <span
id="fr_1222"></span>[1](#fn_1160) feet, for long friendship.

7\. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi! are kings of kingdoms, that
are rich in horses, with large tributes, with snorting horses, sounding
chariots, flashing swords, rich in aliments and in stores of food <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[2](#fn_1161); well-scented where the beds are
spread and full of all the other riches that may be wished for. Happy
the man whom thou dost attend! do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts
of desirable things and strong!

8\. Those men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! have houses that
stand well laid up, rich in cattle, foremost in Asha, and
long-supported. Happy the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou attend me,
thou rich in all sorts of desirable things and strong!

9\. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! have beds that stand
well-spread, well-adorned, well-made, provided with cushions and with
feet inlaid with gold. Happy the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou
attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things and strong!

10\. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! have their ladies
that sit on their beds, waiting for them: they lie on the cushions,
adorning themselves, . . . . <span id="fr_1224"></span>[3](#fn_1162),
with square bored ear-rings and a necklace of gold: 'When will our lord
come? when shall we enjoy in our bodies the joys of love?'

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Happy the man whom
thou dost attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable
things and strong!

11\. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! have daughters that
sit . . . . <span id="fr_1225"></span>[1](#fn_1163); thin is their
waist, beautiful is their body, long are their fingers; they are as fair
of shape as those who look on can wish. Happy the man whom thou dost
attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things
and strong!

12\. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! have horses swift
and loud-neighing; they drive the chariot lightly, they take it to the
battle <span id="fr_1226"></span>[2](#fn_1164), they bear a gallant
praiser (of the gods), who has many horses, a solid chariot, a sharp
spear, a long spear, and swift arrows, who hits his aim, pursuing after
his enemies, and smiting his foes. Happy the man whom thou dost attend!
Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things and
strong!

13\. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! have large-humped,
burden-bearing camels, flying from the ground or fighting with holy
fieriness <span id="fr_1227"></span>[3](#fn_1165). Happy the man whom
thou dost attend! Do thou attend me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable
things and strong!

14\. The men whom thou dost attend, O Ashi Vanguhi! have hoards of
silver and gold brought together from far distant regions; and garments
of splendid make. Happy the man whom thou dost attend! Do thou attend
me, thou rich in all sorts of desirable things and strong!

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

15\. Do not turn thy look from me! turn thy mercy towards me, O great
Ashi! thou art well-made and of a noble seed <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1](#fn_1166); thou art sovereign at thy wish; thou
art Glory in a bodily form.

16\. Thy father is Ahura Mazda, the greatest of all gods, the best of
all gods; thy mother is Ârmaiti Spe*n*ta; thy brothers are Sraosha <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[2](#fn_1167), a god of Asha, and Rashnu <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[3](#fn_1168), tall and strong, and Mithra <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[4](#fn_1169), the lord of wide pastures, who has
ten thousand spies and a thousand ears; thy sister is the Law of the
worshippers of Mazda.

17\. Praised of the gods, unoffended by the righteous <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[5](#fn_1170), the great Ashi Vanguhi stood up on
her chariot, thus speaking: 'Who art thou who dost invoke me, whose
voice is to my ear the sweetest of all that invoked me most?'

18\. And he <span id="fr_1233"></span>[6](#fn_1171) said aloud: 'I am
Spitama Zarathu*s*tra, who, first of mortals, recited the praise of the
excellent Asha <span id="fr_1234"></span>[7](#fn_1172) and offered up
sacrifice unto Ahura Mazda and the Amesha-Spe*n*tas; in whose birth and
growth the waters and the plants rejoiced; in whose birth and growth the
waters and the plants grew; in whose birth and growth all the creatures
of the good creation cried out, Hail <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[8](#fn_1173)!

19\. 'In whose birth and growth Angra Mainyu rushed away from this wide,
round earth, whose ends lie afar, and he, the evil-doing Angra Mainyu,
who is all death, said: "All the gods together

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

have not been able to smite me down in spite of myself, and
Zarathu*s*tra alone can reach me in spite of myself.

20\. ' "He smites me with the Ahuna Vairya, as strong a weapon as a
stone big as a house <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1](#fn_1174); he burns
me with Asha-Vahi*s*ta, as if it were melting brass <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[2](#fn_1175). He makes it better for me that I
should leave this earth, he, Spitama Zarathu*s*tra, the only one who can
daunt me." '

21\. And the great Ashi Vanguhi exclaimed: 'Come nearer unto me, thou
pure, holy Spitama! lean against my chariot!'

Spitama Zarathu*s*tra came nearer unto her, he leant against her
chariot.

22\. And she caressed him with the left arm and the right, with the
right arm and the left, thus speaking: 'Thou art beautiful, O
Zarathu*s*tra! thou art well-shapen, O Spitama! strong are thy legs and
long are thy arms: Glory is given to thy body and long
cheerfulness <span id="fr_1238"></span>[3](#fn_1176) to thy soul, as
sure as I proclaim it unto thee.'

#### III.

23 <span id="fr_1239"></span>[4](#fn_1177). We sacrifice to Ashi
Vanguhi, who is shining, high, tall-formed, well worthy of sacrifice,
with a loud-sounding chariot, strong, welfare-giving, healing, with
fulness of intellect and powerful.

24 <span id="fr_1240"></span>[5](#fn_1178). To her did Haoshyangha, the
Paradhâta, offer up a sacrifice, upon the enclosure of the Hara, the
beautiful height, made by Mazda,

25\. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

me this, O great Ashi Vanguhi! that I may overcome all the Daêvas of
Mâzana; that I may never fear and bow through terror before the Daêvas,
but that all the Daêvas may fear and bow in spite of themselves before
me, that they may fear and flee down to darkness.'

26\. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: Haoshyangha, the
Paradhâta, obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice . . . .

#### IV.

27\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high . . and
powerful.

28 <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1](#fn_1179). To her did Yima Khshaêta,
the good shepherd, offer up a sacrifice from the height Hukairya.

29\. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bring fatness and flocks down to the world created
by Mazda; that I may bring immortality down to the world created by
Mazda;

30\. 'That I may take away both hunger and thirst, from the world
created by Mazda; that I may take away both old age and death, from the
world created by Mazda; that I may take away both hot wind and cold
wind, from the world created by Mazda, for a thousand years.'

31\. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: Yima Khshaêta, the
good shepherd, obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice . . . .

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

#### V.

32\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high . . . . and
powerful.

33 <span id="fr_1242"></span>[1](#fn_1180). To her did Thraêtaona, the
heir of the valiant Âthwya clan, offer up a sacrifice in the
four-cornered Varena.

34\. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may overcome A*z*i Dahâka, the three-mouthed, the
three-headed, the six-eyed, who has a thousand senses, that most
powerful, fiendish Dru*g*, that demon, baleful to the world, the
strongest Dru*g* that Angra Mainyu created against the material world,
to destroy the world of the good principle; and that I may deliver his
two wives, Savanghavâ*k* and Erenavâ*k*, who are the fairest of body
amongst women, and the most wonderful creatures in the world.'

35\. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. Thraêtaona, the
heir of the valiant Âthwya clan, obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice . . . .

#### VI.

36\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high . . . . and
powerful.

37 <span id="fr_1243"></span>[2](#fn_1181). To her did Haoma offer up a
sacrifice, Haoma, the enlivening, the healing, the beautiful, the
lordly, with golden eyes, upon the highest height of the Haraiti Bareza.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

38\. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bind the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan, that I may
drag him bound, that I may bring him bound unto king Husravah, that king
Husravah may kill him, behind the *K*aê*k*asta lake, the deep lake of
salt waters, to avenge the murder of his father Syâvarshâna, a man, and
of Aghraêratha, a semi-man.'

39\. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. Haoma, the
enlivening, the healing, the beautiful, the lordly, with golden eyes,
obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice . . . .

#### VII.

40\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high . . . and
powerful.

41 <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1](#fn_1182). To her did the gallant
Husravah, he who united the Aryan nations into one kingdom, offer up a
sacrifice, behind the *K*aê*k*asta lake, the deep lake of salt waters.

42\. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may kill the Turanian murderer, Franghrasyan, behind the
*K*aê*k*asta lake, the deep lake of salt waters, to avenge the murder of
my father Syâvarshâna, a man, and of Aghraêratha, a semi-man.'

43\. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side. The gallant
Husravah, he who united the Aryan nations into one kingdom, obtained
that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

#### VIII.

44\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high . . . *a*nd
powerful.

45 <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1](#fn_1183). To her did the holy
Zarathu*s*tra offer up a sacrifice in the Airyana Vaê*g*ah, by the good
river Dâitya, with the Haoma and meat, with the baresma, with the wisdom
of the tongue, with the holy spells, with the speech, with the deeds,
with the libations, and with the rightly-spoken words.

46\. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may bring the good and noble Hutaosa to think according
to the law, to speak according to the law, to do according to the law,
that she may spread my law and make it known, that she may bestow
beautiful praises upon my deeds.'

47\. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: the holy
Zarathu*s*tra obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

#### IX.

48\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high . . . . and
powerful.

49\. To her did the tall Kavi Vî*s*tâspa offer up a sacrifice behind the
waters of the river Dâitya.

50\. He begged of her a boon, saying: 'Grant me this, O great Ashi
Vanguhi! that I may put to flight A*s*ta-aurva*nt*, the son of
Vîspô-thaurvô-asti, the all-afflicting, of the brazen helmet, of the
brazen armour, of the thick neck, behind whom seven

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

hundred camels . . . .; that I may put to flight the *Hv*yaona murderer,
Are*g*a*t*-aspa; that I may put to flight Dar*s*inika, the worshipper of
the Daêvas;

51\. 'And that I may smite Tãthrava*nt* of the bad law; that I may smite
Spin*g*auru*s*ka, the worshipper of the Daêvas; and that I may bring
unto the good law the nations of the Varedhakas and of the *Hv*yaonas;
and that I may smite of the *Hv*yaona nations their fifties and their
hundreds, their hundreds and their thousands, their thousands and their
tens of thousands, their tens of thousands and their myriads of
myriads.'

52\. The great Ashi Vanguhi ran and came to his side: the tall Kavi
Vî*s*tâspa obtained that boon.

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

#### X.

53\. We sacrifice to Ashi Vanguhi, who is shining, high . . . . and
powerful.

54\. And the great Ashi Vanguhi said: 'None of those libations will be
accepted by me, which are sent to me either by a man whose seed is dried
out <span id="fr_1246"></span>[1](#fn_1184), or by the courtezan who
produces untimely issues <span id="fr_1247"></span>[2](#fn_1185), or by
young boys, or by girls who have known no man <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[3](#fn_1186).

'When the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[4](#fn_1187), clapping their hands, ran after me,

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

55\. 'I hid myself under the foot of a bull walking under his burden;
then young boys, and girls who had known no man, discovered me, even
while the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras, clapping their hands,
were running after me.

56\. 'Even I hid myself under the throat of a ram of hundredfold energy:
then again young boys, and girls who had known no man, discovered me,
even while the Turanians and the swift-horsed Naotaras, clapping their
hands, were running after me.'

57\. The first wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi is her wailing about
the courtezan who destroys her fruit: 'Stand thou not near her, sit thou
not on her bed!'—'What shall I do? Shall I go back to the heavens? Shall
I sink into the earth?'

58\. The second wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi is her wailing about
the courtezan who brings forth a child conceived of a stranger and
presents it to her husband: 'What shall I do? Shall I go back to the
heavens? Shall I sink into the earth?'

59\. This is the third wailing of the great Ashi Vanguhi: 'This is the
worst deed that men and tyrants do, namely, when they deprive maids,
that have been barren for a long time, of marrying and bringing forth
children. What shall I do? Shall I go back to the heavens? Shall I sink
into the earth?'

60\. Ahura Mazda answered: 'O fair and wise Ashi, go not back to the
heavens, sink not into the

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

earth! Stay here and walk inside the fine kingly palace.'

61\. I shall worship thee with such a sacrifice, I shall worship and
forward thee with such a sacrifice as Vî*s*tâspa offered unto thee,
behind the river Dâitya <span id="fr_1250"></span>[1](#fn_1188). The
Zoatar lifted up a loud voice, with baresma before him. With that sort
of sacrifice shall I worship thee? With that sort of sacrifice shall I
worship and forward thee, O fair and wise Ashi?

For her brightness and glory, I will offer her a sacrifice worth being
heard . . . .

62\. Yathâ ahû vairyô: The will of the Lord is the law of holiness . . .
.

I bless the sacrifice and prayer, and the strength and vigour of Ashi
Vanguhi; of the good *K*isti; of the good Ereth*e*; of the good
Rasãstâ*t*; of the Glory and Weal, made by Mazda <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[2](#fn_1189).

Ashem Vohû: Holiness is the best of all good .

\[Give\] unto that man brightness and glory, give him health of body, .
. . . give him the bright, all-happy, blissful abode of the holy Ones.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[270:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1212) In Parsi
Ardi*s*vang or Ard (Ardi*s* from Arti*s*, the Persian form of Ashi*s*);
she presides over the 25th day of the month; cf. Sîrôzah 25.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[270:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1213) Ashi is not the
feminine adjective of Asha, as the i was originally short (genitive
ashôi*s*, not ashy*a*u); ashi is ar-ti, and means bhakti, piety
(Neriosengh).

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[270:3](sbe2322.htm#fr_1214) The so-called
Ashi's remedies (ashôi*s* baêshaza; cf. Yt. XIII, 32).

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[270:4](sbe2322.htm#fr_1215) This enumeration
is the same as in the Gô*s* Ya*s*t (§§ 3, 8, 14, 17, 21, 26, 29),

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[270:5](sbe2322.htm#fr_1216) Perethu-vîra; see
Études Iraniennes, II, 183.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[271:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1217) The allies of
Saoshya*nt*, who are to be active in the restoration of the world to
eternal life (frashô-kereti). Cf. [p. 165](sbe2316.htm#page_165), note
[1](sbe2316.htm#fn_769). Ashi gives them the 'intelligence of life'
(frasha khratu), through which they will be enabled to perform their
task.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[271:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1218) Cf. Yt. V, 10.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[271:3](sbe2322.htm#fr_1219) The Holy Word.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[271:4](sbe2322.htm#fr_1220) The Daêva of
anger.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[271:5](sbe2322.htm#fr_1221) As drinking Haoma
is an act of religion (cf. Yasna XI, 12 \[31\] seq.).

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[272:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1222) ? Âgairimaiti*s*.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[272:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1223) Cf. Yt. V, 130.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[272:3](sbe2322.htm#fr_1224) ?
A*n*kupasman*a*u.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[273:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1225) ?
Ãgamô-paidhi*s*a.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[273:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1226) Doubtful.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[273:3](sbe2322.htm#fr_1227) Cf. Yt. XIV, 11.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[274:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1228) Born from the
gods; cf. Yt. XXII, 9.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[274:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1229) See Yt. XI.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[274:3](sbe2322.htm#fr_1230) See Yt. XII.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[274:4](sbe2322.htm#fr_1231) See Yt. X.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[274:5](sbe2322.htm#fr_1232) Or, 'doing no
harm to the righteous.'

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[274:6](sbe2322.htm#fr_1233) Zarathu*s*tra.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[274:7](sbe2322.htm#fr_1234) The Ahuna Vairya.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[274:8](sbe2322.htm#fr_1235) Cf. Yt. XIII, 93.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[275:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1236) Cf. Vend. XIX, 4
(13).

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[275:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1237) Cf. Yt. III.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[275:3](sbe2322.htm#fr_1238) Bliss after
death.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[275:4](sbe2322.htm#fr_1239) As § 1.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[275:5](sbe2322.htm#fr_1240) For §§ 24-26, cf.
Yt. IX, 3-6.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[276:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1241) For §§ 28-31, cf.
Yt. IX, 8-11.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[277:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1242) Cf. Yt. V, 34;
IX, 14; XV, 24.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[277:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1243) For §§ 37-39, cf.
Yt. IX, 17-19.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[278:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1244) For §§ 41-43, cf.
Yt. IX, 21-23.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[279:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1245) For §§ 45-47, cf.
Yt. IX, 25-27.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[280:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1246) See Vend, III, 20
\[63\], note.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[280:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1247) By procuring
abortion.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[280:3](sbe2322.htm#fr_1248) She refuses the
offerings of all barren beings.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[280:4](sbe2322.htm#fr_1249) Cf. Yt. V, 98.
The following clauses allude to some myth of Ashi Vanguhi connected with
the conflict between the Turanians and the Naotaras (either Tusa and
Vistauru; cf. [p. 71](sbe2310.htm#page_71), note
[7](sbe2310.htm#fn_352), or more likely Vî*s*tâspa himself, to whom the
preceding chapter <span id="page_281">p. 281</span> \[§§ 48-52\] and the
last but one clause of the Ya*s*t refer). She tried to flee in the way
practised by Ulysses in the Cyclops’ cavern; both parties were pursuing
the animal that bore her, though they knew not what it bore, till
children discovered her.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[282:1](sbe2322.htm#fr_1250) Cf. §§ 49 seq.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[282:2](sbe2322.htm#fr_1251) Cf. Sîrôzah, §
25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Â*s*tâd Ya*s*t](sbe2323)
