[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Native American](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](por02)  [Next](por04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BNKRAM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Path on the Rainbow*, edited by George W. Cronyn, \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

### INTRODUCTION

The poetic faculty is, of all man's modes, the most responsive to
natural environment, the most sensitive and the truest record of his
reactions to its skyey influences, its floods, forests, morning colors.
It is the first to register the rise of his spirits to the stimulus of
new national ideals. If this were not so there would be no such thing as
nationality in art, and it is only by establishing some continuity with
the earliest instances of such reaction that we can be at all sure that
American poetic genius has struck its native note. Therefore it becomes
appropriate and important that this collection of American Indian verse
should be brought to public notice at a time when the whole instinctive
movement of the American people is for a deeper footing in their native
soil. It is the certificate of our adoption, that the young genius of
our time should strike all unconsciously on this ancient track to the
High Places.

Poetic art in America, at the time it began to be overlaid by European
culture, had reached a mark close to that of the Greeks at the beginning
of the Homeric era. The lyric was well developed, the epic was nascent,
and the drama was still in the Satyris stage of development, a rude
dance ritual about an altar or a sacrificial fire. Neither poetry nor
drama were yet divorced from singing, and all art was but half-born out
of the Great Mystery. Magic was sung, and songs had magic power. Both
were accompanied by appropriate bodily movement, so that an Indian will
say indifferently, I cannot sing that dance, or I cannot dance that
song. Words, melody and movement were as much mixed as the water of a
river with its own ripples and its rate of flowing. Hum a few bars of a
plainsman's familiar song, and he will

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

say, puzzled, "It ought to be a war song," but without the words he will
scarcely identify it. Words may become obsolete so that the song is
untranslatable, but so long as enough of it remains to hold together the
primary emotional impulse out of which it sprang, the Indian finds it
worthy to be sung. He is, indeed, of the opinion that "White man's
songs, they talk too much."

This partly explains why most Indian songs are songs for occasions. The
rest of the explanation lies in the fact that songs have magic power.
Tiráwa, Wokonda, The Friend of the Soul of Man, is in everything; in the
field we plant, the stone we grind with, the bear we kill. By singing,
the soul of the singer is put in harmony with the essential Essence of
Things. There are songs for every possible adventure of tribal life;
songs for setting out on a journey, a song for the first sight of your
destination, and a song to be sung by your wife for your safe return.
Many of these songs occur detached from everything but the occasion from
which they sprang, such as the women's grinding song, measured to the
*plump, plump!* of the mealing stone, or the Paddle Song which follows
the swift rhythm of the stroke. Others, less descriptive and retaining
always something of a sacred character, occur originally as numbers in
the song sequences by which are celebrated the tribal Mysteries.

Back of every Indian ceremony lies a story, the high moments of which
are caught up in song, while the burden of the narrative is carried by
symbolic rite and dance. The unequal social development of
contemporaneous tribes affords examples from every phase of structural
development from the elemental dance punctuated by singing exclamations
to the Mountain Chant of the Zuñi in which the weight of the story has
broken down the verse variants into strong simple forms capable of being
carried in a single memory. Halfway between them is the ritual sequence
of the Midéwan.

The practical necessity of being preserved and handed on by word of
mouth only, must be constantly borne in mind in considering the
development of Indian verse forms.

It operated to keep the poetry tied to its twin-born melody,

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

which assisted memory, and was constantly at work modifying the native
tendency to adjust the rhythm to every changing movement of the story.
Ancient Chippeway singers kept ideographic birch bark memoranda of their
songs, and wampum belts commemorated the events that gave use to them,
but the songs themselves came down from their ancient sources hundreds
of years in the stream of human memory shaped by its limitations.

From the Zuñi Creation Cycle with its sustained narrative style to the
Homeric Epic is but one poetic bound, the space between them,
represented in old world literature by the Norse Sagas and the Kalevala,
indicated but not filled, in America, by prose relations. It is probable
that if we had anything like adequate records of the literature of
vanished tribes, this pre-Homeric period would show notable examples of
epic stuff. Nobody really knows how the Walam Olum or the Creek
Migration Myths were recited. They embodied whole epochs of tribal
history, to which the known literary remains were merely the mnemonic
key, a tally of significant items. In every tribe are floating songs
which appear to be fragments from a story sequence the key of which has
been lost, and it is not unlikely that records like the Red Score would
have owned complete, if detached, narratives of the historic events so
slightly indicated, some of which may yet yield themselves to the
patient researcher.

For the casual reader more interest attaches to the personal songs, the
lullabies, love songs, most of all the man's *own* song which he makes
of his great moment. This is a peculiar personal possession. No one may
sing it without his permission. He may bestow it on a friend, or
bequeath it to the tribe on his death, but it is also possible that he
may die without having sung it to anyone but his god.

On one occasion in the high Sierras I observed my Indian packer going
apart at a certain hour each day to shuffle rhythmically with his feet
and croon to himself. To my inquiry he said it was a song which he had
made, to be sung by himself and his wife when they were apart from one
another.

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

It had no words; it was just a song. Wherever they were they turned each
in the direction he supposed the other to be, when the sun was a
bow-shot above the edge of the heavens, and sang together. This is the
sort of incident which gives the true value of song in aboriginal life.
It is not the words which are potent, but the states of mind evoked by
singing, states which the simple savage conceived as being supernally
good for him. He evoked them therefore on all his most personal
occasions. Poetry is the Path on the Rainbow by which the soul climbs;
it lays hold on the Friend of the Soul of Man. Such exalted states are
held to be protective and curative. Medicine men sing for their
patients, and, in times of war, wives gather around the Chief's woman
and sing for the success of their warriors.

"Calling on Zeus by the names of Victory" as Euripides puts it.

It is this inherent power of poetry to raise the psychic plane above the
accidents of being, which gives meaning to the custom of the Death Song.
As he sees his moment approaching, the Indian throws himself, by some
profound instinct of self-preservation, into the highest frame of mind
attainable. When men in battle broke into the death song, they had
committed themselves to the last desperate adventure. Dying of
enfeebling sickness, their friends came and sang around them. One such I
heard, the death song of a Yokut Song Maker. It was very simple:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"All my life  
    I have been seeking,  
    Seeking!"

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What more than
this have the schools taught us!

Of Indian meters there has been no competent study made. The whole
problem of form is inextricably complicated with melody and movement.
The necessity of making his verse conform to a dance, probably accounts
for the liberal use of meaningless syllables. To our ear no specific
forms seem indicated, yet that the Indians recognize a certain
correspondence between

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

form and meaning is certain. They will readily classify songs of other
tribes in unknown tongues into songs of love or war or magic. The genius
of the tribal language is a determining factor. No clumsiness of
translation can quite disguise the—from our point of view—superior
singableness of Chippeway verse. In general, poetry of forest dwellers
is more lyric than the songs of mountain and mesa. An inquiry which I
once made into the psychology of the Indian sign language with a view to
discovering a possible relation between it and Greek manual gesture as
displayed in ancient graphic art, led to the conclusion that Indian
rhythms arise rather in the centre of self-preservation than of
self-consciousness. Which is only another way of saying that poetry is
valued primarily by the aboriginal for the reaction it produces within
himself rather than for any effect he is able to produce on others by
means of it. This is true even of that class of songs which originates
wholly in the desire to affect the fortunes or well being of others,
songs of healing and magic formulae.

The first stage of Indian magic is the rise of the singer on his own
song to a plane of power; only while he is in this plane is he able to
bring the wish of his client to pass. It is a natural process of
deterioration which leads to the song being thought of as having potency
in itself.

Magic songs can generally be recognized by the form of affirmation in
which they are cast, as in the Winnebago Love Song, which is not really
a song of love, but a song to secure success in love,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Whosoe’r I look upon  
    He becomes love crazed.

</div>

or the Cherokee formula to insure the constancy of the beloved, and the
Micmac vengeance song

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Death I make,  
    Singing

</div>

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

Among the Navajo the magic effect is made certain by the fourfold
repetition of the affirming phrase, four being a sacred number.

These are all items which have to be taken into account in interpreting
American Indian poetry. It is in the very nature of primitive verse that
it should require interpretation, even among the audiences for whom it
is originally intended. For verse is to the Red singer but a shorthand
note to his emotions, a sentence or two, a phrase out of the heart of
the situation. It is the "inside song" alone which is important. Says
the Medicine Man, explaining these matters, "You see Injun man singin'
an' cryin' while he sing. It ain't what he singin' make him cry; iss
what the song make him think, thass what he cryin' about."

This inside song may be a fleeting instant of revelation, or a very long
story… as if one should try in the Zuñi fashion to compress the whole
Christian myth into one bitter cry,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

My God! My God!  
    Why hast Thou deserted me?

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Hi-ihiya, naiho-o,  
It is finished,  
In beauty it is finished  
    Nai-ho-o!

</div>

Whole cycles of tribal or personal experience can lie behind some such
simple but absolute phrasing. It is this hidden beauty for which the
interpreter must dig deep into aboriginal life.

The Ghost Dance songs included in this collection are scarcely
intelligible until the reader realizes that they are supposed to be the
flashes of revelation brought from the dead in dreams, foretelling the
approach of a spiritual revival.

Thus it came to the Cheyenne:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

I bring the whirlwind  
That you may know one another

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

We shall live again!

</div>

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

To the Piaute also

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Fog, fog,  
Lightning, lightning,  
Whirlwind, whirlwind.

</div>

and then

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The cottonwoods are growing tall  
They are growing tall and green.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For to the Piaute
from his flat Reservation on Walker River, the faint young green of the
cottonwoods is the first sign of that new growth which follows after
seasonal storms. Any adequate rendering of these songs would have to
convey in native figures all this sense of immanent world-overturning
and spiritual reëstablishment in the Oneness of God and the Brotherhood
of man.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

(It is I who wear the Morning Star on my forehead…  
All that grows upon the earth is mine  
Says the Father.)

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus interpreted
they would rank with the prophetic utterances of the herdsman of Tekoa.
It is quite possible, indeed, that in time all these ghostly songs would
have been detached from their obscure authors and ascribed to the
Messiah of the Ghost Dance, who would have been reckoned among the major
prophets.

For such illuminating gleams that Indian poetry can throw on the genesis
of inspired literature, its study would be worthwhile, even if without
the renewal of our native stock of poetic forms and figures.

It is probable that the best Indian poetry has been lost to us in the
stamping out of superior tribes.

This would be particularly the case in the south, where

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

social development had reached a stage which only the pueblos and the
Five Nations of western New York approached.

Miss Convers has shown us in the fragments of Iroquois ritual something
of what might still be recovered from the remnants of that race, but
this single example from the forgotten tribe of Tenasa, on the shore of
the Missi-sippu seems to me to overleap all time and space and touch the
hidden source of Greek inspiration. It is a marriage song, the faithful
translation of an unliterary explorer, Greek in its mode, and in a
certain tender irony of mood, but with touches to which only a full
knowledge of Indian thought can give their full value, for all of which
I venture to give it the isolation of its native quality.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Tiakens, thou buildest a house,  
Thou bringest a wife to live in it.

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Thou art married, Tiakens, thou art married,  
Thou wilt become famous, thy children wilt name thee among  
    the elders.  
Think of Tiakens as an old man!

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

By what name is thy bride known,  
Is she beautiful?  
Are her eyes soft as the light of the moon?  
Is she a strong woman?  
Didst thou understand her signs as she danced  
    to thee?  
I know not whether thou lovest her,  
    Tiakens,  
What saidst the old man, her father, when you asked for his  
    pretty daughter?  
What betrothal gifts didst thou give her?

</div>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Rejoice, Tiakens, be glad, be happy,  
Build thyself a happy home.  
This is the song of its building.

</div>

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The single line
which identifies the song of Tiakens as intrinsically American is that
one which inquires:

Didst thou understand her signs when she danced to thee? embodying as it
does a very widespread aboriginal belief that in the dance and song,
more than in any other medium, a maiden revealed the physical capacity
and the power of sustained emotion which fitted her for marriage. Since
when, and with what unhappy results, have *we* forgotten that creative
emotion is a qualification for marriage! We do shallowly indeed when we
dismiss the dance and song as mere millinery of courtship. They are the
speech of the spirit identifying itself with cosmic forces. I do not
know whether or not the Tenasa had the custom known on the Pacific Coast
as the Dance of Marriageable Maidens, but I know that if you cut deeply
into any Indian poem it yields that profound and palpitant humanism
without which no literary art can endure.

Failure to realize the living background of Indian art has led to
singular misinterpretation, in a class of songs common to every tribe,
and almost invariably translated as love songs by the novice. These are
the songs of the Mystics, Songs of Seeking. They record the unavailing
search of the soul for the Absolute, for touch of that Great Mystery
which is the object of the Indian's profoundest aspiration. Two such
songs may be found in Frederick Burton's collection of Ojibway music,
done into rather sentimental love ditties, the "Lake's Sheen" and the
"Birch Bark Canoe," though their character as religious songs was so
plainly marked that Mr. Burton himself commented on the singularity of
Indian sweethearts forever getting themselves lost and requiring to be
sought. It is well to remember before attempting the interpretation of
an Indian love song, that the great Mystics have always appropriated the
intimate language of the heart for the soul's quest. As will be seen
from the examples which Mr. Cronyn has included in his collection, the
work of interpreting our treasure of Indian verse has been but lightly
begun. While some of these, notably Miss Corbin's "Across the River"
leave nothing to be desired of the spirit, form and content

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

of the original, many others have had frankly to sacrifice one of them.

In my own interpretations I have been feeling rather for a full
expression of Indian thought, than for lyrical quality.

And in any case, mine is not a singing gift. All Indian verse is either
sung or chanted, but the difficulty of fitting Indian rhythms to
European music is only surpassed by the difficulty of getting Indian
music arranged in European notation.

The long divided Muses of poetry, music and dance must come together
again for the absolute rendering. Enough cannot be said in praise of the
work of Miss Fletcher, Natalie Curtis, Frank Cushing and Washington
Mathews, to mention no others, for the clarity and sincerity of their
literal translations. The interpreter's work is all before him. I know
of no task so salutory to the poet who would, first of all, put himself
in touch with the resident genius of his own land.

MARY AUSTIN

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Songs From The Eastern Woodlands: Abanaki Songs](por04.md)
