[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl129)  [Next](wl131) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE GODS

### XXV

*Zeus. Helius*

*Zeus*. What have you been about, you villainous Titan? You have utterly
done for the earth, trusting your car to a silly boy like that; he has
got too near and scorched it in one place, and in another killed
everything with frost by withdrawing the heat too far; there is not a
single thing he has not turned upside down; if I had not seen what was
happening and upset him with the thunderbolt, there would not have been
a remnant of mankind left. A pretty deputy driver!

*Hel*. I was wrong, Zeus; but do not be angry with me; my

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

boy pressed me so; how could I tell it would turn out so badly?

*Zeus*. Oh, of course you didn't know what a delicate business it is,
and how the slightest divergence ruins everything! it never occurred to
you that the horses are spirited, and want a tight hand! oh no! why,
give them their heads a moment, and they are out of control; just what
happened: they carried him now left, now right, now clean round
backwards, and up or down, just at their own sweet will; he was utterly
helpless.

*Hel*. I knew it all; I held out for a long time and told him he mustn't
drive. But he wept and entreated, and his mother Clymene joined in, and
at last I put him up. I showed him how to stand, and how far he was to
mount upwards, and where to begin descending, and how to hold the reins,
and keep the spirited beasts under control; and I told him how dangerous
it was, if he did not keep the track. But, poor boy, when he found
himself in charge of all that fire, and looking down into yawning space,
he was frightened, and no wonder; and the horses soon knew I was not
behind them, took the child's measure, left the track, and wrought all
this havoc; he let go the reins--I suppose he was afraid of being thrown
out--and held on to the rail. But he has suffered for it, and my grief
is punishment enough for me, Zeus.

*Zeus*. Punishment enough, indeed! after daring to do such a thing as
that!--Well, I forgive you this time. But if ever you transgress again,
or send another substitute like him, I will show you how much hotter the
thunderbolt is than your fire. Let his sisters bury him by the Eridanus,
where he was upset. They shall weep amber tears and be changed by their
grief into poplars. As for you, repair the car--the pole is broken, and
one of the wheels crushed--, put the horses to and drive yourself. And
let this be a lesson to you.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI](wl131)
