[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl157)  [Next](wl159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

# DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD

### XIII

*Diogenes. Alexander*

*Diog*. Dear me, Alexander, *you* dead like the rest of us?

*Alex*. As you see, sir; is there anything extraordinary in a mortal's
dying?

*Diog*. So Ammon lied when he said you were his son; you were Philip's
after all.

*Alex*. Apparently; if I had been Ammon's, I should not have died.

*Diog*. Strange! there were tales of the same order about Olympias too.
A serpent visited her, and was seen in her bed; we were given to
understand that that was how you came into the world, and Philip made a
mistake when he took you for his.

*Alex*. Yes, I was told all that myself; however, I know now that my
mother's and the Ammon stories were all moonshine.

*Diog*. Their lies were of some practical value to you, though; your
divinity brought a good many people to their knees. But now, whom did
you leave your great empire to?

*Alex*. Diogenes, I cannot tell you. I had no time to leave any
directions about it, beyond just giving Perdiccas my ring as I died. Why
are you laughing?

*Diog*. Oh, I was only thinking of the Greeks' behaviour; directly you
succeeded, how they flattered you! their elected patron, generalissimo
against the barbarian; one of the twelve Gods according to some; temples
built and sacrifices offered to the Serpent's son! If I may ask, where
did your Macedonians bury you?

*Alex*. I have lain in Babylon a full month to-day; and Ptolemy of the
Guards is pledged, as soon as he can get a moment's respite from present
disturbances, to take and bury me in Egypt, there to be reckoned among
the Gods.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

*Diog*. I have some reason to laugh, you see; still nursing vain hopes
of developing into an Osiris or Anubis! Pray, your Godhead, put these
expectations from you; none may re-ascend who has once sailed the lake
and penetrated our entrance; Aeacus is watchful, and Cerberus an awkward
customer. But there is one thing I wish you would tell me: how do you
like thinking over all the earthly bliss you left to come here--your
guards and armour-bearers and lieutenant-governors, your heaps of gold
and adoring peoples, Babylon and Bactria, your huge elephants, your
honour and glory, those conspicuous drives with white-cinctured locks
and clasped purple cloak? does the thought of them *hurt*? What, crying?
silly fellow! did not your wise Aristotle include in his instructions
any hint of the insecurity of fortune's favours?

*Alex*. Wise? call him the craftiest of all flatterers. Allow me to know
a little more than other people about Aristotle; his requests and his
letters came to *my* address; *I* know how he profited by my passion for
culture; how he would toady and compliment me, to be sure! now it was my
beauty--that too is included under The Good; now it was my deeds and my
money; for money too he called a Good--he meant that he was not going to
be ashamed of taking it. Ah, Diogenes, an impostor; and a past master at
it too. For me, the result of his wisdom is that I am distressed for the
things you catalogued just now, as if I had lost in them the chief
Goods.

*Diog*. Wouldst know thy course? I will prescribe for your distress. Our
flora, unfortunately, does not include hellebore; but you take plenty of
Lethe-water--good, deep, repeated draughts; that will relieve your
distress over the Aristotelian Goods. Quick; here are Clitus,
Callisthenes, and a lot of others making for you; they mean to tear you
in pieces and pay you out. Here, go the opposite way; and remember,
repeated draughts.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV](wl159)
