[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl172)  [Next](wl174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD

### XXVIII

*Menippus. Tiresias*

*Me*. Whether you are blind or not, Tiresias, would be a difficult
question. Eyeless sockets are the rule among us; there is no telling
Phineus from Lynceus nowadays. However, I know that you were a seer, and
that you enjoy the unique distinction of having been both man and woman;
I have it from the poets. Pray tell me which you found the more pleasant
life, the man's or the woman's?

*Ti*. The woman's, by a long way; it was much less trouble. Women have
the mastery of men; and there is no fighting for them, no manning of
walls, no squabbling in the assembly, no cross-examination in the
law-courts.

*Me*. Well, but you have heard how Medea, in Euripides, compassionates
her sex on their hard lot--on the intolerable pangs they endure in
travail? And by the way--Medea's words remind me did you ever have a
child, when you were a woman, or were you barren?

*Ti*. What do you mean by that question, Menippus?

*Me*. Oh, nothing; but I should like to know, if it is no trouble to
you.

*Ti*. I was not barren: but I did not have a child, exactly.

*Me*. No; but you might have had. That's all I wanted to know.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

*Ti*. Certainly.

*Me*. And your feminine characteristics gradually vanished, and you
developed a beard, and became a man? Or did the change take place in a
moment?

*Ti*. Whither does your question tend? One would think you doubted the
fact.

*Me*. And what should I do but doubt such a story? Am I to take it in,
like a nincompoop, without asking myself whether it is possible or not?

*Ti*. At that rate, I suppose you are equally incredulous when you hear
of women being turned into birds or trees or beasts,--Aëdon for
instance, or Daphne, or Callisto?

*Me*. If I fall in with any of these ladies, I will see what they have
to say about it. But to return, friend, to your own case: were you a
prophet even in the days of your femininity? or did manhood and prophecy
come together?

*Ti*. Pooh, you know nothing of the matter. I once settled a dispute
among the Gods, and was blinded by Hera for my pains; whereupon Zeus
consoled me with the gift of prophecy.

*Me*. Ah, you love a lie still, Tiresias. But there, ’tis your trade.
You prophets! There is no truth in you.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIX](wl174)
