[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl180)  [Next](wl182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VOYAGE TO THE LOWER WORLD

*Charon. Clotho. Hermes. Shades. Rhadamanthus. Tisiphone. Lamp. Bed*

*Cha*. You see how it is, Clotho; here has all been ship-shape and ready
for a start this long time; the hold baled out, the mast stepped, the
sail hoisted, every oar in its rowlock; it is no fault of mine that we
don't weigh anchor and sail. ’Tis Hermes keeps us; he should have been
here long ago. Not a passenger on board, as you may see; and we might
have made the trip three times over by this. Evening is coming on now;
and never a penny taken all day! I know how it will be: Pluto will think
*I* have been wanting to my work. It is not I that am to blame, but our
fine gentleman of a supercargo. He is just like any mortal: he has taken
a drink of their Lethe up there, and forgotten to come back to us. He'll
be wrestling with the lads, or playing on his lyre, or giving his
precious gift of the gab a good airing; or he's off after plunder, the
rascal, for what I know: ’tis all in the day's work with him. He is
getting too independent: he ought to remember that he belongs to us, one
half of him.

*Clo*. Well, well, Charon; perhaps he has been busy: Zeus may<span
class="margnote"><span id="230:2">2</span></span> have had some
particular occasion for his services in the upper world; *he* has the
use of him too, remember.

*Cha*. That doesn't say that he should make use of him beyond

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

what's reasonable. Hermes is common property. We have never kept him
here when he was due to go. No, I know what it is. In these parts of
ours all is mist and gloom and darkness, and nothing to be had but
asphodel and libations and sacrificial cakes and meats. Yonder in
Heaven, all's bright, with plenty of ambrosia, and no end of nectar.
Small wonder that he likes to loiter there. When he leaves us, ’tis on
wings; it is as though he escaped from prison. But when the time comes
for return, he tramps it on foot, and has much ado to get here at all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="231:3">3</span></span>*Clo*. Well,
never mind now; here he comes, look, and a fine host of passengers with
him; a fine flock, rather; he hustles them along with his staff like so
many goats. But what's this? One of them is bound, and another enjoying
the joke; and there is one with a wallet slung beside him, and a stick
in his hand; a cantankerous-looking fellow; he keeps the rest moving.
And just look at Hermes! Bathed in perspiration, and his feet covered
with dust! See how he pants; he is quite out of breath. What is the
matter, Hermes? Tell us all about it; you seem disturbed.

*Her*. The matter is that this rascal ran away; I had to go after him,
and had well nigh played you false for this trip, I can tell you.

*Clo*. Why, who is he? What did he want to run away for?

*Her*. His motive is sufficiently clear: he had a preference for
remaining alive. He is some king or tyrant, as I gather from his piteous
allusions to blessedness no longer his.

*Clo*. And the fool actually tried to run away, and thought to prolong
his life when the thread of Fate was exhausted?

<span class="margnote"><span id="231:4">4</span></span>*Her*. Tried! He
would have got clean away, but for that capital fellow there with the
club; he gave me a hand, and we caught and bound him. The whole way
along, from the moment that Atropus handed him over to me, he dragged
and

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

hung back, and dug his heels into the ground: it was no easy work
getting him along. Every now and then he would take to prayers and
entreaties: Would I let him go just for a few minutes? he would make it
worth my while. Of course I was not going to do that; it was out of the
question.--Well, we had actually got to the very pit's mouth, when
somehow or other this double-dyed knave managed to slip off, whilst I
was telling over the Shades to Aeacus, as usual, and he checking them by
your sister's invoice. The consequence was, we were one short of tally.
Aeacus raised his eyebrows. 'Hermes,' he said, 'everything in its right
place: no larcenous work here, please. You play enough of those tricks
in Heaven. We keep strict accounts here: nothing escapes us. The invoice
says 1,004; there it is in black and white. You have brought me one
short, unless you say that Atropus was too clever for you.' I coloured
up at that; and then all at once I remembered what had happened on the
way, and when I looked round and this fellow was nowhere to be seen, I
knew that he must have made off, and I set off after him along the road
to the upper world, as fast as I could go. My worthy friend here
volunteered for the service; so we made a race of it, and caught the
runaway just as he got to Taenarum! It was a near thing.

*Clo*. There now, Charon! And we were beginning to accuse<span
class="margnote"><span id="232:5">5</span></span> Hermes of neglect.

*Cha*. Well, and why are we waiting here, as if there had not been
enough delay already?

*Clo*. True. Let them come aboard. I'll to my post by the gangway, with
my notebook, and take their names and countries as they come up, and
details of their deaths; and you can stow them away as you get
them.--Hermes, let us have those babies in first; I shall get nothing
out of them.

*Her*. Here, skipper. Three hundred of them, including those that were
exposed.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

*Cha*. A precious haul, on my word!-These are but green grapes, Hermes.

*Her*. Who next, Clotho? The Unwept?

<span class="margnote"><span id="233:6">6</span></span>*Clo*. Ah! I take
you.--Yes, up with the old fellows. I have no time to-day for
prehistoric research. All over sixty, pass on! What's the matter with
them? They don't hear me; they are deaf with age. I think you will have
to pick them up, like the babies, and get them along that way.

*Her*. Here they are; fine well-matured fruit, gathered in due season;
three hundred and ninety-eight of them.

*Cha*. Nay, nay; these are no better than raisins.

*Clo*. Bring up the wounded next, Hermes. *Now* I can get to work. Tell
me how you were killed. Or no; I had better look at my notes, and call
you over. Eighty-four due to be killed in battle yesterday, in Mysia,
These to include Gobares, son of Oxyartes.

*Her*. Adsunt.

*Clo*. The seven who killed themselves for love. Also Theagenes, the
philosopher, for love of the Megarian courtesan.

*Her*. Here they are, look.

*Clo*. And the rival claimants to thrones, who slew one another?

*Her*. Here!

*Clo*. And the one murdered by his wife and her paramour?

*Her*. Straight in front of you.

*Clo*. Now the victims of the law,--the cudgelled and the crucified. And
where are those sixteen who were killed by robbers?

*Her*. Here; you may know them by their wounds. Am I to bring the women
too?

*Clo*. Yes, certainly; and all who were shipwrecked; it is the same kind
of death. And those who died of fever, bring them too,<span
class="margnote"><span id="233:7">7</span></span> the doctor Agathocles
and all. Then there was a Cynic philosopher, who was to have succumbed
to a dinner with

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Dame Hecate, eked
out with sacrificial eggs and a raw cuttlefish; where is he?

*Cy*. Here I stand this long time, my good Clotho.--Now what had I done
to deserve such a weary spell of life? You gave me pretty nearly a
spindleful of it. I often tried to cut the thread and away; but somehow
it never would give.

*Clo*. I left you as a censor and physician of human frailties; pass on,
and good luck to you.

*Cy*. No, by Zeus! First let us see our captive safe on board. Your
judgement might be perverted by his entreaties.

*Clo*. Let me see; who is he? <span class="margnote"><span
id="234:8">8</span></span>

*Her*. Megapenthes, son of Lacydes; tyrant.

*Clo*. Come up, Megapenthes.

*Me*. Nay, nay, my lady Clotho; suffer me to return for a little while,
and I will come of my own accord, without waiting to be summoned.

*Clo*. What do you want to go for?

*Me*. I crave permission to complete my palace; I left the building
half-finished.

*Clo*. Pooh! Come along.

*Me*. Oh Fate, I ask no long reprieve. Vouchsafe me this one day, that I
may inform my wife where my great treasure lies buried.

*Clo*. Impossible. ’Tis Fate's decree.

*Me*. And all that money is to be thrown away?

*Clo*. Not thrown away. Be under no uneasiness. Your cousin Megacles
will take charge of it.

*Me*. Oh, monstrous! My enemy, whom from sheer good nature I omitted to
put to death?

*Clo*. The same. He will survive you for rather more than forty years;
in the full enjoyment of your harem, your wardrobe, and your treasure.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

*Me*. It is too bad of you, Clotho, to hand over my property to my worst
enemy.

*Clo*. My dear sir, it was Cydimachus's property first, surely? You only
succeeded to it by murdering him, and butchering his children before his
eyes.

*Me*. Yes, but it was mine after that.

*Clo*. Well, and now your term of possession expires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="235:9">9</span></span>*Me*. A word in
your ear, madam; no one else must hear this.--Sirs, withdraw for a
space.--Clotho, if you will let me escape, I pledge myself to give you a
quarter of a million sterling this very day.

*Clo*. Ha, ha! So your millions are still running in your head?

*Me*. Shall I throw in the two mixing-bowls that I got by the murder of
Cleocritus? They weigh a couple of tons apiece; refined gold!

*Clo*. Drag him up. We shall never get him to come on board by himself.

*Me*. I call you all to witness! My city-wall, my docks, remain
unfinished. I only wanted five days more to complete them.

*Clo*. Never mind. It will be another's work now.

*Me*. Stay! One request I can make with a clear conscience.

*Clo*. Well?

*Me*. Suffer me only to complete the conquest of Persia; . . . and to
impose tribute on Lydia; . . . and erect a colossal monument to myself,
. . . and inscribe thereon the military achievements of my life. Then
let me die.

*Clo*. Creature, this is no single day's reprieve: you would want
something like twenty years.

<span class="margnote"><span id="235:10">10</span></span>*Me*. Oh, but I
am quite prepared to give security for my expeditious return. Nay, I
could provide a substitute, if preferred--my well-beloved!

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

*Clo*. Wretch! How often have you prayed that he might survive you!

*Me*. That was a long time ago. Now,--I see a better use for him.

*Clo*. But he is due to be here, shortly, let me tell you. He is to be
put to death by the new sovereign.

*Me*. Well, Clotho, I hope you will not refuse my last request. <span
class="margnote"><span id="236:11">11</span></span>

*Clo*. Which is?

*Me*. I should like to know how things will be, now that I am gone.

*Clo*. Certainly; you shall have that mortification. Your wife will pass
into the hands of Midas, your slave; he has been her gallant for some
time past.

*Me*. A curse on him! 'Twas at her request that I gave him his freedom.

*Clo*. Your daughter will take her place in the harem of the present
monarch. Then all the old statues and portraits which the city set up in
your honour will be overturned,--to the entertainment, no doubt, of the
spectators.

*Me*. And will no friend resent these doings?

*Clo*. Who was your friend? Who had any reason to be? Need I explain
that the cringing courtiers who lauded your every word and deed were
actuated either by hope or by fear--time-servers every man of them, with
a keen eye to the main chance?

*Me*. And these are they whose feasts rang with my name! who, as they
poured their libations, invoked every blessing on my head! Not one but
would have died before me, could he have had his will; nay, they swore
by no other name.

*Clo*. Yes; and you dined with one of them yesterday, and it cost you
your life. It was that last cup you drank that brought you here.

*Me*. Ah, I noticed a bitter taste.--But what was his object?

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

*Clo*. Oh, you want to know too much. It is high time you came on board.

<span class="margnote"><span id="237:12">12</span></span>*Me*. Clotho, I
had a particular reason for desiring one more glimpse of daylight. I
have a burning grievance!

*Clo*. And what is that? Something of vast importance, I make no doubt.

*Me*. It is about my slave Carion. The moment he knew of my death, he
came up to the room where I lay; it was late in the evening; he had
plenty of time in front of him, for not a soul was watching by me; he
brought with him my concubine Glycerium (an old affair, this, I
suspect), closed the door, and proceeded to take his pleasure with her,
as if no third person had been in the room! Having satisfied the demands
of passion, he turned his attention to me. 'You little villain,' he
cried, 'many’s the flogging I've had from you, for no fault of mine!'
And as he spoke he plucked out my hair and smote me on the face. 'Away
with you,' he cried finally, spitting on me, 'away to the place of the
damned!'--and so withdrew. I burned with resentment: but there I lay
stark and cold, and could do nothing. That baggage Glycerium, too,
hearing footsteps approaching, moistened her eyes and pretended she had
been weeping for me; and withdrew sobbing, and repeating my name.--If I
could but get hold of them------

<span class="margnote"><span id="237:13">13</span></span>*Clo*. Never
mind what you would do to them, but come on board. The hour is at hand
when you must appear before the tribunal.

*Me*. And who will presume to give his vote against a tyrant?

*Clo*. Against a tyrant, who indeed? Against a Shade, Rhadamanthus will
take that liberty. He is strictly impartial, as you will presently
observe, in adapting his sentences to the requirements of individual
cases. And now, no more delay.

*Me*. Dread Fate, let me be some common man,--some

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

pauper! I have been a king,--let me be a slave! Only let me live!

*Clo*. Where is the one with the stick? Hermes, you and he must drag him
up feet foremost. He will never come up by himself.

*Her*. Come along, my runagate. Here you are, skipper. And I say, keep
an eye------

*Cha*. Never fear. We'll lash him to the mast.

*Me*. Look you, I must have the seat of honour.

*Clo*. And why exactly?

*Me*. Can you ask? Was I not a tyrant, with a guard of ten thousand men?

*Cy*. Oh, dullard! And you complain of Carion's pulling your hair! Wait
till you get a taste of this stick; you shall know what it is to be a
tyrant.

*Me*. What, shall a Cynic dare to raise his staff against me? Sirrah,
have you forgotten the other day, when I had all but nailed you to the
cross, for letting that sharp censorious tongue of yours wag too freely?

*Cynic*. Well, and now it is your turn to be nailed,--to the mast.

*Mi*. And what of me, mistress? Am I to be left out of the<span
class="margnote"><span id="238:14">14</span></span> reckoning? Because I
am poor, must I be the last to come aboard?

*Clo*. Who are you?

*Mi*. Micyllus the cobbler.

*Clo*. A cobbler, and cannot wait your turn? Look at the tyrant: see
what bribes he offers us, only for a short reprieve. It is very strange
that delay is not to your fancy too.

*Mi*. It is this way, my lady Fate. I find but cold comfort in that
promise of the Cyclops: 'Outis shall be eaten last,' said he; but first
or last, the same teeth are waiting. And then, it is not the same with
me as with the rich. Our lives are what they call 'diametrically
opposed.' This tyrant, now, was

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

thought happy while he lived; he was feared and respected by all: he had
his gold and his silver; his fine clothes and his horses and his
banquets; his smart pages and his handsome ladies,--and had to leave
them all. No wonder if he was vexed, and felt the tug of parting. For I
know not how it is, but these things are like birdlime: a man's soul
sticks to them, and will not easily come away; they have grown to be a
part of him. Nay, ’tis as if men were bound in some chain that nothing
can break; and when by sheer force they are dragged away, they cry out
and beg for mercy. They are bold enough for aught else, but show them
this same road to Hades, and they prove to be but cowards. They turn
about, and must ever be looking back at what they have left behind them,
far off though it be,--like men that are sick for love. So it was with
the fool yonder: as we came along, he was for running away; and now<span
class="margnote"><span id="239:15">15</span></span> he tires you with
his entreaties. As for me, I had no stake in life; lands and horses,
money and goods, fame, statues,--I had none of them; I could not have
been in better trim: it needed but one nod from Atropus,--I was busied
about a boot at the time, but down I flung knife and leather with a
will, jumped up, and never waited to get my shoes, or wash the blacking
from my hands, but joined the procession there and then, ay, and headed
it, looking ever forward; I had left nothing behind me that called for a
backward glance. And, on my word, things begin to look well already.
Equal rights for all, and no man better than his neighbour; that is
hugely to my liking. And from what I can learn there is no collecting of
debts in this country, and no taxes; better still, no shivering in
winter, no sickness, no hard knocks from one's betters. All is peace.
The tables are turned: the laugh is with us poor men; it is the rich
that make moan, and are ill at ease.

<span class="margnote"><span id="239:16">16</span></span>*Clo*. To be
sure, I noticed that you were laughing, some time ago. What was it in
particular that excited your mirth?

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

*Mi*. I'll tell you, best of Goddesses. Being next door to a tyrant up
there, I was all eyes for what went on in his house; and he seemed to me
neither more nor less than a God. I saw the embroidered purple, the host
of courtiers, the gold, the jewelled goblets, the couches with their
feet of silver: and I thought, this is happiness. As for the sweet
savour that arose when his dinner was getting ready, it was too much for
me; such blessedness seemed more than human. And then his proud looks
and stately walk and high carriage, striking admiration into all
beholders! It seemed almost as if he must be handsomer than other men,
and a good eighteen inches taller. But when he was dead, he made a queer
figure, with all his finery gone; though I laughed more at myself than
at him: there had I been worshipping mere scum on no better authority
than the smell of roast meat, and reckoning happiness by the blood of
Lacedaemonian sea-snails! There was Gniphon the<span
class="margnote"><span id="240:17">17</span></span> usurer, too,
bitterly reproaching himself for having died without ever knowing the
taste of wealth, leaving all his money to his nearest relation and
heir-at-law, the spendthrift Rhodochares, when he might have had the
enjoyment of it himself. When I saw him, I laughed as if I should never
stop: to think of him as he used to be, pale, wizened, with a face full
of care, his fingers the only rich part of him, for they had the talents
to count,--scraping the money together bit by bit, and all to be
squandered in no time by that favourite of Fortune, Rhodochares!--But
what are we waiting for now? There will be time enough on the voyage to
enjoy their woebegone faces, and have our laugh out.

*Clo*. Come on board, and then the ferryman can haul up the anchor.

*Cha*. Now, now! What are you doing here? The boat<span
class="margnote"><span id="240:18">18</span></span> is full. You wait
till to-morrow. We can bring you across in the morning.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

*Mi*. What right have you to leave me behind,--a shade of twenty-four
hours' standing? I tell you what it is, I shall have you up before
Rhadamanthus. A plague on it, she's moving! And here I shall be left all
by myself. Stay, though: why not swim across in their wake? No matter if
I get tired; a dead man will scarcely be drowned. Not to mention that I
have not a penny to pay my fare.

*Clo*. Micyllus! Stop! You must not come across that way; Heaven forbid!

*Mi*. Ha, ha! I shall get there first, and I shouldn't wonder.

*Clo*. This will never do. We must get to him, and pick him up. . . .
Hermes, give him a hand up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="241:19">19</span></span>*Cha*. And
where is he to sit now he is here? We are full up, as you may see.

*Her*. What do you say to the tyrant's shoulders?

*Clo*. A good idea that.

*Cha*. Up with you then; and make the rascal's back ache. And now, good
luck to our voyage!

*Cy*. Charon, I may as well tell you the plain truth at once. The penny
for my fare is not forthcoming; I have nothing but my wallet, look, and
this stick. But if you want a hand at baling, here I am; or I could take
an oar; only give me a good stout one, and you shall have no fault to
find with me.

*Cha*. To it, then; and I'll ask no other payment of you.

*Cy*. Shall I tip them a stave?

*Cha*. To be sure, if you have a sea-song about you.

*Cy*. I have several. Look here though, an opposition is starting: a
song of lamentation. It will throw me out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="241:20">20</span></span>*Sh*. Oh, my
lands, my lands!--Ah, my money, my money!--Farewell, my fine
palace!--The thousands that fellow will have to squander!--Ah, my
helpless children!--To think of the vines I planted last year! Who, ah
who, will pluck the grapes?------

*Her*. Why, Micyllus, have *you* never an Oh or an Ah? It is

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

quite improper that any shade should cross the stream, and make no moan.

*Mi*. Get along with you. What have I to do with Ohs and Ahs? I'm
enjoying the trip!

*Her*. Still, just a groan or two. It's expected.

*Mi*. Well, if I must, here goes.--Farewell, leather, farewell! Ah,
Soles, old Soles!--Oh, ancient Boots!--Woe's me! Never again shall I sit
empty from morn till night; never again walk up and down, of a winter's
day, naked, unshod, with chattering teeth! My knife, my awl, will be
another's: whose, ah! whose?

*Her*. Yes, that will do. We are nearly there.

*Cha*. Wait a bit! Fares first, please. Your fare, Micyllus;<span
class="margnote"><span id="242:21">21</span></span> every one else has
paid; one penny.

*Mi*. You don't expect to get a penny out of the poor cobbler? You're
joking, Charon; or else this is what they call a 'castle in the air.' I
know not whether your penny is square or round.

*Cha*. A fine paying trip this, I must say! However,--all ashore! I must
fetch the horses, cows, dogs, and other livestock. Their turn comes now.

*Clo*. You can take charge of them for the rest of the way, Hermes. I am
crossing again to see after the Chinamen, Indopatres and Heramithres.
They have been fighting about boundaries, and have killed one another by
this time.

*Her*. Come, shades, let us get on;--follow me, I mean, in single file.

*Mi*. Bless me, how dark it is! Where is handsome Megillus<span
class="margnote"><span id="242:22">22</span></span> *now*? There would
be no telling Simmiche from Phryne. All complexions are alike here, no
question of beauty, greater or less. Why, the cloak I thought so shabby
before passes muster here as well as royal purple; the darkness hides
both alike. Cyniscus, whereabouts are you?

*Cy*. Use your ears; here I am. We might walk together. What do you say?

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

*Mi*. Very good; give me your hand.--I suppose you have been admitted to
the mysteries at Eleusis? That must have been something like this, I
should think?

*Cy*. Pretty much. Look, here comes a torch-bearer; a grim, forbidding
dame. A Fury, perhaps?

*Mi*. She looks like it, certainly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="243:23">23</span></span>*Her*. Here
they are, Tisiphone. One thousand and four.

*Ti*. It is time we had them. Rhadamanthus has been waiting.

*Rhad*. Bring them up, Tisiphone. Hermes, you call out their names as
they are wanted.

*Cy*. Rhadamanthus, as you love your father Zeus, have me up first for
examination.

*Rhad*. Why?

*Cy*. There is a certain shade whose misdeeds on earth I am anxious to
denounce. And if my evidence is to be worth anything, you must first be
satisfied of my own character and conduct.

*Rhad*. Who are you?

*Cy*. Cyniscus, your worship; a student of philosophy.

*Rhad*. Come up for judgement; I will take you first. Hermes, summon the
accusers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="243:24">24</span></span>*Her*. If any
one has an accusation to bring against Cyniscus here present, let him
come forward.

*Cy*. No one stirs!

*Rhad*. Ah, but that is not enough, my friend. Off with your clothes; I
must have a look at your brands.

*Cy*. Brands? Where will you find them?

*Rhad*. Never yet did mortal man sin, but he carried about the secret
record thereof, branded on his soul.

*Cy*. Well, here I am stripped. Now for the 'brands.'

*Rhad*. Clean from head to heel, except three or four very faint marks,
scarcely to be made out. Ah! what does this mean? Here is place after
place that tells of the iron; all

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

rubbed out apparently, or *cut* out. How do you explain this, Cyniscus?
How did you get such a clean skin again?

*Cy*. Why, in old days, when I knew no better, I lived an evil life, and
acquired thereby a number of brands. But from the day that I began to
practise philosophy, little by little I washed out all the scars from my
soul,--thanks to the efficiency of that admirable lotion.

*Rhad*. Off with you then to the Isles of the Blest, and the excellent
company you will find there. But we must have your impeachment of the
tyrant before you go. Next shade, Hermes!

*Mi*. Mine is a very small affair, too, Rhadamanthus; I shall<span
class="margnote"><span id="244:25">25</span></span> not keep you long. I
have been stripped all this time; so do take me next.

*Rhad*. And who may you be?

*Mi*. Micyllus the cobbler.

*Rhad*. Very well, Micyllus. As clean as clean could be; not a mark
anywhere. You may join Cyniscus. Now the Tyrant.

*Her*. Megapenthes, son of Lacydes, wanted! Where are you off to? This
way! You there, the Tyrant! Up with him, Tisiphone, neck and crop.

*Rhad*. Now, Cyniscus, your accusation and your proofs. Here is the
party.

*Cy*. There is in fact no need of an accusation. You will very<span
class="margnote"><span id="244:26">26</span></span> soon know the man by
the marks upon him. My words however may serve to unveil him, and to
show his character in a clearer light. With the conduct of this monster
as a private citizen, I need not detain you. Surrounded with a
bodyguard, and aided by unscrupulous accomplices, he rose against his
native city, and established a lawless rule. The persons put to death by
him without trial are to be counted by thousands, and it was the
confiscation of their property that gave him his enormous wealth. Since
then, there is no conceivable iniquity

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

which he has not perpetrated. His hapless fellow-citizens have been
subjected to every form of cruelty and insult. Virgins have been
seduced, boys corrupted, the feelings of his subjects outraged in every
possible way. His overweening pride, his insolent bearing towards all
who had to do with him, were such as no doom of yours can adequately
requite. A man might with more security have fixed his gaze upon the
blazing sun, than upon yonder tyrant. As for the refined cruelty of his
punishments, it baffles description; and not even his familiars were
exempt. That this accusation has not been brought without sufficient
grounds, you may easily satisfy yourself, by summoning the murderer's
victims.--Nay, they need no summons; see, they are here; they press
round as though they would stifle him. Every man there, Rhadamanthus,
fell a prey to his iniquitous designs. Some had attracted his attention
by the beauty of their wives; others by their resentment at the forcible
abduction of their children; others by their wealth; others again by
their understanding, their moderation, and their unvarying disapproval
of his conduct.

<span class="margnote"><span id="245:27">27</span></span>*Rhad*.
Villain, what have you to say to this?

*Me*. I committed the murders referred to. As for the rest, the
adulteries and corruptions and seductions, it is all a pack of lies.

*Cy*. I can bring witnesses to these points too, Rhadamanthus.

*Rhad*. Witnesses, eh?

*Cy*. Hermes, kindly summon his Lamp and Bed. They will appear in
evidence, and state what they know of his conduct.

*Her*. Lamp and Bed of Megapenthes, come into court. Good, they respond
to the summons.

*Rhad*. Now, tell us all you know about Megapenthes. Bed, you speak
first.

*Bed*. All that Cyniscus said is true. But really, Mr. Rhadamanthus, I
don't quite like to speak about it; such strange things used to happen
overhead.

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

*Rhad*. Why, your unwillingness to speak is the most telling evidence of
all!--Lamp, now let us have yours.

*Lamp*. What went on in the daytime I never saw, not being there. As for
his doings at night, the less said the better. I saw some very queer
things, though, monstrous queer. Many is the time I have stopped taking
oil on purpose, and tried to go out. But then he used to bring me close
up. It was enough to give any lamp a bad character.

*Rhad*. Enough of verbal evidence. Now, just divest yourself<span
class="margnote"><span id="246:28">28</span></span> of that purple, and
we will see what you have in the way of brands. Goodness gracious, the
man's a positive network! Black and blue with them! Now, what punishment
can we give him? A bath in Pyriphlegethon? The tender mercies of
Cerberus, perhaps?

*Cy*. No, no. Allow me,--I have a novel idea; something that will just
suit him.

*Rhad*. Yes? I shall be obliged to you for a suggestion.

*Cy*. I fancy it is usual for departed spirits to take a draught of the
water of Lethe?

*Rhad*. Just so.

*Cy*. Let him be the sole exception.

*Rhad*. What is the idea in that?<span class="margnote"><span
id="246:29">29</span></span>

*Cy*. His earthly pomp and power for ever in his mind; his fingers ever
busy on the tale of blissful items;--’tis a heavy sentence!

*Rhad*. True. Be this the tyrant's doom. Place him in fetters at
Tantalus's side,--never to forget the things of earth.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alphabetical Contents](wl182)
