[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr019.md) 
[Next](abr021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### THE FIRST CHAPTER.

### WHAT AND HOW MANY BE THE FORMS OF VERITABLE MAGIC.

<span id="img_winit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/winit.jpg) |

HOSO should wish to recount all the Arts and Operations which in our
times be reputed and preached abroad as Wisdom and Magical Secrets; he
should as well undertake to count the waves and the sands of the Sea;
seeing that the matter hath come to such a pass that every trick of a
buffoon is believed to be Magic, that all the abominations of impious
Enchanters, all Diabolical Illusions, all Pagan Idolatries, all
Superstitions, Fascinations, Diabolical Pacts, and lastly all that the
gross blindness of the World can touch with its hands and feet is
reckoned as Wisdom and Magic! The Physician, the Astrologer, the
Enchanter, the Sorceress, the Idolater, and the Sacrilegious, is called
of the common People a Magician! Also he who draweth his Magic whether
from the Sun, whether from the Moon, whether from the Evil Spirits,
whether from Stones, Herbs, Animals, Brutes, or lastly from thousand
divers sources, so that the Heaven itself is astonished thereat. There
be certain who draw their Magic from Air, from Earth, from Fire, from
Water, from Physiognomy, from the Hand, from Mirrors, from Glasses, from
Birds, from Bread, from Wine, and even from the very excrements
themselves; and yet, however, all this is reputed as Science!

I exhort you, ye who read, to have the Fear of God, and to study
Justice, because infallibly unto you shall be opened the Gate of the
True Wisdom which God gave unto NOAH and unto his descendants JAPHET,
ABRAHAM, and ISHMAEL; and it was His Wisdom that delivered LOT

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

from the burning of Sodom. MOSES learned the same Wisdom in the desert,
from the Burning Bush, and he taught it unto AARON his brother. JOSEPH,
SAMUEL, DAVID, SOLOMON, ELIJAH, and the Apostles, and Saint JOHN
particularly (from whom we hold a most excellent book of Prophecy <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87).md) possessed it. Let every one then know
that this, this which I teach, is that same Wisdom and Magic, and which
is in this same Book, and independent of any other Science, or Wisdom,
or Magic, soever. It is, however, certainly true that these miraculous
operations have much in common with the Qabalah; it is also true that
there be other Arts which have some stamp of Wisdom; the which alone
would be nothing worth were they not mingled with the foundation of the
Sacred Ministry, whence later arose the Mixed Qabalah. The Arts are
principally twelve. Four in number, 3, 5, 7, 9, among the numbers in the
Mixed Qabalah. The second is the most perfect one, the which operateth
by Sign and Visions. Two of the even numbers, namely 6 and 2, which
operate with the Stars and the Celestial Courses which we call
Astronomy. Three consisteth in the Metals, and 2 in the Planets. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88.md) As to all

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

these Arts, the which be conjoined and mingled together with the Sacred
Qabalah; both he who maketh use of these same, either alone, or mingled
with other things which be in no way from the Qabalah; and he who
seeketh to exercise himself in performing operations with these Arts; is
alike liable to be deceived by the DEMON; seeing that of themselves they
possess no other virtue than a natural property; and they can produce no
other thing than *probable* <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) effects,
and they have absolutely no power in spiritual and supernatural things;
but if, however, on certain occasions they <span
id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90.md) cause you to behold any extraordinary
effect, such is only produced by impious and diabolical Pacts and
Conjurations, the which form of Science ought to be called Sorcery.

Finally, let us conclude that from the Divine Mystery are derived these
three kinds of Qabalah, *viz.*: the Mixed Qabalah, and the True Wisdom,
and the (True) Magic. We will, therefore, show forth this last, and the
manner of becoming its possessors in the Name of God and of His
Celestial Court!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[51:1](abr020.htm#fr_87.md) *I.e.*, the Revelation,
or Apocalypse.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[51:2](abr020.htm#fr_88.md) This whole passage
about the signification of these numbers is very obscurely worded in the
original. I take the meaning to be the following: The Arts or methods of
Magical working are twelve, if we class them under the twelve Signs of
the Zodiac. The second number mentioned above, 5, is perfect because of
its analogy with the Pentagram that potent Symbol of the Spirit and the
Four Elements; 6 is the number of the Planets (as known to the Ancients,
without the recently discovered Herschel and Neptune). As the Chaldean
Oracles of Zoroaster say: "He made them Six, and for the Seventh, He
cast into the midst thereof the Fire of the Sun". 2 operates in the
Stars and Planets as representing their Good or Evil influence in the
Heavens, in other words their dual nature. 3 consists in the Metals
because, the ancient Alchemists considered their bases to be found in
the three principles which *they called* Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt; but
by which they did not mean the substance which we know under these
names.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[52:1](abr020.htm#fr_89.md) *I.e.*, "probable" as
opposed to "certain".

<span id="fn_90"></span>[52:2](abr020.htm#fr_90.md) *I.e.*, professing
Magicians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Chapter. What We Should Consider Before Undertaking
This Operation](abr021.md)
