[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr040.md) 
[Next](abr042.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

### BY WHOM THE SYMBOLS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE THIRD BOOK BE MANIFESTED. <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210.md)

The Symbols of the Chapters of the Third Book, which be manifested only
by the Angels, or by the Guardian Angel, be these, namely:--

Chapter I. (To know all manner of things Past and Future, which be not
however directly opposed to God, and to His Most Holy Will.)

Chapter III. (To cause any Spirit to appear, and take any form, such as
of man, animal, bird, etc.)

Chapter IV. (For divers Visions.)

Chapter V. (How we may retain the Familiar Spirits bond or free in
whatsoever form.)

Chapter VI. (To cause Mines to be pointed out, and to help forward all
kinds of work connected therewith.)

Chapter VII. (To cause the Spirits to perform with facility and
promptitude all necessary chemical labours and Operations, as regardeth
Metals especially.)

Chapter X. (To hinder any Necromantic or Magical Operations from taking
effect, except those of the Qabalah, or of this Sacred Magic.)

Chapter XI. (To cause all kinds of Books to be brought to one, and
whether lost or stolen.)

Chapter XVI. (To find and take possession of all kinds of Treasures,
provided that they be not at all magically guarded.)

Chapter XVIII. (To heal divers Maladies.)

Chapter XXV. (To walk upon, and operate under, Water.)

Chapter XXVIII. (To have as much gold and silver as one may wish, both
to provide for one's necessities, and to live in opulence.)

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

The following (Symbols) be manifested in part by the Angels and in part
by the Evil Spirits, which is why we must not avail ourselves hereof
without the permission of the Holy Angel. They are those of:--

Chapter II. (To obtain information concerning, and to be enlightened
upon, all sorts of Propositions, and all doubtful Sciences.)

Chapter VIII. (To excite Tempests.)

Chapter XII. (To know the Secrets of any person.)

Chapter XIII. (To cause a Dead Body to revive, and perform all the
functions which a Living Person would do, and this during a space of
Seven Years by means of the Spirits.)

Chapter XIV. (The Twelve Symbols for the Twelve Hours of the Day and of
the Night, to render oneself Invisible unto every person.)

Chapter XV. (For the Spirits to bring us anything we may wish to eat or
to drink, and even all (kinds of food) that we can imagine.)

Chapter XVII. (To fly in the Air, and travel any whither.)

Chapter XIX. (For every description of Affection and Love.)

Chapter XX. (To excite every description of Hatred and Enmity, Discords,
Quarrels, Contentions, Combats, Battles, Loss, and Damage.)

Chapter XXIV. (To discover any Theft that hath occurred.)

Chapter XXVI. (To open every kind of Lock without a Key, and without
making any noise.)

Chapter XXIX. (To cause Armed Men to appear.)

 

The following (Symbols) be only manifested by the Evil Spirits,
namely:--

Chapter IX. (To transform Animals into Men, and Men into Animals, etc.)

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

Chapter XXI. (To transform oneself, and take different Faces and Forms.)

Chapter XXII. (This Chapter is only for Evil, for with the Symbols
herein we can cast Spells, and work every kind of Evil; we should not
avail ourselves hereof.)

Chapter XXIII. (To demolish Buildings and Strongholds.)

Chapter XXVII. (To cause Visions to appear.)

Chapter XXX. (To cause Comedies, Operas, and every kind of Music and
Dances to appear.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_210"></span>[136:1](abr041.htm#fr_210.md) I have thought it
advisable to add here the headings of these chapters at length.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Unto What Prince the Operations of Each Chapter are
Submitted](abr042.md)
