[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr033) 
[Next](abr035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.

### CONCERNING WHAT YOU SHOULD DEMAND OF THE SPIRITS WHO ARE DIVIDED INTO THREE DIFFERENT TROOPS AND CONVOKED ON THREE SEPARATE DAYS.

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/tinit.jpg) |

HE Demands we should make to the Spirits are of three different kinds.

### THE FIRST DEMAND.

The Demand of the First Day when the Four Superior Princes shall have
visibly appeared, you shall make according unto the Order of the
Angel:--

Firstly: The Proposition by what Virtue, Power and Authority you make
your demands unto them; that is to say by the Virtue of God our Lord Who
hath made them subject unto all His creatures, and brought them to your
feet. <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165)

Secondly:  <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166)That your object is not
at all a malign curiosity, but (one tending) unto the Honour and Glory

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

of God, and to your own good and that of all the Human Race. That
further, every time that you shall summon them, by whatever Sign or
Word, and in whatever Time and Place, and for whatever occasion and
service, they shall have to appear immediately without any delay, and
obey your commands. And that in case they shall have some legitimate
hindrance hereto, they are to send unto you some other Spirits assigning
then and there such as shall be capable and potent to accomplish and
obey your will and your demand in their place. And that they shall
promise and swear to observe this by the most rigorous judgment of God,
and by the most severe punishment and chastisement of the Holy Angels,
inflicted upon them. And that they will consent to obey, and that the
Four Sovereign Princes will name unto you the Eight Sub-Princes, whom
they will send in their place to take the Oath as I have already said,
to appear at once on the following morning when commanded by you; and
that they will duly send the Eight Sub-Princes.

For greater certainty, quit the Altar now, and go towards the Door which
openeth on to the Terrace, advancing your right hand beyond. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167) Make each one of them touch the Wand,
and take the Oath upon that Wand.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### THE DEMAND OF THE SECOND DAY.

THE Eight Sub-Princes being invoked, you shall make unto them the same
demand and the same admonition which you have (already) made unto the
Four Sovereign Princes. And further you shall request from these four,
that is to say, from ORIENS, PAIMON, ARITON, and AMAIMON; that each of
them shall assign and consign unto you your Familiar Spirit, which from
the day of your birth they are compelled to give unto you. These will be
given and furnished unto you with their dependants and will afterwards
obey you. It is for you to demand from these the other Spirits which you
may wish to have; but seeing that they be infinite in number, and one
more skilful in service than another, one for one matter, another for
another; you shall make a selection of the Spirits whom you wish, and
you shall put outside upon the Terrace a written list of their names for
the Eight Sub-Princes (to see), and you shall require from these
(latter) the Oath, as you did from the Four Superior Princes, that the
following morning they shall have to appear before you together with all
the Spirits whose names you shall have given in writing, and also your
Familiar Spirits.

### THE DEMAND OF THE THIRD DAY.

THE Eight Sub-Princes having presented all the Spirits as you have
directed them, you shall command that ASTAROT <span
id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168) with all his following shall appear
visibly in the Form which the Angel shall have prescribed unto you; and
immediately you shall see a Great Army, and all under the same Form. You
shall propound unto them the same demand, which you have already made
unto the Princes, and you shall cause them to take Oath

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

to observe the same; that is to say, that every time that you shall call
one of them by his name, that he shall at once appear in such Form and
Place as shall please you, and that he shall punctually execute that
which you shall have commanded him. All having sworn, you shall put
outside the entry <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_169) of the Door, all
the Signs of the Third Book which belong unto ASTAROT <span
id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_170) *alone*, and make him swear thereon,
also ordaining unto them <span id="fr_171"></span>[3](#fn_171), that in
cases when it may not seem fit unto you to command them verbally, that
as soon as you shall take one of these Signs in your hand and move it
from its place that the Spirit marked in the Sign shall do and execute
that which the Sign beareth, and that which your intimation <span
id="fr_172"></span>[4](#fn_172) joined thereto shall indicate; also that
in the case that in the Sign <span id="fr_173"></span>[5](#fn_173) none
of them shall be specially named, that all in general shall be obliged
promptly and readily to perform the Operation commanded; and that if
also in the time to come, other (Signs or) Symbols be made by you which
be not here <span id="fr_174"></span>[6](#fn_174) included, that then
also they (the Spirits under Astarot) shall be equally bound to observe
and execute them also. And when the Oath hath been taken, cause the
Prince in the Name of the rest to touch the Wand.

After this, remove those Symbols from the Doorway; and call MAGOT, and
after him ASMODEE, and lastly BELZEBUD; and act with all these as you
have done with

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

\[paragraph continues\] ASTAROT; and all their Symbols having been sworn
unto, put them aside in order in a certain place, so arranged that you
can easily distinguish one from another, as regards the subject,
operation, or effect, for which they have been made, and unto which they
belong.

This being done, you shall call ASTAROT and ASMODEE together, with their
common Servitors, <span id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_175) and shall
propound unto them their Symbols; and having made them swear in the
forementioned manner, you shall call in similar fashion ASMODEE and
MAGOT, with their Servitors, and shall make them take oath upon their
Signs in the aforesaid manner.

And thus shall you observe this method with the Four other
Sub-Princes; <span id="fr_176"></span>[2](#fn_176) but first of all
convoke them with their common Servitors, and make them swear upon the
common Signs, then AMAIMON and ARITON together, and finally each one
apart, as in the first case. <span id="fr_177"></span>[3](#fn_177)

And when you have put back all the Symbols into their proper place,
request from *each* of these last Four <span
id="fr_178"></span>[4](#fn_178) your Familiar Spirit, and make them
repeat its Name, which you shall at once write down, together with the
time during which they shall be obliged to serve you. Then you shall
propound unto them the Signs of the Fifth Chapter of the Third
Book; <span id="fr_179"></span>[5](#fn_179) and shall make them not only
swear upon these Symbols (collectively), but also each one (separately),
that from this time forward he will

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

observe duly and with diligence the six hours destined; <span
id="fr_180"></span>[1](#fn_180) and you shall cause them to promise to
serve you with fidelity, performing all which they are obliged to do,
and that you shall command their (services); and that they shall not in
the slightest degree be false and lying as regardeth you; also, that if
by chance you should assign over one of them unto another person, that
he shall act as faithfully by him as by yourself; and, lastly, that they
are to fulfil, perform, and execute, that which God for their
Chastisement hath destined unto them for Sentence (of judgment).

You shall then observe this form with all the Princes, and until all the
Symbols shall be sworn to, with the Four Familiar Spirits and the others
dominating (them).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_165"></span>[92:1](abr034.htm#fr_165) "*Qui les asoumis
atouttes ses Creatures et avos pieds*."

<span id="fn_166"></span>[92:2](abr034.htm#fr_166) This whole paragraph
is difficult of clear translation by literal rendering, so I give the
MS. text: "*Secondement que vostre fin nest point curiosité maligne mais
alhonneur et gloire de Dieu et alutililè propre et acelle de tout le
genre humain elpourtant toutte ces fois que* <span id="page_93">p.
93</span> *vous les appellerez avec quelquesoit signe ou parole
etenquelquesoit temps et Lieu etpourquelle soit occasion etservile
dabort sans aucunement retarder ayent aparoitre elobeissent avos
commandemens etaucas quils eussent un empechemen Legitime quils ayent
avous envoyer dautres esprits enles nommant presentement ceux quiseront
capable etpuissan pourobeir etaccomplir vostre volonte el vostre demande
en leur place etquils vous promeltent et jurent dobserver cela par le
tresrigoureux jugement de Dieu etpar latres grande peine et chatiment
dessts anges sur eux ils consentiront dobeir et Les 4 princes souverains
vous nommeront les 8 sousprinces quils vous enveront enleurplase
aleurfaire preter le serment comme jelay deja dit deparoitre dabort*,"
etc. The writer of this manuscript never uses the slightest punctuation,
and paragraphs are infrequent.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[93:1](abr034.htm#fr_167) *I.e.*, beyond the
Door, but being careful not to go out on to the Terrace yourself.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[94:1](abr034.htm#fr_168) Written "Atarot" by a
slip in the MS.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[95:1](abr034.htm#fr_169) *I.e.*, upon the sand
on the Terrace.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[95:2](abr034.htm#fr_170) Again erroneously
"*Atarot*".

<span id="fn_171"></span>[95:3](abr034.htm#fr_171) *I.e.*, unto the
subservient Spirits of Astaroth.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[95:4](abr034.htm#fr_172) *I.e.*, whether
Verbal, or Mental, or by Gesture.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[95:5](abr034.htm#fr_173) Again note that the
whole of the operations of this Magic of Abra-Melin and of Abraham the
Jew depends on these Symbols, so that it is not the true and sacred
pentacles and symbols which he condemns; but erroneous and corrupted
ones made use of ignorantly.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[95:6](abr034.htm#fr_174) *I.e.*, in those
which the Operator has written down from the Third Book, and placed at
the entry of the Door for Astaroth to take oath upon.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[96:1](abr034.htm#fr_175) *I.e.*, Servitors
belonging equally to these two Sub-Princes together.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[96:2](abr034.htm#fr_176) *I.e.*, Oriens,
Paimon, Ariton, and Amaimon. Ariton is often called Egin or Egyn in
other works on Magic.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[96:3](abr034.htm#fr_177) *I.e.*, following the
order of the classification in the Nineteenth Chapter of this Second
Book.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[96:4](abr034.htm#fr_178) *I.e.*, Oriens,
Paimon, Ariton, and Amaimon; one Spirit from each for a Familiar.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[96:5](abr034.htm#fr_179) Entitled: "How one
may retain the Familiar Spirits, bound or free, in whatsoever form".

<span id="fn_180"></span>[97:1](abr034.htm#fr_180) *I.e.*, so that each
of the four Familiars shall serve a fourth part of the twenty-four hours
of the day, that is six hours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sixteenth Chapter. Concerning the Sending Them Away](abr035)
