[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr011.md) 
[Next](abr013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SIXTH CHAPTER.

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/tinit.jpg) |

HE Fear of the Lord is the True Wisdom, and he who hath it not can in no
way penetrate the True Secrets of Magic, and he but buildeth upon a
foundation of sand, and his building can in no way last. The RABBIN
MOSES persuaded me to be wise, while he himself, with words which
neither he himself nor any other person understood, and with extravagant
symbols made bells to sound, and while with execrable conjurations he
made appear in glasses him who had committed a theft, and while he made
a water causing an old man to appear young (and that only for the space
of two hours and no longer). All the which things he indeed taught me,
but the whole was but vanity, low curiosity, and a pure deception of the
DEMON, leading to no useful end imaginable, and tending to the loss of
the Soul. And when I had the Veritable Knowledge of the Sacred Magic, I
both forgot them, and banished them from mine heart.

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

That impious Bohemian, <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36.md) with the aid
and assistance of his Associate, performed astounding feats. He rendered
himself invisible, he used to fly in the air, he used to enter through
the keyholes into locked-up rooms, he knew our greatest secrets, and
once he told me things which God alone could know. But his Art cost him
too dear, for the Devil had made him swear in the Pact that he would use
all his secrets to the dishonour of God, and to the prejudice of his
neighbour. Ultimately his body was found dragged through the streets,
and his head without any tongue therein, lying in a drain. And this was
all the profit he drew from his Diabolical Science and Magic.

In AUSTRIA I found an infinitude of Magicians who only occupied
themselves in killing and maiming men, in putting discord among married
people, in causing divorces, in tying witch-knots in osier or willow
branches to stop the flow of milk in the breasts of nursing women, and
similar infamies. But these miserable wretches had made a Pact with the
Devil, and had become his slaves, having sworn unto him that they would
work without cessation to destroy all living creatures. Some of these
had two years (for their Pact) to run, some three, and after that time
they underwent the same fate as the Bohemian.

At LINTZ I worked with a young woman, who one evening invited me to go
with her, assuring me that without any risk she would conduct me to a
place where I greatly desired to find myself. I allowed myself to be
persuaded by her promises. She then gave unto me an unguent, with which
I rubbed the principal pulses of my feet and hands; the which she did
also; and at first it appeared to me that I was flying in the air in the
place which I wished, and which I had in no way mentioned to her.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

pass over in silence and out of respect, that which I saw, which was
admirable, and appearing to myself to have remained there a long while,
I felt as if I were just awakening from a profound sleep, and I had
great pain in my head and deep melancholy. I turned round and saw that
she was seated at my side. She began to recount to me what she had seen,
but that which I had seen was entirely different. I was, however, much
astonished, because it appeared to me as if I had been really and
corporeally in the place, and there in reality to have seen that which
had happened. However, I asked her one day to go alone to that same
place, and to bring me back news of a friend whom I knew for certain was
distant 200 leagues. She promised to do so in the space of an hour. She
rubbed herself with the same unguent, and I was very expectant to see
her fly away; but she fell to the ground and remained there about three
hours as if she were dead, so that I began to think that she really was
dead. At last she began to stir like a person who is waking, then she
rose to an upright position, and with much pleasure began to give me the
account of her expedition, saying that she had been in the place where
my friend was, and all that he was doing; the which was entirely
contrary to his profession. Whence I concluded that what she had just
told me was a simple dream, and that this unguent was a causer of a
phantastic sleep; whereon she confessed to me that this unguent had been
given to her by the Devil.

All the Arts of the Greeks are Enchantments and Fascinations, and the
Demons hold them enchained in these accursed arts so that the Foundation
of the True Magic may be unknown to them which would render them more
powerful than they; and I was the more Confirmed in this opinion because
their operations were of no practical use whatever, and caused injury
unto him who put them into practice, as in fact many of them

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

avowed plainly to me, when I had the True and Sacred Magic. There are
also many operations which they say are handed down from the Ancient
Sibyls. There is an Art called White and Black; <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37.md) another Angelical, TEATIM; in which I avow
that I have seen orations so learned and beautiful, that had I not known
the venom therein hidden, I would have given them herein. I say all this
because it is very easy to him who is not constantly upon his guard to
err.

One old scribbler of symbols <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38.md) gave me
many enchantments which only tended to work evil. He performed other
operations by means of numbers, which were all odd, and of a triple
proportion, in no way similar to the other, and for proof of this, he
caused by such means in my presence a very fine tree which was near my
house to fall to the ground, and all the leaves and fruits were consumed
in a very short time. And he told me that in Numbers there was hidden a
very Great Mystery, because that by the means of numbers one can perform
all the operations for friendships, riches, honours, and all sorts of
things, good and evil; and he assured me that he had tried them, but
that yet some that he knew to be very true had not yet succeeded with
him. With regard to this particular, I found out the reason through the
Wise ABRAMELIN, who told me that this came and depended from a Divine
Ministry, that Is to say, from the Qabalah, and that without that, one
could not succeed. All these things have I beheld, and many others, and
those who possessed these secrets gave them to me out of friendship. I
burned these recipes afterwards in the house of ABRAMELIN, they being
absolutely things very far removed from the Will of God, and contrary to
the charity which we owe unto our neighbour. Every

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

learned and prudent man may fall if he be not defended and guided by the
Angel of the Lord, who aided me, and prevented me from falling into such
a state of wretchedness, and who led me undeserving from the mire of
darkness unto the Light of the Truth. I have known and felt the effects
of the goodness of the Wise ABRAHA MELIN, <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39.md) who of his own free will, and before I had
asked him so to do, accepted me for his disciple. And before that I had
declared my wish unto him he would accomplish and fulfil my desire; and
all that I wished to obtain from him he knew before I could open my
mouth. Also he recounted to me all that I had seen, done, and suffered
from the time of my father's death down to this moment; and this in
words obscure and as it were prophetic, which I did not then comprehend,
but which I understood later. He told me many things touching my good
fortune, but, which was the principal thing, he discovered to me the
Source of the Veritable Qabalah, the which according to our custom, I
have in turn communicated unto thine elder brother JOSEPH, after that he
had fulfilled the requisite conditions without the accomplishment of
which the Qabalah and this Sacred Magic cannot be exercised, and which I
will recount in the two following books. Afterwards he did manifest unto
me the Regimen of the Mystery of that Sacred Magic which was exercised
and put into practice by our forefathers and progenitors, NOAH, ABRAHAM,
JACOB, MOSES, DAVID, and SOLOMON, among whom the last misused it, and he
received the punishment thereof during his life.

In the Second Book I will describe the whole faithfully and clearly, in
order that if the Lord God should wish to dispose of me before that thou
shalt have attained a competent age, thou shalt find these three small
manuscript books as forming at the same time both an inestimable

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

treasure and a faithful master and teacher; because there are very many
secrets in the Symbols of the Third Book which I have seen made
experiment of with mine own eyes by ABRAMELIM, <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40.md) and to be perfectly true, and which
afterwards I myself have performed. And after him I found no one who
worked these things truly; and although JOSEPH at Paris walked in the
same Path, nevertheless God, as a just Judge, did not in any way wish to
grant unto him the Sacred Magic in its entirety, because he had despised
the Christian Law. For it is an indubitable and evident thing that he
who is born Christian, Jew, Pagan, Turk, Infidel, or whatever religion
it may be, can arrive at the perfection of this Work or Art and become a
Master, but he who hath abandoned his natural Law, and embraced another
religion opposed to his own, can never arrive at the summit of this
Sacred Science. <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[20:1](abr012.htm#fr_36.md) *I.e.* Antony, of whom
he makes mention in the preceding chapter.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[22:1](abr012.htm#fr_37.md) ? the Book "Ambrosius".

<span id="fn_38"></span>[22:2](abr012.htm#fr_38.md) Evidently the man
mentioned in Chapter V., as living at Ephiha, near Constantinople. The
word I have rendered by "scribbler of symbols" is *grifas*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[23:1](abr012.htm#fr_39.md) So written here in the
MS.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[24:1](abr012.htm#fr_40.md) Thus spelt here.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[24:2](abr012.htm#fr_41.md) Many Occultists will
doubtless not be of this opinion. It is one thing to simply quit one
debased and materialised form or sect of religion for another, which is
perhaps little if any better; and quite another thing to seek out the
true religion which is at the basis of all, and which could not be
entirely true, were it not free from Sect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seventh Chapter](abr013.md)
