[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr030) 
[Next](abr032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.

### HOW ONE SHOULD KEEP ONESELF IN ORDER TO CARRY OUT THIS OPERATION WELL.

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/tinit.jpg) |

HIS Operation being truly Divine, it is necessary once more to treat of
and distinguish the present Consecration into different periods of time.

You shall then understand that during the two first and two second
Moons, no other Consecration must be performed, than that of which we
have already spoken in the Seventh and Eighth foregoing

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Chapters, <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137)
unto the which I refer you, so as not to be too prolix. And I only say
unto you, that during the course of the two first and two second Moons,
every Saturday when ye perform the Orison, ye shall also burn the
Perfume as well in the morning as in the evening; and in the two third
and last Moons ye shall make the Prayer and the Perfume thrice daily.

Now here hath the last part of the time arrived here therefore open ye
your eyes and be attentive, and govern yourselves in everything and
every place in the way which I have written unto you. Have confidence in
God, because if even until then ye have faithfully observed mine
instructions which I have given unto you, and if your Orisons shall have
been made with a righteous heart and with devotion, there is no manner
of doubt that all things will appear easy unto you, and your own spirit
and your understanding will teach you the manner in which you should
conduct yourself in all points; because your Guardian Angel is already
about you, though Invisible, and conducteth and governeth your heart, so
that you shall not err. The two Moons being finished, in the morning ye
shall commence all that is commanded in the Ninth Chapter, <span
id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) and further observe this present
Chapter.

When first ye shall enter into the Oratory, leave your shoes
without, <span id="fr_139"></span>[3](#fn_139) and having opened the
window, <span id="fr_140"></span>[4](#fn_140) ye shall place the lighted
coals in the Censer which <span id="fr_141"></span>[5](#fn_141) you
shall have brought with you, you shall light the Lamp, and take from the
Cupboard of the Altar your two Vestments,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the Crown, the Girdle and the Wand, placing them upon the Altar. Then
take the Sacred Oil in your left hand, cast some of the Perfume upon the
Fire, and place yourself upon your knees, <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142) praying unto the Lord with fervour.

### THE ORISON.

O LORD GOD of Mercy; God, Patient, Most Benign and Liberal; Who grantest
Thy Grace in a thousand ways, and unto a thousand generations; Who
forgettest the iniquities, the sins, and the transgressions of men; in
Whose Presence none is found innocent; Who visitest the transgressions
of the father upon the children and nephews unto the third and fourth
generation; I know my wretchedness, and that I am not worthy to appear
before Thy Divine Majesty, nor even to implore and beseech Thy Goodness
and Mercy for the least Grace. But, O Lord of Lords, the Source of Thy
Bounty is so great, that of Itself It calleth those who are ashamed by
reason of their sins and dare not approach, and inviteth them to drink
of Thy Grace. Wherefore, O Lord my God, have pity upon me, and take away
from me all iniquity and malice; cleanse my soul from all the
uncleanness of sin; renew within me my Spirit, and comfort it, so that
it may become strong and able to comprehend the Mystery of Thy Grace,
and the Treasures of Thy Divine Wisdom. Sanctify me also with the Oil of
Thy Sanctification, wherewith Thou hast sanctified all Thy Prophets; and
purify in me therewith all that appertaineth unto me, so that I may
become worthy of the Conversation of Thy Holy Angels and of Thy Divine
Wisdom, and grant unto me the Power which Thou

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

hast given unto Thy Prophets over all the Evil Spirits. Amen. Amen."

This is the Prayer which I myself made use of in my Consecration; the
which I give not here to confine you (to a certain form), nor to oblige
you to employ the same, nor to tell it you over as I would to a parrot
whom I should wish to teach to talk; but only and solely to give unto
you an idea of the manner in which we should pray.

Having finished your Orison, rise from your knees, and anoint the
centre <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143) of your forehead with a
little of the Sacred Oil; after this dip your finger into the same Oil,
and anoint therewith the four upper corners of the Altar. Touch also
with this Holy Oil the Vestments, the Girdle, the Crown, and the Wand,
on both sides. You shall also touch the Doors and the Windows of the
Oratory. Then with your finger dipped in the Oil you shall write upon
the four sides of the Altar these words, so that they may be perfectly
clearly written on each side:--

"In whatever place it may be wherein Commemoration of My Name shall be
made, I will come unto you and I will bless you."

This being done the Consecration is finished, and then ye shall put the
White Tunic and all the other things into the Cupboard of the Altar.
Then kneel down and make your ordinary prayer, as is laid down in the
Third Chapter; <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144) and be well ware to
take no consecrated thing out of the Oratory; and during the whole of
the ensuing period ye shall enter the Oratory and celebrate the Office
with naked feet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[78:1](abr031.htm#fr_137) Which give the
instructions for these periods.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[78:2](abr031.htm#fr_138) Concerning the two
last Moons.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[78:3](abr031.htm#fr_139) "Put off thy shoes
from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground."

<span id="fn_140"></span>[78:4](abr031.htm#fr_140) It will be remarked
how this point is insisted on.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[78:5](abr031.htm#fr_141) "Which," apparently,
should refer to the coals, and not to the censer.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[79:1](abr031.htm#fr_142) Preferably I should
advise upon the Western side of the Altar, and facing therefore the
East; also I would have the cupboard opening upon the Western side, for
certain mystical reasons.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[80:1](abr031.htm#fr_143) The place of the
third eye in the Indian figures of Gods.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[80:2](abr031.htm#fr_144) This is apparently a
slip for "the Seventh Chapter"; as the Third Chapter is only a short one
regarding those who are fitted to undertake the Operation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Thirteenth Chapter. Concerning the Convocation of the Good
Spirits](abr032)
