[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr012.md) 
[Next](abr014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.

<span id="img_ginit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/ginit.jpg) |

OD the Father of Mercy, having granted unto me the grace to return safe
and sound into my country; I paid unto Him according to my small power,
some little portion of that which I owed Him; thanking Him for so many
benefits which I had received from Him, and in particular for the
acquisition of the Qabalah which I had made at the house of
ABRAMELIM. <span id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42.md) It now only remained for
me to reduce to Practice this Sacred

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Magic, but many things of importance and
hindrances presented themselves; among the which my marriage was one of
the greatest. I [therefore](errata.htm#1.md) judged it fitting to defer
putting it in practice, and a principal obstacle was the inconvenience
of the place in which I dwelt. I resolved to absent myself suddenly, and
go away into the Hercynian Forests, and there remain during the time
necessary for this operation, and lead a solitary life. It was not
possible for me to do it sooner for many reasons and dangers of which
latter I ran a risk in that place, besides which it would be necessary
to leave my wife, who was young and now *enceinte*. Finally, I resolved
to follow the example of ABRAMELIN, <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43.md)
and I divided my house <span id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44.md) into two
parts; I took another house at rent, which I in part furnished, and I
gave over to one of my uncles the care of providing the necessaries of
life and the needs thereof. Meanwhile I with my wife and a servant
remained in my own house, and I began to accustom myself to the solitary
life, which it was to me extremely difficult to support, because of the
melancholic humour which dominated me, and I lived thus till the season
of Easter which I celebrated with all the family according to custom.
Then first, on the following day, in the Name and to the honour of God
Almighty the Creator of Heaven and of Earth, I commenced this holy
operation, and I continued it for Six Moons without omitting the
slightest detail, as thou wilt understand later. And the period of the
Six Moons being expired, the Lord granted unto me His Grace by His
Mercy; according to the promise made unto our forefathers, since while I
was making my prayer unto Him He deigned to grant unto me the vision and
apparition of His holy Angels, together with which I experienced so
great joy, consolation and contentment of soul, that I could neither

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

express it nor put it into writing. And during the three days, while I
was enjoying this sweet and delightful presence with an indicible
contentment, my holy Angel, whom God the Most Merciful had destined from
my creation for my Guardian, spake unto me with the greatest goodness
and affection; who not only manifested unto me the Veritable Magic, but
even made easier for me the means of obtaining it. He confirmed as being
true the Symbols of the Qabalah which I had received from ABRAMELIN; and
he gave me the fundamental means by which I could have an infinitude of
others in my operations according to my pleasure, assuring me that he
would instruct me fully thereon. (These Symbols are all like those of
the Third Book.) He gave me further very useful advice and admonition,
such as an Angel could give; how I should govern myself the following
days with the Evil Spirits so as to constrain them to obey me; the which
I duly followed out fulfilling always from point to point his
instructions very faithfully, and by the Grace of God I constrained them
to obey me and to appear in the place destined for this operation; and
they obligated themselves to obey me, and to be subject unto me. And
since then even until now, without offending God and the Holy Angels I
have held them in my power and command, always assisted by the power of
God and of His Holy Angels. And this with so great a prosperity of our
house, that I confess that I held myself back from the vast riches which
I could have accumulated; although I possess enough to be counted among
the number of the rich, as thou wilt know when thou shalt be more
advanced in age. May the Grace of the Lord, and the defence and
protection of His Holy Angels never then depart from me, ABRAHAM, nor
from my two sons JOSEPH and LAMECH; nor from all those who by your means
and by the Will of God, shall receive this operation! So be it!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[24:3](abr013.htm#fr_42.md) Thus spelt here.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[25:1](abr013.htm#fr_43.md) *D'embrasser le Parti
d'Abramelin*.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[25:2](abr013.htm#fr_44.md) Probably meaning
"household".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eighth Chapter](abr014.md)
