[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr000) 
[Next](abr002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

# TABLE OF CONTENTS OF THE INTRODUCTION,

By S. L. MAC GREGOR MATHERS.

Notice of the "Bibliothèque de l'Arsenal" at Paris.--The Manuscript of
the present work known to Bulwer Lytton and Éliphas Lévi.--Similarity
between Mejnour's style of instruction of Glyndon in "Zanoni" and that
employed by Abra-Melin to Abraham the Jew.--Critical description of the
present Manuscript; its style; examples; apparent date.--Abraham the
Jew, his era, and occult contemporaries.--His faith and
travels.--Abra-Melin.--Place of residence, and family of Abraham the
Jew.--Value of this Book to Occult students.--Notable persons with whom
Abraham was brought in contact, and for or against whom he worked
Magic.--His warnings against the error of changing one's religion,
whether Jew, Turk, Christian, or Pagan.--The absolute necessity of
unshaken faith in order to produce a Magical effect.--The Author
comparatively broad in his views, though unjust to women.--Good advice
in other matters given by him.--His counsel of a retired life not borne
out by his own history.--White and Black Magic.--Apparent basal
definitions of this particular system of Sacred Magic.--Its advantages,
especially as regards Abraham's comments on other Professors of Magic he
had met.--The employment of a Child-Clairvoyant, necessary or
not.--Abraham's intolerance of other Magical systems.--Basis of his
system in the Qabalah.--Example of Magical Square of Letters from Third
Book, compared with a Pentacle in "Key of Solomon".--General character
of these.--Practical Qabalah.--Definitions of the nature of Angels,
Elemental Spirits, and Devils, with their differences.--Behaviour toward
these, as advocated by Abraham.--Meaning of the word Demon, as distinct

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

from Devil.--Magic in the "Arabian Nights," compared with recipes in
Third Book of this work.--Faust and the effects he is said to have
produced.--Magic and the Qabalah derived from Egypt; difference between
Egyptian and Chaldean Magic.--Value of a Sacred language and one's
mother tongue compared.--Pentacles and Symbols-Evocation by the Magic
Circle and Licence to Depart-Abraham's Remarks on Astrology.--Notes to
this work.--This Introduction written for Occultists only.

*page* [xv](abr002.htm#page_xv)

Appendix A:--Table of Hebrew Letters and English Equivalents

*page* [xli](abr003.htm#page_xli)

B:--Cagliostro's use of a Child-Clairvoyant

*page* [xlii](abr004.htm#page_xlii)

C:--Examples of other forms of Angelic Evocation

*page* [xliii](abr005.htm#page_xliii)

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# ACTUAL TEXT:--TABLE OF CONTENTS OF CHAPTERS.

**THE FIRST BOOK**.

The Chapters of the First Book have no separate heading of contents
given in the text; while those of the Second and Third Books have. I
have therefore here placed those of the Chapters of the First Book in
parentheses.

PROLOGUE.

(The First Book to be considered as introductory to the two others,
which form the actual original Magic as taught by Abra-Melin)

*page* [3](abr006.htm#page_3)

THE FIRST CHAPTER.

(Abraham's reasons for giving this work as a legacy to his son Lamech)

*page* [4](abr007.htm#page_4)

THE SECOND CHAPTER.

(His Father Simon had told him somewhat of the Qabalah.--Of the Magic of
Rabbin Moses of Mayence, and how greatly inferior this was to the Sacred
Magic of Abra-Melin)

*page* [5](abr007.htm#page_5)

THE THIRD CHAPTER.

(Beginning of the Travels of Abraham the Jew.--His going to Mayence in
Vormatia (the district under the rule of Worms) to study under Rabbin
Moses, for four years.--He then forms a friendship with a young Bohemian
Jew named Samuel.--They resolve to travel together to Constantinople,
with the intention of afterwards visiting Palestine.--They begin their
journey on February 13th, 1397, pass through Germany, Bohemia, Austria,
Hungary, and

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Greece, arriving at length at Constantinople,
where they stop two years, and Samuel dies.--Abraham the Jew then
travels into Egypt, where he remains four years, afterwards going into
the Holy Land, where he remains a twelvemonth.--He there meets a
Christian student of Magic with whom he passes on into the wilds of
Arabia; but finding no Adept there, Abraham thinks of returning home)

*page* [7](abr008.htm#page_7)

THE FOURTH CHAPTER.

(He commences his return journey, travelling by Arabia Deserta and
Palestine into Egypt.--Here he lodges with an old Jew named Aaron, in a
small town called Arachi, situated on the banks of the Nile.--He tells
Aaron of his numerous and fruitless travels in search of some Great
Adept in Magic.--Aaron informs him that in the desert, not very far from
Arachi, there dwells a very learned and pious Mage called Abra-Melin;
and that he will find him a guide to shew him the route
thither.--Abraham visits Abra-Melin, and finds in him at length the
Great and Wise Magician he has so long sought.--He remains with him and
studies under him.--Abra-Melin gives him two Books on Magic to copy,
which form the basis of the Second and Third Books of this
work.--Abra-Melin implies that this true Sacred Magical Science will
only remain among the Jews seventy-two years longer.--At length Abraham
quits Abra-Melin, and goes to Constantinople, where he is detained by
illness for two months.--He returns home by ship to Trieste, and thence
through Dalmatia)

*page* [10](abr010.htm#page_10)

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.

(Concerning the various Professors of Magical Art, whom Abraham had
found in the course of his travels.--Of Rabbin Moses of Mayence.--Of
James a Christian of Argentine, and a juggler of a Black Magician called
Antony of Prague in Bohemia, and his fearful end.--Of the Magicians in
Austria.--Of the Magicians in Greece.--Of a Magician of Ephiba, near
Constantinople, who wrote certain numbers on the ground.--Of the
Magicians, Simon, and Rabbin Abraham of Constantinople.--Of the Egyptian
Magicians, Horay, Abimech, Alcaon, Orilach, and Abimelec.--Of the
Arabian Magicians.--Abra-Melin the only truly Great

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Adept.--Of a Magician, Joseph of Paris, a
Christian who had become converted to the Jewish faith, and whose Magic
was after the nature of that of Abra-Melin.--Abraham warns Lamech of the
error of renouncing the religion in which a man is brought up)

*page* [15](abr010.htm#page_15)

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.

(Errors in the Magic of Rabbin Moses.--The Black Magic of Antony the
Bohemian of Prague.--The manner of his death.--Of the Austrian
Magicians.--Of the young Sorceress of Lintz, with whom he
experimented.--Of the Greek Arts of Magic.--Of the many systems of
Magical working, and how that of Abra-Melin was the best; because based
on the Wisdom of the Qabalah)

*page* [19](abr011.htm#page_19)

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.

(Abraham prepares to perform the Operation recommended in this work.--He
acquires the knowledge and vision of his Guardian Angel; and of the
Symbols of Magic like those of the Third Book)

*page* [24](abr012.htm#page_24)

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.

(That he practised Magic with success from 1409 to 1458.--Of the divers
persons he healed.--Of the Magical aid he gave to the Emperor Sigismund
of Germany; how he lent him a Familiar Spirit; and how he facilitated
his marriage.--Of the aid he gave to Count Frederic by making magically
an army of 2000 horsemen appear.--How he helped the Bishop of his
City.--How he delivered the Count of Varvich (Warwick) from an English
prison.--How he aided the flight of Pope John XXIII. from the Council of
Constance.--How he forced a person who had stolen from him, while with
the Duke of Bavaria, to confess the theft and restore the money.--Of his
warnings and prophecies to the Greek Emperor (Constantine
Palæologos).How he performed the feat of raising a dead person to life,
on two occasions, in Saxonia, and in the Marquisate of Magdeburgh.--How
he obtained by Magic, both his marriage and a considerable treasure of
money)

*page* [27](abr014.htm#page_27)

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

THE NINTH CHAPTER.

(General Advice.--That this Art is founded on the Holy Qabalah.--That
all the Signs written in the Third Book are written with the Letters of
the Fourth Hierarchy; but that the mysterious words are taken from
Hebrew, Latin, Greek, Chaldee, Persian, and Arabic)

*page* [35](abr014.htm#page_35)

THE TENTH CHAPTER.

(Warning advice against the deceits of the Devil and the Evil Spirits)

*page* [38](abr016.htm#page_38)

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER

(General Advice)

*page* [40](abr017.htm#page_40)

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.

(Additional advice regarding the communication with the Guardian Angel;
and of the use of a Child as Clairvoyant in the Invocation)

*page* 43

**THE SECOND BOOK**.

PROLOGUE.

(Concerning the Sacred Magic)

*page* [49](abr019.htm#page_49)

THE FIRST CHAPTER.

How many, and what, are the classes of Veritable Magic

*page* [50](abr020.htm#page_50)

THE SECOND CHAPTER.

What we ought to take into consideration before the undertaking of this
Operation

*page* [52](abr020.htm#page_52)

THE THIRD CHAPTER.

Of the Age and Quality of the person who wisheth to undertake this
Operation

*page* [55](abr021.htm#page_55)

THE FOURTH CHAPTER.

That most Books on Magic be false and vain

*page* [56](abr022.htm#page_56)

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.

That in this Operation it is necessary to make election neither of time,
day, nor hour

*page* [59](abr023.htm#page_59)

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.

Concerning the Planetary Hours, and other Errors of the Astrologers

*page* [60](abr024.htm#page_60)

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.

Regarding what it is necessary to accomplish during the first two Moons
of the beginning of this Veritable and Sacred Magic

*page* [64](abr026.htm#page_64)

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.

Concerning the two second Moons

*page* [69](abr026.htm#page_69)

THE NINTH CHAPTER.

Concerning the two last Moons which must be thus commenced

*page* [70](abr027.htm#page_70)

THE TENTH CHAPTER.

Concerning what things a Man may learn and study during these two Moons

*page* [72](abr028.htm#page_72)

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER

Concerning the Selection of the Place

*page* [74](abr030.htm#page_74)

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.

How one should keep oneself in order to carry out this Operation well

*page* [77](abr030.htm#page_77)

THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.

Concerning the Convocation of the Good Spirits

*page* [81](abr032.htm#page_81)

THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER.

Concerning the Convocation of the Spirits

*page* [86](abr033.htm#page_86)

THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.

Concerning what you should demand of the Spirits, who are divided

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

into three different Troops, and convoked on three separate days

*page* [92](abr033.htm#page_92)

THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.

Concerning the sending them away

*page* [97](abr034.htm#page_97)

THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER.

What we should answer unto the interrogations of the Spirits, and how we
should resist their demands

*page* [98](abr035.htm#page_98)

THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER.

How he who intendeth to operate ought to conduct himself with regard to
the Spirits

*page* [101](abr036.htm#page_101)

THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER.

Description of the Names of the Spirits upon whom we may call to obtain
that which we desire

*page* [104](abr038.htm#page_104)

THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER.

In what manner we ought to carry out the Operations

*page* [123](abr040.htm#page_123)

**THE THIRD BOOK**.

PROLOGUE.

(Brief Advice)

*page* [163](abr044.htm#page_163)

THE FIRST CHAPTER.

How to know all kinds of things Past and Future, which be not however
directly opposed to God, and against His Holy Will

*page* [165](abr045.htm#page_165)

THE SECOND CHAPTER.

How to acquire information, and be enlightened concerning every kind of
proposition, and all doubtful sciences

*page* [172](abr047.htm#page_172)

THE THIRD CHAPTER.

How to cause any Spirit to appear, and take various forms, as of man, of
animal, of bird, etc.

*page* [174](abr050.htm#page_174)

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

THE FOURTH CHAPTER.

To procure divers Visions

*page* [175](abr051.htm#page_175)

THE FIFTH CHAPTER.

How one may retain the Familiar Spirits bound or free, in whatsoever
form

*page* [178](abr053.htm#page_178)

THE SIXTH CHAPTER.

How to make manifest mines, and push on all manner of work connected
therewith

*page* [182](abr055.htm#page_182)

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.

To cause a Spirit to perform all manner of Chemical work and Operations
with facility and promptitude, especially as regards Metals

*page* [184](abr057.htm#page_184)

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER.

To excite Tempests

*page* [186](abr059.htm#page_186)

THE NINTH CHAPTER.

To transform Animals into Men, and Men into Animals. (Also to transform
Animals into Stones)

*page* [187](abr061.htm#page_187)

THE TENTH CHAPTER.

To prevent all operations of Necromancy and Magic from producing any
effect; except the Operations of the Qabalah, and of this Sacred Magic

*page* [190](abr063.htm#page_190)

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER.

To cause to be brought to one any kind of book, and whether lost or
stolen

*page* [192](abr065.htm#page_192)

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER.

To know Secrets, and especially those of any person

*page* [194](abr068.htm#page_194)

THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER.

How to make a Corpse rise from the Dead, and perform all the Operations

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

which the person would do were he living, and this during the space of
seven years, through the means of the Spirit.

*page* [196](abr069.htm#page_196)

THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER.

The Twelve Symbols for the Twelve Hours of the Day and of the Night, in
order to make oneself Invisible to every person.

*page* [198](abr072.htm#page_198)

THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER.

To cause the Spirits to bring us everything to eat and drink which we
may wish, and even everything which we can think of

*page* [201](abr073.htm#page_201)

THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.

How to discover and take possession of all kinds of Treasure, provided
that it be in no way (Magically) guarded

*page* [203](abr075.htm#page_203)

THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER.

How to fly in the Air and go wherever one may wish

*page* [209](abr078.htm#page_209)

THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER.

To heal divers Maladies

*page* [211](abr080.htm#page_211)

THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER.

For all kinds of Affection and Love

*page* [214](abr081.htm#page_214)

THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER.

To excite every kind of Hatred, Enmity, Discord, Quarrels, Contests,
Combats, tattles, Loss, and Damage

*page* [220](abr083.htm#page_220)

THE TWENTY-FIRST CHAPTER.

To transform oneself, and take divers shapes and forms

*page* [223](abr085.htm#page_223)

THE TWENTY-SECOND CHAPTER.

This Chapter is only for working Evil, for with the Signs herein we can
cast Spells, and perform every kind of Evil Work. We should not avail
ourselves hereof

*page* [225](abr087.htm#page_225)

THE TWENTY-THIRD CHAPTER.

To demolish Buildings and Castles

*page* [227](abr089.htm#page_227)

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

THE TWENTY-FOURTH CHAPTER.

To discover Thefts

*page* [229](abr092.htm#page_229)

THE TWENTY-FIFTH CHAPTER.

To walk and operate in and under water

*page* [231](abr094.htm#page_231)

THE TWENTY-SIXTH CHAPTER.

How to open every kind of lock without a Key, and without noise

*page* [232](abr095.htm#page_232)

THE TWENTY-SEVENTH CHAPTER.

How to cause Visions to appear

*page* [234](abr097.htm#page_234)

THE TWENTY-EIGHTH CHAPTER.

How to obtain as much gold and silver as one may wish, both to be able
to provide for the necessaries of life, and to live in opulence

*page* [243](abr099.htm#page_243)

THE TWENTY-NINTH CHAPTER.

How to cause Armed Men to appear

*page* [245](abr102.htm#page_245)

THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER.

To make Comedies, Operas, and all kinds of Music and Dances to appear

*page* [246](abr103.htm#page_246)

CONCLUSION.

Remarks on these Symbols of the foregoing Chapters

*page* [248](abr105.htm#page_248)

The Order of the First Hierarchy

*page* [260](abr106.htm#page_260)

The Order of the Second Hierarchy

*page* [260](abr106.htm#page_260)

The Order of the Third Hierarchy

*page* [261](abr106.htm#page_261)

THE END.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](abr002)
