[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr054) 
[Next](abr056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

### NOTES TO CHAPTER V.

(*a*) The Symbols of this Chapter arc manifested only by the Angels or
by the Guardian Angel.

(*b*) ORIENS, PAIMON, ARITON, and AMAYMON execute the Operations hereof
by means of their Common Ministers.

(*c*) The Familiar Spirits can hardly be said so much of themselves to
be able to execute the Operations of this Chapter, as under the rule of
the aforementioned Spirits.

(*d*) Each person can have four Familiar Spirits and no more: the first
working from Sunrise to Midday; the second from Midday till Sunset; the
third from Sunset to Midnight; and the fourth from Midnight till
Sunrise. Such Spirits may also be loaned to friends, in which case you
can avail yourself of another ordinary Spirit in place.

(*e*) The Square numbered 1 is not however placed first in Order in the
MS., but fifth. It is a Gnomon of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 36
Squares. ANAKIM = Hebrew ONQIM = Giants; the root ONQ also = a necklace
or torque. This word "Anakim" hardly appears to have any reference to
the form of a lion.--No. 2 is a Gnomon of 11 Squares again, taken from a
Square of 36 Squares, and is in the MS. placed sixth in order.--CEPHIR
in Hebrew means KPIR a young Lion; and this Square should probably
therefore be numbered 1.--No. 3 is a Gnomon of 13 Squares taken from a
Square of 49 Squares; and in the MS. occupies the first place in order.
OIKETIS, Greek, means a maid-servant or feminine page. This Square
therefore should probably be numbered 2.--NO. 4 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares
taken from a Square of 25 Squares, PARAS = Hebrew PRSh, a horse, or
horseman, while PRS = an ossifrage, a bird of the hawk or eagle kind.
This Square is apparently correctly numbered, though in the MS. it is in
the second place.--No. 5 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of
25 Squares. RACAH is apparently from the Hebrew RQH meaning vain, empty;
and does not seem to have any particular reference to any of the forms
mentioned for the Symbols.--No. 6 is again a Gnomon of 9 Squares, taken
from a Square of 25 Squares. It is placed fourth in order in the
MS.--CUSIS may be from the dative plural of the Greek word KUON = a dog,
but in Hebrew it would mean numbering, computing.--No. 7 is a border of
24 Squares taken from a Square of 49 Squares. PERACHI, perhaps from PRK,
Savagery. DB is a Bear in Hebrew.--No. 8 is a Square of 25 Squares.
RISIR, *perhaps* from Latin "RISOR," a mocker or jester. ISERI, perhaps
from Hebrew or Chaldaic Root, ISR, to punish or whip. SEKES, perhaps
from SChSh = reborn by hope.--No. 9 is again a Square of 25 Squares.
NESER = Hebrew, NShR, an Eagle; which seems to shew that this Square
should be numbered 5. ELEHE is probably ALHI, Hebrew = My God. SEPES?
ShPS = the hair on the lip, the moustache.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

\[paragraph continues\] RESEN = RSN Heb., = a bridle, or bit.--No. 10 is
a Gnomon of 11 Squares taken from a Square of 36 Squares. PETHEN =
Hebrew, PThN, an Asp or venomous Serpent, whence this Square should
probably be numbered 11.--No. 11 is a Square of 25 Squares. KALEF, =
KLP, Hebrew, a hammer. ARARE from Hebrew ARR to curse, cursed. LAMAL
perhaps means "in speaking" from MLL, Hebrew, to speak.--No. 12 is a
Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares. KOBHA = perhaps
Hebrew KBH = to extinguish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sixth Chapter. To cause Mines to be pointed out, and to help
forward all kinds of work connected therewith](abr056)
