[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr024.md) 
[Next](abr026.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SIXTH CHAPTER.

### CONCERNING THE PLANETARY HOURS AND OTHER ERRORS OF THE ASTROLOGERS.

<span id="img_iinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/iinit.jpg) |

T is true that the Wise in Astrology do write of the Stars and of their
movements, and that these attaining thereto do produce divers effects in
inferior and elemental things; and such are, as we have already

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

said, natural operations of the Elements; but that they should have
power over the Spirits, or force in all supernatural things, that is
not, neither can ever be. But it will instead be found that by the
permission of the Great God it is the Spirits who govern the firmament.
What foolishness then would it be to implore the favour of the Sun, of
the Moon, and of the Stars, when the object would be to have converse
with Angels and with Spirits. Would it not be an extravagant idea to
demand from the wild beasts the permission to go hunting? But what else
is it, when they <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md) have elected a
certain day, when they have divided it up into many false divisions such
as hours, minutes, etc. "Here," they say, "we have the Planetary Hours,
and the Planet appropriate to each Hour." O what Planets! O what fine
order! Tell me, I pray you, what advantage you get by this division. You
will reply: "A very great one, because it shows us in all things, either
good or bad fortune!" I tell you, and I repeat absolutely, that this is
in no way true; that they produce thus a change of the time and of the
Air, I in part concede; but do me the grace to tell me how ye do divide
the Planetary Hours. I know that ye begin the first hour of the day with
the Planet which itself giveth the name unto the day, as Sunday is
ascribed to the Sun, Monday to the Moon, Tuesday to Mars, Wednesday to
Mercury, Thursday to Jupiter, Friday to Venus, and Saturday to Saturn;
then ye divide the length of the Day into twelve equal portions which ye
call Hours, and to each Hour ye assign its planet; and ye do the same
thing with the Night, according to whether the days be long or short.
Thus do the Hours become long or short. As for example, suppose that on
a Sunday the Sun riseth at 7 o'clock and setteth at 5 o'clock in the
evening, its course will be ten Hours, the which ye divide up into

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

twelve equal parts, so that each Hour is of fifty minutes' length. I
say, therefore, that the first Planetary Hour is of the Sun, and is
fifty minutes long; that the second is of Venus; the third of Mercury;
and so on of the others; at last the eighth Hour returneth unto the Sun;
the ninth unto Venus; the tenth unto Mercury; and so the Day finisheth.
Then cometh the Night, which is longer, that is to say, fourteen Hours,
and each Planetary Hour of this Night will be seventy minutes, and in
order to continue the regular succession as we have begun, the first
Hour of the Night will be of Jupiter; the second of Mars; the third of
the Sun; and so on until Monday, whose first Hour will be (according to
this rule) of the Moon. Now tell me, I pray you, doth it always happen
that when the Day of Monday commenceth, that is to say, when the Sun
riseth in its horizon, that the Moon riseth also together with him, and
that she setteth also together with him? They cannot answer this.
Wherefore then do they apportion unto the second day of the week and
unto its first hour the Moon? They can tell you no reason, except a
likeness to the name (of the Day). <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md)

O! how gross an error! Hear and tell me when it is that a Planet hath
the greatest force in the Elements; whether when it is *above* or when
it is *below* your Horizon or Hemisphere? We must however avow that it
is more powerful when it is above, because being below it hath no power
save according unto the Will of God. Why then, even further than this,
should we attribute unto a Planet a Day and Hour, if during the whole
period of such Day it appeareth not above the Horizon!

ABRAMELIN as a most excellent MASTER in natural things taught unto me a
very different form of classification

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (which also well examine, and see whether it be
not more surely founded than the aforesaid rule of the Astrologers), and
made me to comprehend what should be the true Planetary Hours. When the
Planet beginneth to appear upon the Horizon then doth *its Day* begin
(whether it be Light or Dark, Black or White), and until it hath passed
its elevation <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110.md) *its Day* lasteth
until it riseth anew, and after that it hath set *its Night* endureth;
so that as well in the Days of the Sun as in those of the Moon and of
the others, *the Days of all the Planets be mingled*, only that one
commenceth sooner than another, according to which nature they be
mingled together in the Celestial Signs. Now it is requisite that I
should tell unto you what be the Planetary Hours! Know then that each
Planet hath only an hour during the which it is very powerful, being
over you and above your head, that is to say when it is in the Meridian.
Then, naturally, will sometimes arrive the Hours of two Planets together
and beginning at the same moment; they then produce an effect according
unto the nature, quality, and complexion of these stars. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_111.md) But all this only hath power in natural
things. Here have I declared and proved unto you the errors of the
(common) Astrologers; keep yourselves carefully from the insensate
follies of their Days and Hours, because if ye make use of these as do
the false Magicians and Enchanters, God will chastise you; and in order
to chastise you will pay but little attention unto the awaiting of the
Hour of Saturn or of Mars.

I therefore now conclude this chapter, having sufficiently treated of
the false and useless method employed by the Astrologers in the Election
of Days and of Hours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[61:1](abr025.htm#fr_108.md) *I.e.*, the
Astrologers to whom Abraham refers in the first sentence of the chapter.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[62:1](abr025.htm#fr_109.md) *I.e.*, the Moon and
Monday; Sun and Sunday; Mars and Tuesday (Tuisco is a name of Mars);
Venus and Friday (Freya's day, after Freya, the Scandinavian Goddess),
etc.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[63:1](abr025.htm#fr_110.md) "*Et jusqua cequil
tremonte son jour dure jusqua cequil se leve derechef*."

<span id="fn_111"></span>[63:2](abr025.htm#fr_111.md) This is the initiated
Rosicrucian teaching, which is very different to that of the outer and
[uninitiated](errata.htm#2.md) World.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seventh Chapter. Regarding What it is Necessary to Accomplish
During the First Two Moons...](abr026.md)
