[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr036) 
[Next](abr038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER.

### HOW HE WHO OPERATETH SHOULD BEHAVE AS REGARDETH THE SPIRITS.

<span id="img_winit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/winit.jpg) |

E have already seen how one should constrain the Spirits, and what one
should ask of them; also how to dismiss them without hurt, and how we
should make answer loll unto their demands and presentments. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_185)

All that I am about to say unto you now is superfluous, because it is
certain that any one who shall have observed with a true heart and firm
resolution the advice which I have given regarding the Six Moons, will
be instructed with so much thoroughness and clearness by his Guardian
Angel, that no doubtful point will present itself which he will not be
able easily to clear up of himself.

We have also already sufficiently shown how on every or any occasion, he
who operateth should comport

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

himself as regardeth the Spirits; that is to say as their Lord, and not
as their Servitor. Yet in all matters there should be a reasonable mean,
seeing that we are not treating with men, but with Spirits, of whom each
one knoweth more than the whole Universe together.

Now if you shall make some demand unto a Spirit, and he shall refuse to
execute it; first well and carefully examine and consider whether it be
in the power and nature of the Spirit to whom you make such demand, to
fulfil the same. For one Spirit knoweth not all things, and that which
appertaineth unto the one, another knoweth not. For this reason, see
that ye well take heed before endeavouring to force them to perform a
matter. Yet if, however, the Inferior Spirits be disobedient, you shall
call their Superiors, and remind them of the oaths which they have taken
unto you, and of the chastisement which awaiteth the breaking of such
vows.

And immediately, on beholding your steadfastness, they will obey you;
but should they not, you ought then to Invoke your Guardian Angel, whose
chastisement they will quickly feel.

Yet, notwithstanding, we should never employ harsh means, in order to
have that which we can obtain by gentleness and courtesy. <span
id="fr_186"></span>[1](#fn_186)

If during the Invocation they should appear with tumult and insolence,
fear nothing; neither give way to anger; but appear to make no account
thereof. Only show them the Consecrated Wand, and if they continue to
make a disturbance, smite upon the Altar twice or thrice therewith, and
all will be still.

It should be noted, that after you shall have licensed

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

them to depart, and they shall have disappeared, you shall take the
Censer from the top of the Altar, and having put perfume therein, take
it out of the Oratory on to the Terrace whereon the Spirits shall have
appeared, and you shall perfume the place all round; for otherwise the
Spirits might work some evil unto persons entering by chance therein.

Now should you be willing to content yourself with the Symbols which be
in the Third Book here following; you shall the day after take away all
the Sand from the Terrace and cast it into a secret place; but above all
things take care not to throw it either into a river or into the
navigable sea.

But should you desire to procure for yourself various other Symbols and
Secrets, leave the Sand and all things in place, as we shall also
describe more particularly in the last chapter.

Also, should you wish it, you can retain your arrangements in place, and
keep the Apartment of the Oratory proper and clean, as well as the
Altar; which latter you may place in a corner, should it incommode you
in the centre of the room. For in this Apartment, if it be not
contaminated nor profaned, you may every Saturday enjoy the presence of
your Guardian Angel; the which is one of the most sublime things which
you can desire in this Sacred Art.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[101:1](abr037.htm#fr_185) In the original:
"*demandes etapparitions*".

<span id="fn_186"></span>[102:1](abr037.htm#fr_186) Let me here once
again insist on the absolute necessity in Occult working of being
courteous, even to the Evil Spirits; for the Operator who is insolent
and overbearing will speedily lay himself open to obsession by a Spirit
of like nature, the which will bring about his ultimate downfall.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Nineteenth Chapter. A Descriptive List of the Names of the
Spirits...](abr038)
