[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr010) 
[Next](abr012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FIFTH CHAPTER.

<span id="img_iinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/iinit.jpg) |

T is not sufficient to travel and journey abroad and see many lands, if
one does not draw some useful experience therefrom. Wherefore, in order
to show unto thee a good example, I will in this chapter speak of the
Mysteries <span id="fr_34"></span>[3](#fn_34) of this Art which I
discovered in one way

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

and another while travelling in the world, and also of the measure and
understanding of their various sciences; while, in the Sixth Chapter
following, I will recount the things which I have learned and seen with
some among them, and whether in actual practice I found them true or
false. I have already before told you that my first Master had been the
RABBIN MOSES at MAYENCE, who was indeed a good man, but entirely
ignorant of the True Mystery and of the Veritable Magic. He only devoted
himself to certain superstitious secrets which he had collected from
various infidels, and which were full of the nonsense and foolishness of
Pagans and Idolaters; to such an extent that the Good Angels and Holy
Spirits judged him unworthy of their visits and conversation; and the
Evil Spirits mocked him to a ridiculous extent. At times, indeed, they
spake to him voluntarily and by caprice, and obeyed him in matters vile,
profane, and of no account, in order the better to entrap, deceive and
hinder him from searching further for the true and certain Foundation of
this Great Science.

At ARGENTINE I found a Christian called JAMES, who was reputed as a
learned and very skilful man; but his Art was the Art of the Juggler, or
Cup and Balls Player; and not that of the Magician.

In the town of PRAGUE I found a wicked man named ANTONY, aged
twenty-five years, who in truth showed me wonderful and supernatural
things, but may God preserve us from falling into so great an error, for
the infamous wretch avowed to me that he had made a Pact with the DEMON,
and had given himself over to him in body and in soul, and that he had
renounced God and all the Saints; while, on the other hand, the
deceitful LEVIATHAN had promised him forty years of life to do his
pleasure. He made every effort, as he was obliged to by the Pact, to
persuade me and drag me to the precipice of the same error and misery;
but at first I kept myself

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

apart from him, and at last I took flight. Unto this day do they sing in
the streets of the terrible end which befel him, may the Lord God of His
Mercy preserve us from such a misfortune. This should serve us as a
mirror of warning to keep far from us all evil undertakings and
pernicious curiosity.

In AUSTRIA I found an infinitude, but all were either ignorant, or like
unto the Bohemians.

In the Kingdom of HUNGARY I found but persons knowing neither God nor
Devil, and who were worse than the beasts.

In GREECE I found many wise and prudent men, but, however, all of them
were infidels, among whom there were three who principally dwelt in
desert places, who showed unto me great things, such as how to raise
tempests in a moment, how to make the Sun appear in the night, how to
stop the course of rivers, and how to make night appear at mid-day, the
whole by the power of their enchantments, and by applying superstitious
ceremonies.

Near CONSTANTINOPLE, in a place called EPHIHA, there was a certain man,
who, instead of Enchantments, made use of certain numbers which he wrote
upon the earth; and by means of these he caused certain extravagant and
terrifying visions to appear; but in all these Arts there was no
practical use, but only the loss of soul and of body, because all these
only worked by particular Pacts, which, had no true foundation; also all
these Arts demanded a very long space of time, and they were very false,
and when these men were unsuccessful they had always ready a thousand
lies and excuses.

In the same city Of CONSTANTINOPLE I found two men of our Law, namely,
SIMON and the RABBIN ABRAHAME, whom we may class with RABBIN MOSES of
Mayence.

In EGYPT the first time I found five persons who

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

were esteemed and reputed as wise men, among whom were four, namely,
HORAY, ABIMECH, ALCAON, and ORILACH, who performed their operations by
the means of the course of the Stars and of the Constellations, adding
many Diabolical Conjurations and impious and profane prayers, and
performing the whole with great difficulty. The fifth, named ABIMELU,
operated by the means and aid of Demons, to whom he prepared statues,
and sacrificed, and thus they served him with their abominable arts.

In ARABIA they made use of plants, of herbs, and of stones as well
precious as common. The Divine Mercy inspired me to return thence, and
led me to ABRAMELIN, who was he who declared unto me the Secret, and
opened unto me the fountain and true source of the Sacred Mystery, and
of the Veritable and Ancient Magic which God had given unto our
forefathers.

Also at PARIS I found a wise man called JOSEPH, who, having denied the
Christian faith, had made himself a Jew. This man truly practised Magic
in the same manner as ABRAMELIN, but he was very far from arriving at
perfection therein; because God, Who is just, never granteth the
perfect, veritable and fundamental treasure unto those who deny Him;
notwithstanding that in the rest of their life they might be the most
holy and perfect men in the world. I am astonished when I consider the
blindness of many persons who let themselves be led by Evil Masters, who
take pleasure in falsehood, and, we may rather say, in the DEMON
himself; giving themselves over unto Sorceries and Idolatries, one in
one manner, another in another manner, with the result of losing their
souls. But the Truth is so great, the Devil is so deceitful and
malicious, and the World so frail and so infamous that I must admit that
things cannot be otherwise. Let us then open our eyes, and follow that
which I shall lay down in the following chapters; and let us not walk

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

In another Path, whether of the Devil, or of men, or of Books which
boast of their Magic; for in truth I declare unto thee that I had so
great a quantity of such matters written out with so much Art, that had
I not had these of ABRAMELIN, I could herein have given thee those.
However, it is true that just as there is only one God, that not one of
these Books is worth an obolus. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) Yet
with all this there are men so blind that they buy them at exorbitant
prices, and they lose their money, their time, and their pains, and
which is worse, very often their souls as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[15:3](abr011.htm#fr_34) *Mistères*, evidently a
slip for *Maistres*, Masters.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[19:1](abr011.htm#fr_35) A coin of base money
formerly in use, its value being about a halfpenny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sixth Chapter](abr012)
