[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr009.md) 
[Next](abr011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

### THE FOURTH CHAPTER.

<span id="img_oinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/oinit.jpg) |

N my return journey I began to reflect on the time which I had lost in
travelling, and on the great expense which I had been at without any
return, and without having made any acquisition of that which I wished
for and which had caused me to undertake the voyage. I had, however,
taken the resolution of returning to my home on quitting Arabia Deserta
by way of Palestine, and so into Egypt; and I was six months on the way.
I at length arrived at a little town called ARACHI, situated on the bank
of the Nile, where I lodged with an old Jew named AARON, where indeed I
had already lodged before in my journey; and I communicated unto him my
sentiments. He asked me how I had succeeded, and whether I had found
that which I wished. I answered mournfully that I had done absolutely
nothing, and I made him an exact recital of the labours and troubles
which I had undergone, and my recital was accompanied by my tears which
I could not help shedding in abundance, so that I attracted the
compassion of the old man, and he began to try to comfort me by telling
me that during my journey he had heard say that in a desert place not
far from the aforesaid town of ARACHI dwelt a very learned and pious man
whose name was ABRAMELINO, <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) and
he <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26.md) exhorted me that as I had already
done so much, not to fail to visit him, that perhaps the Most Merciful
God might regard me with pity, and grant me that which I righteously
wished for. It seemed to me as though I was listening to a Voice, not
human but celestial, and I felt a joy in mine heart such as I could not
express; and I had neither rest nor intermission until AARON found me a
man who conducted me

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

to the nearest route, by which walking upon fine sand during the space
of three days and a half without seeing any human habitation I at length
arrived at the foot of a hill of no great height, and which was entirely
surrounded by trees. My Guide then said "In this small wood dwelleth the
man whom you seek;" and having showed me the direction to take he wished
to accompany me no further, and having taken his leave of me he returned
home by the same route by which we had come, together with his mule
which had served to carry our food. Finding myself in this situation I
could think of no other thing to do than to submit myself to the help of
the Divine Providence by invoking His very holy Name, Who then granted
unto me His most holy Grace, for in turning my eyes in the
aforementioned direction, I beheld coining towards me a venerable aged
Man, who saluted me in the Chaldean language in a loving manner,
inviting me to go with him into his habitation; the which courtesy I
accepted with an extreme pleasure, realising in that moment how great is
the Providence of the Lord. The good old Man was very courteous to me
and treated me very kindly, and during an infinitude of days he never
spake unto me of any other matter than of the Fear of God, exhorting me
to lead ever a well-regulated life, and from time to time warned me of
certain errors which man commits through human frailty, and, further, he
made me understand that he detested the acquisition of riches and goods
which we were constantly employed in gaining in our towns through so
severe usury exacted from, and harm wrought to, our neighbour. He
required from me a very solemn and precise promise to change my manner
of life, and to live not according to our false dogmas, but in the Way
and Law of the Lord. The which promise I having ever after inviolably
observed, and being later on again among my relatives and other Jews, I
passed among them for a wicked and foolish man;

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

but I said in myself Let the Will of God be done, and let not respect of
persons turn us aside from the right path, seeing that man is a
deceiver".

The aforesaid ABRAMELIN, knowing the ardent desire which I had to learn,
he gave me two manuscript books, very similar in form unto these which I
now bequeath unto thee, O Lamech, my son; but very obscure: and he told
me to copy them for myself with care, which I did, and carefully
examined both the one and the other. And he asked me if I had any money,
I answered unto him "Yes". He said unto me that he required ten golden
florins, which he must himself, according to the order which the Lord
had given unto him, distribute by way of alms among seventy-two poor
persons, who were obliged to repeat certain Psalms; <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md) and having kept the feast of Saturday,
which is the day of the Sabbath, he set out to go to ARACHI, because it
was requisite that he

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

should himself distribute the money. And he ordered me to fast for three
days, that is to say, the Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday following;
contenting myself with only a single repast in the day, wherein was to
be neither blood nor dead things; <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)
also he commanded me to make this commencement with exactness, and not
to fail in the least thing, for in order to operate well it is very
necessary to begin well, and be instructed me to repeat all the
seven <span id="fr_29"></span>[2](#fn_29.md) psalms of David one single
time in these three days; and not to do or practise any servile
operation. The day being come he set out, and took with him the money
which I had given him. I faithfully obeyed him, executing from point to
point that which he had ordered me to do. His return was fifteen days
later, and being at last arrived he ordered me the day following (which
was a Tuesday), before the rising of the Sun, to make with great
humility and devotion a general confession of all my life unto the Lord,
with a true and firm proposal and resolution to serve and fear Him
otherwise than I had done in the past, and to wish to live and die in
His most Holy Law, and in obedience unto Him. I performed my confession
with all the attention and exactitude necessary. It lasted until the
going down of the Sun; and the day following I presented myself unto
ABRAMELIN, who with a smiling countenance said unto me: "It is thus I
would ever have you". He then conducted me into his own apartment where
I took the two little manuscripts which I had copied; and he asked of me
whether truly, and without fear, I wished for the Divine Science and for
the True Magic. I answered unto him that it was the only end and unique
motive which had induced me to undertake a so long and troublesome
voyage, with the view of receiving this

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

special grace from the Lord. "And I," said ABRAMELIN, "trusting in the
mercy of the Lord, I grant and accord unto thee this Holy Science, which
thou must acquire in the manner which is prescribed unto thee in the two
little manuscript books, without omitting the least imaginable thing of
their contents; and not in any way to gloss or comment upon that which
may be or may not be, seeing that the Artist who hath made that work is
the same God Who from Nothingness hath created all things. Thou shalt in
no way use this Sacred Science to offend the Great God, and to work ill
unto thy neighbour; thou shalt communicate it unto no living person whom
thou dost not thoroughly know by long practice and conversation,
examining well whether such a person really intendeth to work for the
Good or for the Evil. And if thou shalt wish to grant it unto him, thou
shalt well observe and punctually, the same fashion and manner, which I
have made use of with thee. And if thou doest otherwise, he who shall
receive it shall draw no fruit therefrom. Keep thyself as thou wouldst
from a Serpent from selling this Science, and from making merchandise of
it; because the Grace of the Lord is given unto us free and gratis, and
we ought in no wise to sell the same. This Veritable Science shall
remain in thee and thy generation for the space of seventy-two <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md) years, and will not remain longer in our
Sect. Let not thy curiosity push thee on to understand the cause of
this, but figure to thyself that we are so good <span
id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31.md) that our Sect hath become insupportable
not only to the whole human race, but even to God Himself!" I wished in
receiving these two small manuscript books to throw myself on my knees
before him, but be rebuked me, saying that we ought only to bend the
knee before God.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

I avow that these two books <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) were so
exactly written, that thou, O Lamech my son, mayest see them after my
death, and thou shalt thus recognise how much respect I have for
thee. <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33.md) It is true that before my
departure I well read and studied them, and when I found anything
difficult or obscure I had recourse unto ABRAMELIN, who with charity and
patience explained it unto me. Being thoroughly instructed, I took leave
of him, and having received his paternal blessing; a symbol which is not
only in use among the Christians, but which was also the custom with our
forefathers; I also departed, and I took the route to Constantinople,
whither having arrived I fell sick, and my malady lasted for the space
of two months; but the Lord in His Mercy delivered me therefrom, so that
I soon regained my strength, and finding a vessel ready to depart for
Venice I embarked thereon, and I arrived there, and having rested some
days I set out to go unto Trieste, where having landed, I took the road
through the country of Dalmatia, and arrived at length at my paternal
home, where I lived among my relatives and my brothers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[10:1](abr010.htm#fr_25.md) Thus spelt here.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[10:2](abr010.htm#fr_26.md) Aaron the Jew.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[12:1](abr010.htm#fr_27.md) The Qabalistical reader
will at once remark the symbolism of the numbers "ten" and
"seventy-two," the first being the Number of the *Sephiroth*, and the
second that of the *Schemahamphorasch*. But as many readers may be
ignorant of the meaning and reference of these terms, I will briefly
explain them. The Ten Sephiroth are the most abstract ideas and
conceptions of the ten numbers of the ordinary Decimal Scale, and are
employed in the Qabalah as an ideal means of explaining the different
Emanations or Attributes of the Deity. It was thus that Pythagoras
employed the abstract ideas of Numbers as a means of metaphysical
instruction. The Schemahamphorasch or "Divided Name" is a Qabalistical
method of investigating the natures of the Name of four letters I H V H
(Jehovah), which is considered to contain all the Forces of Nature.
There are in the Book of Exodus three verses in the fourteenth chapter,
describing the pillars of fire and of cloud forming a defence unto the
children of Israel against the Egyptians. Each of these three verses
consists in the Hebrew of seventy-two letters, and by writing them in a
certain manner one above another, seventy-two columns of three letters
each are obtained; each column is then treated as a Name of Three
Letters, and the explanation of these is sought for in certain verses of
the Psalms which contain these Names; and these latter would be the
verses of the Psalms alluded to in the text, which the seventy-two poor
persons were told to recite.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[13:1](abr010.htm#fr_28.md) This would not
necessarily exclude eggs or milk.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[13:2](abr010.htm#fr_29.md) So in the MS.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[14:1](abr010.htm#fr_30.md) Note again the number
of seventy-two.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[14:2](abr010.htm#fr_31.md) This is evidently said
ironically.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[15:1](abr010.htm#fr_32.md) He probably means the
copies he himself had been ordered by Abramelin to make, and not the
originals.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[15:2](abr010.htm#fr_33.md) "*Et tu connoiteras la
deference dont je me sers avec toy*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fifth Chapter](abr011.md)
