[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr029) 
[Next](abr031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123)

### CONCERNING THE SELECTION OF THE PLACE.

<span id="img_winit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/winit.jpg) |

E should make the Selection of the Place (for the Operation) before
commencing it, and prior to the celebration of the Passover, in order
that we may decide upon the same without hindrance, and it is necessary
that all things should be prepared.

He who commenceth this Operation in solitude can elect a place according
unto his pleasure; where there is a small wood, in the midst of which
you shall make a small Altar, and you shall cover the same with a hut
(or shelter) of fine branches, so that the rain may not fall thereon and
extinguish the Lamp and the Censer. Around the Altar at the distance of
seven paces you shall prepare a hedge of flowers, plants, and green
shrubs, so that it may divide the entrance <span
id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_124) into two parts; that is to say, the
Interior where the Altar and Tabernacle will be placed after the manner
of a Temple; and the part Exterior, which with the rest of the place
will be as a Portico thereunto.

Now if you commence not this Operation in the Country, but perform it in
a Town, or in some dwelling-place, I will show unto ye what shall be
necessary herein. <span id="fr_125"></span>[3](#fn_125)

Ye shall choose an Apartment which hath a Window, joined unto the which
shall be an uncovered Terrace (or

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Balcony), and a Lodge (or small room or hut)
covered with a roof, but so that there may be on every side windows
whence you may be able to see in every direction, and whence you may
enter into the Oratory. In the which place <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) the Evil Spirits shall be able to
appear, since they cannot appear within the Oratory itself. In the which
place, beside the Oratory towards the quarter of the North, you shall
have a rooted or covered Lodge, in the which and from whence one may be
able to see the Oratory. I myself also had two large windows made in my
Oratory, and at the time of the Convocation of the Spirits, I used to
open them and remove both the shutters and the door, so that I could
easily see on every side and constrain them <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127) to obey me.

The Oratory should always be clear and clean swept, and the flooring
should be of wood, of white pine; in fine, this place should be so well
and carefully prepared, that one may judge it to be a place destined
unto prayer.

The Terrace and the contiguous Lodge where we are to invoke the Spirits
we should cover with river sand to the depth of two fingers at the
least.

The Altar should be erected in the midst of the Oratory; and if any one
maketh his Oratory in desert places, he should build it <span
id="fr_128"></span>[3](#fn_128) of stones which have never been worked
or hewn, or even touched by the hammer.

The Chamber <span id="fr_129"></span>[4](#fn_129) should be boarded with
pine wood, and a Lamp full of Oil Olive should be suspended therein, the
which every time that ye shall have burned your perfume and finished
your orison, ye shall extinguish. A handsome Censer of bronze, or of
silver if one hath the means, must be placed upon the Altar, the which
should in no wise be removed from its place until the Operation

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

be finished, if one performeth it in a dwelling-house; for in the open
country one cannot do this. Thus in this point as in all the others, we
should rule and govern ourselves according unto the means at our
disposal.

The Altar, which should be made of wood, ought to be hollow within after
the manner of a cupboard, wherein you shall keep all the necessary
things, such as the two Robes, the Crown or Mitre, the Wand, the Holy
Oils, the Girdle or Belt, the Perfume; and any other things which may be
necessary.

 <span id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130)The second habiliments will be a
Shirt or Tunic of linen, large and white, with well and properly made
sleeves. The other Robe will be of Crimson or Scarlet Silk with Gold,
and it should not be longer than just unto the knees, with sleeves of
similar stuff. As for these vestments, there is no particular rule for
them; nor any especial instructions to be followed; but the more
resplendent, clean, and brilliant they are the better will it be. You
shall also make a Girdle of Silk of the same colour as the Tunic,
wherewithal you shall be girded. You shall have upon your head a
beautiful Crown or woven Fillet of Silk and Gold. You shall prepare the
Sacred Oil in this manner: Take of myrrh <span
id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131) in tears, one part; of fine cinnamon,
two parts; of galangal <span id="fr_132"></span>[3](#fn_132) half a
part; and the half of the total weight of these drugs of the best oil
olive. The which aromatics you shall mix together according unto the Art
of the Apothecary, and shall make thereof a Balsam, the which you shall
keep in a glass vial which you shall put within the cupboard (formed by
the interior) of the Altar. The Perfume

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

shall be made thus: Take of Incense in tears <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133) one part; of Stacté <span
id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_134) half a part; of Lign Aloes a quarter of
a part; and not being able to get this wood you shall take that of
cedar, or of rose, or of citron, or any other odoriferous wood. You
shall reduce all these ingredients into a very fine powder, mix them
well together and keep the same in a box or other convenient vessel. As
you will consume a great deal of this perfume, it will be advisable to
mix enough on the eve of the Sabbath to last the whole week.

You shall also have a Wand of Almond-tree wood, smooth and straight, of
the length of about from half an ell to six feet. <span
id="fr_135"></span>[3](#fn_135) And ye shall keep the aforesaid things
in good order in the cupboard <span id="fr_136"></span>[4](#fn_136) of
the Altar, ready for use in the proper time and place.

Here followeth the manner of ordering oneself and of operating.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[74:1](abr030.htm#fr_123) This chapter is
previously referred to in the Seventh Chapter in speaking of the
Bed-chamber and the Oratory.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[74:2](abr030.htm#fr_124) "*L'avenue*"; the
modern sense of this word is, of course, a road or path bordered by
trees.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[74:3](abr030.htm#fr_125) Compare the following
description with that of Sir Philip Derval's so-called Observatory, in
the *Strange Story*, by Bulwer Lytton.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[75:1](abr030.htm#fr_126) *I.e.*, the Terrace
or Balcony.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[75:2](abr030.htm#fr_127) *I.e.*, the Spirits.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[75:3](abr030.htm#fr_128) *I.e.*, the Altar.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[75:4](abr030.htm#fr_129) He here evidently
means the Oratory, and not the Bedchamber described in Chapter VII.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[76:1](abr030.htm#fr_130) The Rosicrucian
initiate will note the description of these vestments.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[76:2](abr030.htm#fr_131) "*Mirrhe en larmes*".

<span id="fn_132"></span>[76:3](abr030.htm#fr_132) ? Galanca, or
galanga, an Indian root, used for medicinal purposes. See description of
Holy Anointing Oil and Perfume in Exodus xxx.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[77:1](abr030.htm#fr_133) Olibanum.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[77:2](abr030.htm#fr_134) Or storax.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[77:3](abr030.htm#fr_135) A "brasse" is a
fathom; but here perhaps implies rather an arm's length: "Lune brasse
enveron ou demi aulne".

<span id="fn_136"></span>[77:4](abr030.htm#fr_136) *I.e.*, in the hollow
interior of the Altar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twelfth Chapter. How One Should Keep Oneself in Order to
Carry Out This Operation Well](abr031)
