[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr022.md) 
[Next](abr024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FOURTH CHAPTER.

### THAT THE GREATER NUMBER OF MAGICAL BOOKS ARE FALSE AND VAIN.

<span id="img_ainit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/ainit.jpg) |

LL the Books which treat of Characters, Extravagant Figures, Circles,
Convocations, Conjurations, Invocations, and other like matters, even
although any one may see some effect thereby, should be rejected, being
works full of Diabolical Inventions; <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md)
and ye should know that the DEMON maketh use of an infinitude of methods
to entrap and deceive mankind. This I have myself proved, because when I
have operated with the Veritable Wisdom, all the other enchantments
which I had learned have ceased, and I could no longer operate with
them, and I made a very careful trial of those which I had learned with
the RABBIN MOSES; the cause of which is that the deceit and fraud of the
DEMON can never appear where the Divine Wisdom is. Furthermore, the most
certain mark of their falsity is the election of certain days; since
there be those which God hath expressly commanded to sanctify, we can
freely operate

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

on all other days, and at all times. And whenever ye shall see tables
which do mark the days and their differences, the Celestial Signs, and
other like matters, <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98.md) pay no attention
thereto, because herein is a very great sin <span
id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99.md) hidden, and a deceit of the DEMON; it
being one of his many methods of endeavouring to confound the True
Wisdom of the Lord with evil matters. Because this True Wisdom of the
Lord can operate and perform its effects every day, and at any moment
and second. The Gates of His Grace are daily open, He wisheth, and it is
pleasing unto Him to aid us, as well on this day as on the morrow; and
in no way could it be true that He desireth to be subjected to the day
and hour which men would wish to prescribe for Him; seeing that He is
the Master to elect such days as He Himself wisheth, and also may they
be sanctified! Flee also all such Books

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

as those whose Conjurations include extravagant, inexplicable, and
unheard-of words, <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) and which be
impossible to understand, and which be truly the inventions of the Devil
and of wicked men.

It is well also to recall that which I have said in the First Book,
*viz.*, that in the greater part of their Conjurations there was not the
slightest mention made of God Almighty, but only of Invocations of the
Devil, together with very obscure Chaldean words. Surely it would be a
rash thing of a man who should deal with God by the intermediary of His
Holy Angels, to think that he ought to address Him in a jargon, neither
knowing what he saith nor what he demandeth. Is it not an act of madness
to wish to offend God and His Holy Angels! Let us then walk in the right
way, let us speak before God with heart and mouth alike opened, in our
own maternal language <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101.md) since how
can ye pretend to obtain any Grace from the Lord, if ye yourselves know
not what ye ask? Yet, however, the number of those who lose themselves
utterly in this vanity is infinite; many say that the Grecian language
is more agreeable unto God, it may be true that it was perhaps at one
time, but how many among us to-day understand it perfectly, this is the
reason why it would be the most senseless thing to employ it.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

I repeat then:--Let each one speak his own language, because thus
understanding what it is that ye are demanding of the Lord, ye will
obtain all Grace. And if ye demand a thing which is unjust, it will be
refused unto you, and ye will never obtain it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[56:1](abr023.htm#fr_97.md) It is necessary that
the reader should not misunderstand this passage. What are meant are
those Black Magic works containing garbled and perverted words and
characters; and which teach nothing but hurtful and selfish practices;
the great point in which is generally the forming of a Pact with an Evil
Spirit. Because true Characters represent the Formulas of the Currents
of the Hidden Forces of Nature and true Ceremonies are the Keys of
bringing the same into action.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[57:1](abr023.htm#fr_98.md) It seems again to me
here that Abraham the Jew stretches the matter too far. it is perfectly
and utterly true without doubt that Angelic Magic is higher than that
form of Talismanic Magic which has its basis in the Astrological
positions of the Heavenly Bodies; and can therefore do more, and be also
independent of Astrological considerations, because the matter is
relegated to a higher plane than this, and one wherein the laws of
Physical Nature do not obtain. But certainly when working with the rays
of the Sun, we shall more easily find his *occult* force of heat
attainable when he himself is producing that effect upon the earth,
*i.e.*, when he is in the Sign of the Lion; while when he is in that of
the Bull, his force will be rather that of Germination, etc., when in
the Northern Hemisphere. And the same with the other Planets. Also if
working by the Indian Tatwas, we shall find it necessary to consider the
position of the Moon, the time in the day, and the course of the Tatwa
in the period of five Gharis. Of course Abraham could not make the
experiments of Rabbin Moses succeed if he substituted the laws of
another plane for their own.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[57:2](abr023.htm#fr_99.md) So it would be if he
applied it to the Angelic working; but equally it would be an error
which, though not so great, would still entail failure, to apply laws
exclusively of the Angelic plane to those experiments which would mainly
depend on the physical rays of the Planets; though undoubtedly the
Angels of a Planet govern its rays. But the Angels of Mars do not govern
the rays of Jupiter, nor those of the latter the rays of Mars.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[58:1](abr023.htm#fr_100.md) The Grimoires of
Black Magic would usually come under this head. But, nevertheless, the
extravagant words therein will be usually found to be corruptions and
perversions of Hebrew, Chaldee, and Egyptian titles of Gods and Angels.
But it is undoubtedly evil to use caricatures of Holy Names; and these
for evil purposes also. Yet it is written in the Oracles of Zoroaster:
"Change not barbarous Names of Evocation, for they are Names Divine,
having in the Sacred Rites a Power Ineffable!"

<span id="fn_101"></span>[58:2](abr023.htm#fr_101.md) Yet, notwithstanding,
it is well in a Sacred Magical Operation to employ a language which does
not to our minds convey so much the commonplace ideas of everyday life,
so as the better to exalt our thoughts. But, as Abraham says, we should
before all things understand what we are repeating.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fifth Chapter. That in This Operation it is not Necessary to
Regard the Time, Nor the Day, Nor the Hours](abr024.md)
