[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr027) 
[Next](abr029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE NINTH CHAPTER.

### CONCERNING THE TWO LAST MOONS WHICH MUST BE THUS COMMENCED.

<span id="img_minit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/minit.jpg) |

ORNING and Noon ye shall wash your hands and your face on entering the
Oratory; <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117) and firstly ye shall make
Confession of all your sins; after this, with a E very ardent prayer, ye
shall entreat the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Lord to accord unto you this particular grace,
which is, that you may enjoy and be able to endure <span
id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118) the presence and conversation of His
Holy Angels, and that He may deign by their intermission to grant unto
you the Secret Wisdom, so that you may be able to have dominion over the
Spirits and over all creatures.

Ye shall do this same at midday before dining, and also in the evening;
so that during these two last Moons ye shall perform the prayer three
times a day, and during this time ye shall ever keep the Perfume upon
the Altar. Also towards the end of your Oration, ye shall pray unto the
Holy Angels, supplicating them to bear your sacrifice before the Face of
God, in order to intercede for you, and that they shall assist you in
all your operations during these two Moons.

The man who is his own master <span id="fr_119"></span>[2](#fn_119)
shall leave all business alone, except works of charity towards his
neighbour. You shall shun all society except that of your Wife and of
your Servants. Ye shall employ the greatest part of your time in
speaking of the Law of God, and in reading such works as treat wisely
thereof; so that your eyes may be opened unto that which from past time
even unto the present ye have not as yet seen, nor thought of, nor
believed.

Every Sabbath Eve shall ye fast, and wash your whole body, and change
your garment.

Furthermore, ye shall have a Vest and Tunic of linen, which ye shall put
on every time that ye enter into the Oratory, before ye commence to put
the Perfume in the Censer, as I shall tell ye more fully hereafter

Also ye shall have a basket or other convenient vessel of copper filled
with Charcoal to put inside the Censer when necessary, and which ye can
take outside the Oratory,

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

because the Censer itself should never be taken away from the place.
Note well that after having performed your prayer, you ought to take
it <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_120) out of the Oratory, especially
during the Two last Moons, and ye should inter it in a place which
cannot well be made unclean, such as a garden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[70:2](abr028.htm#fr_117) This probably means
in the bed-chamber before entering the Oratory.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[71:1](abr028.htm#fr_118) *Que vous puissiez
jouir et resister à la prèsence*, etc.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[71:2](abr028.htm#fr_119) *I.e.*, independent.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[72:1](abr028.htm#fr_120) *I.e.*, the ashes of
the charcoal and incense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tenth Chapter. Concerning What Things a Man May Learn and
Study During These Two Moons](abr029)
