[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr072) 
[Next](abr074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NOTES TO CHAPTER XIV.

(*a*) The Symbols of this Chapter be manifested in part by the Evil
Spirits, and in part by the Good Angels.

(*b*) MAGOT is said to rule the Operations of this Chapter.

(*c*) The Familiar Spirits do not execute the Operations of this
Chapter.

(*d*) To render oneself invisible is said by Abraham to be a very easy
matter. This Chapter contains Twelve Symbols for Twelve different
Spirits submitted unto the Prince MAGOT, who are all of the same force.
Place the Symbol upon the top of your head (under your head covering)
and then you will become invisible, while on taking it away you will
appear visible again.

(*e*) No. 1 is a Square of 49 Squares, whence 19 Squares are taken which
are arranged somewhat in the form of a capital F. ALAMALA is probably
from the Greek, ALE wandering, and MELAS = black, darkness; *i.e.*,
wandering darkness.

No. 2 consists of 25 Squares arranged somewhat in an F form, and taken
from the Square of 49 Squares.--TSAPHAH is from TzPH = a covering or
shroud.

No. 3 is a Square of 25 Squares. CASAH implies "formed by coagulation".

No. 4 consists of 16 Squares in an F form, taken from a Square of 36
Squares.--ALATAH signifies "adhering closely".

No. 5 is a GNOMON of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares.--CODER
= Darkness and Obscurity.

No. 6 consists of 17 Squares, somewhat irregularly disposed, taken from
a Square of 36 Squares.--SIMLAH = "involved, to clothe or surround on
all sides".

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

No. 7 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares.--CEHAH
= Restriction, and compression.

No. 8 is a Gnomon of 9 Squares taken from a Square of 25 Squares.--ANANA
is a word expressing earnest desire for some then defect to be supplied.

No. 9 consists of 19 taken from a Square of 25 Squares.--TAMAN = "to
hide or conceal," and recalls the Biblical name of "Teman". NEDAC means
"accumulated darkness".

No. 10 is a Gnomon of 13 Squares from a Square of 49 Squares.--BEROMIN
signifies "coverings or shrouds of concealment".

No. 11 is a border of 16 Squares from a Square of 25 Squares.--TALAC =
signifies "thy mists".

No. 12 consists of 16 Squares taken from a Square of 49
Squares.--ALAMPIS is the Greek adjective ALAMPES, meaning "without the
light of the Sun". ISIL is Hebrew and means "he will dissolve".

It will be remarked that all these names distinctly express some idea
relating to Invisibility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fifteenth Chapter. For the Spirits to bring us anything we
may wish to eat or to drink...](abr074)
