[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr015) 
[Next](abr017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

### THE TENTH CHAPTER.

<span id="img_iinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/iinit.jpg) |

T being understood that in this operation we have to do with a Great and
Powerful Enemy, whom through our own weakness and human strength or
science we cannot resist without particular aid and assistance from the
Holy Angels, and from the Lord of the Good Spirits; it is necessary that
each one should always have God before his eyes, and in no way offend
Him. On the other hand, he must always be upon his guard, and abstain as
from a mortal sin from flattering, obeying, regarding, or having respect
to the DEMON, and to his Viperine Race; neither must he submit himself
unto him in the slightest thing, for that would be his ruin and the
fatal loss of his soul. As it happened unto all the seed descended from
NOAH, LOT, ISHMAEL, and others who did possess the blessed land (before
our forefathers) who inherited this Wisdom from father to son, from
family to family; but in the course of time having lent an ear unto the
Treacherous Enemy, they let themselves be turned away from the Veritable
Path, and did lose the True Science which they had received from God by
the means of their fathers, and gave themselves over unto Superstitious
Sciences, and unto Diabolical Enchantments, and unto Abominable
Idolatries, the which was the cause that thereafter God did chastise
them, defy <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) them, and chase them from
their country; and did introduce in their stead our predecessors; from
which same errors again later came the cause of our present misery and
servitude, the which will last even unto the end of the world; since
they in no way wished to know the Gift which God had given unto them,
but instead abandoned it to embrace and follow the deceits of the DEMON.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

This is wherefore each one should take care to submit himself unto
him <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) neither by acts, nor by words,
nor by thoughts, because he is so adroit and prompt that he can seize
one unexpectedly; just as a Spider may take a Bird. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76) Let that miserable Bohemian and the others
whom I have before mentioned, serve thee for an example to avoid (even
as they did unto me).

In the commencement of the Operation there appeareth a Man of Majestic
Appearance, who with great affability doth promise unto thee marvellous
things. Consider all this as pure vanity, for without the permission of
God he can give nothing; but he will do it unto the damage and
prejudice, ruin and eternal damnation of whomsoever putteth faith in
him, and believeth in him; as we may see in the Holy Scripture in the
matter Of PHARAOH and his adherents, the which despised the Veritable
and certain Wisdom of MOSES and AARON, and were in the beginning backed
up by the Devil who showed them by the means of Enchantments that he
could both do and put in practice all the works of the aforesaid holy
men, whence he ultimately did reduce them to such a condition of
obstinacy and blindness, that without perceiving their own error and the
deceit of the DEMON, they were cruelly chastised by God with divers
plagues, and were at last all drowned in the Red Sea. This is wherefore
in conclusion I say unto thee in few words, that we must rely upon God
alone, and put all our confidence in Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[38:1](abr016.htm#fr_74) *Les deffit*.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[39:1](abr016.htm#fr_75) *I.e.*, the Demon.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[39:2](abr016.htm#fr_76) There is a very large
species of Spider, which can even capture and kill small birds, but it
is only met with in tropical regions, especially in Central America and
Martinique; the zoological name of this species is *Mygalé*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eleventh Chapter](abr017)
