[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr007.md) 
[Next](abr009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SECOND CHAPTER.

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/tinit.jpg) |

HEREFORE do I confess, that I, even I also, am not born a MASTER;
neither have I invented this science of my own proper Genius; but I have
learned it from others in the manner which I will hereafter tell thee,
and in truth.

My father, SIMON, shortly before his death, gave me certain signs and
instructions concerning the way in which it is necessary to acquire the
Holy Qabalah; but it is however true that he did not enter into the Holy
Mystery by the true Path, and I could not know how to understand the
same sufficiently and perfectly as Reason demanded. My father was always
contented and satisfied with such a method of understanding the same,
and he sought out no further the Veritable Science and Magical Art,
which I undertake to teach thee and to expound unto thee.

After his death, finding myself twenty years of age, I had a very great
passion to understand the True Mysteries of the Lord; but of mine own
strength I could not arrive at the end which I intended to attain.

I learned that at Mayence there was a Rabbi who was a notable Sage, and
the report went that he possessed in full the Divine Wisdom. The great
desire

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

which I had to study induced me to go to seek him in order to learn from
him. But this man also had not received from the Lord the GIFT, and a
perfect grace; because, although he forced himself to manifest unto me
certain deep Mysteries of the Holy Qabalah, he by no means arrived at
the goal; and in his Magic he did not in any way make use of the Wisdom
of the Lord, but instead availed himself of certain arts and
superstitions of infidel and idolatrous nations, in part derived from
the Egyptians, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) together with images
of the Medes and of the Persians, with herbs of the Arabians, together
with the power of the Stars and Constellations; and, finally, he had
drawn from every people and nation, and even from the Christians, some
diabolical Art. And in everything the Spirits blinded him to such an
extent, even while obeying him in some ridiculous and inconsequent
matter, that he actually believed that his blindness and error were the
Veritable Magic, and be therefore pushed no further his research into
the True and Sacred Magic. I also learned his extravagant experiments,
and for ten years did I remain buried in so great an error, until that
after the ten years I arrived in Egypt at the house of an Ancient Sage
who was called ABRAMELIM, who put me into the true Path as I will
declare it unto thee hereafter, and he gave me better instruction and
doctrine than all the others; but this particular grace was granted me
by the Almighty Father of all Mercy, that is to say, ALMIGHTY GOD, who
little by little illuminated mine understanding and opened mine eyes to
see and admire, to contemplate, and search out His Divine Wisdom, in
such a manner that it became possible unto me to further and further
understand and comprehend the Sacred Mystery by which I entered into the
knowledge of the Holy Angels, enjoying

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

their sight and their sacred conversation, from whom <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) at length I received afterwards the
foundation of the Veritable Magic, and how to command and dominate the
Evil Spirits. So that by way of conclusion unto this chapter I cannot
say that I have otherwise received the True Instruction save from
ABRAMELIM, <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_20.md) and the True and
Incorruptible Magic save from the Holy Angels of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[6:1](abr008.htm#fr_18.md) Yet the true Qabalah is
undoubtedly derived from the Egyptian and Eastern Wisdom.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:1](abr008.htm#fr_19.md) *I.e.* from the Angels.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[7:2](abr008.htm#fr_20.md) This name is spelt
"Abramelin" in some places, and "Abramelim" in others. I have
consequently carefully in all cases put the orthography as it there
occurs in the MS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Chapter](abr009.md)
