[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr034.md) 
[Next](abr036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER.

### CONCERNING THE SENDING THEM AWAY.

<span id="img_cinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/cinit.jpg) |

ONCERNING the sending away of the Spirits as well during the Three Days,
as hereafter:--

It is not necessary to observe many Ceremonies in order to send away the
Spirits, <span id="fr_181"></span>[2](#fn_181.md) because they themselves
are only too glad to be

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

far away from you. This is wherefore you need not otherwise I cense them
to depart; that is to say that during the Three Days, having finished
speaking with the Four Sovereign Princes, and afterwards with the Eight
Sub-Princes, and received their Oath (of allegiance), you shall say unto
them that for the present they can go unto their destined place; and
that every time that they shall be summoned, let them remember their
Oath made upon the Symbols.

(And you shall send away) the Familiar Spirits and all other Spirits
with the aforesaid words.

It is true, however, that as regardeth the Familiar Spirits you shall
tell them that at the time when they are on guard-duty they shall remain
near you visible or invisible, in whatever form shall please you, in
order to serve you during the destined Six Hours.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[97:2](abr035.htm#fr_181.md) However in all
Magical Works great stress is laid on the importance of licensing a
Spirit invoked in the Operation to depart, and if he be unwilling, of
even compelling him against his will to return to his place. It must be
remembered here, in this Operation of Abraham the Jew, that not only his
Oratory but his Bed-chamber also is kept pure and consecrated, and
therefore- it would be next to impossible for an Evil Spirit to break
through to attack him. But in all Magical Evocations by the Circle, the
Magician should never quit the same, without having licensed and even
forced the Evil Spirits to depart; as cases are on record of the
Operator experiencing sudden <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> death. I
myself was present on an occasion when in the Evocation by the Circle,
the Magician incautiously having stooped forward and *outward* just over
the limit of the Circle, received a shock like that from a powerful
electric battery, which nearly threw him down, struck the Magical Sword
from his hand, and sent him staggering back to the centre of the Circle.
Compare also with this incident Allan Fenwick's experience in the
*Strange Story*, when his hand accidentally went beyond the limits of
the Circle when he was replenishing the Lamps during the Evocation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seventeenth Chapter. What We Should Answer Unto the
Interrogations of the Spirits, and How We Should Resist Their
Demands](abr036.md)
