[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr023) 
[Next](abr025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FIFTH CHAPTER.

### THAT IN THIS OPERATION IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO REGARD THE TIME, NOR THE DAY, NOR THE HOURS.

<span id="img_tinit"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/tinit.jpg) |

HERE be no other days (to be observed) than those which God hath
ordained unto our Fathers, *viz.*, All Saturdays, which be the days of
the Sabbath Passover; and the Feast of Tabernacles of which the former
is the Fifteenth Day of the First of our Months, and the latter
(beginneth on) the Fifteenth Day of the Seventh Month. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_102) Now for this Operation, any person of
whatever Law <span id="fr_103"></span>[2](#fn_103) he may be, provided
that he confesseth that there is One God, <span
id="fr_104"></span>[3](#fn_104) may observe these feasts. However, the
true time of commencing this Operation is the first day after the
Celebration of the Feasts of Easter, and this was ordained unto Noah,
being the most convenient time, and the end falleth just at the (Feast
of) Tabernacles. <span id="fr_105"></span>[4](#fn_105) Our predecessors
have thus observed it, and the Angel <span
id="fr_106"></span>[5](#fn_106) also

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

hath approved it; and also it is more advisable to follow good counsel
and example, than to be obstinate and follow one's own caprice; and also
to treat the election of a particular day as a Pagan idea, paying no
regard whatever either to Time nor to the Elements; but only (having
respect) unto Him Who granteth such a period. Thus then will we be found
men in the fittest condition of Grace and reconciled with God, and purer
than at another period; and this being an essential point ye ought well
to consider the same.

It is, however, quite true that the Elements and the Constellations do
perform of themselves certain operations <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) but this is to be understood of natural
things, as it happeneth that one day is different unto another; but such
a difference hath not operation in things Spiritual and Supernatural,
being thus useless for (higher) Magical Operations. The Election of Days
is still more useless, the Election of Hours and Minutes whereof the
ignorant make so much, is further a very great error.

Wherefore I have resolved to write this particular chapter, in order
that this error might appear more plainly evident unto him who readeth
it, and that be may draw profit therefrom so as to operate with
judgment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[59:1](abr024.htm#fr_102) The Passover is about
the Vernal Equinox and nearly corresponds to our Easter; it begins on
the 15th or 16th of the Jewish First Month = Nisan or Abib. The Feast of
Tabernacles begins about the middle of their Seventh Month= Tisri.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[59:2](abr024.htm#fr_103) *I.e.*, religious
denomination.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[59:3](abr024.htm#fr_104) It is immaterial
whether the religious conception be Theistic or Pantheistic.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[59:4](abr024.htm#fr_105) The Initiates of the
True Rosicrucian Wisdom, know that there is a certain force in the
observance of the Equinoxes.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[59:5](abr024.htm#fr_106) Abraham evidently
means his Guardian Angel.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[60:1](abr024.htm#fr_107) Here Abraham admits
to an extent what I have urged in my previous notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sixth Chapter. Concerning the Planetary Hours and Other
Errors of the Astrologers](abr025)
