[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr046.md) 
[Next](abr048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NOTES TO CHAPTER I.

(*a*) The Symbols of this Chapter are manifested only by the Angels or
by the Guardian Angel.

(*b*) ORIENS, PAYMON, ARITON, and AMAYMON execute the Operations hereof
by means of their Common Ministers.

(*c*) The Familiar Spirits cannot well execute the Operations of this
Chapter.

(*d*) Take the Symbol in your hand, place it under your hat or cap, upon
the top of your head, and you will be secretly answered by the Spirit
who will execute that which you wish. (This mode of operation will
evidently be applicable to many of the Chapters.)

(*e*) No. 1 is a Square of 25 Squares, and is a complete specimen of
double Acrostic arrangement. MILON, though Greek-sounding, has here
hardly a meaning if derived from either MILOS, a fruit or other tree; or
from MEILON, a precious thing, or article of value.--It seems rather
derived from the Hebrew MLVN = a diversity of things, or matters.--IRAGO
is perhaps from Greek EIRA a question, or inquiry, and AGO to conduct or
decide. Hebrew RGO = to disrupt or analyse.--LAMAL, probably from
Chaldaic MLA = fulness, entirety. OGARI from Hebrew OGR = a swallow or
swiftly-flying thing. NOLIM from Hebrew, NOLIM = hidden or covered
things. Whence we may extract the following as the formula of this
Square: "Various questions fully examined and analysed, and that
quickly, and even things carefully hidden and concealed ". This rule we
can apply to discover the formulas of other Squares.

No. 2 is a Square of 49 Squares, and is also a complete Specimen

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

of double Acrostic.--THIRAMA from Chaldee TIRM = strongly-defended
places, or Citadels.--HIGANAM from Hebrew or Chaldee GNN or GNM = to
defend.--IGOGANA, perhaps from Hebrew GG = a roof or covering or
protection from above.--RAGIGAR, perhaps from Chaldaic ROO (it must be
remembered that, though I here transliterate the letter Ayin by O, it
has really the power of a Gh as well; it is a sound difficult of
comprehension by a non-Orientalist); = to break up, or breach.--ANAGOGI
probably from Greek ANAGOGE the act of raising or elevating.--MANAGIH
from Hebrew MNO to restrain; stop, put a barrier to, or contain by a
barrier.--AMARIHT from Hebrew AMRTh = Word or Speech.--The whole idea of
this Formula seems to be the making forcible way into a defended place
or matter.

No. 3 is a Square of 25 Squares, and again a perfect form of double
Acrostic. DOREH, from DVR Hebrew = a habitation.--ORIRE perhaps from
Latin ORIOR = to rise or be born.--RINIR perhaps from Hebrew NIR = to
renew.--ERIRO perhaps from ARR to curse.--HEROD from Hebrew ChRD =
shaking, trembling.

No. 4 is a Square of 25 Squares, and again a perfect double
Acrostic.--NABHI from Hebrew NBA = to prophesy.--ADAIH perhaps from Heb.
DIH. = a bird of omen. BAKAB from Heb. KAB = in trouble. HIADA from
Hebrew IDH = sent forward, or thrown. IHBAN from IHB Hebrew = to give or
bring. Hence the formula would be somewhat "To prophesy by omens the
troubles to come"; the which is much more applicable to No. 6, "The
Tribulations to come"; than to No. 4, which is for "The Things to happen
in War".

No. 5 is a double Acrostic of 49 Squares.--NVDETON from Hebrew ND = to
remove, and AThN = strongly.--VSILARO from Hebrew BSHL = to ripen, and
Chaldaic ARO = the Earth.--DIREMAT from Hebrew DR = to encompass or
include, and MT = things forgotten or slipped aside. ELEMELE from Hebrew
ALIM and ALH=God of the Mighty Ones.--TAMERID from Hebrew ThMR =
straight like a palm-tree, and ID = put forward.--ORALISV = from Hebrew
= ORL = superfluous, and ISh the substance.--NOTEDVN, from NTH = to
stretch out and DN to contend or rule.

No. 6 is a double Acrostic of 36 Squares.--SARAPI from Hebrew ShRP = to
burn.--ARAIRP from Hebrew AR = a river, and RPH = to abate or
slacken.--RAKKIA from Hebrew RKK = to become faint, to become
softened.--AIKKAR from Hebrew OKR = to trouble or disturb.--PRIARA from
PRR = to shatter or break up.--IPARAS from Hebrew PRS = to break in
pieces, to divide, or part in sunder. This will give a formula of
trouble.

No. 7 is a double Acrostic of 36 Squares.--MALACH from Hebrew MLCh =
Salt; also that which is easily dissolved; to

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

dissolve.--AMANEC from MNK = a chain, or from AMN = stability.--LANANA
from LNN = to lodge, or take up one's abode.--ANANAL from AN = labour,
and NLH, to complete or finish.--CENAMA *perhaps* from QNM =
odoriferous. HCALAM *perhaps* from HCL = spacious (as a palace).

No. 8 is a double Acrostic of 25 Squares.--KOSEM, from Hebrew QSM = to
divine or prognosticate.--OBODE, from Hebrew OBD = a servant.--SOFOS
from Greek SOPHOS = wise, learned, skilful.--EDOBO, perhaps from DB = to
murmur.--MESOK from Hebrew MSK = to mingle or intermix.

No. 9 is a double Acrostic of 36 Squares.--ROTHER is perhaps from RTT,
Trembling, Dread; and HRR to conceive or bring forth.--ORORIE from
Hebrew OROR = laying bare, disclosing.--TOARAH from Hebrew ThVRH = Law,
Reason, or Order of.--HARAOT from Hebrew HRH to bring forth, or from
ChRTh = To inscribe or mark down.--REHTOR from RTT and ThVR = reason for
dread.--The whole formula will represent the disclosing of the reasons
for dreading any terrible effect.

No. 10 is another double Acrostic of 64 Squares, and No. 11 one of 49
Squares. I have here given a sufficiently careful analysis of the
meanings of the combinations formed by the letters in the preceding
Squares to give the Reader a general idea of the formulas involved. To
avoid an undue extension of these notes, I shall not usually analyse
every name contained in each Square, but shall confine myself in most
cases to giving sufficient indications of the meanings of the principal
words or words only, which are therein employed. The Reader must
remember also that in such an Acrostic arrangement of the letters of
words, half of those therein contained will simply be inversions of the
principal word or words therein contained. For example, in No. 11,
REAHBEM is of course MEBHAER written backwards.--ELIAILE reads the same
way backwards or forwards, and so does HAOROAH; and BIKOSIA written
backwards gives AISOKIB. Yet undoubtedly some of these words are to an
extent translatable also, and in this case will be found to have a
bearing on the subject-matter of the Square. Hebrew especially is a
language in which this method will be found to work with a readiness
unattainable in ordinary European languages, from the fact that its
Alphabet may be said to be entirely Consonantal in character, even such
letters as Aleph, Vau, and Yōd, being rather respectively, a drawing in
of the breath than the letter A; V rather than U; and Y rather than I.
Also in common with all really ancient languages the system of Verbal
Roots from which all the words of the language are derived, has this
effect, *viz.*, that the majority of combinations of two or three
letters will be found to be a Verbal Root, bearing a definite meaning.
Besides all this, in the Qabalah each letter of the Hebrew Alphabet is
treated as having a complete sphere

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

of hieroglyphic meanings of its own; whence the most important ancient
Hebrew Names and Words can be treated by the Qabalistic Initiate as in
fact so many formulas of Spiritual force. I have been thus lengthy in
explanation in order that the Reader may have some idea of the reason of
the construction and use of these Magic Squares.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Chapter. To Obtain Information Concerning, and to be
Enlightened Upon All Sorts of Propositions and All Doubtful
Sciences](abr048.md)
