[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abr105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

### ESSENTIAL REMARKS UPON THE FOREGOING SYMBOLS.

IT is certain that among all the Symbols which I have hereinbefore
written down there be many which one can employ for evil (purposes); and
I avow that (at first) I intended not to give them here at all; but
thereafter I did make reflection in myself that I was working no evil;
for often the secret judgments of God permit disgrace, hindrances,
infirmities, and other vexing accidents to happen unto Mortals, either
to awake them from the lethargy wherein they be sunk so that they
recognise not their Creator, or else to give them an opportunity by
their afflictions of increasing their merit. And although God can in no
way do evil, but always good, nevertheless we cannot deny that
occasionally He permitteth the Secondary Causes to act. Now the
Executioners and Executors of the Divine justice be the Evil Spirits.
Whence I conclude that although it may be in no sense advisable to work
Operations for Evil, yet that there may arise, however, certain cases
which do admit of and permit the same; as (for example) when it is
necessary to save and defend one's own life, or to avert some great
scandal or evil, or to prevent offensive acts which might be done
against oneself, or to displease God and hurt one's neighbour, as well
as in just Wars, and other like cases. Yet it is always best in such
instances to govern yourself according to the counsel of your Holy
Guardian Angel. I

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

have also written these for the reason that God hath given unto Man free
Will both in merit and demerit; for, further, having finished the
Operation, if thou shouldest wish (which I pray God not to permit) <span
id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_237) to operate for Evil and to abuse the
Grace which God hath granted thee, the Spirits would be only too ready
to give and manifest unto thee the Symbols, and will grant willingly
unto thee all that thou shalt demand of them. Concerning this matter I
repeat unto thee,--Fear the Lord, love Him, and respect His Commandments
with a good heart, and thou shalt live happy and contented upon Earth.

If thou considerest maturely what be the essential points of this
Operation, thou shalt find that the first point is to make a firm,
veritable, and real resolution to live in a truly edifying condition of
modesty, and in retirement, as far as it shall be possible for thee so
to do. For Solitude is the source of many blessings, such as, to give
oneself up to prayer, and unto the contemplation of things Divine; to
flee evil conversations and occasions of sin; to live in oneself; and to
accustom oneself to continuing a life of such regularity. For if one
were to go to present oneself before a King, what would one not do to
appear before him with splendour and magnificence; and what diligence
and care would not one put in practice to prepare oneself hereunto. Now
we must understand that the enjoyment and vision of the Angels of the
Lord be infinitely above the Princes of Earth, who in fact are but a
vanity, a shadow, and vile dust of Earth. Now if to please these Mortal
Princes one would almost commit idolatries; what ought one not to do to
appear before the Holy Angels of God who represent the Grandeur of the
Majesty of God. Let each one hold for a thing, sure and certain that the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Grace which the Lord granteth unto us in giving
us this Sacred Science by the means and intermediation of His Holy
Angels is so great that none can fitly express it.

It is certain that having obtained this Sacred Wisdom thou mayest
dispose of it and communicate it unto three friends; but thou must not
exceed this Sacred Number of the Ternary, for in such case thou wouldest
be altogether deprived of it. One of the most meritorious deeds in the
sight of the Lord, is to share with one's neighbour the goods which God
hath given unto us; yet must we take note of that which God commanded
unto MOSES, when He ordered him to--give the Operation unto AARON his
brother, namely that he should receive as the Symbol of an Offering Ten
Golden Florins, the which he should distribute unto Seventy-Two poor
persons with his own hands, obliging them to repeat the Psalms which I
have already mentioned in the Second Book, and which should be of the
number of Seventy-Two. For if he who receiveth this Operation should not
perform this Alms, the Operation would be void of value for him. Thou,
not yet having the Authority to give it, without having received the Ten
Golden Florins, thou must act like MOSES, unto whom the Lord granted it
on this condition, for him to give it unto his brother AARON.

I have also described the precautions which we must take before granting
this Sacred Science unto any; and I repeat here that at least Six Months
should transpire during which we should frequently test, and seek by
conversations to sound, the inclinations of him unto whom we may be
willing to give it; so as to know whether he be a reliable person, and
also the object for which he demandeth and is anxious to obtain this
Science. Now shouldest thou perceive that such an one is light and
inconstant, and that he hath only vague ideas, and habits and manners
which be not good, then

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

shalt thou temporise with him for a time, so as to bring up causes,
occasions, or pretexts, so as not to give it unto him, *even shouldest
thou already have promised it to him*. For it is better to undergo the
displeasure of a Mortal Man than that of an Eternal God, from Whom thou
hast received so great a Grace. I have, however, myself made trial
hereof, for to my great wonderment (once upon a time) when I was
thinking that I was putting it to good use in giving it unto a certain
person for whom I had great respect; God Himself intervened and did not
permit my intention to be carried out, for that person began of his own
accord to wonder whether the matter were true or no, and he doubted it
much, believing that it was a fable, and did not have an entire faith
therein; and he made me comprehend by his discourse that he was not such
an one as I had thought. Furthermore it happened that he fell
dangerously ill, and I in my turn was reprimanded by my Angel who blamed
me for the choice I had made. The whole machinery of the Universe is
maintained by Faith; and he who believeth not, suffereth the
chastisement of his perfidy both in this World and in the next. I could
here say much more relating to our own selves, but as thou wilt have to
pass under the influence <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238) of thy
Holy Guardian Angel, thou wilt be sufficiently instructed in his own
good time, and by himself, concerning these matters which be both
delicate and to be jealously guarded. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[2](#fn_239)

The Evil Spirit is so subtle, so keen, and so cunning, that that which
he cannot obtain at the time of the Conjuration, he will seek. to have
on other occasions in offering thee his services. This is why the very
first action to take especially with thy Familiar Spirits, should

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

be to command them, never to say anything unto thee of themselves, but
only to speak when thou shalt interrogate them, unless it were to warn
thee of matters which concern either thine advantage or thine hurt. For
if thou dost not limit their liberty of speech they will tell thee so
many and so important things, that they will completely overcloud <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_240) thine understanding, and thou wilt not
know what to believe, so that in the confusion of ideas they could make
thee prevaricate, and perhaps fall into irretrievable error. Never make
thyself to be greatly entreated in any matter wherein thou canst aid and
succour thy neighbour, and do not wait until he demandeth assistance
from thee, but seek to know to the full his need even though it be
concealed, and give him prompt aid. Also trouble not thyself as to
whether he be Turk, Pagan, or Idolater, but do good unto all those who
believe in a God. Be especially charitable towards those who are in
extreme want, prisoners, or sick, and let thine heart be touched, and
succour them generously; for God taketh pleasure in beholding the poor
succoured.

In the Twenty-Eighth Chapter where it is treated of the way to have
Silver and Gold sufficient to supply one's needs on occasion; thou must
know that the quantity of Gold or of Silver of which thou hast then
actually need, will be at once brought unto thee, and thou canst use it
for this occasion only. And if thou usest it not within the twenty-four
hours, this sum will disappear and thou wilt no longer be able to avail
thyself of . it. Think not, however, that this Gold is but a phantasy,
for if thou effectually expendest it, and dost not endeavour to hoard
the same, he who shall receive it from thine hands can enjoy the same
and expend it according unto his

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

desire, and the money will be real both for him and for others.

For once only mayest thou demand of thine Holy Angel the amount of Gold
and of Silver which thou shalt judge suitable unto thine estate and
conditions. My possessions were few, and I demanded of mine Angel Three
Thousand Thousand Golden Florins, <span id="fr_241"></span>[1](#fn_241)
and they were granted unto me. Later I made such good use of the Sacred
Science, and I understood so well how to augment my goods, that at the
present time, after having married three Daughters unto each of whom I
gave a hundred thousand (golden florins), as thou wilt see by the
testament which I have made, I am leaving in current money more than a
Million Golden Florins, besides a large quantity of very valuable
furniture. Had I been of noble birth I might have demanded much more and
have profited less. When any one demanded of me: "Eh! How have you
managed to gain so much?" I would reply thereto that it is a fine thing
to know by certain Knowledge how much such or such a thing is worth
here, and how much it is worth elsewhere, that this year, wheat, barley,
and other crops, will be cheap in Italy, and dear in France, etc., etc.;
and that commerce well managed, enricheth any one.

As for what concerneth the manner of treating and commanding the
Spirits, it is an easy thing unto whomsoever walketh by the proper
paths; and it is a very difficult thing for whomsoever through ignorance
submitteth himself unto them. I have heard say that there be some men
who pass for being famous herein, such as a certain blind man D'ACALI, a
certain BEARLI, a PETER D'ABANO, <span id="fr_242"></span>[2](#fn_242)
and many others. Ah! how many of them do but deceive themselves! I do
not say that

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

these men did not perform extraordinary things; but it is necessary to
note their manner of working, for their Science is imperfect, and their
Authority proceedeth not from God by the intermediation of His Holy
Angels, but proceedeth directly from express Pacts made with the
Devil, <span id="fr_243"></span>[1](#fn_243) and (acteth) by means of
Consecrated Books full of thousands of Diabolical Conjurations and
impious Exorcisms; in one word things which be contrary unto the
Commandments of God and the peace of men. And with all this their
Operations be destined for certain times and hours, and finally the
Demon carrieth away with him their miserable Souls, which thing arriveth
only too often. And yet it is the Science of these persons which causeth
them to pass for famous Wise Men.

In the First Book I have made mention of those whom I had encountered in
my journeyings in Europe. The true Commandment is that which dependeth
from God, and in which there is no dependence placed on any Spirit
imaginable, for in employing them, if you make unto them the least
submission, the slightest prayer, or honour, you are rendering
yourselves their slaves, and they are in no way submitted unto you. The
Spirits have so great knowledge that they comprehend very well by our
actions what dispositions we have, and understand our inclinations, so
that from the very beginning they prepare the way to make us to fail. If
they know that a man is inclined unto Vanity and Pride, they will
humiliate themselves before him, and push that humility unto excess, and
even unto idolatry, and this man will glory herein and become
intoxicated with conceit, and the matter will not end without his
commanding them some pernicious thing of such a nature that ultimately
thencefrom

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

will be derived that sin which will make the Man the Slave of the Demon.
Another man will be easily accessible to Avarice, and then if he take
not heed the Malignant Spirits will propose unto him thousands of ways
of accumulating wealth, and of rendering himself rich by indirect and
unjust ways and means, whence total restitution is afterwards difficult
and even impossible, so that he who is in such case findeth himself ever
the Slave of the Spirits. Another will be a man of Letters; the Spirits
will inspire him with presumption, and he will then believe himself to
be wiser even than the Prophets, furthermore they will endeavour to lead
him astray in subtle points in matters appertaining unto God, and will
make (that man) fall into a thousand errors, the which afterwards when
he wisheth to support he will very frequently deny God, and His high
Mysteries. The causes and matters whereof (the Spirits) will make use to
cause a man to waver are infinite, especially when the man attempteth to
make them submit to his commands, and this is why it is most necessary
to be upon one's guard and to distrust oneself, The true Commandment
will be that which will be given when he who commandeth shall have
maturely reflected and considered who he is in himself, and who he is
who should serve and obey him. And if a Mortal Man not having on his
side the support of the Power and Will of the Lord shall have sufficient
force to command the Spirits and to constrain them to obey him; (they,
namely) who have the same virtue and power, which God hath granted unto
them, they having lost nothing hereof; and they also being Spirits from
God and herein differing from thee who art drawn from the mire, as Gold
is from Lead; and that their sin is notorious, for the which they were
chased from Heaven; figure also unto thyself, that a Spirit which of his
own nature is all vanity, would not be likely to submit himself unto
thee without a superior

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

force (compelling him), neither would he wish to obey thee nor to serve
thee. <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244) He who shall reflect and
reason upon these particulars will know that all things come unto us
from God, and that it is He Who wisheth and commandeth that the Evil
Spirits should be submitted unto us. If then all things depend from the
Lord, upon whom wilt thou, O Man, base thyself so as to be capable of
thyself (alone) to dominate the Spirits? It is certain that such an
enterprise cannot succeed without the loss of thine own soul. Then it is
by the virtue of that God Who hath submitted them under thy feet, that
thou shalt command them, as will be precisely ordained unto thee by thy
Holy Angel. "*Donec ponam inimicos tuos scabellum pedum tuorum*." "Until
I shall make thy foes thy footstool." Also do not familiarise thyself
with them; for they be not little pet dogs. Adopt a serious tone and an
air of authority, make them obey thee, and be well ware of accepting the
least offer which they shall make unto thee of themselves; and treat
them as their Master, also without occasion thou shalt never molest
them, and order them to execute thy commands from point to point without
adding or diminishing in any way imaginable. And when thou canst employ
Inferior Spirits (in a matter), thou shalt in no way make thy requests
unto the Superiors. Also seeing that all have not the same powers, thou
shalt take heed not to command unto one (Spirit) a thing appertaining
unto (the office of) another; and because it would be impossible for me
to here write down in full the quality, virtue, and office of each
Spirit, thou shouldest search this out for thyself and sharpen thy
faculties; and in the first demand which thou shalt make unto the Four
Spirits (who are) the Supreme Princes, and unto the Eight Sub-Princes;

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

thou shalt demand the most skilful of the Spirits, of whom thou shalt
make a register for convenience of the practice which I describe unto
thee in this Third Book where also thou wilt find the Symbols of many
Spirits. But seeing that the subjects of various erring humours (of
mind) and other occasions which arise daily be diverse, each man will
procure for himself those (Spirits) which be of his nature and genius
and fit for that wherein thou wouldest employ them. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[1](#fn_245) And when thou shalt find an extreme
resistance unto operating, on the part of any Spirit, after that thou
shalt have given him the necessary instructions, and that he cannot
execute that which thou hast commanded him; in such case thou shalt
convoke the Superior Spirits and demand of them others which may be
better capable of serving thee in thy need. And in all cases thou shalt
avail thyself of the power and command of thy Holy Angel. Keep ever
continually before thine eyes the Fear of God; and seek to obey His
Commandments, and those of thy Holy Angel, ever retain in thine heart
his holy instructions; never submit thyself unto the Evil Spirits in the
slightest degree even should it seem to be to thine own advantage and
unto that of thy neighbour (so to do). For the rest, be certain that
they will obey thee so perfectly and really, that there will be no
operation however great or difficult it may be, that thou shalt not
bring unto a glorious termination; the which I myself also have done. As
regardeth the service which thou shouldest render unto thy neighbour in
his necessities, thou shouldest perform it with zeal, and in no sense
wait for him to ask it of thee, and seek also to comprehend his needs
unto the uttermost, so as to be able to take sound action (therein).
Thou shalt take heed to succour the infirm and the sick and to work for
their healing; and see that thou dost

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

not good works to attract praises and to make thyself talked of in the
world. Also thou mayest make semblance of performing (thy cures) by
prayers, or by ordinary remedies, or by (the recital of) some psalm, or
by other like means.

Thou shouldest be especially circumspect not to discover the like
matters unto reigning Princes; and in this particular thou shalt do
nothing without consulting thy Good Angel; for there is a certain
generation which is never contented, and besides that which ariseth from
simple curiosity, these Princes regard such (action) as a duty and
obligation. Also it is a certain fact that he who possesseth this Sacred
Magic, hath no need whatever of them. Further they are naturally
inclined to ask of thee always things prejudicial, the which if granted
by thee would offend the Lord, and if not they become your declared
enemies. Now my opinion (is that it) would be always (preferable) to
render them what services you can from a distance.

There is nothing which is so pleasing unto the Angels as to demand
knowledge from them, and for my part I think there is no greater
pleasure than that of becoming wise when one learneth from such masters.

I both have exhorted, and do exhort unto a solitary life, <span
id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_246) which is the source of all good; it is
true that it is difficult to accustom oneself thereunto; but once thou
shalt have obtained the Sacred Science and Magic the love for retirement
will come unto thee of thine own accord, and thou wilt voluntarily shun
the commerce with and conversation of men; for the pleasure and
contentment thou wilt enjoy when thou shalt be the possessor of this
Science will be so great that thou wilt despise

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

all amusements, excursions, riches, and every other thing however
attractive such may be.

For once only will it be permissible to obtain property and goods
proportionate unto thy degree and estate; the which afterwards are to be
used by spending them liberally for thine own needs and those of thy
neighbour, sharing with him in his necessity the good things which God
shall have given (unto thee); for he who should employ these for evil
ends shall render himself incapable of obtaining from God any other
grace and benefit.

The Child which one should choose for greater surety and success in (the
acquisition of) this Sacred Science should be born of a legitimate
marriage, and its father and mother should be also legitimate. It should
be from six to seven years of age, vivacious, and witty; it should have
a clear speech and pronounce well. Thou shalt prepare it some time
before commencing the Operation and have it ready when the time
requireth. I myself am of opinion that there should be two (children) in
case of any accident which might happen, through sick ness, or death, or
other like (hindrance). Thou shalt gain it over to thee by giving it
puerile things to amuse it, and have it ready when necessary, but in no
way tell it anything of what it is to serve for, so that if it be
questioned by its parents it can tell them nothing. And if it be a
well-behaved Child, it is all the better. We may be certain that by this
means we can arrive at the possession of the Sacred Science; for where
he who operateth faileth, the innocence of the Child supplieth (that
which is wanting); and the Holy Angels are much pleased with its purity.
We should not admit women into this Operation. <span
id="fr_247"></span>[1](#fn_247)

All the clothes and other things which have been

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

used during the period of the Six Moons, you should preserve, if you
intend to continue in the same house wherein thou hast performed the
Operation, because they be always good. But if thou dost not intend to
use them more, nor yet the Oratory, thou shalt burn them all, and bury
the ashes in a secret place.

It is now necessary to give unto thee a little light, and declare unto
thee the quality and value of the Spirits, and in what thou canst
exactly employ them with surety of success. Thou must however take note
that each Spirit hath a great quantity of Inferior Spirits which be
submitted unto him. Also I wish to say that as regardeth things base,
vile, and of little importance the Superior Spirit will not execute
them, but will cause them to be executed by his Inferiors with all
punctuality. And this mattereth not unto him who operateth provided that
his commands be fulfilled, and that he be punctually obeyed.

### THE ORDER OF THE FIRST HIERARCHY.

### (SERAPHIM, CHERUBIM, THRONES. <span id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_248))

THE Spirits of the Seraphim serve to make thee respected and loved for
works of Charity, for that which regardeth honours and other similar
things. In matters of great importance they themselves act; but for
matters base and carnal, it is their subjects who do serve and operate.

### THE ORDER OF THE SECOND HIERARCHY.

### DOMINIONS, VIRTUES, AND POWERS.

THE property of the Dominions is to dominate; to procure liberty; to
vanquish enemies; to give authority

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

over Princes, and over all kinds of persons, even Ecclesiastics.

The Virtues are proper to give strength and force in all matters whether
of War or Peace; and in all Operations concerning the health of men, and
in all maladies for which the fatal hour hath not yet been written.

The Powers have the dominion over all the Inferior Spirits; and this is
why they can serve in all things in general, good or evil, and they are
devoted unto all things in general, good or evil; and they be straight
and right in execution, very punctual, very prompt, and exact in their
Operations.

### THE ORDER OF THE THIRD HIERARCHY.

### PRINCES, ARCHANGELS, AND ANGELS.

THE Princes comprise Spirits capable of giving Treasures and Riches, and
they or their dependants serve in all the Operations, being a mass
composed of different Orders, and they are sufficiently truthful.

The Archangels be proper to reveal all Occult matters, and all kinds of
secret things, such as obscure points in Theology and the Law. They
serve with great diligence.

The Angels in general do operate each one according unto his quality.
There be an infinite number of them. They command the Four Princes and
the Eight Sub-Princes in all kinds of Operations. These latter <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_249) having taken their oath, observe that
which they have promised, provided that the Operation one demandeth of
them be in their power.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

\[paragraph continues\] To cause the Spirit to re-enter a dead body is a
very great and difficult Operation, because in order to accomplish it
the Four Sovereign Princes <span id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_250) have to
operate. Also it is necessary to take great care, and to pay heed unto
this warning, namely that we should not commence this Operation until
the sick person is really at the point of death, so that his life is
absolutely despaired of. It should be so timed as to take place a little
while before the sick person giveth up the ghost; and thou shalt carry
out all that we have said hereon in the Second Book. But on no account
should we perform this Operation to divert ourselves, nor for every
class of person; but only on occasions of the very utmost and most
absolute necessity. This Operation I myself have performed but twice in
my life, namely once for the Duke of Saxonia, and on another occasion in
the case of a lady whom the Emperor Sigismond loved passionately.

 

THE Familiar Spirits are very prompt, and they are able to execute in
most minute detail all matters of a mechanical nature, with the which
therefore it is well to occupy them; as in historical painting; in
making statues; clocks; weapons; and other like matters; also in
chemistry; and in causing them to carry out commercial and business
transactions under the form of other persons; in making them transport
merchandise and other goods from one place to another; also to employ
them in causing quarrels, fights, homicides, and all kinds of evils, and
malefic acts; also to convey letters and messages of all kinds from one
country to another; to deliver prisoners; and in a thousand other ways
which I have frequently experimented.

These Spirits should be treated according to their quality, and a
distinction should be made between a

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

great Spirit and one of a vile or insignificant nature, but thou
shouldest nevertheless alway conserve over them that domination which is
proper unto him who operateth. In speaking unto them thou shalt give
them no title; but shalt address them sometimes as "you," sometimes as
"thou"; and thou shalt never seek out expressions to please them, and
thou shalt always have with them a proud and imperious air. <span
id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_251)

There be certain little terrestrial Spirits that are simply detestable;
Sorcerers and Necromantic Magicians generally avail themselves of their
services, for they operate only for evil, and in wicked and pernicious
things, and they be of no use soever. He who operateth could, should he
so wish, have a million such, but the Sacred Science which worketh
otherwise than Necromancy in no way permitteth you to employ such as be
not constrained by an Oath to obey you.

 

ALL that hath hitherto been said and laid down should suffice, and it is
in no wise to be doubted that he who executeth all these matters from
point to point, and who shall have the right intention to use this
Sacred Science unto the honour and glory of God Almighty for his own
good, and for that of his neighbour, shall arrive with ease at the
possession thereof; and even matters the most difficult shall appear
easy unto him. But Human Nature is so depraved and corrupted, and so
different from that which the Lord hath created, that few persons, if
any, do walk in the right way; and it is so easy to prevaricate, and so
difficult not to fall in an Operation which demandeth the whole (soul of
a) man in (its) entirety. And in order not to intimidate in any way him
who shall resolve to undertake this Operation, I am about here to

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

set down in writing the difficulties, temptations, and hindrances which
will be caused him by his own relatives; and all this will be occasioned
by the Evil Spirits so as to avoid having to submit themselves, and
humiliate themselves, and subject themselves unto Man, their greatest
enemy, seeing that they behold him in powerful condition arriving at the
enjoyment of that Eternal Glory which they themselves have foolishly
lost; and their rage is so great and their grief so poignant, that there
is in the world no evil which they be not ready to work, if God were to
permit them, they being always attracted by the idea of the destruction
of the Human Race. Therefore is it necessary to take courage and make a
constant resolution to resist in all things with intrepidity, and to
earnestly desire to obtain from God so great a Grace in despite of men
and of the Demon. Also beforehand thou shouldest arrange thine affairs
in such wise that they can in no way hinder thee, nor bring thee any
disquietude in the period of the Six Moons, during which time there will
occur the greatest possible attempts at assault and damage unto thee
which the keen and subtle Enemy will bring to bear upon thee. He will
cause thee to come in contact with evil books, and wicked persons, who
by Diabolic methods and tricks will seek to turn thee aside from this
enterprise, even though it be already commenced, by bringing before thee
matters which in appearance will seem of the greatest importance, but
which really be only built up on false (and evil) foundations. To such
annoying accidents thou shouldest steadily oppose thyself, by following
out carefully the ample instructions which I have given thee, thus
banishing them from thee with calmness and tranquillity so as to give no
chance to the Enemy of exercising his fraudulent tricks to interrupt
thee.

Thy relations also, astonished at thy manner of life and thy retirement,
will make every effort to attempt to

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

find out the reasons thereof. It will be necessary to satisfy them by
words full of affection, and to make them think that time which
engendereth change, also causeth men who are not altogether ignorant
persons to resolve at times to live by themselves. This hath been the
cause why so great a number of good and learned men have retired into
desert places, so that being separated from their own relatives and from
the world they might live tranquilly in prayer and orisons to render
themselves more worthy to obtain through the Grace of the Lord a Gift so
great and so perfect.

 

I FURTHER approve of thy possessing a Bible in the vulgar language, and
also the Psalms of David, for thine own use. Some person may here reply:
"I understand the Latin, and I have no need of the common language". I
answer him that when we pray we ought not in any way to embarrass the
Mind by having to interpret the Psalms; for at such a moment we should
be as much united as possible to God; and even the Psalms being in the
vulgar tongue when one readeth them they imprint themselves better on
the memory; and this is the true manner of particular prayer, if the
person praying be illiterate, for in saying the Psalms in Latin he would
not know what he was asking of God.

 

IN these Three Books we shall not find the slightest thing which hath
not a true and necessary foundation. And we should take the greatest
care, and keep ourselves as we would from a deadly poison, from
commencing this Operation at all, if we have not made a firm resolution
to carry it through unto the end. Because (in the contrary case) some
notable evil would befal him who had (carelessly) commenced the
Operation, and who would then only too well comprehend that we may not
make a mock of the Lord. Should it happen that God by

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

\[paragraph continues\] His Will and Commandment should visit thee and
afflict thee with some malady which should render thee incapable of
finishing the Operation according unto thy wish, thou having already
commenced it; then shouldest thou like an obedient servant submit
thyself humbly unto His Holy Will and Commandment, reserving His Grace
unto the time pleasing unto His Divine Majesty to grant it thee. And
thou shalt cease from thine Operation, so as to finish it on another
more favourable occasion, and meanwhile thou shalt devote thyself unto
the cure of thy body. And such a case ought in no way to afflict thee,
for the Secrets of God are impenetrable, and He performeth, permitteth,
and operateth all things for the best and for our good, although it may
be not understanded of us.

 

HEREINAFTER Will I set down the Key of this Operation, which is the only
thing which facilitateth this Operation to enjoy the Vision of the Holy
Angels, by placing the Symbols <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_252)
given hereafter upon the brow of the Child and of him who performeth the
Operation, as I have said in the First Book, to which one can easily
refer.

I will say even as much as this, that out of an hundred scarcely five or
six persons can attain unto the possession of this Sacred Magic without
this Key; for reasons which one can in no way disclose.

Also we should repeat the Psalm VI. "*Domine, ne in furore tuo arguas
me*," etc. ("O Lord, afflict me not in Thine Anger").

 

THERE is nothing in the World which we should so much desire as a true
Science, neither is there any more difficult to obtain than this one,
because often one dieth before attaining unto it in its entirety.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

This is the true and only Way of this Sacred Science and Magic which the
Lord hath granted unto us by His pure mercy; and is that which in Six
Months maketh us attain unto the most high and Occult gifts of the Lord
which we can think of.

This is the True Science which comprehendeth all other Sciences once one
is in possession thereof.

Oh! how many books be read among us which *seem* wonderful!

It is not fitting for me even to reveal a part of this Science and its
properties; and to appropriate unto myself that which appertaineth unto
a person of a great mind and so far above me. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[1](#fn_253) In teaching it even, I have far exceeded
that which I should have done, in having given unto thee the two last
Symbols, but what will not paternal love and affection do? Endeavour
only to obey me and to follow out my precepts from point to point,
according to the manner in which I have given them unto thee in writing;
keeping alway the Fear of God before thine eyes. Also forget not the
slightest thing which I have said unto thee in these Three Books, for
with the help of God Who ruleth and governeth all things, and reigneth
gloriously in Heaven and upon Earth, and Whose Divine justice shineth in
Hell; if thou hast recourse unto Him and puttest all thy confidence in
His Divine Mercy, thou shalt obtain this Holy Science and Magic whose
power is inexpressible. Then, O my Son! and Whosoever may attain
thereunto; remember to praise and glorify the Lord, and to pray unto Him
that He may be willing to deign and accord unto me His Holy Glory, the
place of veritable rest, whereof to me while yet in this Valley of
Misery He hath granted a large share through His Goodness and Mercy; and

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I pray the Lord also that He may be willing to
grant it unto thee also with His Holy Benediction, and unto all those
who by thy means will arrive at the possession of this Sacred Magic, and
who will use it according unto His Holy Will.

May God deign, say I, to grant unto such all temporal goods, and a good
Death in His Holy Kingdom!

SO MAY IT BE!

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| 12  | 13  | 4   | 6   | 148 |
| 13  | 9   | 148 | 12  | 6   |
| 4   | 148 | 8   | 148 | 33  |
| 16  | 23  | 148 | 9   | 15  |
| 148 | 27  | 4   | 21  | 31  |

</div>

 

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| 20  | 1   | 24  | 3   |
| 1   | 20  | 13  | 24  |
| 37  | 15  | 20  | 1   |
| 26  | 40  | 63  | 48  |

</div>

 

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| U   | R   | I   | E   | L   |
| R   | I   | L   | U   | E   |
| I   | L   | I   | L   | I   |
| E   | U   | L   | I   | R   |
| L   | E   | I   | R   | U   |

</div>

 

<div align="center">

|     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| A   | D   | A   | M   |
| D   | A   | R   | A   |
| A   | R   | A   | D   |
| M   | A   | D   | A   |
| H   | O   | M   | O   |

</div>

 

E N D.

 

*Note*.--The above set of four Squares evidently represent the Symbols
already referred to in the Second Book (Chap. xx.), and in the
concluding pages of this Third Book; as being those to be placed on the
head of the Operator and of the Child during the Angelic Invocation. The
Name URIEL for the former, the Name ADAM for the latter. But evidently,
also, the Squares of numbers above are intended as the reverse sides of
the two lower ones. The Latin word HOMO is the translation of ADAM in
the sense of Man. The Squares of numbers are not of the ordinary magical
class.
