[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr064) 
[Next](tbr066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE BLESSED DEAD.

Rev. 14:12-13.

"Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus. And I heard a voice from
Heaven saying unto me, Write, **blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord FROM HENCEFORTH: Yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from
their labors: and their works do follow them**."

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

This is blessedly true of all saints but refers here to those who die
**after** the False Prophet has issued the command that all who will not
worship the "Image of the Beast **shall be killed**." Rev. 13:15. This
is settled by the word **HENCEFORTH**. This warning is given for the
benefit of those who in that day shall be tempted to compromise with
evil in order to preserve their lives. Better to live and reign with
Christ a **1000 years**, than with Antichrist **3½ years**. This special
class of dead who "**DIE IN THE LORD**" will be blessed because they
will be delivered from the trials and sufferings of the Great
Tribulation, and will receive the "**MARTYR'S CROWN**" (Rev. 2:10), and
they shall rest from their labors of stemming the tide of iniquity of
those days, and their works follow with them (R. V.). During the "Great
Tribulation" they that are loyal to God have no prospect before them but
martyrdom, hence the need at this time of a special message of blessing
to those who are faithful **until death**. What a contrast between the
"Blessed Dead," and those who have the "Mark of the Beast." The former
will **rest** from their labors, while the latter shall not **rest** day
or night.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Harvest And Vintage](tbr066)
