[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr073) 
[Next](tbr075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FIFTH VIAL.

### (Darkness.)

Rev. 16:10-11.

"And the 'Fifth Angel' poured out his Vial upon the **SEAT** (Throne)
**OF THE BEAST**: and his Kingdom was **full of darkness**; and they
**GNAWED THEIR TONGUES FOR PAIN**, and **blasphemed the God of Heaven
because of their 'PAINS'** and their '**SORES**,' and repented not of
their deeds."

Here we have a repetition of the "Ninth Egyptian Plague," that of
**DARKNESS**. Ex. 10:21-23. This is the "**day**" spoken of by Joel. "A
day of **darkness** and of **gloominess**, a day of **clouds** and of
**thick darkness**." Joel 2:1-2. Christ speaks of it in Mark 13:24, as
the time when "the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give
her light."

Notice that this Plague immediately follows the Plague of "Scorching
Heat," as if God in mercy would hide the Sun whose rays had been so hard
to bear. The effect of the darkness was to make men **gnaw their tongues
for PAIN and for their SORES**, showing that these Plagues overlapped
each other, or followed in such rapid order that they were not over the
sufferings of one before they were suffering from another, and that they
were limited to a short period of a few months, and not distributed over
a period of years as the Historical School of interpretation claims.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

The notable feature is, that their sufferings brought no repentance, but
caused them to blaspheme the God of Heaven. Some talk of conversion in
Hell, and of the ultimate restoration of the wicked, but it is not
revealed here. If Hell's torments will cause men to repent, why do not
the torments of those under these plagues lead to repentance? No, it
only causes them to blaspheme the more, and while sin and impenitence
last, Hell lasts. This Plague extends over the whole Kingdom of the
Beast.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sixth Vial (The Euphrates Dried Up)](tbr075)
