[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr011) 
[Next](tbr013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### I. THE CHURCH AT EPHESUS.

(**A Backslidden Church**.)

Rev. 2:1-7.

1\. **THE SALUTATION**--"Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write;
these things saith He that **holdeth the 'Seven Stars' in His right
hand**, who **walketh in the midst of the 'Seven Golden
Candlesticks'.**"

2\. **THE COMMENDATION**--"I know thy **works**, and thy labor, and thy
patience, and how thou canst not bear them which are evil; and thou hast
tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and hast found them
liars; and hast borne, and hast patience, and for **My Name's Sake**
hast labored, and hast not fainted."

3\. **THE COMPLAINT**--"Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee,
because thou **Hast Left Thy First Love**."

4\. **THE WARNING**--"Remember therefore **from whence thou art
fallen**, and **repent**, and **do the first works**; or else I will
come unto thee quickly, and will **remove thy CANDLESTICK out of his
place**, except thou repent."

5\. **PRAISE**--"But this thou hast, that thou **hatest** the deeds of
the Nicolaitanes, which I also hate."

6\. **THE PROMISE**--"He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
**SPIRIT saith unto the Churches**: To him that **overcometh** will I
give to eat of the **TREE OF LIFE**, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God."

The complaint that Christ makes against this Church is that it "**had
left its First Love**." Its character is seen in its very name, for
Ephesus means to "let go," "to relax." It had become a **Backslidden
Church**. Paul, who founded it, warned it of what should happen, in his
parting message.

"I know this, that after my departing shall grievous 'wolves' enter in
among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men
arise, 'speaking perverse things,' to draw away disciples after them."
Acts 20:29, 30.

The significance of this warning is seen in the commendation of the
Message, vs. 6--"But this thou hast, that thou 'hatest' the deeds of the
Nicolaitanes which I also hate." Here Paul's "wolves" are called
Nicolaitanes. They were not a sect, but a party in the Church who were
trying to establish a "Priestly Order." Probably trying to model the
Church after the Old Testament order of Priests, Levites, and common
people. This is seen in the meaning of the word, which is from "Niko" to
conquer, to overthrow, and "Laos" the people or laity. The object was to
establish a "Holy Order of Men," and place them over the laity, which
was foreign to the New Testament plan, and call them not pastors,
but--Clergy, Bishops, Archbishops, Cardinals, Popes. Here we have the
origin of the dogma of "Apostolic Succession," and the separation of the
Clergy from the Laity, a thing that God "hates." The Church at Ephesus
was not deceived, but recognized them as. false apostles and liars.

The character of the Church at Ephesus is a fair outline of the Church
Period from A. D. 70 to A. D. 170.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Church At Smyrna](tbr013)
