[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr010) 
[Next](tbr012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

# II. The Things Which Are

### THE MESSAGES TO THE SEVEN CHURCHES.

It is worthy of note that the "Messages to the Seven Churches" are
inserted between **Two Visions**, the "**Vision of Christ**" in the
midst of the "Seven Lampstands" in chapter one and the "**Vision of the
Four and Twenty Elders**" round about the Throne, in chapter four.

As chapter four is a vision of the "**Glorified Church**" with the Lord,
after it has been caught out (1 Thess. 4:13-17), then the Second
Division of the Book--

**"The Things Which Are,"**

and which includes chapters two and three, must be a description or
prophetic outline of the "Spiritual History" of the Church from the time
when John wrote the Book in A. D. 96, down to the taking out of the
Church, or else we have no "prophetic view" of the Church during that
period, for she disappears from the earth at the close of chapter three,
and is not seen again until she reappears with her Lord in chapter
nineteen. This we shall find to be the case. See [Chart of the Book of
Revelation](tbr005.htm#img_tbr).

This interpretation of the "Messages to the Seven Churches" was hidden
to the early Church, because time was required for Church History to
develop and be written, so a comparison could be made to reveal the
correspondence. If it had been clearly revealed that the Seven Churches
stood for "Seven Church Periods" that would have to elapse before Christ
could come back, the incentive to watch would have been absent.

While the character of these Seven Churches is descriptive of the Church
during seven periods of her history, we must not forget that the
condition of those churches, as described, were their exact condition in
John's day. So we see that at the close of the First Century the leaven
of "False Doctrine" was at work in the Churches. The churches are given
in the order named, because the peculiar characteristic of that Church
applied to the period of Church History to which it is assigned. It also
must not be forgotten, that, that which is a distinctive characteristic
of each Church Period, does not disappear with that Period, but
continues on down through the next Period, and so on until the end, thus
increasing the imperfections of the visible Church, until it ends in an
open Apostasy, as shown on the chart--"The Messages to the Seven
Churches Compared with Church History."

It is noteworthy that the "Salutation" to each Church contains a
reference to some characteristic of the Son of Man as described in
chapter one. We will now consider each message separately.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

 

<span id="img_01900"></span>

[![The Messages to the Seven Churches Compared with Church
History](tn/01900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01900.jpg)  
The Messages to the Seven Churches Compared with Church History  

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Church At Ephesus](tbr012)
