[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr018) 
[Next](tbr020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span> <span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

# III. The Things Which Shall Be Hereafter

We have now come to the Third Division of the Book. The Three Divisions
of the Book do not overlap nor are they concurrent. The word translated
"hereafter," would be better translated "**after these things**." The
word "hereafter" permits a "time space," while the words "after these
things" refer to the things that shall **immediately** follow the
**completion** of the "Church Age," as prefigured in the Messages to the
Seven Churches. The Church disappears from view with the close of the
third chapter and is not heard of again until the nineteenth chapter,
where her marriage to the Lamb is announced. Rev. 19:7-9. The removal of
the Church at the end of the third chapter opens the way for God to
renew His dealings with Israel, and take up the broken thread of Jewish
History. That the portion of the Book from chapter three to the end of
chapter nineteen is largely made up of symbols taken from the Old
Testament, as the Tabernacle, Ark of the Covenant, Altar, Censer,
Elders, Cherubim, Seals, Trumpets, Plagues, etc., is conclusive evidence
that we are here back on Jewish ground, and that the Parenthetical
Dispensation of the Church is complete, and that the last or "Seventieth
Week" of Daniel's "Seventy Weeks" is in course of fulfilment. It is
clear therefore that we must look for the explanation of these symbols
to the Old Testament.

Chapters four and five are introductory and preparatory to the
"Prophetic Action" of the "Seals," "Trumpets" and "Vials," and must be
considered first.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Heavenly Door](tbr020)
