[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr012) 
[Next](tbr014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### II. THE CHURCH AT SMYRNA.

(**A Persecuted Church**.)

Rev. 2:8-11.

1\. **THE SALUTATION**--"And unto the Angel of the Church in Smyrna
write; These things saith the **First** and the **Last**, who **was
dead**, and is **alive**."

2\. **THE PERSECUTION**--"I know thy **works**, and **TRIBULATION**, and
**poverty**, (but thou **art rich**), and I know the blasphemy of them
which say, they are Jews, and are not, but are the '**Synagogue of
Satan**'."

3\. **THE EXHORTATION**--"Fear none of those things which thou shalt
suffer: behold the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may
be tried; and ye shall have **TRIBULATION** ten days: be thou faithful
**UNTO** death, and I will give thee a **CROWN OF LIFE**."

4\. **THE PROMISE**--"He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
saith unto the Churches: He that overcometh **shall not be hurt of the
SECOND DEATH**."

The Church in its "Ephesian Period" having lost its "First Love," the
Lord is now about to "chastise" it, so as to cause it to return to Him.
Smyrna has for its root meaning "bitterness," and means "Myrrh," an
ointment associated with death, and we see in the meaning of the word a
prophecy of the persecution and death which was to befall the members of
the Smyrna Church. They were told not to "fear" the things that they
should be called on to suffer, but to be faithful "unto" death, not
"until" death. That is, not until the end of their "natural" life. They
were not to "recant" when called upon to face a Martyr's death, but
remain faithful until death relieved them of their suffering. The reward
would be a "Crown of Life." This is the Martyr's crown.

They were told that the "author" of their suffering would be the Devil,
and its duration would be "ten days," which was doubtless a prophetic
reference to the "Ten Great Persecutions" under the Roman Emperors,
beginning with Nero, A. D. 64, and ending with Diocletian in A. D. 310.
Seven of these "Great Persecutions" occurred during this "Smyrna Period"
of Church History. Or it may refer to the 10 years of the last and
fiercest persecution under Diocletian. This Period extended from A. D.
170 to Constantine A. D. 312.

See the [Judgment of Reward Chart](tbr022.htm#img_03900).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Church At Pergamos](tbr014)
