[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Revelation](../../bib/kjv/rev)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tbr033) 
[Next](tbr035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. THE BLOOD WASHED MULTITUDE.

Rev. 7:9-17.

"After this I beheld, and, lo, a **great multitude**, which no man
**could number**, of **ALL nations**, and **kindreds**, and **people**,
and **tongues**, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb, **clothed
in white robes**, and **palms in their hands**; and cried with a loud
voice, **SALVATION TO OUR GOD WHICH SITTETH UPON THE THRONE, AND UNTO
THE LAMB**. And all the angels stood round about the Throne, and about
the Elders and the Four Beasts, and fell before the Throne on their
faces, and worshipped God, saying, **AMEN: BLESSING, AND GLORY, AND
WISDOM, AND THANKSGIVING, AND HONOR, AND POWER, AND MIGHT, BE UNTO OUR
GOD FOR EVER AND EVER. AMEN**.

And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, **What are these which
are arrayed in White robes? and whence came they?** And I said unto him,
Sir, thou knowest. And he said to me, **These are they which came out of
great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in
the BLOOD OF THE LAMB**. Therefore are they before the Throne of God,
and serve Him day and night in His Temple: and He that sitteth on the
Throne shall dwell among them. They shall **hunger no more, neither
thirst any more: neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat**.
For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall **feed them**,
and shall **lead them unto living fountains of water**: and God shall
**wipe away all tears from their eyes**."

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

This "Blood Washed Multitude" introduces us to another class of the
saved of the "End-time." They do not represent the Church, for the
Church has already been taken out. They differ from the Elders, who
represent the Church, in that they **stand**, and have "**palms**" in
their hands, while the Elders have "**crowns**," and "**sit on
thrones**," and have "**harps**," and "**golden vials**" in their hands.
They are an "elect body" of Gentiles gathered out from **all nations**,
and **kindreds**, and **people**, and **tongues**. The statement that
they "**came out of great tribulation**" does not necessarily imply that
it was "**The Great Tribulation**" that they came out of, for that
covers only the "**last half**" of the Week, and they are seen by John
in the middle of the "**first half**" of the Week. The Revised Version
uses the word "come" instead of "came," and some versions the words
"coming out." It does not say that they came out of "**THE Great
Tribulation**," but simply that they came out of "**great
tribulation**," and as the whole of the Week is a period of
**tribulation** they could come out of **tribulation** any time during
the Week. They are a vast multitude saved by the preaching of the
"Gospel of the Kingdom." While the Holy Spirit went back with the Church
to escort the "Bride to be" home, it does not follow that He remained
there. For in Old Testament times, and during the earthly ministry of
Jesus, He was active in the conversion of men, and so it will be after
the Church is caught out. Those who are converted during the Tribulation
period will be converted by the Holy Spirit.

The claim has been made that this "Blood Washed Multitude" represent the
Gentiles who shall pass safely through "The Great Tribulation," and who
cry "**SALVATION**" because they have been saved from martyrdom and
death during the Tribulation, and that they serve God day and night in
the new "Millennial Temple" on the earth because there is no day or
night or Temple in Heaven. While that is true of the Holy City, New
Jerusalem (Rev. 21:22-25), it is not true of Heaven, for they are not
the same. The New Jerusalem is the place (City) that Jesus went to
prepare for His Bride, the Church (John 14:2), and John declares that he
saw it coming down "**out of**" Heaven. Rev. 21:2. Therefore the New
Jerusalem is not Heaven. That there is a **"TEMPLE" in Heaven** we are
told in chapters 11:19, 15:5-8, and 16:1. And the statement "That they
shall **hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the sun
light on them, nor any heat**, for the **LAMB** which is in the **MIDST
OF THE THRONE** shall feed them, and shall lead them unto **living
fountains of waters**: and **GOD** shall wipe away **all tears from
their eyes**," is not Millennial but Heavenly in character. And further
this "Blood Washed Multitude, **being Gentiles**, could not serve in an
earthly **Jewish Temple**."

The sight of this "Blood Washed Multitude" will so thrill and rejoice
the Angelic Hosts that they will fall upon their faces and worship God,
saying, "**AMEN: BLESSING, AND GLORY, AND WISDOM, AND THANKSGIVING, AND
HONOR, AND POWER, AND MIGHT, BE UNTO OUR GOD FOR EVER AND EVER. AMEN**."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seventh Seal (Silence)](tbr035)
