[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coz06)  [Next](coz08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419179896/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### MAGICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL PRECEPTS

144\. Direct not thy mind to the vast surfaces of the Earth; for the
Plant of Truth grows not upon the ground. Nor measure the motions of the
Sun, collecting rules, for be is carried by the Eternal Will of the
Father, and not for your sake alone. Dismiss (from your mind) the
impetuous course of the Moon, for she moveth always by the power of
necessity. The progression of the Stars was not generated for your sake.
The wide aërial flight of birds gives no true knowledge nor the
dissection of the entrails of

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

victims; they are all mere toys, the basis of mercenary fraud:, flee
from these if you would enter the sacred paradise of piety, where
Virtue, Wisdom and Equity are assembled.

*Psel*., 4. Z.

145\. Stoop not down unto the Darkly-Splendid World; wherein continually
lieth a faithless Depth, and Hades wrapped in clouds, delighting in
unintellible images, precipitous, winding, a black ever-rolling Abyss;
ever espousing a Body unluminous, formless and void.

Synes., *de Insom.,* 140. Z. or T.

146\. Stoop not down, for a precipice lieth beneath the Earth, reached
by a descending Ladder which hath Seven Steps, and therein is
established the Throne of an evil and fatal force.

*Psell*., 6; *Pletho*, 2. Z.

147\. Stay not on the Precipice with the dross of Matter, for there is a
place for thy Image in a realm ever splendid.

*Psell*., 1, 2; *Pletho*, 14; *Synesius*, 140. Z.

148\. Invoke not the visible Image of the Soul of Nature.

*Psell*., 15; *Pletho*, 23. Z.

149\. Look not upon Nature, for her name is fatal.

Proc. in *Plat. Th*., 143. Z.

150\. It becometh you not to behold them before your body is initiated,
since by alway alluring they seduce the souls from the sacred mysteries.

Proc. in I. *Alcib*. Z. or T.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

151\. Bring her not forth, lest in departing she retain something.

*Psell*., 3; *Pletho*, 15. Z.

*Taylor says that "her" refers to the human soul*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

152\. Defile not the Spirit, nor deepen a superficies.

*Psell*., 19; *Pletho*, 13. Z.

153\. Enlarge not thy Destiny.

*Psell*., 37; *Pletho*, 4.

154\. Not hurling, according to the Oracle, a transcendent foot towards
piety.

Dam. in *Vitam Isidore. ap. Suidam* Z. or T.

155\. Change not the barbarous Names of Evocation for-there are sacred
Names in every language which are given by God, having in the Sacred
Rites a Power Ineffable.

Psell., 7. *Nicephotus*. Z. or T.

156\. Go not forth when the Lictor passeth by.

Picus de Mirandula, *Concl*. Z.

157\. Let fiery hope nourish you upon the Angelic plane.

Olymp. in *Phæd*. Proc. in *Alcib*. Z. or T.

158\. The conception of the glowing Fire hath the first rank, for the
mortal who approacheth that Fire shall have Light from God; and unto the
persevering mortal the Blessed Immortals are swift.

Proc. in *Tim*., 65. Z. or T.

1S9. The Gods exhort us to understand the radiating form of Light.

Proc. in *Crat*. Z. or T.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

160\. It becometh you to hasten unto the Light, and to the Rays of the
Father, from whom was sent unto you a Soul (Psyche) endued with much
mind (Nous).

*Psell*., 33. *Pletho*, 6. Z.

161\. Seek Paradise.

*Psell*., 41. *Pletho*, 27. Z.

162\. Learn the Intelligible for it subsisteth beyond the Mind.

*Psell*., 41. *Pletho*, 27. Z.

163\. There is a certain Intelligible One, whom it becometh-you to
understand with the Flower of Mind.

*Psell*., 31. *Pletho*, 28. Z.

164\. But the Paternal Mind accepteth not the aspiration of the soul
until she hath passed out of her oblivious state, and pronounceth the
Word, regaining the Memory of the pure paternal Symbol.

*Psell*., 39. *Pletho*, 5. Z.

165\. Unto some He gives the ability to receive the Knowledge of Light;
and others, even when asleep, he makes fruitful from His own strength.

Synes., *de Insomn*, 135. Z. or T.

166\. It is not proper to understand that Intelligible One with
vehemence, but with the extended flame of far reaching Mind, measuring
all things except that Intelligible. But it is requisite to understand
this; for if thou inclinest thy Mind thou wilt understand it, not
earnestly; but it is becoming to bring with thee a pure and enquiring
sense, to extend the void mind of thy Soul to the Intelligible, that
thou mayest learn the Intelligible, because it subsisteth beyond Mind.

Dam. T.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

167\. Thou wilt not comprehend it, as when understanding some common
thing.

Damascius, *de primis principiis*. T.

168\. Ye who understand, know the Super-mundane Paternal Depth.

Dam. Z. or T.

169\. Things Divine are not attainable by mortals who understand the
body alone, but only by those who stripped of their garments arrive at
the summit.

Proc. in *Crat*. Z. or T.

170\. Having put on the completely armed-vigour of resounding Light,
with triple strength fortifying the Soul and the Mind, He must put into
the Mind the various Symbols, and not walk dispersedly on the empyræan
path, but with concentration.

171\. For being furnished with every kind of Armour, and armed, he is
similar to the Goddess.

Proc. in *Pl. Th.*, 324. T.

172\. Explore the River of the Soul, whence, or in what order you have
come: so that although you have become a servant to the body, you may
again rise to the Order from which you descended, joining works to
sacred reason.

*Psell*., 5. *Pletho*. 1. Z.

173\. Every way unto the emancipated Soul extend the rays of Fire.

*Psell*., 11. *Pletho*, 24. Z.

174\. Let the immortal depth of your Soul lead you, but earnestly raise
your eyes upwards.

*Psell*., 11. *Pletho*, 20.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

175\. Man, being an intelligent Mortal, must bridle his Soul that she
may not incur terrestrial infelicity, but be saved.

Lyd., *De Men*., 2.

176\. If thou extendeth the Fiery Mind to the work of piety, thou wilt
preserve the fluxible body.

*Psell*., 22. *Pletho*, 16. Z.

177\. The telestic life through Divine Fire removeth all the stains,
together with everything of a foreign and irrational nature, which the
spirit of the Soul has attracted from generation, as we are taught by
the Oracle to believe.

Proc. in *Tim*., 331. Taylor.

178\. The Oracles of the Gods declare, that through purifying
ceremonies, not the Soul only, but bodies themselves become worthy of
receiving much assistance and health, for, say they, the mortal vestment
of coarse Matter will by these means be purified." And this, the Gods,
in an exhortatory manner, announce to the most holy of Theurgists.

Jul., *Crat*. v., p. 334. Z. or T.

179\. We should flee, according to the Oracle, the multitude of men
going in a herd.

Proc. in *I. Alc*. Z. or T.

180\. Who knoweth himself, knoweth all things in himself.

*I. Pic*., p. 211. Z.

181\. The Oracles often give victory to our own choice, and not to the
Order alone of the Mundane periods. As, for instance, when they say, "On
beholding thyself, fear!" And again, "Believe thyself to be above the
Body, and thou art so." And,

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

still further, when they assert, "That our voluntary sorrows germinate
in us the growth of the particular life we lead."

Proc., *de Prov*., p. 483. Z. or T.

182\. But these are mysteries which I evolve in the profound Abyss of
the Mind.

183\. As the Oracle thereforth saith: God is never so turned away from
man, and never so much sendeth him new paths, as when he maketh ascent
to divine speculation's or works in a confused or disordered manner, and
as it adds, with unhallowed lips, or unwashed feet. For of those who are
thus negligent, the progress is imperfect, the impulses are vain, and
the paths are dark.

Proc. in *Parm*. Z. or T.

184\. Not knowing that every God is good, ye are fruitlessly vigilant.

Proc. in *Platonis Pol*., 355. Z. or T.

185\. Theurgists fall not so as to be ranked among the herd that are in
subjection to Fate.

Lyd., *De men*. Taylor.

186\. The number nine is divine, receives its completion from three
triads, and attains the summits of theology, according to the Chaldaic
philosophy as Porphyry informeth us.

*Lyd*., p. 121.

187\. In the left side of Hecate is a fountain of Virtue, which
remaineth entirely within her, not sending forth its virginity.

*Psell*., 13; *Pletho*, 9. Z.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

188\. And the earth bewailed them, even unto their children.

*Psell*., 21; *Pletho*, 3. Z.

189\. The Furies are the Constrainers of Men.

*Psell*., 26; *Pletho*, 19. Z.

190\. Lest being baptized to the Furies of the Earth, and to the
necessities of nature (as some one of the Gods saith), you should
perish.

Proc. in *Theol*., 297. Z. or T.

191\. Nature persuadeth us that there are pure Dæmons, and that evil
germs of Matter may alike become useful and good.

*Psell*., 16; *Pletho*, 18. Z.

192\. For three days and no longer need ye sacrifice.

*Pic. Concl.* Z.

193\. So therefore first the Priest who governeth the works of Fire,
must sprinkle with the Water of the loud-resounding Sea.

Proc. in *Crat*. Z. or T.

194\. Labour thou around the Strophalos of Hecaté.

*Psell*., 9. Nicephorus.

195\. When thou shalt see a Terrestrial Dæmon approaching, Cry aloud!
and sacrifice the stone Mnizourin.

*Psell*., 40. Z.

196\. If thou often invokest thou shalt see all things growing dark; and
then when no longer is visible unto thee the High-arched Vault of
Heaven, when the Stars have lost their Light and the Lamp of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the Moon is veiled, the Earth abideth not, and around thee darts the
Lightning Flame and all things appear amid thunders.

*Psell*., 10; *Pletho*, 22. Z.

197\. From the Cavities of the Earth leap forth the terrestrial
Dog-faced demons, showing no true sign unto mortal man.

*Psell*, 23; *Pletho*, 10. Z.

198\. A similar Fire flashingly extending through the rushings of Air,
or a Fire formless whence cometh the Image of a Voice, or even a
flashing Light abounding, revolving, whirling forth, crying aloud. Also
there is the vision of the fire-flashing Courser of Light, or also a
Child, borne aloft on the shoulders of the Celestial Steed, fiery, or
clothed with gold, or naked, or shooting with the bow shafts of Light,
and standing on the shoulders of the horse; then if thy meditation
prolongeth itself, thou shalt unite all these Symbols into the Form of a
Lion.

Proc. in *Pl. Polit*., 380; Stanley *Hist. Philos*. Z. or T.

199\. When thou shalt behold that holy and formless Fire shining
flashingly through the depths of the Universe: Hear thou the Voice of
Fire.

*Psell*., 14; *Pletho*, 25. Z.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oracles From Porphyry](coz08.md)
