[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coz03)  [Next](coz05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419179896/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

# IDEAS.

#### INTELLIGIBLES, INTELLECTUALS, IYNGES, SYNOCHES, TELETARCHÆ, FOUNTAINS, PRINCIPLES, HECATE AND DÆMONS.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

39\. The Mind of the Father whirled forth in reechoing roar,
comprehending by invincible Will Ideas omniform; which flying forth from
that one fountain issued; for from the Father alike, was the Will and
the End (by which are they connected with the Father according to
alternating life, through varying vehicles). But they were divided
asunder, being by Intellectual Fire distributed into other
Intellectuals. For the King of all previously placed before the
polymorphous World a Type, intellectual, incorruptible, the imprint of
whose form is sent forth through the World, by which the Universe shone
forth decked with Ideas all various, of which the foundation is One, One
and alone. From this the others rush forth distributed and separated
through the various bodies of the Universe, and are borne in swarms
through its vast abysses, ever whirling forth in illimitable radiation.

They are intellectual conceptions from the Paternal Fountain partaking
abundantly of the brilliance of Fire in the culmination of unresting
Time.

But the primary self-perfect Fountain of the Father poured forth these
primogenial Ideas.

Proclus in *Parmenidem*. Z. or T.

40\. These being many, descend flashingly upon the shining Worlds, and
in them are contained the Three Supernals.

Damascius in *Parmenidem*. T

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

41\. They are the guardians of the works of the Father, and of the One
Mind, the Intelligible.

Proclus in *Theologiam Platonis*, 205. T.

42\. All things subsist together in the Intelligible World.

Damascius, *De Principiis*. T.

43\. But all Intellect understandeth the Deity, for Intellect existeth
not without the Intelligible, neither apart from Intellect doth the
Intelligible subsist.

Damascius. Z. or T.

44\. For Intellect existeth not without the Intelligible; apart from it,
it subsisteth not.

Proclus, *Th. Pl.*, 172. Z. or T.

45\. By Intellect He containeth the Intelligibles and introduceth the
Soul into the Worlds.

46\. By Intellect he containeth the Intelligibles, and introduceth Sense
into the Worlds.

Proclus in *Crat*. T.

47\. For this Paternal Intellect, which comprehendeth the Intelligibles
and adorneth things ineffable, hath sowed symbols through the World.

Proclus in *Cratylum*. T.

48\. This Order is the beginning of all section.

Dam., *De Prin*. T.

49\. The Intelligible is the principle of all section.

Damascius, *De Principiis*. T.

50\. The Intelligible is as food to that which understandeth.

Dam., *De Prin*. T.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

51\. The oracles concerning the Orders exhibits It as prior to the
Heavens, as ineffable, and they add--It hath Mystic Silence.

Proclus in *Cratylum*. T.

52\. The oracle calls the Intelligible causes Swift, Mid asserts that,
proceeding from the Father, they rush again unto Him.

Proclus in *Cratylum*. T.

53\. Those Natures are both Intellectual and Intelligible, which,
themselves possessing Intellection, are the objects of Intelligence to
others.

Proclus, *Theologiam Platonis*. T.

*The Second Order of the Platonist philosophy was the "Intelligible and
Intellectual Triad." Among the Chaldæans this order includes the Iynges,
Synoches and Teletarchs. The Intellectual Triad of the later Platonists
corresponds to the Fountains, Fontal Fathers or Cosmagogi of the
Chaldæans*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

54\. The Intelligible Iynges themselves understand from the Father; by
Ineffable counsels being moved so as to understand.

*Psellus*, 41; *Pletho*, 31. Z.

55\. Because it is the Operator, because it is the Giver of Life Bearing
Fire, because it filleth the Life-producing bosom of Hecaté; and it
instilleth into the Synoches the enlivening strength of Fire, endued
with mighty Power.

Proclus in *Tim*., 128. T.

56\. He gave His own Whirlwinds to guard the Supernals, mingling the
proper force of His own strength in the Synoches.

Dam., *De Prin*. T.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

57\. But likewise as many as serve the material Synoches.

T.

58\. The Teletarchs are comprehended in the Synoches.

Dam., *De Prin*. T.

59\. Rhea, the Fountain and River of the Blessed Intellectuals, having
first received the powers of all things in Her Ineffable Bosom, pours
forth perpetual Generation upon all things.

Proc. in *Crat*. T

60\. For it is the bound of the Paternal Depth, and the Fountain of the
Intellectuals.

Dam., *De Prin*. T.

61\. For He is a Power of circumlucid strength, glittering with
Intellectual Sections.

Dam. T.

62 . He glittereth with Intellectual Sections, and hath filled all
things with love.

Dam. T.

63\. Unto the Intellectual Whirlings of Intellectual Fire, all things
are subservient, through the persuasive counsel of the Father.

Proc. in *Parm*. T.

64\. O! how the World hath inflexible Intellectual Rulers.

65\. The source of the Hecaté correspondeth with that of the Fontal
Fathers.

T.

66\. From Him leap forth the Amilicti the all-relentless thunders, and
the whirlwind receiving

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bosoms of the
all-splendid Strength of Hecaté Father-begotten; and He who encircleth
the Brilliance of Fire; And the Strong Spirit of the Poles, all fiery
beyond.

Proc. in *Crat*. T.

67\. There is another Fountain, which leadeth the Empyræan World.

Proc. in *Tim*. Z. or T.

[68](errata.htm#1). The Fountain of Fountains, and the boundary of all
fountains.

Dam., *De Prin*.

69\. Under two Minds the Life-generating fountain of Souls is
comprehended.

Dam., *De Prin*. T.

70\. Beneath them exists the Principal One of the Immaterials.

Darn. in *Parm*. Z. or T.

*Following the Intellectual Triad was the Demiurgos, from whom proceeded
the Effable and Essential Orders including all sorts of Dæmons, and the
Elementary World*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

71\. Father begotten Light, which alone hath gathered from the strength
of the Father the Flower of mind, and hath the power of understanding
the Paternal mind, and Both instil into all Fountains and Principles the
power of understanding and the function of ceaseless revolution.

Proc. in *Tim*., 242.

72\. All fountains and principles whirl round and always remain' in a
ceaseless revolution.

Proc. in *Parm*. Z. or T.

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

73\. The Principles, which have understood the Intelligible works of the
Father, He hath clothed in sensible works and bodies, being intermediate
links existing to connect the Father with Matter, rendering apparent the
Images of unapparent Natures, and inscribing the Unapparent in the
Apparent frame of the World.

Dam., *De Prin*. Z. or T.

74\. Typhon, Echidna, and Python, being the progeny of Tartaros and
Gaia, who were united by Uranos, form, as it were, a certain Chaldæan
Triad, the Inspector and Guardian of all the disordered fabrications.

Olymp. in *Phæd*. T.

75\. There are certain Irrational Demons (mindless elementals), which
derive their subsistence from the Aërial Rulers; wherefore the Oracle
saith, Being the Charioteer of the Aërial, Terrestrial and Aquatic Dogs.

Olymp. in *Phæd*. T.

76\. The Aquatic when applied to Divine Natures signifies a Government
inseparable from Water, and hence the Oracle calls the Aquatic Gods,
Water Walkers:

Proc. in *Tim*., 270. T.

77\. There are certain Water Elementals whom Orpheus calls Nereides,
dwelling in the more elevated exhalations of Water, such as appear in
damp, cloudy Air, whose bodies are sometimes seen (as Zoroaster taught)
by more acute eyes, especially in Persia and Africa.

*Ficinus de Immortalitate Animæ*, 123. T.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Particular Souls](coz05)
