[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](coz05)  [Next](coz07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1419179896/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# MATTER.

#### THE WORLD--AND NATURE.

99\. The Matrix containing all things.

T.

100\. Wholly divisible, and yet indivisible.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

101\. Thence abundantly springeth forth the generations of multifarious
Matter.

Proc. in *Tim*., 118. T.

102\. These frame atoms, sensible forms, corporeal bodies, and things
destined to matter.

Dam, *De Prin*. T.

103\. The Nymphs of the Fountains, and all the Water Spirits, and
terrestrial, aërial and astral forms, are the Lunar Riders and Rulers of
all Matter, the Celestial, the Starry, and that which lieth in the
Abysses.

*Lydus*., p. 32.

104\. According to the Oracles, Evil is more feeble than Non-entity.

Proc. *de Prov*. Z. or T.

105\. We learn that Matter pervadeth the whole world, as the Gods also
assert.

Proc., *Tim*., 142. Z. or T.

106\. All Divine Natures are incorporeal, but bodies are bound to them
for your sakes. Bodies not being able to contain incorporeals, by reason
of the Corporeal Nature, in which ye are concentrated.

Proc. in *Pl. Polit*., 359. Z. or T.

107\. For the Paternal Self-begotten Mind, understanding His works sowed
in all, the fiery bonds of love, that all things might continue loving
for an infinite time. That the connected series of things might
intellectually remain in the Light of the Father; that the elements of
the World might continue their course in mutual attraction.

Proc. in *Tim*., 155. T.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

108\. The Maker of all things, self-operating, framed the World. And
there was a certain Mass of Fire: all these things Self-Operating He
produced, that the Body of the Universe might be conformed, that the
World might be manifest, and not appear membranous,

Proc. in *Tim*., 154. Z. or T.

109\. For He assimilateth the images to himself, casting them around his
own form.

110\. For they are an imitation of his Mind, but that which is
fabricated hath something of Body.

Proc. in *Tim*., 87. Z or. T.

111\. There is a Venerable Name, with a sleepless revolution, leaping
forth into the worlds, through the rapid tones of the Father.

Proc. in *Crat*. Z. or T.

112\. The Ethers of the Elements therefore are there.

Olympiodorus in *Phæd*. Z. or T.

113\. The Oracles assert that the types of Characters, and of other
Divine visions appear in the Ether (or Astral Light).

Simp. in *Phys*., 144. Z. or T.

114\. In this the things without figure are figured.

Simp. in *Phys*., 143. Z. or T.

115\. The Ineffable and Effable impressions of the World.

116\. The Light hating World, and the winding currents by which many are
drawn down.

Proc. in *Tim*., 339. Z. or T

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

117\. He maketh the whole World of Fire, Air,. Water, and Earth, and of
the all-nourishing Ether.

Z. or T.

118\. Placing Earth in the middle, but Water below the Earth, and Air
above both these.

Z. or T.

119\. He fixed a vast multitude of un-wandering Stars, not by a strain
laborious and hurtful, but with stability void of movement, forcing Fire
forward into Fire.

Proc. in *Tim*., 280. Z. or T.

120\. The Father congregated the Seven Firmaments of the Kosmos,
circumscribing the Heavens with convex form.

Dam. in *Parm*. Z, or T.

121\. He constituted a Septenary of wandering Existences (the Planetary
globes).

Z. or T.

122\. Suspending their disorder in Well-disposed Zones.

Z. or T.

123\. He made them six in number, and for the Seventh He cast into the
midst thereof the Fiery Sun.

Proc. in *Tim*., 280. Z. or T.

124\. The Centre from which all (lines) which way soever are equal.

Proc. in *Euclidem*.

125\. And that the Swift Sun doth pass as ever around a Centre.

Proc. in *Plat. Th.*, 317. Z. or T.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

126\. Eagerly urging itself towards that Centre of resounding Light.

Proc. in *Tim*., 236. T.

127\. The Vast Sun, and the Brilliant Moon.

128\. As rays of Light his locks flow forth, ending in acute points.

Proc. in *Pl. Pol*. 387. T.

129\. And of the Solar Circles, and of the Lunar, clashings, and of. the
Aërial Recesses; the Melody of Ether, and of the Sun, and of the phases
of the Moon, and of the Air.

Proc. in *Tim*., 257. Z. or T.

130\. The most mystic of discourses informs us that His wholeness is in
the Supra-mundane Orders for there a Solar World and Boundless Light
subsist, as, the Oracles of the Chaldæans affirm.

Proc. in *Tim*., 264. Z. or T.

131\. The Sun more true measureth all things by time, being itself the
time of time, according to the Oracle of the Gods concerning it.

Proc. in *Tim*., 249. Z. or T.

132\. The Disk (of the Sun) is borne in the Starless.. realm above the
Inerratic Sphere; and hence he is, not in the midst of the Planets, but
of the Three Worlds, according to the telestic Hypothesis.

Jul., *Crat*., 5, 334. Z. or T.

133\. The Sun is a Fire, the Channel of Fire, and the dispenser of Fire.

Proc. in *Tim*., 141. Z. or T.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

134\. Hence Kronos, The Sun as Assessor beholds the true pole.

135\. The Ethereal Course, and the vast motion of the Moon, and the
Aërial fluxes.

Proclus in *Tim*., 257. Z. or T.

136\. O Ether, Sun, and Spirit of the Moon, ye are the chiefs of the
Air.

Proc. in *Tim*., 257. Z. or T.

137\. And the wide Air, and the Lunar Course, and the Pole of the Sun.

Proc. in *Tim*., 257. Z. or T.

138\. For the Goddess bringeth forth the Vast Sun, and the lucent Moon.

139\. She collecteth it, receiving the Melody of Ether, and of the Sun,
and of the Moon, and of whatsoever things are contained in the Air.

140\. Unwearied Nature ruleth over the Worlds and works, that the
Heavens drawing downward might run an eternal course, and that the other
periods of the Sun, Moon, Seasons, Night and Day, might be accomplished.

Proc. in *Tim*., 4, 323. Z. or T.

141\. And above the shoulders of that Great Goddess, is Nature in her
vastness exalted.

Proc. in *Tim*., 4. T.

142\. The most celebrated of the Babylonians, together with Ostanes and
Zoroaster, very properly call the starry Spheres "Herds"; whether
because these alone among corporeal magnitudes, are perfectly carried
about around a Centre, or in conformity to the Oracles, because they are
considered by them

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

as in a certain respect the bands and collectors of physical reasons,
which they likewise call in their sacred discourse "Herds" (agelous) and
by the insertion of a gamma (aggelous) Angels. Wherefore the Stars which
preside over each of these herds are considered to be Deities or Dæmons,
similar to the Angels, and are called Archangels; and they are seven in
number.

Anon. in *Theologumenis Arithmeticis*. Z.

*Daimon in Greek meant "a Spirit," not "a bad Spirit." *

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

143\. Zoroaster calls the congruities of material forms to the ideals of
the Soul of the World--Divine Allurements.

Ficinus, *de Vit. Cæl. Comp*. Z.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Magical and Philosophical Precepts](coz07.md)
