[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb11)  [Next](ptb13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX

### THE INFLUENCE OF THE FIXED STARS

NEXT in succession, it is necessary to detail the natures and properties
of the fixed stars; all of which have their respective influences,
analogous to the influences of the planets: and those stars which form
the constellations of the zodiac require to be first described.

*Aries*. The stars in the head of Aries possess an influence similar in
its effects to that of Mars and Saturn: those in the mouth act similarly
to Mercury, and in some degree to Saturn; those in the hinder foot, to
Mars; those in the tail, to Venus.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

*Taurus*. Those stars in Taurus, which are in the abscission of the
sign, resemble in their temperament the influence of Venus, and in some
degree that of Saturn: those in the Pleiades are like the Moon and Mars.
Of the stars in the head, that one of the Hyades which is bright and
ruddy, and called Facula, <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43) has the
same temperament as Mars: the others resemble Saturn, and, partly,
Mercury; and those at the top of the horns are like Mars.

*Gemini*. The stars in the feet of Gemini have an influence similar to
that of Mercury, and moderately to that of Venus.

The bright stars in the thighs are like Saturn: of the two bright stars
on the heads, the one, which precedes and is called Apollo, <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44) is like Mercury; the other which follows,
called Hercules, <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45) is like Mars.

*Cancer*. The two stars in the eyes of Cancer are of the same influence
as Mercury, and are also moderately like Mars. Those in the claws are
like Saturn and Mercury. The nebulous mass in the breast, called the
Præsepe, has the same efficacy as Mars and the Moon. The two placed on
either side of the nebulous mass, and called the Asini, have an
influence similar to that of Mars and the Sun.

*Leo*. Of the stars in Leo, two in the head are like Saturn and partly
like Mars. The three in the neck are like Saturn, and in some degree
like Mercury. The bright one in the heart, called Regulus, <span
id="fr_46"></span>[4](#fn_46) agrees with Mars and Jupiter. Those in the
loins, and the bright one in the tail, are like Saturn and Venus: those
in the thighs resemble Venus, and, in some degree, Mercury.

*Virgo*. The stars in the head of Virgo, and that at the top of the
southern wing, operate like Mercury and somewhat like Mars: the other
bright stars in the same wing, and those about the girdle, resemble
Mercury in their influence, and also Venus moderately. The bright one in
the northern wing, called Vindemiator, is of the same influence as
Saturn and Mercury: that called Spica Virginis is like Venus and partly
Mars: those at the points of the feet and at the bottom of the garments
are like Mercury, and also Mars, moderately.

*Libra*. <span id="fr_47"></span>[5](#fn_47) Those stars at the points
of the claws of Scorpio operate

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

like Jupiter and Mercury: those in the middle of the claws, like Saturn,
and in some degree like Mars.

*Scorpio*. The bright stars in the front of the body of Scorpio have an
effect similar to that produced by the influence of Mars, and partly to
that produced by Saturn: the three in the body itself, the middle one of
which, called Antares, <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) is ruddy and
more luminous, are similar to Mars and moderately to Jupiter: those in
the joints of the tail are like Saturn and partly like Venus: those in
the sting, like Mercury and Mars. The nebula is like Mars and the Moon.

*Sagittarius*. The stars at the point of the arrow in Sagittarius have
influence similar to that of Mars and the Moon: those on the bow, and at
the grasp of the hand, act like Jupiter and Mars: the nebula in the face
is like the Sun and Mars: those in the waist and in the back resemble
Jupiter, and also Mercury moderately: those in the feet, Jupiter and
Saturn: the four-sided figure in the tail is similar to Venus, and in
some degree to Saturn.

*Capricorn*. The stars in the horns of Capricorn have efficacy similar
to that of Venus, and partly to that of Mars. The stars in the mouth are
like Saturn, and partly like Venus: those in the feet and in the belly
act in the same manner as Mars and Mercury: those in the tail are like
Saturn and Jupiter.

*Aquarius*. The stars in the shoulders of Aquarius operate like Saturn
and Mercury; those in the left hand and in the face do the same: those
in the thighs have an influence more consonant with that of Mercury, and
in a less degree with that of Saturn: those in the stream of water have
power similar to that of Saturn, and, moderately, to that of Jupiter.

*Pisces*. Those stars in Pisces, which are in the head of the southern
fish, have the same influence as Mercury, and, in some degree, as
Saturn: those in the body are like Jupiter and Mercury: those in the
tail and in the southern line are like Saturn, and, moderately, like
Mercury. In the northern fish, those on its body and back-bone resemble
Jupiter, and also Venus in some degree: those in the northern line are
like Saturn and Jupiter; and the bright star in the knot acts like Mars,
and moderately like Mercury. <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[17:1](ptb12.htm#fr_43) The little Torch; now
known by the name of Aldebaran.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[17:2](ptb12.htm#fr_44) Castor.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[17:3](ptb12.htm#fr_45) Pollux.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[17:4](ptb12.htm#fr_46) Cor Leonia.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[17:5](ptb12.htm#fr_47) Called by the ancients
χηλαι Chelæ, or the *claws* of Scorpio; which sign they made to consist
of 60 degrees, omitting Libra. Thus Virgil in the first Georgic, line
33, &c.

Quo locus Erigonen inter, Chelasque sequentes  
Panditur: ipse tibi jam brachia contrahit ardens  
Scorpius, et cœli justâ plus parte reliquit.

Ovid, likewise, takes the following notice of Scorpio

Porrigit in spatium signorum membra duorum.  
                                                  *Met*. 2, l. 198.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[18:1](ptb12.htm#fr_48) Adams's Treatise on the
Globes calls this star "Kalb al Akrab, or the Scorpion's heart," and
adds, that "the word Antares (if it is not a corruption) has no
signification." But it should be observed that Ptolemy states that this
star partakes of the nature of Mars: it seems therefore not improbable
that Antares may be a regular Greek word, compounded of αντι *pro* and
αρης *Mars*, and signifying *Mars's deputy*, or *lieutenant*, or *one
acting for Mars*.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[18:2](ptb12.htm#fr_49) Salmon, in his "Horn;
Mathematics, or Soul of Astrology" (printed by Dawks, 1619) divides each
sign of the zodiac into six faces of five degrees each, "because that in
every sign there are various stars of differing natures"; <span
id="page_19">p. 19</span> and he gives a particular description to each
face, depending on its ascension or culmination. This seems an attempt
to adapt Ptolemy's signification of the several stars, composing the
different signs, to some general rule or mode of judgment: but it does
not merit the implicit assent of astrologers. It is understood that
Salmon was not the inventor of this division of the signs into faces,
but that it came originally from the Arabian schools.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Constellations North of the Zodiac](ptb13)
