[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb37)  [Next](ptb39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII

### THE GENUS, CLASS, OR KIND, LIABLE TO BE AFFECTED

THE third division of these observations relates to the mode of
distinguishing the genus, or species, of animals or things about to
sustain the expected effect. This distinction is made by means of the
conformation and peculiar properties of those signs in which the place
of the eclipse, and the places of such fixed stars and planets, as are
in dominion according to the actual sign of the eclipse, and that of the
angle before it, may be found. And a planet, or fixed star, is to be
considered as holding dominion when circumstanced as follows.

If there be found one planet having more numerous claims than any other
to the place of the eclipse, as well as to that of the angle, being also
in the immediate vicinity of those places, and visibly applying to, or
receding from them, and having likewise more rights over other places
connected with them by configuration; the said planet being, at the same
time, lord by house, triplicity, exaltation, and terms; in such a case,
only that single planet is entitled to dominion. But, if the lord of the
eclipse and the lord of the angle be not identical, then those two
planets which have most connections with each place are to be noted;
and, of these two, the lord of the eclipse is to be preferred to the
chief dominion, "although the other is to be considered as bearing rule
conjointly." <span id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_100) And if more than two
should be found, having equal pretensions

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

to each place, that particular one among them which may be nearest to an
angle, or most concerned with the places in question, by the nature of
its condition, is to be selected for dominion <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101).

But, among the fixed stars, the chief bright one (which, during the time
of the eclipse, may hold connection, in any of the nine modes of
apparent configuration detailed in the First Syntaxis <span
id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102) with the angles then actually in
passage), is to be admitted to dominion; as also that one which, at the
ecliptical hour, may be in an eminent situation, either having risen, or
having culminated with the, angle following the place of the
eclipse. <span id="fr_103"></span>[3](#fn_103)

Having considered, according to the foregoing rules, what stars
co-operate in regulating the coming event, the conformation and figure
of the signs, in which the eclipse takes place and the said ruling stars
may be posited, are also to be observed; and, from the properties and
characteristics of those signs, the genus or species, to be comprehended
in the event, is chiefly to be inferred.

For instance, should the zodiacal constellations, and those of the
ruling fixed stars out of the zodiac, be of human shape, the effect will
fall upon the human race. If the signs be not of human shape, but yet
terrestrial, or quadrupedal, the event would be indicated to happen to
animals of similar form: the signs shaped like reptiles signify that
serpents and creatures of that description will be affected; those
bearing the figure of ferocious beasts denote that the event will affect
savage and destructive animals; and those figured like tame beasts show
that it will operate on animals serviceable to mankind, and of domestic
character; as intimated by the shape and figure of the signs, whether
resembling horses, oxen, sheep, or any other useful animals. In addition
to this, the terrestrial signs situated in the north, about the Arctic
circle, indicate sudden earthquakes; and those in the south, sudden
deluges of rain. And, should the ruling places be situated in signs
shaped like winged animals, as in that of Aquila, or in others of
similar form, the event will take effect on birds; and will chiefly
attach to those which afford food to man. If the said places should be
in signs

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

formed like creatures which swim, and in marine signs, such as
Delphinus, the effect will be felt by marine animals, and in the
navigation of fleets; if in river signs, such as Aquarius and Pisces, it
will attach to animals living in rivers and in fresh waters: and, if in
Argo, both sea and fresh-water animals will be affected by it. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104)

Again, should the ruling places be situated in tropical or in
equinoctial signs, in either case alike they presignify changes in the
state of the atmosphere, at the respective season to which each sign is
appropriated. For example, with regard to the season of spring and the
productions of the earth, if the said places should be in the sign of
the vernal equinox, they will produce an effect on the buds of the vine
and fig, and of such other trees as sprout forth at that season. Should
they be in the sign of the summer tropic, the event will affect the
gathering and depositing of fruits; and, with respect to Ægypt in
particular, it will impede the rising of the Nile. If they should be in
the sign of the autumnal equinox, they foreshow that it will operate on
grain and on various sorts of herbs; if in the sign of the winter
tropic, on potherbs, esculent vegetables, and such birds and fishes as
arrive in that season.

The equinoctial signs further indicate the circumstances liable to
happen in ecclesiastical concerns, and in religious matters: the
tropical signs give warning of changes in the atmosphere and in
political affairs; the fixed signs, of changes in institutions and in
buildings; and the bicorporeal signs show that the future event will
fall alike on princes and their subjects.

Again, the ruling places situated in the east, during the time of the
eclipse, signify that fruits and seeds, incipient institutions, and the
age of youth, will be affected; those, which may be in the mid-heaven
above the earth announce that the coming event will relate to
ecclesiastical affairs, to kings and princes, and to the middle age;
those in the west, that it will influence the laws, old age, and persons
about to die.

The proportion liable to be affected, of that genus or kind on which the
event will fall, is to be ascertained by the magnitude of the
obscuration caused by the eclipse, and by the positions held by the
operative stars in regard to the ecliptical place; as, in vespertine
position to a solar eclipse, or in matutine position to a lunar eclipse,
the said stars will most usually much diminish the effect; in opposition
they render it moderate; but in matutine position to a solar eclipse, or
in vespertine to a lunar, they greatly augment and extend it. <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[55:2](ptb38.htm#fr_100) The edition of
Allatius does not contain the words here marked by inverted commas; but
they are found in other editions of the text, and seem necessary to
complete the sense of the passage.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[56:1](ptb38.htm#fr_101) "When planets, in
election for Lords of the eclipse, are found of equal strength and
dignity, those which are direct are to be preferred before those which
are retrograde; and the oriental before the occidental."--*Whalley's*
"*Annotations*."

<span id="fn_102"></span>[56:2](ptb38.htm#fr_102) That is to say, in the
Almagest, Book VIII, Chap. IV; which chapter is given, entire, in the
Appendix.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[56:3](ptb38.htm#fr_103) "In electing fixed
stars, Cardan directs to observe the angle which the eclipse follows,
and that which it precedes: as, if the eclipse be between the seventh
house" (or occidental angle) "and the mid-heaven, the stars which are in
the seventh shall be preferred; and next, those in the mid-heaven; but,
if between the mid-heaven and the ascendant, those in the mid-heaven
shall have the preference; and next, those in the
ascendant."--*Whalley's* "*Annotations*."

<span id="fn_104"></span>[57:1](ptb38.htm#fr_104) It is perhaps
unnecessary to remark, that, in speaking of ruling places, as liable to
be situated in Aquila, Delphinus or Argo, Ptolemy alludes only to the
places of the fixed stars in dominion: since the ecliptical place and
the planets must be confined to the zodiacal signs.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[57:2](ptb38.htm#fr_105) According to Whalley,
Cardan, in reference to the nine modes of configuration, applicable to
the fixed stars, says, "When a fixed star is with any planet, or in any
angle, consider whether it be by any of these ways; if not, <span
id="page_58">p. 58</span> it is most weak; if it be, consider whether it
be with the Sun, and not to be seen; then it is very weak. Or if it is
to be seen, and is with the Sun occidental, it is indifferent. Or if it
be seen, and is not with the Sun, it is stronger; or if it be seen, and
is oriental, then it is strongest."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Quality and Nature of the Effect](ptb39)
