[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb56)  [Next](ptb58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIII

### THE NUMBER OF PROROGATORS, AND ALSO THE PART OF FORTUNE

AFTER due attention has been given to the instructions in the preceding
chapter, the Sun, the Moon, the Ascendant, and the part of Fortune, are
to be considered as the four principally liable to be elected to the
office of prorogator; and their positions, together with those of such
planets as rule in the places of their positions, are to be observed.

The part of Fortune is ascertained by computing the number of degrees
between the Sun and the Moon; and it is placed at an equal number of
degrees distant from the ascendant, in the order of the signs. It is in
all cases, both by night and day, to be so computed and set down, that
the Moon may hold with it the same relation as that which the Sun may
hold with the ascendant; and it thus becomes, as it were, a lunar
horoscope or ascendant. <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154)

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

Among the candidates for prorogation, as beforementioned, by day the Sun
is to be preferred, provided he be situated in a prorogatory place; and,
if not, the Moon; but if the Moon, also, should not be so situated, then
that planet is to be elected which may have most claims to dominion, in
reference to the Sun, the antecedent new Moon, and the ascendant; that
is to say, when such planet may be found to have dominion over any one
of the places where these are situated, by at least three prorogatives,
if not more; the whole number being five. If, however, no planet should
be found so circumstanced, the Ascendant is then to be taken.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

By night, the Moon is to be elected as prorogator, provided, in like
manner, she should be in some prorogatory place; and if she be not, the
Sun: if he also be not in any prorogatory place, then that planet which
may have most rights of dominion in reference to the Moon, <span
id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155) and the antecedent full Moon and the
part of Fortune. But, if there be no planet claiming dominion in the
mode prescribed, the Ascendant must be taken, in case a new Moon had
last preceded the birth; but, if a full Moon, the part of Fortune.

If the two luminaries, and also some ruling planet of appropriate
condition, should be each posited in a prorogatory place, then, provided
one luminary may be found to occupy some place more important and
influential than the others, that luminary must be chosen; but should
the ruling planet occupy the stronger place, and have prorogatives of
dominion suitable to the conditions of both luminaries, the planet must
then be preferred to either of them. <span
id="fr_156"></span>[2](#fn_156)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[89:1](ptb57.htm#fr_154) The Latin translation,
printed at Perugio in 1646, has here the following passage in addition:
"But it must be seen which luminary may follow the other in the
succession of the signs; for if the Moon should so follow the Sun, the
part of Fortune is also to be numbered from the horoscope or ascendant,
*according* to the succession of the signs. But if the Moon precede the
Sun, the <span id="page_90">p. 90</span> part of Fortune must be
numbered from the ascendant, *contrary* to the succession of the signs."

There is a long dissertation on the part of Fortune, in Cooper's
Placidus, from pp. 308 to 318; and, among the directions there given for
computing its situation, the following seem the most accurate and
simple: viz. "In the diurnal geniture, the Sun's true distance from the
east is to be added to the Moon's right ascension, and in the nocturnal,
subtracted; for the number thence arising will be the place and right
ascension of the part of Fortune: and it always has the same declination
with the Moon, both in number and name, wherever it is found. Again, let
the Sun's oblique ascension, taken in the ascendant, be subtracted
always from the oblique ascendant of the ascendant, as well in the day
as in the night, and the remaining difference be added to the Moon's
right ascension; the sum will be the right ascension of the part of
Fortune, which will have the Moon's declination." It is shown also by
this dissertation, that the situation of the part of Fortune must be
necessarily confined to the lunar parallels; that it can but rarely be
in the ecliptic; and that its latitude is ever varying. Cooper also
adds, from Cardan's Commentaries on the Tetrabiblos, that "if the Moon
is going from the conjunction to the opposition of the Sun, then the
Moon follows the Sun, and the part of Fortune is always under the Earth,
from the ascendant; but if the Moon has passed the opposition, she goes
before the Sun, and the part of Fortune is before the ascendant, and
always above the earth." This remark of Cardan's is, in effect, exactly
equivalent to what is stated in the additional passage inserted in the
Perugio Latin translation, and given above.

In the Primum Mobile of Placidus (Cooper's translation, p 45), the
following remark and example are given: "The part of Fortune is placed
according to the Moon's distance from the Sun; and you must observe what
rays the Moon has to the Sun, for the latter ought to have the same, and
with the same excess or deficiency, as the part of Fortune to the
horoscope. As the Moon is to the Sun, so is the part of Fortune to the
horoscope; and as the Sun is to the horoscope, so is the Moon to the
part of Fortune. So, in the nativity of Charles V, the Moon applies to
the ultimate sextile of the Sun, but with a deficiency of 7° 45': I
subtract the 7° 45' from 5° 34' of Scorpio, the ultimate sextile to the
horoscope, and the part of Fortune is placed in 28° 9' of Libra.
N.B.--In this nativity, according to Placidus, the Sun is in the second
house, in 14° 30' of Pisces: the Moon in the ascendant, in 6° 45' of
Capricorn; the ascendant is 5° 34' of Capricorn; and the part Fortune is
in the ninth house, in 28° 9' of Libra.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[91:1](ptb57.htm#fr_155) According to her
position in the scheme of the nativity.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[91:2](ptb57.htm#fr_156) Placidus, in remarking
on the nativity of John di Colonna, after stating his opinion that it is
an error to suppose that a malign influence to the horoscope, when the
horoscope has *not* the primary signification of life is anæretic, says,
that "the order and method which Ptolemy lays down for the election of a
prorogator are quite absurd, unless life be at the disposal of a sole
prime significator only." He proves by other arguments also, and by
instances of the fact, that "*one only* signifies life, elected
according to Ptolemy's method." (Cooper's translation, p. 184.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Number of the Modes of Prorogation](ptb58)
