[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb57)  [Next](ptb59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XIV

### NUMBER OF THE MODES OF PROROGATION

WHEN the prorogator has been determined as above directed, it is also
necessary to take into consideration the two modes of prorogation; one
into succeeding signs, under the projection of rays, as it is called;
and, when the prorogator may be in an oriental place, that is to say, in
any place between the mid-heaven and the ascendant, this mode only is to
be used. The other mode extends into signs preceding the prorogator,
according to what is called horary proportion <span
id="fr_157"></span>[3](#fn_157); and, in cases when the prorogator may
be situated in any place receding from the mid-heaven, or, in other
words, between the mid-heaven and the angle of the west, both modes of
prorogation are to be adopted.

It is next to be observed, that certain degrees are anæretic; though, in
the prorogation made into signs preceding, the only degree which is
strictly anæretic is that of the western horizon; and it becomes so

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

because it obscures the lord of life; while other degrees, of stars
meeting with or testifying to the prorogator, both take away from and
add to the aggregate amount of the prorogation, which would otherwise
continue until the descension or setting of the prorogator. Of these
last-mentioned degrees, however, there are none properly anæretic; since
they are not borne to the prorogatory place, but, on the contrary, that
place is carried to their positions. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158) In this manner the benefics increase the
prorogation, but the malefics diminish it; and Mercury assists the
influence of either party with which he may be configurated. The amount
of the increase or diminution is indicated by the degree, in which each
star, so operating, is exactly situated; for the number of years will
depend upon, and correspond with, the horary times <span
id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159) proper to each degree; and if the birth
be by day, care must be taken to calculate the diurnal horary times; if
by night, the nocturnal. These directions are to be understood as
applicable to instances wherein the degrees in question may be in the
ascendant; if farther advanced, a deduction proportionate to the
distance is to be made, unless they should be on the occidental horizon,
in which case there can be no remainder.

But, in the prorogation made into succeeding signs, the places of the
malefics, Saturn and Mars, are anæretic, whether meeting the prorogator
bodily, or by emission of rays in quartile, from either side, or in
opposition: they are also sometimes anæretic, by a sextile ray, if in a
sign of equal power, obeying or beholding the sign of the prorogator.
And even the mere degree, in signs following, in quartile with the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

prorogatory place, as also the degree in sextile, if badly afflicted,
which is sometimes the case in signs of long ascension, and, still
further, the degree in trine, if in signs of short ascension, are all
anæretic: so also is the Sun's place, should the Moon be prorogatory.
But, although the meetings, which occur in the course of prorogation
thus made, have, respectively, some of them an anæretic, and other a
preservative, power, in consequence of their occurring by means of an
actual transmission to the prorogatory place <span
id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160); yet their anæretic tendency is not
always effectual, but only in cases where the places, so brought to the
prorogatory place, may be badly afflicted. For should those places be
situated within the terms of a benefic, the operation of their anæretic
degree becomes impeded; and it will likewise be impeded, if either of
the benefics should cast a ray in quartile, trine, or opposition, <span
id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_161) to the said anæretic degree itself, or
to some other degree near in succession, and not farther distant from it
than twelve degrees, if the benefic be Jupiter; nor than eight, if
Venus: the like impediment will also subsist, if both the prorogator and
its opponent <span id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_162) should be
bodies, <span id="fr_163"></span>[4](#fn_163) and not have the same
latitude.

Therefore, whenever there may be found two or more conflicting
configurations, auxiliary on the one hand, and hostile on the other, due
observation must be made to ascertain which party surpasses the other,
in power as well as in number. The pre-eminence in number will be, of
course, obvious, from the greater number <span
id="fr_164"></span>[5](#fn_164) on one side than on the other; but, for
pre-eminence in power, it must be seen whether the stars, auxiliary or
hostile as the case may be, are, on the one side, in places appropriate
to themselves, while they are not so on the other; and especially
whether those on the one side may be oriental, and those on the other
occidental. It is also to be observed, in all cases, that not any one of
such stars, whether hostile or auxiliary, is to be left out of the
present calculation, on account of its casual position under the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

sunbeams <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165). This rule must be
particularly attended to, because, even though the Moon be not
prorogatory, the solar place itself becomes anæretic, if shackled by the
simultaneous presence of a malefic, and not restored to freedom of
operation by any benefic.

The number of years, depending on the distances between the prorogatory
and anæretic places, cannot be always gathered simply and at once from
the ascensional times <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166) of each
respective degree; but only in cases when the ascendant itself, or some
other specific degree or body, actually ascending in the oriental
horizon, may possess the prorogation. For, if it be desired to calculate
agreeably to nature, every process of calculation that can be adopted
must be directed to the attainment of one object; that is to say, to
ascertain after how many equatorial times <span
id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167) the place of the succeeding body, or
degree, will arrive at the position preoccupied at the birth by the
preceding body, or degree: and, as equatorial time transits equally both
the horizon and the meridian, the places in question <span
id="fr_168"></span>[4](#fn_168) must be considered, in respect of their
proportionate distances from both these; each equatorial degree <span
id="fr_169"></span>[5](#fn_169) being taken to signify one solar year.

In conformity with the foregoing remarks, when it may happen that the
prorogatory and preceding place may be actually on the oriental horizon,
it will be proper to reckon, at once, the ascensional times which may
intervene until the meeting of the degrees; because, after the same
number of equatorial times, the anæreta will arrive at the prorogatory
place; that is to say, at the oriental horizon. Should the prorogatory
place be found on the meridian, the whole number of degrees by right
ascension, in which the whole intercepted arc will transit the meridian,
must then be taken. And if the prorogatory place be on the occidental
horizon, the number of descensions, in which every degree of the
distance will be carried down (or, in other words, the number of
ascensions, in which their opposite degrees will ascend), is in that
case to be reckoned. <span id="fr_170"></span>[6](#fn_170)

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

When, however, a prorogatory and preceding place may not be situated on
any one of the three aforesaid points, but in some intermediate station,
it must be observed that *other* times <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_171) will then bring the succeeding place to
the preceding one; and *not* the times of ascension or descension, or
transit of the mid-heaven, as above spoken of. For any places whatever,
which have one particular position, on the same degree, in regard to the
horizon and meridian, are alike and identical. This is the case, for
instance, with all places lying on any one of those semicircles which
are drawn through the arcs of the meridian and horizon; and each of
these semicircles (all of which have position at the same equal distance
from each other) marks one temporal hour <span
id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_172); and, as the time occupied in proceeding
through the places <span id="fr_173"></span>[3](#fn_173) above
described, and arriving at the same position of the horizon and
meridian, is rendered unequal to and different from the time of transits
in the zodiac; so, also, the transits of other spaces are made,
agreeably to their position, in time again distinct from this.

There is, however, a method by which the proportion of time, occupied in
the progress of a succeeding place to a prorogatory and preceding place,
in whatever position, whether oriental, meridianal, or occidental, or
any other, may be easily calculated. It is as follows:

When it has been ascertained what degree of the zodiac is on the

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

mid-heaven, as also which are the preceding and succeeding degrees, the
period of whose meeting is to be calculated, the position of the
preceding degree, and its distance in temporal hours from the meridian,
are next to be noted; because any part of the zodiac, on becoming
distant from the meridian in the same temporal hours, must fall on the
same individual semicircle <span id="fr_174"></span>[1](#fn_174). For
ascertaining this distance, the number of ascensions, in a right sphere,
found in the intermediate space between the said preceding degree and
the mid-heaven, either above or under the earth, is to be divided by the
number of the diurnal or nocturnal horary times of the said preceding
degree: for instance, if that degree be above the earth, by its diurnal
horary times; and, by its nocturnal, if it be under the earth. It is
then to be discovered in what number of equatorial times the succeeding
degree will be distant from the same meridian, by as many similar
temporal hours as those by which the preceding degree is distant from
it. And, to effect this, the hours in question must be noted, and it
must first be observed, by the right ascensions again, how many
equatorial times the succeeding degree, at its original position, is
distant from the degree on the mid-heaven; and then it must be seen how
many equatorial times it will be distant, on coming to the preceding
degree's distance in temporal hours fro ‘m the said mid-heaven: this
will be found, by multiplying those hours by the succeeding degree's
horary times; diurnal, if the future position be above the earth, and
nocturnal if under; and the difference in amount, of these two
distances, in equatorial times, will present the number of years
inquired for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_157"></span>[91:3](ptb58.htm#fr_157) "*Horary proportion*."
So the Perugio Latin of 1646; the Greek word, however, is ωριμαιαν,
which seems to be compounded of ωρα and ιμαω; and, if so, the literal
signification would be "extraction of hours"

<span id="fn_158"></span>[92:1](ptb58.htm#fr_158) By the apparent motion
of the planetary system. On this passage, Placidus has the following
observations: "In directing the significator to the west, you must
consider what stars or mundane rays are intercepted between the
significator and the west; if fortunate, add their arc to the
significator's arc of direction to the west; if unfortunate, subtract it
from the same, and it will give the arc of direction, augmented or
diminished according to Ptolemy. How largely and differently authors
have spoken of this direction of the significator to the west, putting
various constructions on the words of Ptolemy, is known to every one.
See Cardan in his Commentaries, Maginus in Prim. Mob. and the Use of
Legal Astrology in Physic, c. viii, where he delivers the sentiments of
Naibod. Argol censures wholly this doctrine of Ptolemy's, of directing
the moderator of life to the west, as vain and useless; but I say it is
worthy of remark, and altogether comformable to truth; because then the
rays and intermediate stars of the malign only lessen the arc of
direction to the west, and do not destroy life, when, by a right
direction, the moderator or life does not remain at the same time with
the malignant planet: for, should this happen, they kill, without any
manner of doubt." (Cooper's translation, pp. 106 and 108.)

<span id="fn_159"></span>[92:2](ptb58.htm#fr_159) "*Horary times*."
These are the number of equatorial degrees which any degree of the
zodiac may appear, in a certain latitude on the earth, to transit in an
equatorial hour.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[93:1](ptb58.htm#fr_160) By the apparent motion
of the planetary system.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[93:2](ptb58.htm#fr_161) In reference to this
passage, Placidus, in speaking of the death of Octavian Vestrius of
Rome, has these words: "the Moon is found in a parallel declination of
Mars, and Saturn with the opposition of Mars; the sextile of Jupiter to
the Sun could give no assistance, because Jupiter is cadent, and the ray
sextile is very weak, especially when it is the principal ray: for which
reason, Ptolemy, in the chapter of Life, when he mentions the planets
that are able to save in the courses of the infortunes, does not name
the sextile, but the quartile, trine, and opposition; because the
sextile ray is feeble, particularly when it is less than 60°: neither
could Venus assist, as she was cadent from the house, and in a sign
inimical to the Sun," &c. (Cooper's Translation, p. 286.)

<span id="fn_162"></span>[93:3](ptb58.htm#fr_162) Literally, and perhaps
more properly, "its meeter."

<span id="fn_163"></span>[93:4](ptb58.htm#fr_163) That is to say, orbs,
in contradistinction to prorogations made by aspects or degrees merely.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[93:5](ptb58.htm#fr_164) Of the stars and
places brought into configuration.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[94:1](ptb58.htm#fr_165) Whalley's translation
of this passage is in direct contradiction to the sense: and even that
of Allatius, as well as other Latin ones, are (if strictly correct)
confused in their meaning.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[94:2](ptb58.htm#fr_166) "*Ascensional times*."
These are, in other words, the number of degrees of the equator,
equivalent to a certain number of zodiacal degrees, ascending in any
particular latitude. They are also otherwise called the *oblique
ascension* of such zodiacal degrees.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[94:3](ptb58.htm#fr_167) "*Equatorial times*"
here signify degrees of the equator, by which all time is measured.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[94:4](ptb58.htm#fr_168) That is to say, of the
preceding and of the succeeding body of degree.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[94:5](ptb58.htm#fr_169) Which may be
intercepted in the arc between them.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[94:6](ptb58.htm#fr_170) This number is that of
the oblique descensional times of the intercepted arc, or of the oblique
ascensional times of the arc opposite to it. The whole of the
instructions in this paragraph are fully exemplified in the following
chapter.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[95:1](ptb58.htm#fr_171) Or, times to be
reckoned in another manner.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[95:2](ptb58.htm#fr_172) On this passage, there
has been founded (to use Whalley's words) "what we call Mundane
Parallels, or parallels in the world. And, as zodiacal parallels are
equal distances from the tropical or equinoctial circles, so mundane
parallels are a like equal distance from the horizontal or meridianal
points or circles. And as zodiacal parallels are measured by the
zodiacal circle, so those mundane parallels are measured by the diurnal
or nocturnal arcs: and just so long as the Sun or any other planet is,
in proceeding from the cusp of the twelfth House to the cusp of the
tenth, the same Sun or other planet will be in proceeding from the cusp
of the tenth to the cusp of the eighth House. And the distance between
Sun-rising and setting, is the diurnal arc which the meridian cuts in
two equal parts. In directions, these mundane parallels have a twofold
consideration: first, simple; secondly, according to the rapt motion of
the earth, or the *primum mobile*: all which have been largely explained
by the learned Monk, Placidus," &c. That Author has certainly stated, in
one of his Theses, that "those seats, or parts of the circle, are to be
received, in which the stars, having a different declination, effect
equal temporal hours" (p. 22, Cooper's Translation), and he has fully
exemplified this principle in other parts of his "Primum Mobile"; but
Ptolemy here speaks only of *one* of the *semi*circles between the
horizon and meridian, without reference to any other semicircle,
corresponding in distance from the horizon and mid-heaven; and all that
he has said on the subject amounts only to this, that the prorogation is
completed when the succeeding place arrives at the same semicircle on
which the preceding place had been posited.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[95:3](ptb58.htm#fr_173) The ascendant,
mid-heaven, and western horizon; as mentioned in the preceding
paragraph.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[96:1](ptb58.htm#fr_174) *Vide* Note
<sup>2</sup>, [p. 95](#page_95).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. Exemplification](ptb59)
