[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb49)  [Next](ptb51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VI

### BROTHERS AND SISTERS

UNDER this head of inquiry, a general and cursory investigation, only,
can be performed; and an attempt to dive into minute particulars would
be fruitless, and would prove to be merely a vain search after things
not open to discovery. <span id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138)

The place, whence inferences are drawn respecting brothers and sisters,
is to be considered as being applicable only to children of the same
mother, and it is consequently, agreeably to nature, presumed to be the
same as the maternal place; viz. the sign occupying the mid-heaven; or,
by day, that which contains Venus, and, by night, the Moon. This sign
and its succedent are considered as indicative of the mother and her
children, and the same place is therefore properly allotted to brothers
and sisters.

Hence, provided this place be configurated with the benefics, there

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

will be several brothers and sisters: the number of them depending upon
the number and positions of such benefic stars, whether in bicorporeal
signs, or in signs of single form.

If, however, the malefics should be in elevation over this place, or be
hostilely situated in opposition thereto, the brothers and sisters will
then be few in number; and this fewness especially follows when the
malefics may surround the Sun. Should the hostile configuration be
presented from the other angles, <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139)
and, particularly, if from the ascendant, Saturn will then represent the
elder born; and Mars, by inflicting death, will diminish the total
number of brothers and sisters. <span id="fr_140"></span>[2](#fn_140)

Again, should the stars, which promise brethren, be favourably
circumstanced as to their cosmical position, the brethren will be
eminent and illustrious; but humble and obscure, if the cosmical
position be of an adverse nature. If, also, the malefic stars should be
in elevation over those which give brethren, the life of the brethren
will then be only of short duration.

Stars, constituted masculinely, represent brothers; those femininely,
sisters. The more oriental stars likewise represent the elder born; and
those which are more occidental, the younger.

Moreover, should the stars, which give brethren, be harmoniously
configurated with that one which has dominion of the sign allotted to
brethren, the brethren will be mutually friendly and affectionate; and,
if an harmonious configuration be also extended, by the same planets, to
the part of fortune, the brethren will live together in communion. But,
if the stars, which give brethren, should, on the contrary, be in
situations unconnected with each other, or be in opposition, the
brethren will then live at variance, mutually practising enmity and
fraud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_138"></span>[81:2](ptb50.htm#fr_138) In spite of this
declaration of the author, it seems, by Whalley's note on this chapter,
that Cardan maintained that the particular circumstances, liable to
affect the brothers and sisters, might be inferred by adopting, as an
ascendant, the degree of the planet holding chief dominion over the
place of brethren, and erecting a scheme thereby; in a mode similar to
that allowed by Ptolemy in the case of the parents.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[82:1](ptb50.htm#fr_139) That is to say, from
the angles in quartile (and therefore hostile also) to the mid-heaven.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[82:2](ptb50.htm#fr_140) The text does not show
whether it be necessary that Saturn and Mars should both be in the
ascendant, in order to produce the effect described; nor whether the
same effect would not follow, if one of them should be in the ascendant,
and the other in the occidental angle, or even in some other position.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Male or Female](ptb51)
