[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb55)  [Next](ptb57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XII

### THE PROROGATORY PLACES

FIRSTLY, those places, only, are to be deemed prorogatory, to which the
future assumption of the dominion of prorogation exclusively belongs.
These several places are the sign on the angle of the ascendant, from
the fifth degree above the horizon, to the twenty-fifth degree below it;
the thirty degrees in dexter sextile thereto, constituting the eleventh
house, called the Good Damon; also the thirty degrees in dexter
quartile, forming the mid-heaven above the earth; those in dexter

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

trine making the ninth house, called God; and lastly, those in
opposition, belonging to the angle of the west.

Secondly, among these places, the degrees which constitute the
mid-heaven are entitled to preference, as being of a more potent and
paramount influence: the degrees in the ascendant are next in virtue;
then the degrees in the eleventh house succedent to the mid-heaven; then
those in the angle of the west; and, lastly, those in the ninth house,
which precedes the mid-heaven.

No degrees under the earth are, in any manner, eligible to the dominion
now in question; except such only as enter into light actually above the
succedent, or, in other words, with the ascendant. And any sign,
although it may be above the earth, is still incompetent to partake in
this dominion, if it be inconjunct with the ascendant: hence the sign
which precedes the ascendant, and constitutes the twelfth house (called
that of the Evil Dæmon), is incompetent; and not only for the above
reason, but also because it is cadent, and because the beams cast by the
stars posited therein, towards the earth, are impaired by the thick and
dark exhalations arising from the earth's vapours, which produce an
unnatural colour and magnitude in the appearance of stars so posited,
confusing, and in some measure annihilating, their beams.

Thus far with regard to the places of prorogation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Number of Prorogators, and Also the Part of
Fortune](ptb57)
