[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb66)  [Next](ptb68) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IV

### THE QUALITY OF EMPLOYMENT

THE dominion of the employment, or profession, is claimed in two
quarters; viz. by the Sun, and by the sign on the mid-heaven.

It is, therefore, necessary to observe whether any planet may be making
its oriental appearance nearest to the Sun, <span
id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231) and whether any be posited in the
mid-heaven; especially, when also receiving the application of the Moon.
And if one and the same planet possess both these qualifications, that
is to say, make its nearest appearance to the Sun, and be also in the
mid-heaven, that one alone must be elected to determine the present
inquiry: and, likewise, though the planet should not be thus doubly
qualified, but only singly, in whichever respect, even then that planet
alone must still be elected provided itself alone should possess such
single qualification. If, however, there should be one planet presenting
its nearest appearance, and another in the mid-heaven conciliating the
Moon, both must then be noticed; and whichever of two may have greater
sway, and possess greater rights of dominion, that one must be
preferred. But where not any planet may be found so situated, neither
making its appearance as above described, nor being in the mid-heaven,
then that one, possessing the dominion of the mid-heaven, <span
id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_232) is to be considered as lord of the
employment: it is,

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

however, only some occasional occupation which can be thus denoted;
because persons, born under such a configuration, most commonly remain
at leisure and unemployed.

What has now been said, relates to the election of the lord of the
employment or profession; but the species of the employment will be
distinguished by means of the respective properties of the three
planets, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, and of the signs in which they may be
posited.

Mercury, for instance, produces writers, superintendents of business,
accountants, teachers in the sciences, merchants and bankers: also,
soothsayers, astrologers, and attendants on sacrifices, and, in short,
all who live by the exercise of literature, and by furnishing
explanation or interpretation; as well as by stipend and salary, or
allowance. If Saturn bear testimony jointly with Mercury, persons then
born will become managers of the affairs of others, or interpreters of
dreams, or will be engaged in temples for the purpose of divination, and
for the sake of their fanaticism. But, if Jupiter join testimony, they
will be painters, orators, or pleaders in argument, and occupied with
eminent personages.

Should Venus have dominion of the employment, she will cause persons to
be engaged in the various perfumes of flowers, in unguents and wines,
and also in colours, dyes, and in spices: thus she will produce vendors
of unguents, garland-makers, <span id="fr_233"></span>[1](#fn_233)
wine-merchants, dealers in medical drugs, weavers, dealers in spices,
painters, dyers, and vendors of apparel. If Saturn add his testimony to
hers, he will cause persons to be employed in matters belonging to
amusement and decoration; and will also produce jugglers,
[sorcerers](errata.htm#12) and charlatans, and all such as practise
similarly. But, if Jupiter join testimony with Venus, persons will
become prize-wrestlers, and garland-wearers, <span
id="fr_234"></span>[2](#fn_234) and will be advanced in honour through
female interest.

Mars, ruling the employment, and being configurated with the Sun, will
produce persons who operate by means of fire; for instance, cooks, as
well as those who work in copper, brass, and other metals, by

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

melting, burning, and casting: if Mars be separated from the Sun, he
will make shipwrights, smiths, agriculturists, stonemasons, carpenters,
and subordinate labourers. If Saturn bear testimony, in addition to
Mars, persons will [become](errata.htm#13) mariners, workers in wells,
vaults or mines, painters, keepers of beasts or cattle, cooks or
butchers, and attendants on baths or on exhibitions. And, if Jupiter
join testimony, they will be soldiers, or mechanics, collectors of
revenue, inn-keepers, toll-gatherers, or attendants on sacrifices.

Further, should it happen that two arbiters of employment may be found
together, and provided they should be Mercury and Venus, they will then
produce musicians, melodists, and persons engaged in music, poetry, and
songs: they will also produce (especially if changed in their
places) <span id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_235), mimics, actors, dealers
in slaves, makers of musical instruments, choristers and musical
performers, dancers, weavers, modellers in wax, and painters. And if
Saturn join testimony with Mercury and Venus, the preparation and sale
of female ornaments will be added to the aforesaid occupations. But, if
Jupiter give testimony, the persons will become administrators of
justice, guardians of public affairs, instructors of youth, and
magistrates of the people.

Should Mercury and Mars together be lords of the employment, persons
will become statuaries, armour-makers, sculptors, <span
id="fr_236"></span>[2](#fn_236) modellers of animals, wrestlers,
surgeons, spies or informers, adulterers, busy in crime, and forgers.
And, if Saturn also bear testimony in addition to Mercury and Mars, he
will produce assassins, highwaymen, thieves, robbers lurking in ambush,
marauders on cattle, and swindlers. But, if Jupiter afford testimony, he
will engage persons in honourable warfare, and in industry; making them
cautious and diligent in business, curious in foreign matters, and
deriving profit from their pursuits.

When Venus and Mars exercise the dominion together, persons will become
dyers, dealers in unguents and perfumes, workers in tin, lead, gold, and
silver, mock combatants or dancers in armour, dealers in medical drugs,
agriculturists, and physicians, healing by means of medicine. And if
Saturn add testimony to Venus and Mars, he will produce persons
attendant on animals consecrated to religion; also grave-diggers and
undertakers, mourners and musicians at funerals, and fanatics occupied
in religious ceremonies, lamentations, and blood. But, if Jupiter add
testimony, the persons will become regulators of sacrifices, augurs,
holders of sacred offices, governors placed over women, and
interpreters; and they will derive support from such occupations.

The properties of the signs, in which the lords of the employment may be
posited, are also influential in varying the employment. For

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

example, the signs of human shape promote all scientific pursuits, and
such as are of utility to mankind; the quadrupedal signs contribute to
produce employment among metals, in business and trade, in
house-building, and in the work of smiths and mechanics: the tropical
and equinoctial signs tend to give employment in translation or
interpretation, in matters of exchange, in mensuration and agriculture,
and in religious duties: the terrestrial and watery signs tend to
employment in water, and in connection with water, as well in regard to
the nurture of plants, as to ship-building; they likewise contribute to
employment in funerals, in embalming and preserving, and also in salt.

Moreover, should the Moon herself actually occupy the place regulating
the employment, <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_237) and, after her
conjunction, continue in course with Mercury, being at the same time in
Taurus, Capricorn, or Cancer, she will then produce soothsayers,
attendants on sacrifices, and diviners by the basin. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[2](#fn_238) If she be in Sagittarius or Pisces, she
will make necromancers, and evokers of dæmons: if in Virgo or Scorpio,
magicians, astrologers, and oracular persons, possessing prescience:
and, if in Libra, Aries, or Leo, she will produce fanatics, interpreters
of dreams, and makers of false vows and adjurations.

From the foregoing rules, the various forms of employment are to be
inferred; and its magnitude or importance will be manifested by the
existing power of the ruling planets. For instance, if the said planets
be oriental, or in angles, they will give the person eminence and
authority in his employment; but, if occidental or cadent, they will
render him subordinate. And should the benefics be in elevation, the
employment will be important, lucrative, secure, honourable, and
agreeable; but, on the other hand, if the malefics be in elevation above
the lords of the employment, it will then be mean, disreputable,
unprofitable, and insecure: thus, Saturn brings an adverse influence in
coldness or tardiness, and in the composition or mixture of
colours <span id="fr_239"></span>[3](#fn_239); and Mars

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

produces opposition by audacity and publicity in enterprise: and both
planets are alike hostile to proficiency and prosperity.

The general period, at which any increase or diminution of the
employment may take place, must, again in this case also, be determined
by the disposition of the stars, which operate the effect towards the
oriental and occidental angles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_231"></span>[120:1](ptb67.htm#fr_231) See the 4th Chapter
of the 8th Book of the Almagest inserted in the Appendix.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[120:2](ptb67.htm#fr_232) The Greek says merely
"that one having the dominion," without specifying the place of
dominion: the Latin printed at Perugio, is, however, "*dominum accipe
medii cœli*," which is certainly the sense required by the tenor of the
previous instructions. Whalley also has similarly rendered it.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[121:1](ptb67.htm#fr_233) Among the ancients, a
garland was an indispensable decoration at all public ceremonies,
whether civil or religious, and at private banquets. The making of
garlands was, therefore, a considerable employment.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[121:2](ptb67.htm#fr_234) It would seem, from
"garland-wearers" being placed here in connection with "prize-wrestlers"
(αθληται), that the author intended to point out persons competent to
obtain the victors' wreath in public exhibitions. But it appears that
the word σεφανηφορος, *garland-wearer*, also signifies a person who was
annually chosen by the priests to superintend religious ceremonies, an
office similar to that of high priest. According to Athenæus, the
Stephanephorus of Tarsos was invested with a purple tunic, edged or
striped with white, and wore the laurel chaplet, which Plato, in the
treatise *de Legibus*, describes as being constantly worn by these
officers, although the other priests wore it only during the performance
of the ceremonies.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[122:1](ptb67.htm#fr_235) Meaning probably "if
in mutual reception," which position has been before explained.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[122:2](ptb67.htm#fr_236) Or makers of
hieroglyphics--ιερογλυφοι.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[123:1](ptb67.htm#fr_237) That is to say, the
mid-heaven; as stated in the 4th Chapter of the 3rd Book, and in the
commencement of the present Chapter.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[123:2](ptb67.htm#fr_238) This mode of
divination, as practised by the Greeks, is mentioned by Potter. It is
likewise described by a learned Doctor of Medicine, Geo. Pictorius
Vigillanus (in his Treatise "de Speciebus Magiæ Ceremonialis," printed
at Strasburgh, 1531), as being used "when the fraudulent vanity of a
dæmon renders things more like each other than eggs are to eggs." And,
according to this writer, it is practised by exorcising water, and
pouring it into a basin, wherein the vain and refractory dæmon is
immersed: the said dæmon will sometimes remain at the bottom, and
sometimes raise himself to the surface, sending forth a slender hissing;
out of which the desired responses are to be formed.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[123:3](ptb67.htm#fr_239) Κρασεσι των
χρωματων.--These words have been rendered literally, but they seem to
contain some figurative meaning, rather than a literal one. Perhaps the
preferable sense of them is, "*by a mixture of views*," or "*from
various pursuits being blended together*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Marriage](ptb68)
