[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb65)  [Next](ptb67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

### THE FORTUNE OF RANK

THE disposition of the luminaries and the respective familiarities,
exercised by the stars attending them, are to be considered as
indicative of the degree of rank or dignity. <span
id="fr_227"></span>[3](#fn_227)

For example, should the two luminaries be found in masculine signs and
in angles, or even if only one of them be in an angle, <span
id="fr_228"></span>[4](#fn_228) they being at the same time specially
attended by a doryphory <span id="fr_229"></span>[5](#fn_229) composed
of all

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

the five planets; the Sun by such as are oriental, but the Moon by
occidental, the persons then about to be born will consequently become
kings or princes. And, if the attendant stars themselves should also be
in angles, or configurated with the angle above the earth, <span
id="fr_230"></span>[1](#fn_230) the said persons will become great,
powerful, and mighty in the world: and even yet more abundantly so,
provided the configurations, made by the attendant stars with the angles
above the earth, be dexter,. But, when both luminaries may not be found
in masculine signs as aforesaid, but the Sun only in a masculine and the
Moon in a feminine sign, and only one of them posited in an angle, the
other concomitant circumstances still existing in the mode above
described, the persons about to be born will then become merely
chieftains, invested with the sovereignty of life and death.

And if the attendant stars, while the luminaries may be situated in the
manner last-mentioned, should be neither actually in angles, nor bear
any testimony to the angles, the persons then born, although they will
still enjoy eminence, will attain only some limited dignity or
distinction; such as that of a delegated governor, or commander of an
army, or dignitary of the priesthood; and they will not be invested with
sovereignty.

If, however, neither of the luminaries be in an angle, and it happen
that most of the attendant stars be either themselves in angles, or
configurated with the angles, the persons then born will not attain to
any very eminent rank; yet they will take a leading part in ordinary
civil and municipal affairs: but, should the attendant stars have no
configuration with the angles, they will then remain altogether
undistinguished and without advancement; and provided, further, that
neither of the luminaries be found situated in a masculine sign, nor in
an angle, nor be attended by any benefics, they will be born to complete
obscurity and adversity.

The general appearance of exaltation or debasement of rank is to be
contemplated as before stated, but there are many gradations
intermediate to those already specified, and requiring observation of
the particular interchanges and variations, incidental to the luminaries
themselves and their doryphory, and also to the dominion of the planets

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

which compose their doryphory. For instance, should the benefits, or
stars of the same condition, exercise the chief dominion, the dignities
to be acquired will be not only important, but also more securely
established; and, on the other hand, if the chief dominion be claimed by
the malefics, or by stars of an adverse condition, the dignities will be
more subordinate, and more dangerous and evanescent.

The species of dignity may be inferred by observing the peculiar
qualities of the attendant stars. And, if Saturn have chief dominion of
the doryphory, the power and authority derived therefrom will lead to
wealth and profit: authority proceeding from Jupiter and Venus will be
pleasurable, and attended by presents and honours: that proceeding from
Mars will consist in commanding armies, in obtaining victories, and in
overawing the vanquished: and that proceeding from Mercury will be
intellectual, superintending education and study, and directing the
management of business.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_227"></span>[118:3](ptb66.htm#fr_227) It seems that there
have been different opinions on this point. Placidus makes the following
remark on the subject: "I do not take the dignities from the horoscope,
but from the Sun and Medium Cœli, according to Ptolemy and others."
(Cooper's Translation, p. 121.)

<span id="fn_228"></span>[118:4](ptb66.htm#fr_228) The Perugio Latin, of
1646, says, "If either both luminaries, or only that one of the *chief
quality*" (which Whalley defines to be the Sun by day, and the Moon by
night) "be in an angle," &c.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[118:5](ptb66.htm#fr_229) Doryphory. *Vide*
Chapter V of the 3rd Book. On the present passage, Placidus has the
following words: "You are not to observe what is generally alleged by
professors, respecting the satellites" (*quasi* doryphory) "of the
luminaries, for dignities; viz. that the satellites are those planets
which are found within 30°, on either side of the luminaries; but that a
satellite is \[also\] <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> any kind of
aspect of the stars to the luminaries of what kind soever: which, if it
be made by application, its power extends inwardly over the whole orb of
light of the aspecting planet, and the more so, as the proximity is
greater; but, by separation, it is not so. This doctrine may be seen in
several chapters of Ptolemy; for, an aspecting star influences the
significator, and disposes him to produce effects co-natural to him, by
a subsequent direction. But a star of no aspect does not predispose the
significator, and produces very little or no effect of its nature, by a
subsequent direction; this is the true doctrine of the stars." (Cooper's
Translation, pp. 124, 125.)

<span id="fn_230"></span>[119:1](ptb66.htm#fr_230) The angle of the
mid-heaven; see the first note to this Chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Quality of Employment](ptb67)
