[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb69)  [Next](ptb71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII

### FRIENDS AND ENEMIES

WITH respect to friendship and enmity, it may be observed that great and
lasting familiarities, or disagreements, are respectively called
sympathies and enmities; while the smaller, such as arise occasionally,
and subsist for a short time only, are denominated casual intimacies and
strifes: the whole are to be contemplated according to the following
rules.

Indications of great and lasting friendships, or enmities, may be
perceived by observation of the ruling places, exhibited in the
respective nativities of both the persons, between whom the friendship
or enmity may subsist. It is consequently essential to observe the
places of the Sun, the Moon, the ascendant, and the part of fortune;
for, should all these in both nativities be in the same signs, or should
either all or most of them be counterchanged in position in each
nativity, and especially should the two ascendants be within the
distance of seventeen degrees from each other, <span
id="fr_262"></span>[1](#fn_262) they will create fixed and indissoluble
friendship. On the other hand, should they be in signs inconjunct, or in
opposition, they will produce great and lasting enmity. If, however,
they be not constituted in either of the modes above mentioned, but
merely configurated in signs, <span id="fr_263"></span>[2](#fn_263) they
will then produce minor friendship; provided such configuration exist by
trine or sextile; but, if by quartile, they will excite minor enmity, so
as to take effect at certain particular times, in which the friendship
remains, as it were, inactive and subdued, while the malefics transit
the configuration: and, in a similar manner, enmity also will be
softened and abated, when the benefics may enter upon the
configuration. <span id="fr_264"></span>[3](#fn_264)

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

The friendship and enmity, which men bear towards each other, may be
classed under three general heads. One kind is suggested by spontaneous
wilfulness; another, by the idea of profit; and another, by pain and
pleasure mutually excited.

And, therefore, should either all or most of the aforesaid places be in
familiarity with each other, friendship of all the three kinds will be
established: so, also, should the places be entirely without
familiarity, similar enmity will be established. If, however,
familiarity, or absence of familiarity (as the case may be), exist only
as regards the places of the luminaries, friendship or enmity will then
be established by spontaneous will; and friendship thus produced is the
best and most secure; while, on the other hand, enmity so arising is, in
like manner, the worst and most dangerous. The friendship, or enmity,
consequent on the familiarity or non-familiarity of the respective parts
of Fortune, will be established on the idea of profit; and that,
consequent on a similar disposition of the respective ascendants, will
arise from pain or pleasure mutually excited between the parties.

It will, however, be necessary to pay still further attention to the
places in question, in order to observe whether any and what planets may
be in elevation above them, or in aspect to them; because, among all the
said places, that particular one, to which any planet in elevation, or
in succession, may be adjacent, whether in the same sign, or in the
next, will possess the more powerful influence over friendship or
enmity: and whichever place may have its aspecting planets more
powerfully benefit, will operate in a greater degree <span
id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_265) to advantage in friendship, and to the
relaxation of enmity. The foregoing instructions are applicable to such
friendships or enmities as are great and lasting.

But, in the case of others, which subsist only occasionally, and which
have been defined as casual intimacies and strifes, it is essential to
make observation of the motions of the planets, as exhibited by each
nativity; that is to say, the times are to be calculated, on the
completion of which the motions of the planets of one nativity will
cause them to enter on certain places of the other nativity; for it is
at such periods that certain particular friendships and enmities occur,
continuing for a short time, until the said ingress of the planets shall
have passed over.

For instance, Saturn and Jupiter, when making ingress upon each other's
places, produce friendship by certain agreements, or engagements,
relating either to agriculture or to inheritance: Saturn and Mars create
contention and treachery spontaneously entertained: Saturn and Venus,
friendship between kindred; liable, however, soon to grow cool: Saturn
and Mercury, friendship on account of business, or profit, or some
secret art or mystery.

Jupiter and Mars create friendship in the direction of affairs, and by
means of dignities; Jupiter and Venus also create friendship by means

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

of female persons, or attendants on religion, or on oracles: Jupiter and
Mercury, friendship by means of eloquence and science, and philosophical
inclinations.

Mars and Venus cause friendship in the course of amours, adultery, and
fornication: Mars and Mercury excite hatred and strife by offences
committed in business and trade, or by sorcery.

And Venus and Mercury produce communion by means of the arts and
sciences, by a mutual interest in literature, or by female persons.

It is in this manner that the planets operate in producing friendship or
enmity. And their comparative intensity or relaxation of vigour is to be
distinguished by the situation of the places, which they occupy, with
regard to the four principal and ruling places <span
id="fr_266"></span>[1](#fn_266): for, should they be posited in angles,
at the places of the respective parts of Fortune, or at those of the
luminaries, they will render the casual intimacies or strifes more
eminent and remarkable; but, if they be remote from these places, their
effects will not be highly conspicuous. The comparative degree of injury
or advantage, liable to be received, is to be discerned by means of the
good or evil properties of such planets as may be thus in aspect to the
aforesaid places.

With respect to servants, <span id="fr_267"></span>[2](#fn_267) the sign
of the evil dæmon <span id="fr_268"></span>[3](#fn_268) is considered as
the place to which the disposition ruling over them must be referred;
and it is to be observed what planets are in aspect to that place, both
at the actual time of nativity, and at that of any ingresses made upon
it, or oppositions to it; and also, especially, whether the lords of the
said sign may be configurated in familiarity with the ruling places of
the nativity, or not in familiarity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[130:1](ptb70.htm#fr_262) Or, regard each other
within the distance of seventeen degrees.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[130:2](ptb70.htm#fr_263) That is to say; if
the places of the Sun, &c., in one nativity be configurated with such
parts of the zodiac as are occupied by the Sun, &c., in the other
nativity.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[130:3](ptb70.htm#fr_264) Of any of the four
places above described.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[131:1](ptb70.htm#fr_265) Than the rest of the
places.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[132:1](ptb70.htm#fr_266) Those of the Sun,
Moon, Ascendant, and part of Fortune, as before mentioned.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[132:2](ptb70.htm#fr_267) "------and the
attachment, or disagreement, subsisting between them and their masters
";--so Allatius, and the Latin translation printed at Perugio.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[132:3](ptb70.htm#fr_268) The twelfth house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Travelling](ptb71)
