[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb72)  [Next](ptb74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

### THE PERIODICAL DIVISIONS OF TIME

IN addition to the foregoing brief observations, applicable to the
various forms of death, further attention is demanded with respect to
the division of time, which requires to be contemplated in its natural
order and succession.

Now as, in all genethlialogical cases, a certain common and general
arrangement, affecting the region or country and the race or generation,
is pre-supposed to be in operation, to which arrangement particular
inferences, relating to the form of the body, the properties of the
mind, and national habits and variations, must each be subservient; and
as, in these respects, certain causes more general and predominating are
pre-supposed in existence before particular causes, due care must
consequently be taken, in order to make an inference consistent with the
course of nature, to observe always the original and predominating
cause, and never to lose sight of it; lest some similarity in nativities
(if any such should exist) might induce an assertion when the original
predominating cause proceeding from the region itself has been
overlooked, that the native of Æthiopia will be born of white
complexion, and with long and straight hair; or, on the other hand, that
the native of Germany or of Gaul will be black in complexion, and have
curled

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

hair; or, that the said nations are polished in manners, and cultivate
learning, but that the people of Greece are barbarous and illiterate:
and so, in short, of any other countries; without duly considering the
national differences and variations in their several courses of life. So
also, with regard to the division of time, it is in the same manner
essential to consider the different qualities of the several ages of
life, and to pre-determine the appropriate fitness of every age to such
events as may be expected: in order to avoid the gross error which might
arise from a merely vague consideration of the subject, by attributing
to infancy some deed or circumstance of too complete a nature and
belonging rather to manhood, or by ascribing to extreme old age the
pro-creation of children, or some other action belonging to youth; and
to adapt, on the contrary, to each separate age such circumstances as
seem, by due observation of the periods, to be suitable and appropriate
thereto.

The mode of consideration <span id="fr_282"></span>[1](#fn_282)
applicable to human nature is universally one and the same; and it is
analogous to the arrangement of the seven planetary orbs <span
id="fr_283"></span>[2](#fn_283) It, therefore, duly commences with the
first age of human life, and the first sphere next above the earth, that
of the Moon; and it terminates with the final age of man, and the last
of the planetary spheres, which is that of Saturn; and, in fact, it
accordingly happens that the appropriate qualities of each sphere take
effect in a corresponding age of life, each age being subjected to one
particular sphere. These observations are necessary, because the general
divisions of time must be considered by means of the spheres, as a
primary arrangement; although minor distinctions are to be made by means
of the existing peculiarities found in nativities.

Hence, the first age of infancy, which endures for four years, agreeing
in number with the quadrennial period of the Moon, is consequently
adapted to her; being in its nature moist and incompact, presenting
rapidity of growth, being nourished by moist things, and possessing a
highly variable habit. Its mental incompleteness is likewise in
accordance with its familiar relation to the Moon, and her operative
influence.

The age after this continues for ten years, and accommodates itself to
the second sphere, that of Mercury. In this period, the intellectual and
reasoning faculties of the mind begin to take their character, imbibing
the seeds of learning, and developing, as it were, the elements and
germs of the genius and abilities, and their peculiar quality. The mind
is also roused to discipline and instruction, and to its first
exercises.

Venus corresponds with the next and third age, which lasts throughout
the following eight years, the number of her own period: from her, the
movement of the seminal vessels originates, as well as an unrestrained
impetuosity and precipitancy in amours.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

The fourth and adult age next succeeds, and is subject to the fourth
sphere, that of the Sun: it endures for nineteen years, according to the
Sun's number. Authority of action now commences in the mind, the career
of life is entered upon, distinction and glory are desired, and puerile
irregularities are relinquished for more orderly conduct, and the
pursuit of honour.

Mars, next after the Sun, claims the fifth age, that of manhood,
agreeing in duration with his own period, viz. fifteen years. He induces
greater austerity of life, together with vexation, care, and trouble.

Jupiter occupies the sixth sphere, and influences the maturer age,
during the twelve years corresponding to his own period. He operates the
relinquishment of labour, of hazardous employment and tumult, and
produces greater gravity, foresight, prudence, and sagacity, favouring
the claim to honour, respect, and privilege.

Saturn, moving in the last sphere, regulates the final old age, as
agreeing with its chilliness. He obstructs the mental movements, the
appetites and enjoyments; rendering them imbecile and dull, in
conformity with the dullness of his own motion.

The common properties attributable to the various times of life are
subject, in a general manner, to this previous adaptation; but there are
particular periods, arising from the respective peculiarities of
nativities, which also require determination, and must be ascertained
from the ruling prorogations; that is to say, from the whole of them,
and not from any single one only, as in the case of the duration of
life. For example, prorogation made from the ascendant is to be applied
to events affecting the body, and to travelling, or change of residence;
that from the part of Fortune, to incidents affecting the substance or
wealth; that from the Moon, to actions of the mind, and to
communion <span id="fr_284"></span>[1](#fn_284) and cohabitation; that
from the Sun, to dignities and glory; and that from the mid-heaven, to
other particular circumstances of life, such as employment, friendship,
and the possession of children. So that thus, at one and the same time
any single planet, whether benefic or malefic, will not possess the sole
dominion; for many conflicting events frequently occur at the same
period, and a person may, at one and the same time, lose a kinsman, yet
inherit his substance; or be at once ill in health, yet prosperous and
advantageously established in regard to fortune; or be struggling with
adversity and in want, yet, notwithstanding, be also a father and beget
children; or he may experience other similar contrarieties: because
individuals are subject to occurrences which may affect either the body,
the mind, the rank, or the condition of wealth, and which are not
altogether fortunate or unfortunate at the same period. Something of the
kind will, however, frequently happen in cases of perfect good fortune
or distress, when meetings of all the benefics or malefics may concur in
all or most of the prorogations. Still such cases

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

are but rare, because human nature in general is not subjected to the
extremity either of good or evil, but rather to their moderate
alteration and counter-change.

The prorogatory places must, therefore, be separately distinguished in
the mode before pointed out; and the planets meeting the prorogations
must again be all taken into consideration: not only those which may be
anæretic (as in the case of the duration of life), nor those only which
may be configurated bodily, <span id="fr_285"></span>[1](#fn_285) or in
opposition or quartile, but also those in trine or sextile. And, first,
the times in each prorogation will be governed by the planet occupying
or configurated with the actual prorogatory degree itself: if, however,
there be found no planet thus constituted, the nearest preceding planet
will govern the times until another, which may be in aspect to the
degree following in the order of the signs, shall take them; and this
one, again, will do the same until the next in succession shall take
them. <span id="fr_286"></span>[2](#fn_286) The like rule obtains with
respect to any other planets received into dominion, and with respect to
those in occupation of the terms.

Further, in prorogations of the ascendant, the degrees of distances will
be equal in number to the ascensional times of the particular latitude;
but, in prorogation, from the mid-heaven, to the times of culmination;
and, in other prorogations, they will be in proportion to the
ascensions, or descensions, or culminations, and will depend on their
proximity to the angles; as has been already said in treating of the
duration of life. <span id="fr_287"></span>[3](#fn_287)

The arbiters of general times are to be determined by the foregoing
method; but arbiters of annual periods as follows: viz. after the number
of years which have elapsed since the birth has been ascertained, the
amount is to be projected from each place of prorogation, in the
succession of the signs, at the rate of one sign for a year, <span
id="fr_288"></span>[4](#fn_288) and the lord

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

of the last sign <span id="fr_289"></span>[1](#fn_289) is to be assumed
as arbiter. And, with regard to periods reckoned by months, the same
rule is to be observed: for in this case also, the number of the month,
as counted from the month of the nativity, is to be projected from such
places as possess the dominion of the year, in the proportion of
twenty-eight days per sign. So, likewise, in the case of periods
reckoned by days, the number of the day, counted from the day of birth,
must be projected from the monthly places of dominion, allowing for each
sign two days and a third. <span id="fr_290"></span>[2](#fn_290)

It is, however, necessary to notice the ingresses made on places
allotted to different periods; for they take effect in no small degree
on the events of the period. Thus, the ingresses made by Saturn, on
places of general periods, require special observation; those made by
Jupiter, on places of annual periods; those made by the Sun, Mars,
Venus, and Mercury, on monthly places; and the Moon's transit over daily
places. It must also be remembered, that arbiters of general periods are
chiefly paramount over the events; and that, to their influence, the
arbiters of particular periods (each of whom acting by its own proper
nature) present either co-operation or obstruction; and that the
ingresses also operate on events, by increasing or diminishing their
force and extent. <span id="fr_291"></span>[3](#fn_291)

The general characteristic property, and the duration of the period,
will be indicated by the place of prorogation, as also by the lord of
the general times, and by the planet in possession of the terms; by
means of the familiarity subsisting, from the actual birth, between each
planet, and the places of which they may have respectively and
originally taken dominion. The arbiters of time will also give
indication whether the event will be good or evil, by means of their own
naturally benefic or malefic property and temperament, and by their
original familiarity or variance with the place of which they have
become lords. But the period, at which the event will become more
strongly evident, is shown

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

by the relative positions of the annual and monthly signs towards the
places wherein the causes exist, and also by the ingresses of the
planets. <span id="fr_292"></span>[1](#fn_292)

The mode in which the Sun and Moon may be disposed, in reference to the
signs relating to annual and monthly periods, is also indicative. For
example, should they, from the date of the nativity, be posited in
concord with the operative places, and keep a position of concord at the
ingresses, they will produce good; but, if adversely posited, evil. And
also, if they be not in concord with the said places, and provided they
be contrary in condition, and in opposition or in quartile, to the
transits, they will cause evil: should they, however, not be in
quartile, nor in opposition, but otherwise configurated, their influence
then will not be equally malefic.

Should it happen that the same planets may be lords of the times, <span
id="fr_293"></span>[2](#fn_293) as well as of the ingresses, the effect
will be extreme and unalloyed, if of a favourable nature; and more
particularly unmitigated, if evil. And should the said planets be not
only lords of the times, but likewise hold dominion from the date of the
nativity, and provided also that all the prorogations, or most of them,
should tend to, or depend on, one and the same place, or, should the
prorogations not be so constituted, yet notwithstanding, if the meetings
occurring at the periods be found to be either all, or most of them,
benefic or malefic, they will wholly produce, in all respects, good or
evil fortune, respectively.

It is in this method, which preserves a natural order and succession,
that times and seasons require to be contemplated.

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

And now, in adverting to the scope allotted to this work in its
commencement, all further adaptation of the forms of events liable to
take effect at particular times will here be relinquished; because the
operative influences which the stars exercise in all events, whether
general or particular, may be arranged in proper order, if care be taken
that the causes set forth by the Rules of Science, and the causes
arising from any existing commixture, be duly combined and blended
together.

THE END

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_281"></span>[137:1](ptb72.htm#fr_281) On this chapter
Whalley makes the following annotations: "One direction, how malevolent
soever, rarely kills; and, in most nativities, there is required a train
of malevolent directions to concur to death: where several malevolent
directions concur so together, without the aid of intervenings of the
benevolents, they fail not to destroy life.

"In such trains of directions, the author here distinguisheth between
the killing planet and the causer of the quality of death; for one
planet doth not give both. The foremost of the malevolent train is the
killing place, and shows the time of death; but the following
directions, though benevolent, show the quality. If the train fall
altogether, and none follow, for the quality observe those which
precede, though at a distance and benevolent also; for, though the
benevolent contribute to the preservation of life, yet they frequently
specify the disease which is the cause of death. And with these, our
author tells us, concur the configurating stars, the quality of the
stars and signs, and the terms in which the lords happen. In violent
deaths, the genethliacal positions of the lights are to be observed, and
how the malefics affect them, and \[*how they*\] are also concerned by
directions in the quality or death." See also Chap. XIV, Book II.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[138:1](ptb73.htm#fr_282) With respect to the
periodical divisions of time.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[138:2](ptb73.htm#fr_283) It will, of course,
be remembered, that the Sun, in the Ptolemaic astronomy, is counted as a
planetary orb.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[139:1](ptb73.htm#fr_284) The Latin copy of
Basle, 1541, says, "to marriages."

<span id="fn_285"></span>[140:1](ptb73.htm#fr_285) "*Bodily*," or in
conjunction.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[140:2](ptb73.htm#fr_286) On this passage,
Whalley remarks, "we are to observe in direction, that the star in exact
ray with the prorogator shall be ruler until the prorogator meets
another ray; that then the planet whose ray it is shall take the
dominion, and so on. But if no planet aspect the hyleg (prorogator)
exactly, that which casts its rays before the prorogator is to be taken
for ruler of the time, till another planet's ray comes in by direction.
And the lord of the term, in which the direction falls, must be
considered as a co-partner in this dominion."

<span id="fn_287"></span>[140:3](ptb73.htm#fr_287) *Vide* Chap. XIV,
Book 3.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[140:4](ptb73.htm#fr_288) The Greek is simply
as εισ τα επομενα κατα ξωδιον; but the context proves that the entire
meaning must be as now given, although the Latin translation of Perugio
renders it "one year to each degree." Whalley explains that by annual
periods "the author intends profections: for the taking of which, for
every year from the birth, add one sign to the sign in which the
aphetics are at birth, and the sign which ends at the year desired is
the sign profectional for that year, and the lord of that sign is
chronocrator (arbitor) for that year; so far as the degrees of that sign
reach. For example, if a prorogator at birth <span id="page_141">p.
141</span> be in 15° of Gemini, to 15° of Cancer serves the first year;
but the first six months are ruled by Mercury, and the last six by the
Moon and Jupiter; and so on.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[141:1](ptb73.htm#fr_289) The Latin translation
of Basle, 1541, says, "the lord of that sign in which the number shall
terminate."

<span id="fn_290"></span>[141:2](ptb73.htm#fr_290) Whalley says here,
"let a sign be added for each month to the sign of the year. So, in the
example before proposed, the last 15° of Gemini, and the first 15° of
Cancer, shall serve for the first month: the last 15° of Cancer and the
first 15° of Leo, for the second month; and so on. And for days, from
15° of Gemini to 15° of Cancer, rules two days and eight hours after
birth, &c."

Placidus is of opinion, "that Ptolemy, speaking of annual places, is to
be understood of the places of secondary directions; and that when he
speaks of the menstrual, he hints at the places of progressions."
(Cooper's Translation, pp. 25 and 57.)

<span id="fn_291"></span>[141:3](ptb73.htm#fr_291) Placidus says, that
"active ingresses, if they be similar, to the pre-ordained effects,
cause them to influence; if dissimilar, they either diminish or retard;
as Ptolemy has it in the last Chapter of Book IV." (Cooper's
Translation, p. 27.)

<span id="fn_292"></span>[142:1](ptb73.htm#fr_292) Placidus observes,
that "the primary directions of the significators to their promittors,
and the lords of the terms, Ptolemy calls the General Arbiters of Times,
because they pre-ordain the general times of their effects; which, as
its motion is slow and its perseverance long, discovers its effects
after a very long time; that is, after months and years. In order that
we may know, in this extent of time, on what particular month and day
the effects appear, Ptolemy proposes these motions for observation,
wherein, when the majority of the causes agree together, then doubtless
the effect is accomplished, or most clearly manifests itself." (Cooper's
Translation, p. 109.) And he says afterwards, in speaking of secondary
directions, progressions, ingresses, &c., "these subsequent motions of
the causes demand our greatest attention." (*Ibid*., p. 110.) In the
Appendix to the same book, at p. 438, the proper equation of time, of
measurement of the arcs of direction, is also treated of, in reference
to the 16th canon of Placidus, which is as follows:

"*To equate the Arc of Direction*. Add the arc of direction to the right
ascension of the natal Sun; look for this sum in the table of right
ascensions under the ecliptic, and take the degree and minute of
longitude corresponding with that sum; then, in the best ephemeris,
reckon in how many days and hours the Sun, from the day and hour of
birth, has arrived at that degree and minute. The number of days
indicate as many years; every two hours over, reckon a month." (*Ibid*.,
p. 55.)

<span id="fn_293"></span>[142:2](ptb73.htm#fr_293) Whether general or
annual.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. I. Almagest; Book VIII, Chap. IV](ptb74)
