[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptb76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NO. IV

### THE ZODIACAL PLANISPHERE

THE Reader is desired to refer to the Plate at end of book containing
diagrams of the Zodiacal Planisphere, which has been spoken of in the
Note in p. 99.

Fig. 1 is the Planisphere adjusted for the northern latitude of 30° 22'
(where the longest day consists of fourteen equatorial hours), agreeably
to the "Exemplification" given by Ptolemy in Chapter XV, Book 3. It
represents that portion of the celestial sphere which is contained
between the tropics: the central horizontal line is the equator; the
curved line extending longitudinally from east to west is the ecliptic;
the central perpendicular line is the meridian, or cusp of the 10th
house; the other short lines, cutting the equator transversely, are the
cusps of the other houses; that of the 1st house being the eastern
horizon; that of the 7th, the western horizon. Hence, the distance from
the 1st house to the meridian, or from the meridian to the 7th house,
shows the semi-diurnal arc of any parallel of declination in the
ecliptic; and the distance of the 7th house to the 4th, or from the 4th
to the 1st, shows the semi-nocturnal arc. The distance from the cusp of
one house to that of the next, taken on the same parallel, is also equal
to two

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

temporal hours; thus, for instance, in the latitude above quoted, the
semi-diurnal arc of 0° ♊ is 6 h. 50 m., or 102° 39' of the equator;
consequently the diurnal temporal hour is equal to one equatorial hour
and eight minutes, or to 17° 6' of the equator.

In his first example, Ptolemy directs 0° ♈ to be placed on the
ascendant, so that the beginning of ♑ may be on the mid-heaven; 0° ♊
must, therefore, fall on the point A, distant from the mid-heaven 147°
44' of the equator, as measured by the line AB; because every point in
the sphere always preserves one and the same parallel with the equator;
and 6° ♊, in passing to the mid-heaven, must proceed along the line AB.
In the present case, however, it is required to know how long 0° ♊ will
be in coming to the ascendant, the given position of 0° ♈. Now 0° ♊ will
be on the ascendant when it arrives at the point G; therefore the
distance from A to C is the amount of the prorogation between 0° ♈ (when
posited on the ascendant) and 0° ♊, and it is equal to 45° 5' of the
equator. In the second example, 0° ♈ is placed on the mid-heaven, which
position must be at D, so that 0° ♊ must necessarily be at E; and the
distance from E to B, equal to 57° 44' of the equator, is the
prorogation between 0° ♈ and 0° , when 0° ♈ is on the mid-heaven. In the
third example, 0° ♈ supposed to be on the 7th house, descending, at F,
so that ♋ is on the mid-heaven, and 0° ♊ at the point G, in advance of
the mid-heaven 32° 16' of the equator, as shown by the distance BG. Now
it is required to bring 0° ♊ to the 7th house (the place of 0° ♈), and
it will be there on arriving at H, distant from B 102° 39' of the
equator; but as 0° ♊ is already at G, the distance from G to H, equal to
70° 23' of the equator, is the amount of the prorogation between 0° ♈
and 0° ♊, when 0° ♈ is on the 7th house. The fourth example places 0° ♈
at I, three temporal hours past the meridian; 0° ♈ therefore falls on
the point K, at the distance of 13 equatorial degrees before the
meridian or mid-heaven, and will be three temporal hours past the
meridian (the position of 0° ♊) on arriving at L, distant 51 equatorial
degrees from the mid-heaven: the whole distance from K (the first
position of 0° ♊) to L, its second position, equal to 64 degrees of the
equator, is therefore the prorogation between 0° ♈ and 0° ♊, when 0° ♈
is past the meridian at the distance of three temporal hours. Ptolemy
has also instanced two other positions for 0° ♈; viz. at two temporal
hours past the meridian, and at two temporal hours before the occidental
angle; or, in other words, on the cusp of the 9th house, and on that of
the 8th. Now, if 0° ♈ be on the cusp of the 9th house, it must be at M,
and 0° ♊ will be at N, distant 62 equatorial degrees from Q, which is
also on the cusp of the 9th. If 0° ♈ be on the cusp of the 8th, it must
be at O, and 0° ♊ will be at P, distant 66 equatorial degrees from R,
which is also on the cusp of the 8th: these two several numbers of
degrees will be the respective prorogations between 0° and 0° ♊, when 0°
♈ is placed on the 9th and 8th houses.

Ptolemy's "Exemplification" has been followed thus minutely in

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

order to show how perfectly Mr. Ranger's invention is adapted to assist
(if not to supersede) arithmetical calculation; for, after the
Planisphere has once been accurately laid down, a line drawn parallel to
the equator, from the significator to the promittor, or to the
promittor's pole of position, and measured by degrees of the equator,
will accomplish the whole operation of ascertaining the amount of
prorogation.

 

Fig. 2 is the Equator extended, *in plana*, on a scale proportionate to
the planispheres in [Figs. 1 and 3](#img_figs): it is divided into 360
degrees, and into equal time, as measured by the 24 hours of the earth's
daily rotation on its axis, and by smaller portions of four minutes
each, corresponding with degrees of the equator.

 

Fig. 3 is the Planisphere set for the latitude of Southern Britain, 51°
30' N., where the longest day is 16 h. 30 m., the semi-diurnal arc of 0°
being consequently 7 h. 52 m., or 118° of the equator, and its diurnal
temporal hour equal to one hour and nearly nineteen minutes of
equatorial time, or to 19° 40' of the equator. In applying Ptolemy's
examples, given in Chapter XV, Book 3, to this latitude, it will follow
that, when 0° ♈ may be on the ascendant, 0° ♊ will be at A, and will
subsequently arrive at the ascendant at C, after the passage of 29° 43'
of the equator. When 0° ♈ may be on the mid-heaven at D, 0° ♊ will be at
E, and will arrive at B, on the mid-heaven, after the passage of 57° 44'
of the equator, as in [Fig. 1](#img_figs). When 0° ♈ may be on the 7th
house, at F, 0° ♊ will be at G, and will come to the 7th house, at H,
after the passage of 85° 45' of the equator. If 0° ♈ be three temporal
hours past the meridian, at I, 0° would be at K, again 13 equatorial
degrees before the meridian, as in [Fig. 1](#img_figs), and will be
three temporal hours past the meridian, a position similar to that
assumed for 0° ♈, on arriving at L, distant from the mid-heaven 59
equatorial degrees; thus making the whole distance, from K to L, 17
equatorial degrees. If 0° ♈ be on the 9th house, at M, 0° ♊ will be at
N, distant from Q (also on the 9th house) about 67 equatorial degrees.
If 0° ♈ be on the 8th house, at O, 0° ♊ will be at P, distant from R
(also on the 8th house) about 76 equatorial degrees.

By taking the trouble to calculate the distances between the several
positions given by Ptolemy, the Reader may satisfy himself of the
sufficiency of this Planisphere for the purpose for which it was first
projected; viz. for the more expeditious measurement of the arcs of
direction. The Tables of Ascensions, extracted from the Almagest, in [p.
152](ptb75.htm#page_152), will show that the arcs, as measured in [Figs.
1 and 2](#img_figs) of the plate, exactly tally with the amounts of
distance obtained by calculating arithmetically, according to the
respective latitudes, as quoted in the Tables.

 

The slight view which has been here given of the Zodiacal Planisphere
invented by Mr. Ranger, must not be considered as pretending to

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

offer a complete idea of its powers: they are so manifold and various,
that another volume would be required to detail them fully; and it has
now been used only in order to give a better illustration of Ptolemy's
examples of the spaces of prorogation than mere words can do. To persons
conversant with the mathematical part of astronomy, the facility with
which a complete representation of zodiacal latitude, declination, the
poles of position, crepusculine circles, and other phenomena, may be
made by this Planisphere, will be sufficiently obvious from the
accompanying Figures.

FINIS

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

 

<span id="img_figs"></span>

[![Figures 1-3](tn/figs.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/figs.jpg)  
Figures 1-3  

 
