[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37069)  [Next](sbe37071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

### CHAPTER XXI.

*Sû*d*kar Nask*.

1\. The twentieth fargar*d*, Vohû-khshathrem <span
id="fr_667"></span>[1](#fn_662), is about the oppressive actions of the
sovereignty which Dahâk <span id="fr_668"></span>[2](#fn_663) exercised
over the earth of seven *regions*, and the forward progress of his
commands owing to a surrounding of terrors.

2\. About Dahâk's enquiry of the members of the assembly, regarding the
reason of the affliction of the collected people, after the cutting *up*
of Yim <span id="fr_669"></span>[3](#fn_664) and the accession
(khû*d*âyih) of Dahâk; and the people's saying, *in* reply to Dahâk,
that Yim had kept away want and destitution, hunger and thirst, decay
and death, lamentation and weeping from the world, *besides* the cold
and heat of the immoderate mingling of the demon with mankind. 3. And
this, too, that <span id="fr_670"></span>[4](#fn_665) 'a giver of
comfort was Yim—that is, those things *were* produced by him which are
the comfort of mankind—and he was a giver of desire for them, so that
his happiness *was* through the gratification produced—that is, mankind
gratified him through virtue. 4. And Aû*d*ak <span
id="fr_671"></span>[5](#fn_666), who made

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yim the splendid
*and* rich in flocks—who *was* struck down by you through violent
assault—unauthorisedly desirous (varak <span
id="fr_672"></span>[1](#fn_667)) and eager for the world, produced want
and destitution, distress and greed, hunger and thirst, and the
sanctifier <span id="fr_673"></span>[2](#fn_668) of Wrath the wounding
assailant, Want without pastures, Terror, Destruction the secret-moving,
Decay the decrepit <span id="fr_674"></span>[3](#fn_669), and the seven
*arch-*demons <span id="fr_675"></span>[4](#fn_670).' 5. And this, too,
that 'those who look *for* a son *are* made devoid of pregnancy by thee;
evil-destined is the monster (*s*îpist) self-made, the uncompleted demon
that it is impossible to seek a remedy for, who does not extend (lâ
vâlê*d*) from *himself*, that is, no lineage proceeds from him. 6. And
thou *art* a sheep that is a wide-traveller, *and* keeps the dog *away*
from mankind; thou *hast* snatched away from us the bright radiance of
Yim the splendid *and* rich in flocks, who came out on every evil
contingency, at the approach of

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

every winter, *or* scorched by extreme heat, so as to act for the
benefit of his place <span id="fr_676"></span>[1](#fn_671). 7. Thou art
intelligent, O Bêvarâsp <span id="fr_677"></span>[2](#fn_672)! do thou
even tell how this opinion is so, that a bad ruler is a thing which is
so bad; he who is a good ruler is our desire, we *will* give the revenue
*of* taxation (bâhar-i madam-dedrûni*s*nîh) to him, and anything which
is necessary *for* good government when he shall achieve *it*.'

8\. About the smiting *by* Frê*d*ûn <span
id="fr_678"></span>[3](#fn_673), for the sake of killing Dahâk; the
striking of *his* club upon the nape of the neck <span
id="fr_679"></span>[4](#fn_674) (pilîk), the heart, and even the skull;
and Dahâk's not dying from that beating. 9. Then smiting *him* with a
sword, and the formation (va*s*tanŏ) of noxious creatures of many kinds,
from the body of Dahâk, at the first, second, and third blow. 10. The
exclamation of the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd* to Frê*d*ûn thus: 'Thou
shouldst not cut him who is Dahâk, because, if thou shouldst cut him,
Dahâk would be making this earth full of serpents, toads (khan-galâk),
scorpions, lizards, tortoises, and frogs;' with the mode *of* binding
*him* with awful fetters, in the most grievous punishment of
confinement <span id="fr_680"></span>[5](#fn_675).

11\. This, too, *that* when *Az*-î Dahâk was bound, the report of the
same proceeded thus through all the regions, which are seven, that
down-stricken is *Az*-î Dahâk, but he *who* smote *him* is Frê*d*ûn the
Âspîkân <span id="fr_681"></span>[6](#fn_676), the exalted *and* mighty.
12. And *in* the

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

tenth winter those particulars *were* believed, and thus they spoke,
that *it was* owing to <span id="fr_682"></span>[1](#fn_677) Yim that
*Az*-î Dahâk is now smitten by them, because the tidings which are good
are not yet gathered unto all the regions, which are seven, and those
which are evil do not mention *Az*, nor demand the virtuous maiden
(*k*arâtîk) with importunity, nor even coveted wealth <span
id="fr_683"></span>[2](#fn_678). 13. This, too, that, when information
came to him of women, *or* property, that seemed to him desirable to
possess, *they were* then admitted by him into a golden cage <span
id="fr_684"></span>[3](#fn_679), and that, which was completely
impregnable (aîrî*s*tŏ), came on through immaterial space
(maînôg-dîvâkîh) to the den (grêstakŏ) of *Az*-î Dahâk.

14\. This, too, that, though <span id="fr_685"></span>[4](#fn_680) he
who smote him *were* his brother, or descendant, or kinsman, or any one
whatever *of his* nearest relations, it did not seem to them as that
which is grievous, and *it was* not thought *of* in their minds, so that
it did not occasion them even a reminiscence again; and thus they
talked, that *if* a householder *be* he *that* smote, *he is one* for
whom all the fires of the religion are suitable, *but* that householder
*being* a monarch, he *that* smote is *one* who is every way their
ruler. 15. This,

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

too, that *at* every place where he came on, *and* upon which *his*
horse's hoofs (safô) fell, the dense fire from them *was* for the
protection of the horse's body. 16. This, too, that through his confused
(gûm*êz*akŏ) practising *of* good deeds *arose* even the evil deeds of
*Az*-î Dahâk.

17\. About those of the Mâzendarân <span id="fr_686"></span>[1](#fn_681)
country *having* consulted, after the smiting of Dahâk, as to turning
(gâ*s*tanŏ) to Khvanîras <span id="fr_687"></span>[2](#fn_682), and
driving out Frê*d*ûn therefrom, *and* as to the residence offered *by*
the same place through the great number fallen; also, on account of
their tallness, there are *parts* of the wide-formed ocean <span
id="fr_688"></span>[3](#fn_683) that come up to *their* mid-thigh, there
are *others* that *are* up to the navel, and the deeper places *are* up
to the mouth. 18. And, when they have come to this region, *their*
producing grievous harm and destruction *to* the poor <span
id="fr_689"></span>[4](#fn_684), and the coming of the people with
complaints to Frê*d*ûn, and *their* speaking thus: 'Why didst thou smite
*Az*-î Dahâk, who was a good ruler as to prerogative, so that danger
*was* kept away by him, and an inquisitor (vi*g*ôyî*d*âr) from him
protected this region from those of the Mâzendarân country?' 19. And
they also said this, about the vileness of the Mâzendarâns, and the
wretched state of the people of this region as regards them, that is,
they then speak thus: 'Since their habits are thus, since they

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

are filthy (dô*s*-hômônd)—that is, dirt (karak) is theirs—possessing
holes <span id="fr_690"></span>[1](#fn_685) (sûlak-hômônd)—that is,
holes are theirs—*and* having appellations (ka*rî*tuni*s*nŏ-hômônd)—that
is, they call to one another—we men (vîr) think, *and* consider upon
this, that they also are human beings.'

20\. About the encountering of Frê*d*ûn with those of the Mâzendarân
country on the plain of Pê*s*ânîgas <span
id="fr_691"></span>[2](#fn_686), and disputing with them thus: 'You are
of the Mâzendar country, *and* I (anmanŏ) *have* destroyed *Az*-î Dahâk
by the swiftest ruin, *him* who was a grievous sovereign of every one,
demons *and* men; for that smiting of him I am produced *by*
Aûha*r*ma*zd* more overpowering than his limbs made paralyzed by his own
enmity, and then you destroy this country of mine, you who are of the
Mâzendar country.'

21\. And the Mâzendarâns thought slightingly (s*a*pûkŏ) of Frê*d*ûn,
*and* spoke in a tone of derision thus: 'Should it be so, that thou
destroyedst *Az*-î Dahâk by the swiftest ruin, *him* who was a good
sovereign of both demons and men, and thou art produced *by*
Aûha*r*ma*zd*, for that smiting of him, more overpowering than his
limbs, even then we *will* settle in this *place* and *will* stay in
this *place*; and *it is* not thou that *art* exalted, who *art* an
overgrown (kabed-ârôyi*s*nŏ) huge sheep with the speech of a hero among
other people, *and* we would not admit thee here.'

22\. This, too, that 'nevertheless *they* afterwards fled, and the
victorious Frê*d*ûn pursued *them* to the

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

foremost upland, and his nostrils flamed *upon* it so that *they* split
it through; from his right nostril is the cutting *and* sharp scorching
of the ice *that* has fallen *and* of all the cold of winter; and from
his left nostril is the cutting *and* sharp scorching of the rock *that*
has fallen, which is similarly burning to a fire the size of a house,
carrying the dust from the feet of the male ox, Barmâyûn <span
id="fr_692"></span>[1](#fn_687), of the obstructed victor, the mighty
Frê*d*ûn. 23. And he made it rush up on the ascent, whereby they are
made figures of stone, and they who *are* of the Mâzendar country are
destroyed by him through the smiting of fifties, the smiting of
hundreds, the smiting of thousands <span
id="fr_693"></span>[2](#fn_688), the smiting of myriads, and the smiting
of *multitudes* innumerable <span id="fr_694"></span>[3](#fn_689).'

24\. 'Thus *there* are destroyed by him, the victorious *and* mighty
Frê*d*ûn, two-thirds *of* those of the Mâzendar country, and one-third
came out beaten and sick; and never afterwards, O Spîtâmân Zaratû*s*t!
have they who *are* of the Mâzendar country marched upon this region of
Khvanîras, and *it has* not *been* imagined by them, even in thinking
about *it*, that they <span id="fr_695"></span>[4](#fn_690) should go
*there*, except those <span id="fr_696"></span>[5](#fn_691) whose names
were thus, S*p*îtîyô*s*, *son* of S*p*ânsnâyô*s* <span
id="fr_697"></span>[6](#fn_692), and Arezrâs*p*âh, *son* of
S*p*ânsnâyô*s* <span id="fr_698"></span>[7](#fn_693), who have wandered
(ta*g*-î*d*ŏ)

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

in search of wisdom and have proceeded unto Frashô*s*tar <span
id="fr_699"></span>[1](#fn_694) of the Hvôbas <span
id="fr_700"></span>[2](#fn_695).'

25\. Perfect excellence is righteousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_662"></span>[212:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_667) The first two
words of the fourth Gâtha (Yas. LI, 1), here written vohûk-khshatar (B)
and vôhûk-khshatar (K) in Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[212:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_668) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. XIII, 8.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[212:3](sbe37070.htm#fr_669) As mentioned in
Yt. XIX, 46; Bd. XVII, 5 ('when Yim was cut up by them the fire Frôbak
saves the glory of Yim from the hand of Dahâk') and XXXI, 5. Regarding
Yim see Bk. VIII, Chap. XIII, 6-8.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[212:4](sbe37070.htm#fr_670) What follows, as
far as the end of § 7, appears to be quoted verbatim from the original
Pahlavi text of the Nask.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[212:5](sbe37070.htm#fr_671) The demon Uda who
tries to make people talk when they ought to be silent (Bd. XXVIII, 19),
and who seems to be identified <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> (in
Pahl. Vend. XVIII, 70) with the fiend who confesses her amours to Srôsh,
and is said (in Bd. XXXI, 6) to have been the mother of Dahâk, there
named Udaî or Aû*d*, but more commonly called Va*d*ak (see Chap. X, 3;
Dd. LXXII, 5, LXXVIII, 2), whence possibly the matronymic Va*d*akân
(Mkh. LVII, 25, the Av. vadhaghana of Vend. XIX, 6) of that monarch. The
text here appears to allude to an amour with Yim.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[213:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_672) Av. vara; or it
may be a miswriting of var*d*ak, 'astray' (Av. vareta).

<span id="fn_668"></span>[213:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_673) Pahl.
a*îz*i*s*n-hômônd, 'one holding ceremonies,' alluding to Dahâk himself
as the progeny of Aû*d*ak.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[213:3](sbe37070.htm#fr_674) These five demons
are Aeshm, Nîy*âz*, Saham, S*êg*, and Zarmân in Pahlavi, who, with the
exception of Saham, 'terror,' are described in Bd. XXVIII, 15-17, 23,
26.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[213:4](sbe37070.htm#fr_675) The seven
*arch-*demons are the six mentioned in Bd. I, 27. XXVIII, 7-13, XXX, 29,
whose Avesta names are Akem-manô, I*n*dra, Sauru, N*a*unghaithya, Tauru,
and Zairi*k*a (see Vend. X, 9, 10, XIX, 43), together with either
Mithaokhta or Angramainyu himself (see Bd. I, 24).

<span id="fn_671"></span>[214:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_676) K has only 'who
came out at every place to act for *its* benefit.'

<span id="fn_672"></span>[214:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_677) 'With a myriad of
horses,' a title of Dahâk.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[214:3](sbe37070.htm#fr_678) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. XIII, 8, 9.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[214:4](sbe37070.htm#fr_679) Or, perhaps, 'the
reins.'

<span id="fn_675"></span>[214:5](sbe37070.htm#fr_680) In Mount Dimâvand
(see Chap. XV, 2 n).

<span id="fn_676"></span>[214:6](sbe37070.htm#fr_681) Av. Âthwyâna, a
patronymic derived from Âthwya who, <span id="page_215">p. 215</span>
according to Yas. IX, 7, was the father of Thraêtaona (Frê*d*ûn); but
Bd. XXXI, 4, 7, 8, XXXII, 1 n, make it a family name for many preceding
generations.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[215:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_682) Or min may mean
'*apart* from.'

<span id="fn_678"></span>[215:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_683) Demands often made
by Dahâk, as stated in § 13.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[215:3](sbe37070.htm#fr_684) Pahl.
sûlak-hômand, '*something* having apertures;' compare the sûlâk-hômand
which translates Av. sufrãm and suwraya in Vend. II, 7, 18, 30, and has
sometimes been understood as a 'signet-ring.' Also compare § 19 below.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[215:4](sbe37070.htm#fr_685) Assuming that mûn,
'who,' stands for amat, as in Chap. XIII, 2.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[216:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_686) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. XIII, 9.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[216:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_687) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. VIII, 2. Mâzendarân was considered to be outside of Khvanîras
because it is separated from Irân by lofty mountains.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[216:3](sbe37070.htm#fr_688) The Caspian is
probably meant here, being considered a portion of the circumambient
ocean.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[216:4](sbe37070.htm#fr_689) K omits '*to* the
poor.'

<span id="fn_685"></span>[217:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_690) Burrows, caves,
and similar underground habitations are probably meant.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[217:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_691) See Chap. XVI, 17.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[218:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_692) This appears to
have also been the name of a brother of Frê*d*ûn (see Bd. XXXI, 8).

<span id="fn_688"></span>[218:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_693) B omits 'the
smiting of thousands.'

<span id="fn_689"></span>[218:3](sbe37070.htm#fr_694) Compare Yt. V, 54,
58, 117; Pahl. Vend. VII, 137, 139.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[218:4](sbe37070.htm#fr_695) Literally 'we.'

<span id="fn_691"></span>[218:5](sbe37070.htm#fr_696) K has 'the two.'

<span id="fn_692"></span>[218:6](sbe37070.htm#fr_697) These first two
names are only in K, because B repeats here a previous phrase by
mistake. The second name is written Sânsnâyô*s* here, but is spelt
correctly on its next occurrence.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[218:7](sbe37070.htm#fr_698) These two sons of
S*p*ânsnâyô*s* were the spiritual chiefs, or <span id="page_219">p.
219</span> supreme high-priests, of the two northern regions,
Fra*d*adafsh and Vîda*d*afsh. They are named Spîtôî*d*-î Aûspôsînân and
Aêr*êz*râsp-î Aûspôsînân in Bd. XXIX, 1; and the statement that they
came from Mâzendarân, made in the text here, identifies that country
with the two northern regions. The names of these two high-priests are
evidently derived from the Avesta genitives Spitôi*s* Uspãsnao*s* and
Erezrâspahê Uspãsnao*s* in Yt. XIII, 121, persons concerning whom it is
only stated that their fravashis, or guardian spirits, are to be
reverenced.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[219:1](sbe37070.htm#fr_699) See Bk. VIII,
Chap. XXXVIII, 68.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[219:2](sbe37070.htm#fr_700) Av. Hvôva, the
family name of Frashô*s*tar, *G*âmâsp, and several other ancient
personages (see Bk. VIII, Chap. XXIX, 25).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](sbe37071)
