[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37128)  [Next](sbe37130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FROM THE DÎN-VI*G*IRGARD <span id="fr_1727"></span>[1](#fn_1686).

In the name and *for* the propitiation of the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd*
these several commentaries (zand) are published from revelation (dênô).

The names of the twenty-one Nasks.

1\. One is this that is Yathâ, that is, the Stô*d*-ya*s*t, *and* the
subdivisions of this Stô*d*-ya*s*t are thirty-three. In that Nask are
the blessing *and* propitiation of Aûha*r*ma*zd* and the archangels, and
they are *for* the utterance of praise. Aûha*r*ma*zd* sends this Nask
into the world, which is suitable for every one, *and* whoever has
committed this Nask to memory recites *it*. And to every one who,
being-a high-priest, becomes a reciter of both the Avesta and Zand,
*and* shall recite that Nask three times with correctness, the
archangels will come near; as to this they know *it* without doubt.

2\. The second Nask is that *which is* Ahû, the Stû*d*gar, *and* the
subdivisions of that Nask are

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

twenty-two. In it are the giving of advice *to* mankind, the performance
of prayer and virtue, the doing of good actions, intercession, producing
union among relations, *and* such-like topics.

3\. The third is Vairyô, the Vahi*s*t-mânsar, *and* the subdivisions of
this Nask are twenty-two. In this is the topic of those who are becoming
without doubt as to the religion of Ma*zd*a-worship, causing
heedfulness, and thinking about the religion; also the production of the
benediction and attributes (s*i*fât) of the blessedness of Zaratû*s*t,
every action which was declared virtuous before Zaratû*s*t, and all
actions which have to occur after Zaratû*s*t until the future existence;
the benefit of his world, and such-like topics.

4\. The fourth Nask is this *which is* Athâ, the Bagh, *and* the
subdivisions of that Nask are twenty-one. In this the topic is this
which is the purpose of the religion of Ma*zd*a-worship, and the ideas
which Aûha*r*ma*zd* caused *to be* taught unto mankind; the exercise of
reverence, heedfulness, adjudication, and justice; the performance of
the proper duty of decision, doing good actions (kâr-î khvaîr), closing
the way of Aharman into oneself, attaining unto the spiritual
*existence* for oneself, *and* such as are like *these*.

5\. The fifth Nask is Ratu*s*, the Dvâzdak-hômâst, *and* the
subdivisions of that Nask are thirty-two. In that Nask are all the
topics of the spiritual *existence and* the heavenly state, virtue and
vileness, the material *existence* of this worldly state, about the sky
and about the earth, and everything which Aûha*r*ma*zd* produced *and
which* exists in the water, fire, and plants; human beings and

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

quadrupeds, grazing animals and birds, and everything which is similarly
produced from any (*aêk*) *of them*, and the characteristics of all
things. Secondly, that which is the production of the resurrection and
future existence, and the coming together and separation *at* the
*K*inva*d* pass; the recompense for the doers of good works and the
punishment for sinners occur through the future existence, *and*
such-like topics as *these* are.

6\. The sixth Nask is Ashâ*d*, the Nâdûr, *and* the subdivisions of that
are thirty-five. In this Nask are the purposes of the stars (nu*g*ûm),
the zodiac, and the planets, the goodness and evil of each
constellation, and the movement of all the planets in the signs of the
zodiac (bûr*g*) and lunar mansions (mahîgân nu*g*ûm). They have
translated *it* into Arabic and Persian, and the name they have adopted
*for* this book is Bûtâl, *and* in Persian the name which is appointed
for it is Kapâm*âg*ân.

7\. The seventh is this *which is* *K*î*d*, *and* is the P*âg*am, and
its subdivisions are twenty-two. In this P*âg*am Nask is the topic of
the slaughtering of quadrupeds *and* sheep, how *they* are to be
slaughtered, of which among the quadrupeds the command is that it is
allowable to eat, and of which kind the eating is not allowable; how
*he* who slaughters shall strike at the time of the expiring of the
sheep. The more expenditure (saraf) *one* makes upon a season-festival,
so much the more is the reward; how much it is expedient to bestow upon
the Dastûrs, Môbads, and Hêrbads, and upon the unwavering practisers of
good works *in* the good religion; what merit accrues *to* every one

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

who celebrates a season-festival and consecrates clothing for a soul,
*and* who, *for* that reason, is in the supreme heaven *in* the last
times; and it is necessary to give clothing to relations *and* the
righteous as a righteous gift, *and* to exercise mediation on the part
of the righteous; the five greater and lesser days of the guardian
spirits, and the practice of good works on *these* ten days is enjoined
in this Nask. It is requisite for all people that they shall read this
book with good and wise understanding, that all *may* become aware of
its topics.

8\. The eighth Nask is that *which is* Ha*k*â, the Ratu*s*tâîh, *and*
the subdivisions of that Nask *were* fifty when the accursed Alexander
had the Nasks burnt up, *but* after that, *as* they sought out this
Nask, *only* thirteen of those subdivisions came to hand, and no *more*
remained of those previously *existing*. In this Nask are the reasons of
performing service, giving orders, and remaining at the command of kings
and at the command of high-priests and judges; the
adornment-preserving <span id="fr_1728"></span>[1](#fn_1687) purpose of
cities is declared, the command of religion, and things made
magnificently (a*gîz*îhâ), grazing animals, birds, cattle, and fish;
everything which is a production of Aûha*r*ma*zd* *or* Aharman; all the
purposes of all the seas, mountains, and lands; *and matter* similar
*to* such as are mentioned.

9\. The ninth Nask is this *which is* Vangh*e*u*s*, *and* is the
Bari*s*; the subdivisions of that Nask were first sixty, *but* after the
accursed Alexander *only* twelve remained. *As to* the information in
this Nask, just as there is the sovereignty for *those*

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

who are kings, so *there* is the usage which it is necessary *for them*
to practise, and the command of the sentence of judges of the religion
such as is necessary to be executed; the custody and protection for the
world, and making each new city flourishing; also the reasons of people,
who are false-speaking, sinners, *and* such-like, are mentioned in this
Nask.

10\. The tenth Nask is that *which is* Dazdâ, the Ka*s*srôb, *and* the
subdivisions of that Nask were formerly sixty, *but* after the accursed
Alexander *only* fifteen subdivisions remained. In that Nask the topic
is that which is wisdom and knowledge, the reason of *its* being brought
forth from the mother, and the teaching of wisdom *by* demonstration,
the performance of purification and the speaking of truth; bringing
people from vileness unto virtue, and bringing *them* from defilement
and pollution unto purity; greatness and good progeny arise for people
near kings, and how the habit of people telling lies, to others and to
kings, arises; *and* such-like as *these*.

11\. The eleventh Nask was Mananghô, the Vî*s*tâspâ*d*, *and* the
subdivisions of that Nask were sixty, *but* after the accursed Alexander
*only* ten remained. In this Nask is the topic of the sovereignty of
Gû*s*tâsp, and Zaratû*s*t the Spîtâmân, *having* brought the religion
from Aûha*r*ma*zd*, king Gu*s*tâsp accepted *it*, and made *it* current
in the world; *and* such-like as *these*.

12\. The twelfth is *Sh*yaothananãm, the Khûst, *and* the subdivisions
of that Nask were first twenty-two, *but* after the accursed Alexander
*only* six remained. Among those six, which are the first

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

portions (zizp = Ar. *g*izb), the topics in *one* portion are the
attributes (sifât) of the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd*, and the understanding
*of them;* also being without doubt about the religion of Zaratû*s*t,
the Spîtâmân, all the duty and good works which are prescribed in the
religion, *and* such-like. In the second portion is the reason of
service for kings, the truth of the religion, submission *to* all *its*
commands, and withholding *one's* hand from evil actions, so that it
*has* become far from mischief. In the third portion is that which is
the debt for performers of virtuous position, the advantage *of* good
works, the final release from hell, *and* such-like. The fourth is the
reason of the creation of the world, the practice of agriculture, the
cultivation of trees, the date-tree and every fruit-tree; whence arises
most strength for people and animals; being under the command of the
practisers of good works *and* the virtuous, and being under the command
of the high-priests, *and* such-like as they are. In the fifth portion
all the specimens of mankind are mentioned: *they* who are of great
knowledge, who are kings, judges, and the sages of the religion; in the
second specimen are *they* that *have* to keep watch *over* all the
cities, and to make the enemy confounded; in the third specimen are
these whose object *one* mentions *in the term* 'husbandmen;' the fourth
specimen which *one* mentions *are* these who are the greatly-skilled
and sitters in the market, grandiloquent to repel loss, giving one-tenth
to the high-priest and king, and offering praise on hardened knees, the
last reward of which is that *one* obtains in the spiritual *existence*.

13\. The thirteenth Nask is that which is Angh*e*u*s*,

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

the Spend; its subdivisions are sixty which are precious unto people of
pedigrees (mâyagân) and *those who* possess much avidity for virtuous
actions and *have* to proceed *in* the footsteps (pâî-rapîh) *of* the
great and religious; *also* accounts of Zaratû*s*t, who is born from the
womb of Dûghd*âv*ŏ, till ten years *of age*. Every Dastûr and Môbad
shall recite this Nask in purity, and with ease and the proper words,
*for* several days, and shall obtain every desire of his own, or *any*
wish which he claims on account of (ba*r*â râî-î) others.

14\. The fourteenth Nask is that *which is* Mazdâi; the name Zira*s*t is
appointed *for it, and* the subdivisions of that Nask are twenty-two. In
like manner this Nask is sent *by* Aûha*r*ma*zd*, which is to make
manifest to the people what is the purpose *of* that science through
which mankind are born from the womb of a mother, how many individuals
among them will die *away* from the womb, and how many individuals will
live; how many persons *and* people among them become kings, and how
many, meanwhile (fîmâ), exercise apostleship, that is, the
high-priesthood; how many are the grandest of people, and how many are
the meanest *of* mankind, *and* in what mode this occurs; from first to
last, the time people are born and all those topics are in this Nask.

15\. The fifteenth is Khshathrem*k*â, *and* the name of that Nask is
Baghân-ya*s*t, *and* its subdivisions are seventeen. In it are the
topics of Aûha*r*ma*zd* the lord and the archangels, the knowledge of
their attributes, and the service *and* sublimity *of* Aûha*r*ma*zd*; at
what time every Gâh occurs until the future existence, and what duty is

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

performed; offering praise *for* every benefit *from* Aûha*r*ma*zd*, and
obtaining benefit from him; the appearance of the archangels, and
knowing what is such-and-such an appearance of such-and-such an
archangel in the future existence. This Nask used in the service of
Aûha*r*ma*zd* and the archangels is very excellent.

16\. The sixteenth is Ahurâi, *and* they have appointed it the name
Niyârâm; the subdivisions of that Nask are fifty-four, about the reason
of preserving wealth and placing *it* out, agreement *and* measure *by*
the cubit *and* handful; everything the creator Aûha*r*ma*zd* has
ordained *as* uncontaminated, release from hell, and how to walk in the
path of reverence and worship; what is in the mind of man, and what is
everything in the body of man; *and* such-like as *these that* are
mentioned.

17\. The seventeenth Nask is that which is Â, *and* the name they have
appointed *for* it is Aspârûm; one mentions sixty-five subdivisions of
it, *and* in this Nask is every religious topic which all persons well
understand, and the punishment suffered *by* sinners, which they receive
in *their* last career; everything which is uncontaminated is allowable,
*and what* is not uncontaminated is not allowable; the stars preside
over the destiny of mankind; and such-like as *these*.

18\. The eighteenth Nask is that *which is* Yim, that *has* the name
Duvâsarôzad appointed *for it*, and the subdivisions of it are likewise
sixty-five. In this Nask are the reasons of next-of-kin marriage,
forming connections among relations, and such-like as *these*.

19\. The nineteenth Nask is Drigubyô, the name

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

of which is Askâram, *and* is of fifty-two stanzas (v*êk*astihâ),
*about* the giving of orders, exercise of authority, and practising
wisdom in everything; producing the resurrection, *by* which every
person passed *away* is made living again, and the malformations of
Aharman and the demons are withered away; *and* such-like.

20\. The twentieth Nask is that *which is* Dada*d*, that they call *by*
its name of Vendîdâ*d*, where the meaning *of* this is 'the law against
the demons,' which is of twenty-two fargar*d*s. The topic *of* it is
what preserves mankind from evil *and* pollution, and will restrain
*them* from the menstruous, dead matter, pestilence, and running sores.
Of all the twenty-one Nasks the Nask of 'the law against the demons' has
*alone* remained entire; while several remain scattered by the
wickedness (*s*ûmîh) of the accursed Alexander, this Nask of the
Vendîdâ*d* remained in hand, *and* owing to its elucidation the religion
of Ma*zd*a-worship exists now.

21\. The twenty-first Nask is Vâstârem, whose name *one* calls Hâdôkht,
*and its* fargar*d*s are said *to be* thirty. In it are much excellence
and many miracles, and the vile Aharman becomes far from every one who
recites this Hâ*d*ôkht, and it makes *him* extinct, and *the reciter*
comes near *unto* Aûha*r*ma*zd* and becomes purified from sin.

22\. Now, alas! if all these Nasks do not remain, so that *one* is not
able to solemnize *them*, that is for this reason, that the accursed
Alexander, the Arûman, took several transcripts—in the Arûman language
and characters (hurûfŏ)—of any among those twenty-one Nasks which were
*about* the stars and medicine, and burnt up the other Nasks; and

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

the soul of the accursed Alexander, the Rûman, will remain wretched and
burnt in gloomy hell till the resurrection, owing to his own vileness
which injured the religion of Zaratû*s*t.

23\. After the villany of Alexander, an assemblage of several
high-priests, who were sages of the religion, brought the Avesta of all
*of them* from various places, *and* made a collection of so much Avesta
and Zand *as* the sacred (ya*s*tô) Yasna, Vîspera*d*, Vendîdâ*d*,
Ar*d*â-fravar*d*, and other scraps of the Avesta, the Darûn,
*A*f*rî*ngân, and the Commands of the religion; all these *were*
written, and the Bûndahi*s* book *was* correctly written; *and* all
such, among them, as *were* not written, which did not come into the
thoughts of the sages, departed, on that account, from the midst of the
many topics of revelation.

24\. Just as it is said that *there* were twenty-one Nasks, there are
first, in seven Nasks, the topics of the religion *of* Ma*zd*a-worship,
in the second seven Nasks are the topics of medical practice, *and* in
the third seven Nasks the topics and capabilities of the stars are
mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[438:1](sbe37129.htm#fr_1727) A Rivâyat in
Pahlavi writing, but its language is more Persian than Pahlavi; it
commences with this account of the Nasks, combining most of the
information contained in the four preceding extracts from the Persian
Rivâyats. For this text the translator is indebted to a MS. written A.D.
1813 and belonging to Dastûr Hôshangji Jâmâspji of Poona; a previous
translation, in Haug's Essays, was from a transliteration of the same
text prepared by Haug some 25 years ago.

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[441:1](sbe37129.htm#fr_1728) Assuming that
fr*êv*vânîk, which might mean 'important,' stands for pard*az*ânîk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Sû*d*kar Nask](sbe37130)
