[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37039)  [Next](sbe37041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXVII.

*Hûspâram Nask*.

1\. One section *of* the seven <span id="fr_288"></span>[1](#fn_287) at
the end *contains* particulars about the daily *food* of a grown-up man,
a pregnant woman, her who is childless, *and* a child, as provided by
law; *also* that of a shepherd's dog, a village dog, and a blood-hound;
and the characteristics of these three kinds of dog.

2\. About the sign of a person's conversion to the religion. 3. About
association of several kinds, and one of them is that of the keepers
(pa*d*ân) with the flocks (ramân), and the flocks in connection with the
keepers; and of what kind is the meritoriousness of the keepers *of*
those flocks, as to guardianship of every description; the happy effects
of the flock, *and* those of the keeper, of every description; the
advantage from this association, and whatever is on the same subject. 4.
One is the association of priestly instructor (ra*d*ŏ) and pupil <span
id="fr_289"></span>[2](#fn_288), *and their* meritoriousness together;
the fame of the priestly instructor for priestly instruction, *and* that
of the disciple (hâvi*s*tô) for every kind of *learning derived* from
the priestly instructor, and every kind that the priestly instructor
*imparts* to the pupil; *and* the happy effects of the priestly
instructor, of every kind, in similar matters. 5. One is the association

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of ceremonial priests (ra*d*-pî*s*akânŏ), the worthiness of a man for
the sacerdotal leadership, supplies for the whole of the ceremonial
priests, *and* whatever is on the same subject. 6. About the highest of
all associations <span id="fr_290"></span>[1](#fn_289), and about the
lawful and virtuous existence of this same association, when *there are*
two men in *a case* where he who is opulent is always necessary for him
who is in innocence, and *has* given *him* the wealth that he asks for;
or where, when the one shall commit sin, wealth is an affliction to the
other; or the ownership, as to that which the one obtains, is as much
even that of the other; or, on the passing away *of the one*, it is
mingled with the wealth of the other; and whatever is on the same
subject.

7\. About the punishment of the sin of him for whom *one* lies <span
id="fr_291"></span>[2](#fn_290) to him by whom provision is made, by
thought or by word, *and* given to him who is worthy. 8. About a
father's making a child aware of the sin at the time of the sin. 9.
About the sin of taking the course of a false guide *and* exalting
falsehood, *and* whatever is on the same subject. 10. The sin of
extorting supplies for a beast *of burden* from a lonely labouring
person.

11\. About important gifts to the worthy, atonement for deprival of food
(atapdâ*d*ŏ-vi*g*âri*s*nîh) <span id="fr_292"></span>[3](#fn_291), and
disbursements (aûrûzdân) *of* that which is legally, and also *of* that
which is derived from *what is* legally, property among impoverished
(nyûrûzd) supplicants. 12. The depriver of food is he who is *for* early
atonement, and *they* who severally *exist*,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

through grazing <span id="fr_293"></span>[1](#fn_292) *and* bringing
forth, are *they* who severally are also in loss of vitality, through
deprival of the food of strength *and* intellect; *even* a powerful man
is prostrated thereby; the food which is suitable as atonement for
deprival of food, *and* that which is not suitable.

13\. About that through which the indispensable creation *of* a debt
arises, *and* whatever is on the same subject. 14. Where *it is* the
healing *of* the sick, the spiritual *debt* is unto the archangel
Ashavahi*s*t <span id="fr_294"></span>[2](#fn_293), *and* that which is
worldly unto the physician's anteroom (dâlânakŏ).

15\. About the worthiness *of* a good physician for every benefit, *and*
the unworthiness *of* a bad physician for any benefit. 16. About each
one of the plants *being* produced by Aûha*r*ma*zd* for the subjugation
of one disease at least. 17. About the protectiveness *and* preciousness
of the profession of medicine; the advantage and reasoning thought of a
physician due to the carrying on of *his* medical practice; the pleasant
food, the handsome clothing, and the swift steed for a physician; and
*his* wealth *being* as much as that of an average man in a house,
village, community, *or* province. 18. About the diligently

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

remedial hand *of* the physician for the sick, opportunely mindful, yet
without chastisement.

19\. About the sin of a physician through handling (sû*d*akîh) and
*having* spread *a disease* by walking up to the sick, because that is
when *he would have been* innocent through not *having* gone. 20. About
a great pestilence (s*êg*ŏ), *and* that which is trivial.

21\. About the fee <span id="fr_295"></span>[1](#fn_294) of a physician
for curing a sick *person* of disease of the whole body, *and* of each
one of the members; even of him who *has* cured chieftains, both those
of the lower grades *and* him who is the supreme king of kings, and so
also various destitute people. 22. About the mode *and* extent of
delivering up fees to a physician, after the declaration of the sick
*person being* well; that is, from whom *comes* the physician's fee
which is announced for the cure, *and* also that which is not announced;
from whom that only which is announced for it, from whom a meal
(pishôn-1), and from whom nothing whatever *of* worldly reward comes.

23\. About the physician whom *one* hears <span
id="fr_296"></span>[2](#fn_295) *and* asks for medical treatment. 24.
About a test as to the competency of a physician; that is, how *it is*
to be made, how it is when it is possible to test *it, and* how it is
when it is not possible to test *it*. 25.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> About the sin of a
physician who is not tested, *and* also *of* him whom it is not possible
to test, when he shall undertake the medical treatment of others, *and*,
as regards a limb of any one, there is not anything which is another's
test of him, *nor* even that which is not another's test of him, *nor*
that which is a trial of him.

26\. About how long is the duration of *having* sought a physician in
Irân whereafter *it* is allowable, through not obtaining *one*, to seek
*him* even from foreigners. 27. The sin of *having* sought *one* from
foreigners, when *one can* obtain a physician in Irân. 28. About the fee
for a foreign physician, and much else on the same subject. 29. The
medical treatment of mankind, and also about the medical treatment of
beasts *of burden and* cattle.

30\. About the sin owing to intrusting him who is unfit for a duty. 31.
About the greater suitability of a priest than *of* a disciple for duty
and position; a trusty *person* is also obtaining the important *rather*
than obtaining a desire for the important, and even so far as *being* a
potter *rather* than an astrologer, and being careful *rather* than a
potter; and the reason of it.

32\. About preparing an unauthorised (*a*-dastôbar) dwelling in the
locality of other persons, *and* whatever is on the same subject. 33.
About boundaries where *there* is a place of residence for people, and
whatever is on the same subject. 34. About what description of testimony
of *one of* the good religion is *received* as evidence regarding an
infidel, *and* of an infidel as regards *one of* the good religion.

35\. About the greatness of eminence *of* the abode of priestly
authorities (ra*d*ânŏ), *both* for procedure

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

and for petitions <span id="fr_297"></span>[1](#fn_296); the openness of
the doors of a priestly authority; the want of eminence of any one
through every kind of offence to others, which is owing to his closed
doors and evil eminence in every mode; *and* whatever is on the same
subject. 36. About the extent of splendour (lîyânŏ) and pomp-diffusing
(vafsh-*a*fgânŏ) tokens from the abode of fires, *and* the arrangement
as regards him who casts the allotted twigs *and* charcoal (khâr akhgar)
into *them*. 37. About conveying prosperity (pa*d*îkhûîh) <span
id="fr_298"></span>[2](#fn_297) to the abode of fires appropriately *to*
the capability of every one.

38\. About the quality (sâmân) of water oozing out (aîrî*d*ŏ) and that
which is flowing in a channel (nâêv-tâk). 39. About the characteristics
of specified works which are contiguous in a place between two frontiers
(mar’*z*ŏ).

40\. About a decision as to a sheep *free* from unlawful influence—and
so also *as to one under* unlawful influence—which goes to the pasture
of others with thievish intention, neglecting its own; and as to that
which *does so* not with thievish intention. 41. About the quantity
which *one has* to provide, in the duration of a day and night, on
admitting to pasture *and* corn, in the case of an ox without defect
(anâgânŏ), or *of* another kind, or a horse, or a sheep, or a goat, or a
pig, or an animal of any other kind.

42\. About the distance of a residence of mankind from a river flowing
in a channel. 43. About the period for letting a sheep graze at pleasure
in a pasture, *and* that for restraining *it;* the time for not

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

cutting trees, *and* that for little slaughter of sheep. 44. About an
article of clothing which is associated with defence, for fear of
enemies, *and* becomes quite a good omen (sukûn) *among* mankind,
*being* imperceptible *and* appropriate. 45. About a tree with stem
uprooted, where *and* how *it is* allowable.

46\. About a leader's causing a march of whatever kind, the people
*being* in motion through fear, and they drive the sheep which are with
the army on account of molestation; *also* making the sheep decide as to
the pasture near to the road within reach, the pasturing *of* the first
of the species of sheep, *and* letting *them* forth to pasture in
succession unto the last, and the reason of it.

47\. About a person who is of note <span id="fr_299"></span>[1](#fn_298)
on account of wealth, *and* whatever is on the same subject. 48. About
this intermixture *of* with-the-stream *and* against-the-stream, with
banks and without banks, and waters running *and* down-pouring
(nîy*â*pân), on the road; that is, which of the waters, running *or*
down-pouring, is to be earlier reverenced *by him* who is returning from
the road, and the reason of it. 49. About the subordination of the
disciple unto the priest, as to eating, drinking, and plenty, goodness
and preciousness; *and* whatever is on the same subject.

50\. About that which *occurs* when foreigners come to the frontier of
Irân, *and* shall do damage to Irân; *and* the frontier governors *and*
fellow-champions *have* to repel the foreigners by fighting, to save the
Irânian people and property which *were*

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

to be made foreign; *and* whatever is on the same subject.

51\. About the advantage of punishing a violent thief by the members of
the assembly, that owing to reliance upon the actions *and* convictions
of the ancients, that owing to forming many priestly assemblies, that
owing to providing a disciple for a priest, that through passing away
after *being* high-priest, that through *doing so* without *being*
high-priest, *and* that of much information on similar statements prior
to any other resources.

52\. Perfect is the excellence *of* righteousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_287"></span>[114:1](sbe37040.htm#fr_288) It is doubtful
whether seven sections are meant, or whether we should read 'the seven
Fargar*d*s at the end of one section.' See, however, Chap. XXXVI, 1 n.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[114:2](sbe37040.htm#fr_289) Pahl. ra*d*ûnê
(Av. ratunaya).

<span id="fn_289"></span>[115:1](sbe37040.htm#fr_290) That of
disinterested and devoted friendship, as appears from the examples
given.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[115:2](sbe37040.htm#fr_291) By falsely
recommending him as a worthy object of charity.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[115:3](sbe37040.htm#fr_292) See Chap. XVII, 6
n.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[116:1](sbe37040.htm#fr_293) Reading
*k*ari*s*nŏ, but part of the first letter has been cut off by the
repairer of the MS. The semi-starvation of cattle is being referred to.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[116:2](sbe37040.htm#fr_294) The
personification of 'perfect righteousness' (Av. ashavahi*s*ta) whose
special duty is stated to be the care of fire (see Sls. XV, 5, 12, 13),
and whose name, often written A*rd*avahi*s*t or Ar*d*avahi*s*t in
Pahlavi, is applied to the second month and third day of the month in
the Parsi year (see Chap. XX, 22). He is here connected with the healing
of the sick, because of his association with Airyaman, the smiter of
diseases (see Vend. XXII, Yt. III, Sîr. I, II, 3).

<span id="fn_294"></span>[117:1](sbe37040.htm#fr_295) In Vend. VII,
36-44 (W.) we have some of the old Avesta laws regarding medical men and
their fees. How far the Avesta text of this section of the Hûspâram Nask
corresponded with that of the Vendîdâ*d* on the same subject it is
impossible to determine, because we have always to recollect that this
summary of the contents of the Nasks was compiled from their Pahlavi
versions (see Chap. I, 3) which included extensive commentaries,
adapting the original Avesta statements to the altered circumstances of
Sasanian times.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[117:2](sbe37040.htm#fr_296) Or 'satisfies'
(shnâyê*d*ŏ).

<span id="fn_296"></span>[119:1](sbe37040.htm#fr_297) These six words
should, perhaps, be appended to the next clause of the sentence.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[119:2](sbe37040.htm#fr_298) By providing fuel
and other necessaries.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[120:1](sbe37040.htm#fr_299) Reading mûn
sakhûnag. Another guess would be min nî*s*ôn-î (for nî*s*ân-î), in which
case the translation would be 'a person *free* from indications relating
to wealth.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII](sbe37041)
