[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37023)  [Next](sbe37025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXI.

1\. The first of eighteen sections of the Ganabâ-sar-ni*g*a*d* <span
id="fr_214"></span>[2](#fn_213) *contains* particulars about the thief,
with his arrest as the special thief of that which is seized (tereftŏ)
by him; the premeditated sin, the imprisonment and fettering, the
punishment appointed for atonement of the sin, the execution of the
duty,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and the amount of the reward (na*v*i*s*n); the amount of speciality in
the ransom (navâk) of every one, each separately; the act *and* place of
punishment, what is the person who is strangling and the mode, how those
who are therein strangling are drawn forth (na*z*î-aîtŏ) successively,
*and* which is set to work first.

2\. About a person whose offending limbs *are* bound, the degree of
tightness of the binding and fettering, and the formula (nîrang) of
*being* bound for the sin of theft. 3. About imprisonment, and the
imprisonment which accusers *have* to provide, *at* their own expense,
*if* they are those who are privileged; and whatever is on the same
subject. 4. The number of places for fetters, and those which the thief,
whoever *he is*, possesses, each separately. 5. How far, how, *and* for
what putting on of fetters (garov-dahi*s*nîh) those accusers *have* to
provide a thief's fetters, too, *at* their own expense, *if* they are
those who are privileged; the place for the requisite privileged putting
on of fetters, the sin owing to putting on more fetters of a different
kind, and that which is owing to neglecting the putting on of the
fetters which *they have* to provide; the limit as regards the deserving
of more fettering, the number of grades of theft beyond the limit of
deserving fettering, and those which are below the limit of deserving
fettering.

6\. About the kinds of theft, and the excessive sinfulness of a thief
through cutting <span id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_214) and wounding the
body; the undiscoverableness which is specially as regards a thief at a
distance (pavan hâsar), he

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

who is on the spot *being* he who is within one step; theft, with
plunder, injuring the existence <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_215),
minor injury, and other sins, *may be* in confederacy <span
id="fr_217"></span>[2](#fn_216) beforehand *or* afterwards. 7. About the
thievish design of a theft which is not abetted (lâ ham), a theft with
equal shares, and a theft with different shares.

8\. About the sin of assisting a thief (dû*g* aîyyârak), *of* making
investigation and releasing, *of* a sentence of acquittal, and *of* a
listener to a thief; he who is a giver of assistance to a thief is
carried off for theft; also decisions about theft by a child, by a
childless woman, *and by* her who is pregnant; likewise their
maintenance *and* earnings (vindi*s*nŏ) in retributive work, and the
work of a pregnant thief.

9\. About the accumulated property *of* the innumerable which they would
keep away from thieves, *both* the thief by means of *his* hands, and
him who is a thief not by means of *his* hands. 10. About the testimony
*of* a thief, that is, for what *it* is admissible when <span
id="fr_218"></span>[3](#fn_217) he advances as a thief; how at the
*time* when *it is necessary* to seize *and* bind *him*, and how at the
time when it is necessary to flatter (nivâkhtanŏ) and deceive *him*
until *one* attains to absolute power (kâm-kârîh) thereby. 11. About
rewards (na*v*i*s*nŏ) with thieves. 12. About the difference of theft
from plunder.

13\. About property which *any one*, carrying *it* off,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

*has* to bring back to *its* owners; such as that which the frontier
people *may take away* from foreigners, that which the judge *may take
away* from thieves, and the share which he may take away from *any one*
not interfering <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_218) with thieves. 14.
And about protectors *and* defenders of a thief, and also many other
legal decisions as regards theft.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_213"></span>[74:2](sbe37024.htm#fr_214) Corresponding to
the sixteenth word, ahurâi, in the Ahunavair, according to B. P. Riv.;
but it is the eighteenth Nask in other Rivâyats. Ganabâ-sar-ni*g*a*d*
means 'the thief's head downstricken;' but it is misread Dvâsrû*g*ad,
Dvâsrûn*g*ad, Dvâsrû*g*îd, or Dvâsrôb, in the Rivâyats, which also state
that it contained sixty-five kardah, or subdivisions, which agree with
the numbers of sections mentioned in Chaps. XXI, XXIII, XXIV. This Nask
is evidently named from the contents of its first section, and possibly
from its initial words.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[75:1](sbe37024.htm#fr_215) Assuming that
gû*d*anŏ stands for khû*d*anŏ.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[76:1](sbe37024.htm#fr_216) See Chap. XIX, 1.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[76:2](sbe37024.htm#fr_217) Pâz. hidhih,
probably for a Pahl. adjective ha*d*ak from Av. hadha, and referring to
accomplices before and after the fact (see Chap. XVIII, 5).

<span id="fn_217"></span>[76:3](sbe37024.htm#fr_218) Assuming that mûn
stands for amat, their Irânian equivalents being nearly alike, and the
latter word being used in the succeeding clauses.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[77:1](sbe37024.htm#fr_219) Av. asterethwãn.
The share being a bribe for purchasing non-interference. In each case
the property is to be restored to its original owner who had been robbed
by the foreigners or thieves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](sbe37025)
