[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37018)  [Next](sbe37020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVII.

1\. The beginning of the law is the Nîkâ*d*ûm <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_129) of thirty fargar*d*s <span
id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_130). 2. The section Patkâr-ra*d*istân
('*magistrate code*') <span id="fr_132"></span>[4](#fn_131) is about
this, that the ruin *and* misery (ayôyakîh) from the destroyer, for
mankind and animals, occurring really apart from the spiritual
*existence*, have arisen through the sinfulness even of

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

mankind; *and* the progress of ruin and misery in the world is owing to
unauthorisedly assaulting one another. 3. Advice. to mankind about
abstaining therefrom, *with* an estimate of an authorised assault,
*and*, again, for a slight assault and no assault. 4. To stand
magisterially, even opposed to the unmagisterial, with freedom from hurt
and loss to oneself; *and* to abstain altogether, likewise, from the
most innocuous (anakhrûgûnôtam) assault even upon an unmagisterial
*person*.

5\. *In* all magisterial investigation (patkâr-ra*d*îh)—of which, when
the custom that exists is established judicially, the substance is two
statements, which are verbal and demonstrable, that subsist in different
combinations—*there* are four species: the verbal and demonstrable, the
verbal which is not demonstrable, the demonstrable *which* is not
verbal, *and that which is* neither verbal nor yet demonstrable. 6. In
the arguments (sâmân) which are allotted *as* verbal are four species,
the dispute *having* different arguments *and* different assertions
which are for unmagisterial investigation, for one's own priestly
authority (ra*d*ŏ), for another good man—three of such being
requisite <span id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_132)—and also for other
evidence <span id="fr_134"></span>[2](#fn_133). 7. And in those which
are allotted as demonstrable are six species, and for an unmagisterial
*person* the assertions, like the previous species which are on the same
subject, are twelve <span id="fr_135"></span>[3](#fn_134). 8. Of

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

all unmagisterial proceedings—which, though it be a custom, is to
proceed unauthorisedly—the species are five <span
id="fr_136"></span>[1](#fn_135), which consist in *having* demonstrated,
getting upon, striking <span id="fr_137"></span>[2](#fn_136), *having*
caused a wound, and *having* slain.

9: Of *those* subject to the magistrate (patkâr-ra*d*ŏ-hômônd) the
twelve species are divided into four sections of three each. 10. One
section are the hearing who are seeing, they to whom a dispute which is
verbal \[is demonstrable; the hearing who are not seeing, they to whom a
dispute which is verbal <span id="fr_138"></span>[3](#fn_137)\] is not
demonstrable; and the seeing who are not hearing, they to whom even a
dispute which is demonstrable is not verbal. 11. And with these three,
who are in one section, there is magisterial investigation; and the
magistrate, unless (ba*r*â hat) <span id="fr_139"></span>[4](#fn_138)
risk for the body *be* certain, is then irresistible; which is as though
it be said *that* to restrain by

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

wounding (rêsh) is not justifiable, *but* the decision therein is this,
that, when they do not change through lawful litigation, and they cannot
hold back without wounding, *it* is justifiable to keep *them* back even
by wounding. 12. One section are the not hearing who are also not
seeing, the women, and the children; and with these three, who are in
one section, there is no magisterial investigation; and the decision *as
to* the bodies thereof is this, that, unless risk for the body *be*
certain from their complete change, they are then to be completely
changed (ba*r*â var*d*i*s*nŏ). 13. One section are the foreigner and
*him* worthy of death, certain of thereby producing a sentence for
*being* executed from the judges; *also* the highwayman, when he stays
on the highway and his destruction is proclaimed, *but* it is not
possible to effect *it*. 14. With these three, likewise, who are in one
section, there is no magisterial investigation, but the decision about
them is even this, that when *one* is utterly destroying their life,
*one* is thereby possessing merit. 15. One section are they who are
walking, *or* coming upon *one*, unseasonably, *or* retreating confused
into a rugged place, *and*, when *people* ask them to speak, *they* are
giving no answer, *and* they are not suspicious as foreigners. 16. With
these three, likewise, who are in one section, there is no magisterial
investigation, and the decision about them is this, that when *one*
kills them outright, *one* does not become sinful thereby.

17\. *As to* whatever is on the same subject it introduces many
opinions, and also this, that a counter-assault (*avâz*-zatam) is that
which becomes a blow and wound, *and* is to be so committed when it

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

is possible to produce *them* again exactly in every single particular.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[35:2](sbe37019.htm#fr_130) Corresponding to
the fifteenth word, khshathrem*k*â, in the Ahunavair, according to B. P.
Riv.; but it is the sixteenth Nask in other Rivâyats. This name should
probably be Vîk-*aî*t-tûm, meaning 'the most separate concerns,' as the
Nask refers chiefly to public law; but it is called Niyâram, or Niyâdâm,
in the Rivâyats.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[35:3](sbe37019.htm#fr_131) The Rivâyats say
fifty-four kardah, which number may have been obtained by adding the
'twenty-four particulars,' mentioned in Chap. XX, 1, to the thirty
fargar*d*s stated here.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[35:4](sbe37019.htm#fr_132) The patkâr-ra*d*,
or settler of disputes, appears to have held a position somewhere
between an arbitrator and a judge, and which may be approximately
defined as that of a magistrate.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[36:1](sbe37019.htm#fr_133) Evidently referring
to arbitrators with an umpire.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[36:2](sbe37019.htm#fr_134) Reading hanŏ
gôkâyîh, but hanŏ is an unusual form. Perhaps agôkâyîh, 'want of
evidence,' would be more suitable to the context.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[36:3](sbe37019.htm#fr_135) So the MS., but
'four' would suit the context better, and the two Pahlavi ciphers do not
differ much in shape.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[37:1](sbe37019.htm#fr_136) These five grades
of unauthorised retribution are analogous to the five grades of personal
outrage mentioned in Vend. IV, 17.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[37:2](sbe37019.htm#fr_137) Pahl. zatam, 'a
blow, assault, striking,' is used throughout, instead of zâkham (Pers.
za‘*h*m), which latter word does not occur in these two books of the
Dinka*rd*, except in the form zakhamî-hastanŏ in Bk. IX, Chap. VIII, 6.
The Farhang-î Oîm-aêvak also uses zatôm in the same sense, in its oldest
MSS.; and Dd. V, 1 has zatam. Darmesteter suggests that zatam and zâkham
are both traceable to an original zathma, or zathema.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[37:3](sbe37019.htm#fr_138) The words in
brackets are omitted by mistake in the MS.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[37:4](sbe37019.htm#fr_139) The ambiguity,
mentioned in the latter clause of this section, appears to lie in these
words, which mean either 'but if' or 'only if.' Such ambiguity must have
existed in the original Pahlavi text of the Nask, and probably indicates
that the earlier part of this section is a summary of the Pahlavi
version of the original Avesta text, while the latter part is a summary
of the Pahlavi commentary upon that version. As the same ambiguity
occurs, without comment, in § 12, where the meaning seems tolerably
certain, it is doubtful if the commentator's opinion can be adopted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](sbe37020)
