[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe37041)  [Next](sbe37043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part IV (SBE37)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1892\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIX.

*Sakâ*d*ûm Nask*.

I. One section is the *H*a*k*î*d*akânistân ('*code of sequestrations*'),
particulars about a statement of seized property, the retention thereof,
*and* how was the confinement *of* that *which was* animate; how it is
when *one* keeps *it* in a shepherd's-dog's care, and how it is when in
the sequestrator's care (*h*a*k*î*d*akŏdârîh). 2. And when *it is* a
seized horse of the warriors, how to keep *it* when it is not possible
to retain *it* in confinement *of* any kind, and the damage which *has*
arisen therefrom; what is the danger to occasion by it, how it is when
the shelter (srâyi*s*nŏ) <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_317) is on all
sides, *and* how it is when on one side; while the trust, when *there
is* shelter, is in the extent of the shelter, how much *and of* what
kind is the shelter. 3. When *it is* a seized beast *of burden*, after
*its* coming into the possession of the sequestrator
(*h*a*k*î*d*ak-dâr), for how long *he has* to order work for the
reasoning thought of the herdsman, *and* how is that of the
sequestrator, *in* like manner, before he quite attains to his share;
even through his own reasoning thought the work is authorisedly ordered,
and how *and in* what manner is the ordering of his work. 4. And when
the seized *animal* has offspring, *in* what mode *he has* to milk *it*,
as well as the nourishment of the young, and whatever is on the same
subject; *also* the sin owing to doing *it* unlawfully.

5\. About the sequestrator when the beast *of burden* seized comes into
his possession, how it is

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

when its special reputation is altered, *and* how it is when it comes
with utility and advantage for him. 6. About the seizer's keeping a
sheep, which is seized, in *his* flock; that is, how the custom is
produced, owing to its milk *being* for the *sacred* feast, and the
notification of the feasts is owing to the seized <span
id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_318) sheep; when, too, it is not possible to
keep *it* in the flock, what is the mode of confining *it*; and when it
is not possible to keep *it* in confinement, what *he has* to do with
it. 7. About the wool of a sheep which is seized; that is, how it is
when the shearing is even before the various times specified, *and* the
sin of shearing when *it is* before the time specified, *or one* shears
when there is no reason for shearing. 8. About the lambing
(gurû*s*î*d*ŏ) of the sheep seized, and the sin owing to *its* not
lambing.

9\. About sheltering (sru*d*anŏ) <span id="fr_321"></span>[2](#fn_319)
the seized *animal* in the most public place in a house, village,
community, *or* province. 10. About the sin of the shepherd when,
without saving *it* for the sequestrator, *and* through the
guilelessness of the sequestrator, he shall carry away a female; *and*
the sin which is owing to the offence as regards unlawfully beating
*and* wounding *it*, before *it is* seized for the buyers of meat
(khûr-kharânŏ), *and* other offences regarding it. 11. About the time
appointed, between the shepherd and the sequestrator, for leading *and*
bringing the female, *belonging to* the sequestrator, to the place for
which the time is appointed; *in* the case when the shepherd arrives
*and* the sequestrator *does*

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

not, how that which *belongs to* the sequestrator is to come into the
possession of the sequestrator, and when; when *it is* the sheep *or*
beast *of burden* of a sequestrator <span
id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_320), how *it is* to come into the possession
of that sequestrator; when the sheep *or* beast *of burden* which is
seized dies in the possession of the sequestrator, how *and* how long
*he has* to shelter (srû*d*an) the young ones (gurû*s*) and wool of the
same several sheep; *and* the sin when he does not shelter *them*, or
*does it* otherwise.

12\. About a sheep <span id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_321) which is
mingled among the flock of any one that is in sequestration, how it is
when the shepherd, *and* how it is when the shepherd's dog, is its own;
and when it is mingled among any flock owing to sequestration, how it is
when the shepherd, *and* how it is when the shepherd's dog, \[who is its
own\] <span id="fr_324"></span>[3](#fn_322) goes to another flock; how
it is when the first flock-owner, *and* how it is when the second, is
its own. 13. About the killing of a seized sheep *by* a shepherd's dog
for necessary provisions; that is, how *it is* allowable, and *in* what
mode *it is* to be done.

14\. About him unto whom the sheep *or* beast *of burden* which is
seized *is delivered* when it comes into a district; *and* the
sequestrator's informing the governor of the district, in whose herd the
sheep *or* beast *of burden* which is seized *remains*, as to the
species, colour, and form of it <span id="fr_325"></span>[4](#fn_323).
15. Watching over

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

a man with sheep, who is in a disabled state of illness owing to a wound
*received* in his duty as regards slaughtering; the case when *he is*
concealed from a passer-by (amat nîhân min vi*d*âr) and there is
protection, when *he is* an eater *and* there is no protection, when *he
is* not eating *and* there is protection, and when *he is* not eating
*and* there is no protection.

16\. About the distraction <span id="fr_326"></span>[1](#fn_324) of a
sequestrator as regards a sheep *or* beast *of burden* which is seized,
when *it* is one *out* of four varieties <span
id="fr_327"></span>[2](#fn_325), and when one *out* of three; when he
nourishes *it for* half a year, *and* when *for* the duration of a year;
when that which he obtains is a young *one*, and when that which he
obtains is large, where *and* what is a shelter for it, and, *as to* the
care of it, how it is when *in* a grain vault (*k*igârakŏ-1), *and* when
it is *under* a tree; how it is when *in* a damaged cellar (varkhŏ-1-î
kû*s*takŏ), and how it is when *in* a cage (pan*g*ar-1) which is not
incomplete, *but is* broken, or *is* not incomplete and *is* sound, or
*is* complete and sound.

17\. About treasure which *they find* in the surroundings of a dwelling,
*and* that which they find within the limits of the dwelling of any one.
18. About buried treasure when it is found by the side of a

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

road, *and* the ground is hard, how it is when it is one
finger*-breadth* below, *and* how it is when *it is* two
finger*-breadths;* as well as (ham-gûn) when the ground is soft, how it
is when it is two finger*-breadths* below, *and* how it is when *it is*
three finger*-breadths*. 19. When it is found within the road, and the
ground is hard, how it is when it is two finger*-breadths* below, and
how it is when *it is* three finger*-breadths;* *and* when the ground is
soft, how it is when it is three finger*-breadths* below, *and* how it
is when *it is* four finger*-breadths*. 20. When *it is* in an ascent
*or* descent, there where *one* turns out from the road, and the ground
is hard, how it is when it is below *up* to the instep <span
id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_326), and how *it is* when it is up to the
middle of the leg (patî*s*tân) <span id="fr_329"></span>[2](#fn_327);
*and if* soft, how it is when it is below up to the middle of the leg,
and how it is when *it is* up to the knee. 21. When *it is* in a stream
of water, *and* the ground is hard, how it is when it is below up to the
knee, and how *it is* when it is up to mid-thigh; and when the ground is
soft, how it is when it is below up to mid-thigh, *and* how *it is* when
it is up to the testicles. 22. When *it is* in a ford *through* the
water, and the ground is hard, how it is when it is below up to the
testicles, *and* how *it is* when it is up to the navel; and when the
ground is soft, how it is when it is below *up to* the navel, and how
*it is* when it is up to the mouth. 23. And when *it is* in a kitchen
(â*s*khânŏ), the middle of a garden (van), *or* a sheepfold (pâh-hastŏ);
that is, how *it is* when it is not a permanent residence
(af*râz*-mâni*s*nŏ) of *any*body,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

*and* how it is when *it is* a permanent residence <span
id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_328).

24\. About *him* who nourishes a sheep which is seized; that is, how it
is when *it is* out of his store, *and* how it is when he nourishes it
*as* it arrives. 25. About a dispute as regards a sheep that is seized,
when one *person* says *it was* born of the colour of the mother, *and
another* one *says it was of* her form <span
id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_329), both *being* true; or one *person*
mentions a single characteristic truly, *and another* one *mentions*
many characteristics of it untruly; the *cases* when they mention *its*
peculiarities otherwise, *and* in what manner and whatever is on the
same subject. 26. About a sheep <span id="fr_332"></span>[3](#fn_330)
seized, which *has* to pass on through the loftiest places in which
*there* is lawfully shelter; *and* how there are three years, three
existences (ahvôn), three places, nine occasions, and also many other
regulations on the same subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_317"></span>[131:1](sbe37042.htm#fr_319) Av. thrâ.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[132:1](sbe37042.htm#fr_320) Instead of
*h*a*k*î*d*akŏ, 'seized,' the MS. has the very similarly written word
*avêz*akŏ, 'pure.'

<span id="fn_319"></span>[132:2](sbe37042.htm#fr_321) Compare srâyi*s*nŏ
in § 2, and srû*d*an in § 11.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[133:1](sbe37042.htm#fr_322) Perhaps another
sequestrator is meant.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[133:2](sbe37042.htm#fr_323) The first case
seems to be that of an unseized sheep in a seized flock, and the second
that of a seized sheep in an unseized flock.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[133:3](sbe37042.htm#fr_324) The words in
brackets are supplied by guess, to fill up a blank space left by the
repairer of the MS. on one of his patches.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[133:4](sbe37042.htm#fr_325) Reading
va-darand-î denman.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[134:1](sbe37042.htm#fr_326) Reading h*âz*akŏ,
but it is possibly a contracted form of ay*âv*akŏ, 'gain.'

<span id="fn_325"></span>[134:2](sbe37042.htm#fr_327) If it were
allowable to omit this word, âyûînakŏ, 'variety,' and to substitute
'gain' for 'distraction,' the sentence would stand as follows:—'About
the gain of a sequestrator as regards a sheep *or* beast *of burden*
which is seized, when he nourishes *it for* one-fourth, when for
one-third, when *for* half a year, and when *for* the duration of a
*whole* year.' This seems more intelligible than the text as it stands
in the MS.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[135:1](sbe37042.htm#fr_328) Supposing that
Pâz. âava*d* is intended for âfrapa*d*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[135:2](sbe37042.htm#fr_329) That is, up to the
shin.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[136:1](sbe37042.htm#fr_330) The utility of
these minute details was probably to determine how long the treasure had
been buried, and for what purpose, and whether there was any possibility
of the rightful owner being still alive.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[136:2](sbe37042.htm#fr_331) Reading darand-î
denman.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[136:3](sbe37042.htm#fr_332) Supposing that pês
stands for pâh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](sbe37043)
