[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28023)  [Next](cc28025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span>a translation of

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>Calvin’s Version of

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>The Prophecies of Micah.

<span id="vi.ii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vi.ii.i-p3"></span>**1** The word of Jehovah, which came to
Micah, the Morasthite, in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah, kings of
Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p4"></span>**2** Hear, all ye people, Give ear, O
earth, and its fullness; (**155**) And the Lord Jehovah shall be against
you a witness, *Even* the Lord from the temple of his holiness:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p5"></span>**3** For, behold, Jehovah goeth forth from
his place, And will descend and tread on the heights of the earth;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p6"></span>**4** And melt shall the mountains under
him, And rent shall be the valleys; As wax before the fire, As waters
rolling into a lower place. (**160**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p7"></span>**5** For the wickedness of Jacob is all
this, And for the transgressions of the house of Israel: What is the
wickedness of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? And what are the high places of
Judah? Are they not *those of* Jerusalem? (**162**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p8"></span>**6** I will therefore make Samaria A heap
of the field, a plantation for vineyards; And I will roll into the
valley its stones, And its foundations will I discover;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p9"></span>**7** And all her graven images shall be
broken down, And all her rewards shall be burnt in the fire, And all her
idols will I lay desolate; For from the reward of a harlot hath she
gathered, And to the reward of a harlot shall they return.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p10"></span>**8** For this will I wail and howl, I
will go spoiled and naked; I will make wailing as the dragons, And
mourning as the daughters of the ostrich: (**170**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p11"></span>**9** For grievous is her stroke, For it
has come to Judah, It has reached the gate of my people—even Jerusalem.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p12"></span>**10** In Gath tell ye it not; weeping,
weep not; In the house of Ophrah, roll thyself in the dust.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p13"></span>**11** Pass over also, thou inhabitant of
Saphir, Naked and in shame; Go forth shall not the inhabitant of Zaanan,
In the mourning of Beth-ezel; She will take from you her station.
(**176**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p14"></span>**12** Verily, grieved for good has the
inhabitant of Maroth; For come down has evil from Jehovah To the gate of
Jerusalem.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p15"></span>**13** Tie the chariot to the dromedary,
Thou inhabitant of Lachish; The beginning of sin has she been to the
daughter of Zion; For in thee have been found the transgressions of
Israel.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p16"></span>**14** Thou shalt therefore send presents,
For Moresheth-gath, to the sons of Achzib, (**180**) *Who have been* a
deception to the kings of Israel.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p17"></span>**15** Yet a possessor will I send to
thee, inhabitant of Mareshah; Even to Adullam, the glory of Israel,
shall he come.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p18"></span>**16** Make bald, and poll thyself, For
the children of thy delicacies; Enlarge thy baldness as the eagle,
Inasmuch as they have migrated from thee.

<span id="vi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1** Woe to those who devise iniquity,
And contrive wickedness on their beds! When the morning shines, they
execute it; For to do it their hand is ready.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p4"></span>**2** And they covet fields, and forcibly
take them; And houses, and they take them away; And they oppress a man
and his house, A man and his heritage. (**187**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p5"></span>**3** Therefore, thus saith Jehovah, —
Behold, I am devising against this family an evil, From which ye shall
not remove your necks; And ye shall not walk in your height, For an evil
time will it be.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p6"></span>**4** In that day shall they take up
against thee a proverb, And bewail with a lamentable lament, And say,
“Wasted, we are laid waste; The portion of my people has he changed; How
he takes away from me instead of restoring! Our fields he divides.”
(**191**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p7"></span>**5** There shall not therefore be for
thee One to cast a line for lot in the assembly of Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p8"></span>**6** “Prophecy not, ye who prophesy;” —
They shall not prophesy for them; — He will not take reproaches.
(**195**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p9"></span>**7** O thou who art called the house of
Jacob! Is the Spirit of Jehovah straightened? Are these his works? Are
not my words good to him Who walks uprightly? (**201**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p10"></span>**8** And they who were heretofore my
people, Have risen up as an enemy against me; The robe of beauty they
plunder From those who pass by securely, As those who return from war.
(**203**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p11"></span>**9** The women of my people have ye
expelled From the house of their delights; From their children have ye
taken away My ornament forever. (**204**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p12"></span>**10** Arise, depart, for this is not
*your* rest; Because it has been polluted: (**206**) He will scatter
*you* with a violent scattering.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p13"></span>**11** If a man, walking in the spirit,
and lying deceitfully, says, “I will prophesy to thee of wine and of
strong drink,” He shall be the prophet of this people. (**208**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p14"></span>**12** Gathering, I will gather the whole
of thee Jacob, Assembling, I will assemble the residue of Israel; I will
set them together as the sheep of Bozrah, As a flock in the midst of its
fold; They shall make a noise on account *of the number* of men.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p15"></span>**13** Ascend shall a breaker before
them, They shall break through and pass the gate; Yea, they shall go out
through it; And pass shall their king before them, And Jehovah at their
head. (**215**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p3"></span>**1** And I said, “Hear, I pray, ye
princes of Jacob; And ye rulers of the house of Israel: Is it not for
you to know judgment?”

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p4"></span>**2** But they hate good and love evil;
They pull off the skin from them, And the flesh from their bones:

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p5"></span>**3** Yea, they devour the flesh of my
people, And their skin they strip from them, And their bones they break,
And make them small as for the pot, And their flesh for the cauldron.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p6"></span>**4** They shall then cry to Jehovah, And
he will not answer them, But he will hide his face from them at that
time, As they have acted perversely in their doings.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p7"></span>**5** Thus saith Jehovah to the Prophets,
Who deceive my people, And bite with their teeth, and cry, “Peace;” And
when any one putteth not in their mouth, Against him they declare war;

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p8"></span>**6** Night shall therefore be to you
instead of a vision, And darkness shall be to you instead of
divination;’ And set shall the sun on the Prophets, And darkened over
them shall be the day: (**227**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p9"></span>**7** And ashamed shall be the seers, And
confounded shall be the diviners; And they shall all cover their lips,
For there will be no answer from God.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p10"></span>**8** But I indeed am filled with power,
By the Spirit of Jehovah, yea, with judgment and courage, To declare to
Jacob his wickedness, And to Israel his sin.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p11"></span>**9** Hear this, I pray, ye princes of
the house of Jacob, And ye rulers of the house of Israel, Who abominate
judgment, And all rectitude pervert; (**237**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p12"></span>**10** Who build Zion by blood, And
Jerusalem by iniquity.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p13"></span>**11** Its princes judge for reward, And
its priests for wages teach, And its prophets for money divine; And on
Jehovah they lean, saying, “Is not Jehovah in the midst of us? Come upon
us shall no evil.”

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p14"></span>**12** Therefore for you Zion as a field
shall be plowed, And Jerusalem shall be a heap, And the mount of the
house as the heights of a forest.

<span id="vi.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p3"></span>**1** But it shall be in the last days,
That the mount of the house of Jehovah Shall be set in order on the top
of the mountains, And elevated shall it be above the hills; And assemble
there shall nations; (**252**)

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p4"></span>**2** And go shall many nations and say, —
“Come and let us ascend to the mount of Jehovah, And to the house of the
God of Jacob; And he will teach us of his ways, And we will walk in his
paths:” For from Zion shall go forth a law, And the word of Jehovah from
Jerusalem;

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p5"></span>**3** And he will rule among many people,
And convince strong nations afar off; (**260**) And beat their swords
shall they into plowshares, And their spears into pruninghooks; And lift
up shall not a nation against a nation a sword, And they shall learn war
no more;

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p6"></span>**4** And they shall sit everyone under
his own vine, And under his own fig-tree; And none will there be to
terrify them; For *thus* hath the mouth of Jehovah of hosts spoken.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p7"></span>**5** For all people shall walk, Every one
in the name of his god; (**271**) But we will walk In the name of
Jehovah our God forever.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p8"></span>**6** In that day, saith Jehovah, I will
assemble the lame, And the driven out will I gather, And her whom I have
afflicted:

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p9"></span>**7** And I will make the lame a remnant,
And the driven out a strong nation; Reign over them shall Jehovah on
mount Zion, From henceforth, even forever.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p10"></span>**8** And thou tower of the flock, The
fortress of the daughter of Zion, To thee it shall come; Yea, come shall
the former dominion; The kingdom, to the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p11"></span>**9** Why dost thou now cry with a loud
crying? Is there no king in thee? Has thy counselor perished? For seized
thee has pain as one in travail.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p12"></span>**10** Be in pain, and groan, O daughter
of Zion, As a woman in travail; For go forth shalt thou from the city,
And thou shalt dwell in the field, Yea, thou shalt go as far as Babylon;
There shalt thou be delivered, There shall Jehovah redeem thee From the
hand of thy enemies.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p13"></span>**11** And now gathered against thee are
many nations, Who say, “Let her be condemned, And look shall our eye on
Zion.” (**284**)

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p14"></span>**12** But they know not the thoughts of
Jehovah, And understand not his counsel; For he shall gather them as a
handful to the floor.

<span id="vi.ii.iv-p15"></span>**13** Arise, and thrash, thou daughter
of Zion; For thy horn will I make iron, And thy hoofs will I make brass;
And thou shalt tear in pieces strong nations; And consecrate to Jehovah
their wealth, And their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="vi.ii.v"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="vi.ii.v-p3"></span>**1** Assemble now thyself, thou daughter
of a troop; A siege has he set against us: (**294**) With a rod shall
they smite on the cheek the judge of Israel.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p4"></span>**2** And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, Art
small to be among the thousands of Judah! From thee shall to me come
forth One to be a ruler in Israel; And his goings forth *are* from the
beginning, From the days of ages.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p5"></span>**3** He will therefore give them up till
the time, When she who travails shall bring forth, And return to the
children of Israel Shall the residue of his brethren:

<span id="vi.ii.v-p6"></span>**4** And he shall stand and feed in the
power of Jehovah, In the majesty of the name of Jehovah his God; And
they shall quietly dwell, For he shall now be magnified to the ends of
the earth.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p7"></span>**5** And he shall be *our* peace; When the
Assyrian shall come into our land, And when he shall tread in our
palaces, Then we shall set up against him seven shepherds, And eight
princes of men;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p8"></span>**6** And they shall lay waste The land of
the Assyrian by the sword, And the land of Nimrod by their swords;
(**311**) And he will deliver us from the Assyrian, When he shall come
into our land, And when he shall tread in our borders.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p9"></span>**7** And the residue of Jacob shall be,
Among the nations, in the midst of many people, As a dew from Jehovah,
as drops of rain on the grass; Which tarries not for man, nor waits for
the sons of men.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p10"></span>**8** The residue of Jacob shall also be,
Among the nations, in the midst of many people, As a lion among the
beasts of the forest, As a young lion among a flock of sheep, Who, when
he passes through, tears and carries away, And no one can deliver.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p11"></span>**9** Exalted shall be thy hand above
thine enemies, And all thine adversaries shall be cut off.

<span id="vi.ii.v-p12"></span>**10** And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah, That I will cut off thy horses from the midst of thee, And I
will destroy thy chariots;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p13"></span>**11** And cut off will I the cities of
thy land, And will overthrow all thy fortresses;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p14"></span>**12** And I will cut off diviners from
thine hand, And soothsayers shall not be to thee;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p15"></span>**13** And cut off will I thy graven
images, And thy stature from the midst of thee, And thou shalt no more
bow down Before the work of thy hands;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p16"></span>**14** And I will demolish thy groves from
the midst of thee, That I man destroy thine enemies;

<span id="vi.ii.v-p17"></span>**15** And in anger and fury will I
execute on the nations A vengeance, which they have not heard.

<span id="vi.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p3"></span>**1** Hear ye now what Jehovah saith, —
“Arise, contend before the mountains, And let the hills hear thy voice.”

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p4"></span>**2** Hear, ye mountains, the controversy
of Jehovah, And ye strong foundations of the earth; For Jehovah has a
controversy with his people, And with Israel he will contend: —

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p5"></span>**3** “My people! What have I done to
thee? And in what have I molested thee? Testify against me.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p6"></span>**4** I have indeed made thee to ascend
from Egypt, And from the house of servants I redeemed thee; I sent
before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p7"></span>**5** My people! Remember now What Balak,
the king of Moab, consulted, And what Balaam, the son of Bosor, answered
him, *And what happened* from Shittim even to Gilgal, That thou mayest
know the righteousness of Jehovah.” (**336**)

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p8"></span>**6** “Wherewith shall I approach Jehovah?
*And* bow down myself before the high God? Shall I approach him with
burnt-sacrifices? With calves a year old?

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p9"></span>**7** Will Jehovah be pleased with
thousands of rams? With ten thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my
first-born as my sin-offering? The fruit of my loins as an expiation For
the wickedness of my soul?” —

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p10"></span>**8** He hath declared to thee, O man,
what is good: And what does Jehovah require from thee, But to do
justice, and to love mercy, And to humble thyself to walk with thy God?

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p11"></span>**9** The voice of Jehovah crieth to
arouse; And the man of understanding will see his name: Hear ye the rod,
and who testifies of it.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p12"></span>**10** Are there still in the house of
the wicked The treasures of iniquity, And the scanty detestable measure?

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p13"></span>**11** Shall I justify balances of
wickedness, And the bag of deceitful weights?

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p14"></span>**12** For her rich men have filled
themselves by violence, And her inhabitants have spoken falsehood, And
their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p15"></span>**13** And I also by smiting will afflict
thee, And thee will I destroy for thy sins: (**352**)

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p16"></span>**14** Thou shalt eat and not be
satisfied, And thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee; And thou
shalt lay hold, and not deliver, And what thou deliverest will I give up
to the sword:

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p17"></span>**15** Thou shalt sow and not reap, Thou
shalt press the oil, and not anoint thyself with oil, And the new wine,
and not drink wine.

<span id="vi.ii.vi-p18"></span>**16** For observed are the statues of
Omri, And every work of the house of Ahab; And ye walk in their
counsels, That I should make thee a desolation, And her inhabitants an
hissing; And the reproach of my people ye shall bear.

<span id="vi.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p3"></span>**1** Woe is me! For I am as the
ingatherings of summer, And as the bunches of the vintage: There is no
cluster to eat; The ripe fruits my soul hath desired. (**360**)

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p4"></span>**2** Perished has the meek from the
land, And upright among men there is none; For all lie in wait for
blood, Every one hunts his brother with a net.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p5"></span>**3** To effect the wickedness of their
hands, The prince asketh, and the judge also, for reward. And the great
man speaks himself Of the mischief of his soul; and they wrap it up.
(**365**)

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p6"></span>**4** The good among them is like a
brier, The upright is worse than a thorn-hedge: The day of thy watchmen,
thy visitation, is coming; They shall be their confusion.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p7"></span>**5** Trust not a friend, put no faith in
a counselor; From her who sleepeth in thy bosom, Guard the openings of
thy mouth:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p8"></span>**6** For the son dishonors his father,
The daughter rises up against her mother, The daughter-in-law against
her mother-in-law; Enemies to man are his own domestics.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p9"></span>**7** But I to Jehovah will look, I will
wait for the God of my salvation; Hear me will my God.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p10"></span>**8** Rejoice not thou over me, my
enemy; (**374**) Though I have fallen, I shall rise again; When I sit in
darkness, Jehovah will be my light.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p11"></span>**9** The wrath of Jehovah will I bear,
(For I have sinned against him,) Until he plead my cause, And execute
judgment for me; He will bring me to light, I shall see his
righteousness:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p12"></span>**10** And see shall my enemy, And cover
her shall shame, who said to me, — “Where is Jehovah thy God?” Mine eyes
shall see her; And now trodden shall she be as the mire of the street.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p13"></span>**11** The day to build thy walls! That
day shall remove far the decree:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p14"></span>**12** And in that day to thee shall
they come From Assyria and the cities of the fortress, From the fortress
also to the river, (**386**) And from sea to sea, and from mountain to
mountain, —

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p15"></span>**13** But the land shall become a
desolation, On account of its inhabitants, For the fruit of their works.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p16"></span>**14** Feed thy people by thy crook, Thy
flock of thy heritage, Who dwell in solitude, in the wood, *As* in the
midst of Carmel; They shall be fed in Bashan and Gilead, As in the days
of old. (**392**)

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p17"></span>**15** As in the days of thy going forth
from the land of Egypt, I will show to him wonderful things.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p18"></span>**16** Shall see the nations, And be
ashamed of all their might; They shall lay their hand on their mouth,
Their ears shall become deaf;

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p19"></span>**17** They shall lick the dust as a
serpent, As reptiles of the earth shall they move from their holes;
Jehovah our God shall they dread, And they shall be afraid of thee.

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p20"></span>**18** What God is like thee, Taking
away iniquity, And passing over transgression, As to the remnant of his
heritage? He will not retain forever his anger, For he loveth mercy:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p21"></span>**19** He will return, he will have
mercy on us; He will tread down our iniquities, And cast into the depths
of the sea all their sins:

<span id="vi.ii.vii-p22"></span>**20** Thou wilt grant truth to Jacob,
Mercy to Abraham; Which thou hast sworn to our fathers In the days of
old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum](cc28025)
