[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28019)  [Next](cc28021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.2"></span>

<span id="v.2-p1"></span>Chapter 2

<span id="v.2.i"></span>

<span id="v.2.i-p1"></span><span id="v.2.i-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)<span id="v.2.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.i-p2"></span>**1.** He that dasheth in pieces is come up
before thy face: keep the munition, watch the way, make *thy* loins
strong, fortify *thy* power mightily

<span id="v.2.i-p3"></span>**1.** Ascendit destructor coram facie tua;
custodi munitionem, respice viam, robora lumbos, fortifica vires valde:

<span id="v.2.i-p4"></span>**2.** For the LORD hath turned away the
excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel: for the emptiers have
emptied them out, and marred their vine branches.

<span id="v.2.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quia abstulit (alii vertunt, recedere
fecit; alii, quiescere fecit) Jehova fortitudinem (alii, superbiam)
Jacob, sicuti fortitudinem (vel, superbiam, est idem nomen) Israel; quia
evacuarunt avacuantes, et palmites eorum succiderunt.

<span id="v.2.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.2.i-p7"></span><span id="v.2.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.i-p8"></span>The waster spoken of here by the Prophet,
some consider him to have been Sennacherib, and others, Nebuchodonosor.
The verb <span id="v.2.i-p8.1"></span>עלה, *ole,* is also variously
explained: it is often taken metaphorically in Hebrew for vanishing, as
we say in French, <span id="v.2.i-p8.2"></span>*Il s’en va en fumee;*
for smoke ascends, and this is the reason for the metaphor. They then
elicit this meaning, — that a destroyer had ascended before the face of
the chosen people, that is, openly; so that it was evidently the work of
God, that the Assyrians vanished, who had come to lay waste the whole
land: Vanished then has the destroyer; and then *before thy face,* that
is, manifestly, and before thine eyes. <span
id="v.2.i-p8.3"></span>מצורה נצור, *nutsur metsure, guard the fortress;*
that is let every one return to his own city, and keep watch, as it is
usually done; for the country shall be left without men; and watch the
way, that is, look out which way Sennacherib took in coming to assail
the holy city; that way shall be now free from enemies; and then, keep
firm or strengthen *the loins,* for <span id="v.2.i-p8.4"></span>חזק,
*chesek,* sometimes means to keep firm, — keep *firm* then or strengthen
the loins, that thou mayest not relax as before, but stand courageously,
for there is no one who can terrify thee; and, lastly, *fortify strength
greatly,* that is, doubt not but thou shalt be hereafter strong enough
to retain thy position; for cut off shall be that monarchy, which has
been an oppression to thee. But others take a different view and say, —
that the destroyer had ascended, that is, that Sennacherib had come; and
what follows, they think, was intended to strike terror, as though the
Prophet said “Now while ye are besieged keep watch, and be careful to
preserve your fortresses and strengthen all your strongholds; but all
this will avail nothing. — Why? Because God has taken away the pride of
Jacob as he has the pride of Israel.” This is the second explanation.
Others again think, that the Prophet addresses here the Assyrians, and
that Nebuchodonosor is here called a waster, by whom the empire was
removed, and Nineveh, as it has often been stated, was destroyed.
According to these interpreters, the Prophet here denounces ruin on the
Assyrians in this manner, — “The destroyer now ascends before thy face.”
The Assyrians might indeed have regarded such threatening with disdain,
when they were surrounded by many provinces and had cities well
fortified: — “It will not be,” he says, “according to your expectation;
the waster will yet come” before thy face; and how much soever thou
mayest now guard thy fortresses, watch thy ways, and carefully look
around to close up every avenue against thy enemies, thou wilt yet
effect nothing; strengthen the loins as much as thou pleasest and
increase thy power, yet this shall be useless and vain.” If this view be
approved, it will be in confirmation of what has been previously said, —
that God had now determined to destroy the city Nineveh and the empire
possessed by the Assyrians. This meaning then is not unsuitable; but if
we receive this view, something additional must also be stated, and that
is, — that God now designed to destroy Nineveh and its monarchy, because
it had humbled more than necessary his people, the kingdom of Judah, as
well as the ten tribes. I cannot proceed farther now.

<span id="v.2.ii"></span>

<span id="v.2.ii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="v.2.ii-p2"></span>Grant Almighty God, that since we are daily
chastised by thy scourges, we may know that we are justly punished by
thee, and so examine our whole life, that with true and sincere
confession we may humbly flee to thy mercy, which is offered to us by
thy gospel in Christ our Lord; and since thou dost also show us so many
favors, may we not be ungrateful, and may no forgetfulness of thy grace
creep over us, but may we especially exercise ourselves through our
whole life in the worship of thy name and in giving thanks to thee, and
so offer to thee, with our tongues, the sacrifices of praise, that our
whole life may be consistent, and thus glorify thy name on earth, that
at length we may be gathered into thy celestial kingdom through the same
Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.2.iii"></span>

<span id="v.2.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Second

<span id="v.2.iii-p2"></span>We said yesterday that some interpreters
regard these words of the Prophet, *Ascended has the destroyer before it
face, guard the fortress,* as having a reference to Sennacherib; that
is, that God had taken him away and made him like mist to disappear. We
also said, that some elicit this meaning, — that Sennacherib ascended
into Judea and filled the whole country with terror, and that he had at
length laid it wholly waste. But I am disposed to take their view, who
think that this is said of Nebuchodonosor, the waster of Nineveh: as he
had been raised up by God to overturn the tyranny of that city, the
Prophet ridicules all the efforts and preparations made by the Ninevites
(as it is usual when a country is invaded) to oppose him. He therefore
says, *guard the fortress, watch the way, confirm the loins, and
strengthen thy courage greatly* But these are ironical expressions; as
though he said, Whatever the Ninevites may contrive to defend themselves
against the assault of their enemies will be all in vain.  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222)

<span id="v.2.iii-p6"></span><span id="v.2.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.iii-p7"></span>What is now subjoined has been added, in my
view, in reference to what had already taken place, that is that God
*had taken away the pride of Jacob, as the pride of Israel* Some give
this rendering, “God has made to returns or to rest;” and they take
<span id="v.2.iii-p7.1"></span>גאון, *gaun,* in a good sense, as meaning
courage or glory. The sense, according to these, would be, — that God,
having routed the army of Sennacherib, or destroyed the Assyrians, would
make the ancient glory of his people to return; for both kingdoms had
fallen. They then understand this to have been said respecting the
restoration of the whole people; and they who translate, “he will make
to rest,” think that continual peace is here promised to the Israelites,
as well as to the Jews. But, on the contrary, it appears to me, that the
Prophet shows, that it was the ripened time for the destruction of the
city Nineveh, for God had now humbled his people. *He had* then *taken
away the pride of Jacob, as the pride of Israel;* that is, God, having
first corrected the pride of Israel, had also applied the same remedy to
Judah: thus the whole people were humbled, and had left off their
extreme height; for <span id="v.2.iii-p7.2"></span>גאון, *gaun*, for the
most part, is taken in a bad sense, for haughtiness or pride. This then
is the reason why God now declares, that the ruin of Nineveh was nigh at
hand; it was so, because the Jews and the Israelites had been
sufficiently brought down. This sense is the most suitable.

<span id="v.2.iii-p8"></span>And then for the same purpose is the next
clause, — that *the emptiers had emptied,* that is that robbers had
pillaged them, and left nothing to remain for them. There is a passage
in Isaiah which corresponds with this, where it is said, — that when the
Lord had completed his work on mount Zion and in Jerusalem, he would
then turn his vengeance against the Assyrians, (<span
id="v.2.iii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012)<span id="v.2.iii-p8.1"></span>:)
but why were they not sooner destroyed? Because the Lord designed to
employ them for the purpose of chastising the Jews. Until then the whole
work of God was completed, that is, until he had so corrected their
pride, as wholly to cast it down, it was not his purpose to destroy the
Ninevites; but they were at length visited with destruction. The same
thing does our Prophet now teach us here, — that Nebuchodonosor would
come to demolish Nineveh, when the Lord had taken away the haughtiness
of his people.  <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223)

<span id="v.2.iii-p12"></span>What follows, Ανδ τηεψ ηαςε δεστροψεδ
τηειρ σηοοτσ*,* or their branches, I take metaphorically, because the
Israelites, as to outward appearances had been pulled up by the roots;
for before the eyes of their enemies they were reduced to nothing, and
their very roots were torn ups so that they perceived nothing left. The
Lord indeed always preserved a hidden remnant; but this was done beyond
the perceptions of men. But what the Prophet says metaphorically of the
ruined branches, is to be understood of what was apparent.

<span id="v.2.iv"></span>

<span id="v.2.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.2.iv-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003)<span id="v.2.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.iv-p2"></span>**3.** The shield of his mighty men is made
red, the valiant men *are* in scarlet: the chariots *shall be* with
flaming torches in the day of his preparation, and the fir trees shall
be terribly shaken.

<span id="v.2.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Clypeus fortium ejus rubefactus est,
viri potentiae ejus vermiculati (hoc est, rubro etiam colore;) in igne
lampadum (vel, taedarum) currus in die expeditionis ejus, et abietes
tremefactae sunt.

<span id="v.2.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.iv-p5"></span><span id="v.2.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet describes here how dreadful the
Chaldeans would be when prepared against the Assyrians. He says, *The
shield of his brave men*  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) *is
made red* Some think that their shields were painted red, that blood
might not appear; and that the soldiers had on red garments, that they
might not be frightened in case they were wounded; and this is what
history records of the Lacedemonians. But as the habits of these nations
are not much known to us, it is enough for us to know, that their
warlike appearance is here described; as though he had said, that the
Chaldeans would come against Nineveh with violent and terrible power.
Hence he says, that *the men of his strength*  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) *would be clad in scarlet;* he refers
no doubt to the color of their dress. Some expound this of the
Assyrians, and say that their shame is here designated; but this is too
strained. The Prophet, I have no doubt, describes here the Chaldeans,
and shows that they would be so armed that even their very appearance
would put to flight their enemies, that is, the Assyrians.

<span id="v.2.iv-p9"></span>For the same purpose he afterwards adds,
*With fire of torches*,  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) or
*lamps*, *is the chariot in the day of his expedition*. The word <span
id="v.2.iv-p14.1"></span>פלדות, *peladut,* occurs nowhere else; and the
Jews think that the letters are inverted, and that it should be <span
id="v.2.iv-p14.2"></span>לפידות, as this word is afterwards used by the
Prophet in the next verse, and in the same sense. It is certainly
evident from the context that either torches or lamps are meant by the
Prophet. His chariot then is with the fire of lamps, that is, his
chariots drive so impetuously that they appear as flames of fire, when
wheels roll with such velocity.

<span id="v.2.iv-p15"></span>And *the fir-trees,* he says, *are terrible
shaken* Some translate, “are inebriated” or, “stunned;” and they apply
this to the Assyrians, — that their great men (whom they think are here
compared to fir-trees, or are metaphorically designated by them) were
stunned through amazement. Astonished then shall be the principal men
among the Assyrians; for the very sight of their enemies would render
them, as it were, lifeless; for the verb <span
id="v.2.iv-p15.1"></span>רעל, *rol,* is taken by some in the sense of
infecting with poison, or of stupefying. But their opinion is more
correct who think that fir-trees are to be taken for lances, though they
do not sufficiently express the meaning of the Prophet; for he means, I
have no doubt, that such would be the concussion among the lances, that
it would be like that of fir-trees, tossed here and there in the forest.
For lances, we know, are made of fir-trees, because it is a light wood
and flexible, as when any one says in our language, les lances
branslent. The lances then trembled, or shook in the hands of the
soldiers, as fir-trees shake. Thus we see that the Prophet here
continues to describe the terrible appearance of the Chaldeans. Let us
go on —

<span id="v.2.v"></span>

<span id="v.2.v-p1"></span><span id="v.2.v-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004)<span id="v.2.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.v-p2"></span>**4.** The chariots shall rage in the
streets, they shall justle one against another in the broad ways: they
shall seem like torches, they shall run like the lightnings.

<span id="v.2.v-p3"></span>**4.** In compitis insanient per currus (est
hic nomen singulare, currus, ideo quidam subaudiunt viros currus, sed
possumus aliter intelligere, quod insaninient in suis curribus; diende)
properabunt in plateis (alii vertunt, congregabuntur; potest deduci tam
a <span id="v.2.v-p3.1"></span>שקק, quam in <span
id="v.2.v-p3.2"></span>שוק, sed hic significat properare;) aspectus
eorum quasi lampades (hoc est, lampadum,) quasi fulgura discurrent.

<span id="v.2.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.v-p5"></span><span id="v.2.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.v-p6"></span>He still goes on with the same subject, —
that they shall be furious in the streets that is, that they shall he so
turbulent, as though they were out of their minds: as furious men are
wont to be who are impetuously carried away beyond all reason and
moderation, so shall they also become mad in their tumult. He then says,
*They shall hasten*. The verb is derived from the hips; for he who
hastens shakes the hips, and moves them with a quick motion; and if it
be lawful to coin a word, it is, they shall hip; *Ils remueront les
hanches.* This is what the Prophet meant. And then, *Their appearance*
 <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) shall be *as lamps*. He refers
here to the chariots. They shall then be like lamps; that is they shall
dazzle the eyes of beholders with their brightness. All these things are
intended to set forth what is terrific. He says also, *as lightning*
they shall run here and there.

<span id="v.2.v-p8"></span>In short, he intimates, that the impetuosity
of the Chaldeans would be so violent as to surpass what is commonly
witnessed among men, that it would be, as it were, a species of fury and
madness sent down from above. Thus, then, they were to be like lightning
and flames of fire, that they might exceed every thing human. But these
forms of speech, though they are hyperbolical, were not yet used without
reason; for we may easily conjecture how great was then the security of
the city Nineveh, and how incredible was the event of its ruin. That
monarchy was then preeminent over every other in the whole world, and no
one could have thought that it could ever be assailed. Since then it was
difficult to persuade the Jews that ruin was nigh the Assyrians, it was
necessary for the Prophet to accumulate these various forms of
expressions, by which he sets forth the power of God in the destruction
of the Assyrians. It afterwards follows —

<span id="v.2.vi"></span>

<span id="v.2.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.2.vi-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005)<span id="v.2.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.vi-p2"></span>**5.** He shall recount his worthies: they
shall stumble in their walk; they shall make haste to the wall thereof,
and the defence shall be prepared.

<span id="v.2.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Recordabitur fortium suorum,
impingent in itinere suo (vel, itineribus suis, si legamus plurali
numero;) festinabunt ad murum ejus, parabitur integumentum.

<span id="v.2.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.vi-p5"></span><span id="v.2.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.vi-p6"></span>Some interpreters explain this also of the
Chaldeans: The king of Babylon then shall remember his mighty men; that
is, shall recount his forces and whatever strength he will have under
his power; all this he will collect to make war with Nineveh and the
Assyrians. Others think that there is here a transposition in the words,
(which is too strained,) “Mighty men shall remember,” as though it were
a change of number. But I take the words of the Prophet simply as they
are, — that he will remember mighty men: but this, as I think, refers to
the Assyrians. He then, that is, either the king of Nineveh, or the
people, will remember the mighty men; that is, he will gather from every
quarter his forces and will omit nothing which may avail for defense; as
it is usually done in great danger and in extremities: for they were
noted then as warlike men; and every one who had any skill, every one
who was endued with courage, every one who was trained up in arms, all
these were mustered, that they might give help. So then the Prophet
says, that such would be the dread in the land of Assyria, that they
would collect together whatever force they had, to defend themselves
against their enemies. The king then *shall remember his mighty men,*
that is, he will muster all the subsidies within his reach.

<span id="v.2.vi-p7"></span>Then he says, *They shall stumble in their
march;* that is, the mighty men, when gathered, shall tremble and
stumble like the blind: and this will be occasioned by fear; so that
like men astounded, they will move to and fro, and have no certain
footing. The Prophet then declares here two things, that the Assyrians
would be diligent in gathering forces to repel the assault of their
enemies, — but that yet they would effect nothing, for trembling would
seize the minds of all, so that mighty men would stumble in their
marches. They shall stumble, and then it is said, *they shall hasten to
its wall,* that is, they shall ascend the wall; and it is added,
Prepared shall be the covering, as it is usual in defending cities. Some
apply this to the Chaldeans; *prepared shall be the covering,* that is,
when they shall come to the wall. It was indeed usual, as it is well
known from histories, for those who approached a wall to defend
themselves either with turrets or hurdles. But the Prophet, I doubt not,
intimates, that the Assyrians would come with great trembling to meet
their enemies, but without any success. However then they might defend
themselves, their enemies would yet prevail.  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) He therefore subjoins —

<span id="v.2.vii"></span>

<span id="v.2.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.2.vii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006)<span id="v.2.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.vii-p2"></span>**6.** The gates of the rivers shall be
opened, and the palace shall be dissolved.

<span id="v.2.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Portae fluviorum apertae sunt, et
palatium solutum est.

<span id="v.2.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.vii-p5"></span><span id="v.2.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.vii-p6"></span>By the gates of the rivers the Prophet
means that part of the city which was most fortified by the river
Tigris; for the Tigris flowed close by the city. As then the Tigris was
like the strongest defense, (for we know it to have been a most rapid
river,) the Prophet ridicules the confidence of the Ninevites, who
thought that the access of enemies could be wholly prevented in that
part where the Tigris flowed. *The gates* then *of the rivers are
opened;* that is, your river shall not prevent your enemies from
breaking through and penetrating into your city.

<span id="v.2.vii-p7"></span>We hence see, that the Prophet removes all
the hindrances which might have seemed available to keep off enemies;
and he did so, not so much for the sake of Nineveh as for the sake of
his chosen people, that the Israelites and Jews might know, that that
city was no less in the power of God than any other; for God can no less
easily pass through rivers than go along the plain, where there is no
obstacle. We now see why the Prophet says, that the gates of the rivers
were opened: and then he adds, The palace is dissolved; that is, there
will be no impediment to prevent the approach of enemies; for all the
fortresses will melt away, and that of themselves, as though they were
walls of paper, and the stones, as though they were water. He afterwards
adds —

<span id="v.2.viii"></span>

<span id="v.2.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.2.viii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#007)<span id="v.2.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.viii-p2"></span>**7.** And Huzzab shall be led away
captive, she shall be brought up, and her maids shall lead *her* as with
the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.

<span id="v.2.viii-p3"></span>**7.** Et quae stabat solida (vel, firma)
ejecta est in exilium (vel, quae stabat occulta, patefacta est, jussa
est ascendere;) et ancillae ejus ducentes tanquam in voce columbarum,
plangentes super pectora sua.

<span id="v.2.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.viii-p5"></span><span id="v.2.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.viii-p6"></span>There is some ambiguity in these words,
and many interpreters think that <span id="v.2.viii-p6.1"></span>הצב,
*estab,* to be the name of the queen. The queen then they say, of the
name of <span id="v.2.viii-p6.2"></span>הצב, *estab*, is drawn away into
exile; she is bidden to ascend, that she might migrate to a hostile
land. But this view is too strained; nor was there any reason to suppose
the word to be a proper name, except that there was a wish to say
something, and that there was no other conjecture more probable. But I
regard their opinion more correct, who refer this to the state of the
kingdom; and there is here, I have no doubt, a personification, which is
evident if we attend to the meaning. If any one prefers to regard the
queen as intended, it would yet be better to take <span
id="v.2.viii-p6.3"></span>הצב, *estab,* in its proper and real meaning,
— that the queen, previously hid in her palace, and hardly able, through
being so delicate, to move a step, — that she was brought forth to the
light; for <span id="v.2.viii-p6.4"></span>גלה, *gele,* means to
uncover, and also to cast out. If we render it, was made manifest, the
Prophet alludes to hiding-places, and means that the queen did not go
forth to the light, but was like delicate women who keep themselves
within their chambers: but if we render it, Who is drawn forth into
exile, it would be more suitable to one who was previously fixed in her
dwelling. The word comes from <span id="v.2.viii-p6.5"></span>יצב,
*itsab*, to stand; but it is here in Hophal, <span
id="v.2.viii-p6.6"></span>הוצב, *eustab,*: it then signifies one who was
before fixed and firmly settled, that is, in her concealment; she is
drawn, he says, into exile. If then any one chooses to refer this to the
person of the queen, the most suitable meaning would be, — that the
queen, who before sat in the midst of her pleasures, shall be violently
drawn into exile, and carried away to another country. And it is
probable that the Prophet speaks of the queen, because it immediately
follows, *Her handmaids lead* her as *with the voice of doves, and smite
on their breasts;* that is, her maids, who before flattered her, shall
laments and with sighing and tears, and mourning, shall lead away, as a
captive, their own mistress. Thus the context would harmonize.

<span id="v.2.viii-p7"></span>But, as I have said, their opinion seems
right, who think that under the person of a woman the state of the
kingdom is here described. She then, who before stood, or remained
fixed, shall be drawn into captivity; or she, who before sat at leisure,
shall be discovered; that is, she shall no more lie hid as hitherto in
her retirement, but shall be forced to come abroad. And then, *she shall
ascend;* that is, vanish away, for the verb is to be here taken
metaphorically; *she shall* then *vanish away,* or be reduced to
nothing. And as the Prophet sets a woman here before us, what follows
agrees with this idea, — Her handmaids shall weep and imitate the doves
in their moaning; that is, the whole people shall bewail the fate of the
kingdom, when things shall be so changed, as when handmaids lead forth
their own mistress, who had been before nourished in the greatest
delicacies.  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229)

<span id="v.2.viii-p14"></span>Now this accumulation of words was by no
means in vain; for it was necessary to confirm, by many words, the faith
of the Israelites and of the Jews respecting the near approach of the
destruction of the city Nineveh, which would have been otherwise
incredible; and of this we can easily form a judgment by our own
experience. If any one at this day were to speak of mighty kings, whose
splendor amazes the whole world, — if any one were to announce the ruin
of the kingdom of one of them, it would appear like a fable. This then
is the reason why the Prophet, by so many figures, sets forth an event
which might have been expressed in few words, and confirms it by so many
forms of speech, and even by such as are hyperbolical. He at length
subjoins —

<span id="v.2.ix"></span>

<span id="v.2.ix-p1"></span><span id="v.2.ix-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#008)<span id="v.2.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.ix-p2"></span>**8.** But Nineveh *is* of old like a pool
of water: yet they shall flee away. Stand, stand, *shall they cry*; but
none shall look back.

<span id="v.2.ix-p3"></span>**8.** Atqui Nineveh quasi piscina aquarum a
diebus (*hoc est*, a longo tempore) fuit; ipsi autem fugiunt; state,
state; et nemo respicit.

<span id="v.2.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.ix-p5"></span><span id="v.2.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.ix-p6"></span>The prophet here anticipates a doubt which
might have weakened confidence in his words; for Nineveh not only
flourished in power, but it had also confirmed its strength during a
long course of time; and antiquity not only adds to the strength of
kingdoms, but secures authority to them. As then the imperial power of
the city Nineveh was ancient, it might seem to have been perpetual:
“Why! Nineveh has ever ruled and possessed the sovereign power in all
the east; can it be now shaken, or can its strength be now suddenly
subverted? For where there is no beginning, we cannot believe that there
will be any end.” And a beginning it had not, according to the common
opinion; for we know how the Egyptians also fabled respecting their
antiquity; they imagined that their kingdom was five thousand years
before the world was made; that is, in numbering their ages they went
back nearly five thousand years before the creation. The Ninevites, no
doubt, boasted that they had ever been; and as they were fixed in this
conceit respecting their antiquity, no one thought that they could ever
fail. This is the reason why the Prophet expressly declares, that
*Nineveh had been like a pool of waters from ancient days;*  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) that is, Nineveh had been, as it were,
separated from the rest of the world; for where there is a pool, it
seems well fortified by its own banks, no one comes into it; when one
walks on the land he does not enter into the waters. Thus, then, had
Nineveh been in a quiet state not only for a short time, but for many
ages. This circumstance shall not, however, prevent God from overturning
now its dominion. How much soever, then, Nineveh took pride in the
notion of its ancientness, it was yet God’s purpose to destroy it.

<span id="v.2.ix-p12"></span>He says then, *They flee:* by fleeing, he
means, that, though not beaten by their enemies, they would yet be
overcome by their own fear. He then intimates, that Nineveh would not
only be destroyed by slaughter, but that all the Assyrians would flee
away, and despair would deliver them up to their enemies. Hence the
Chaldeans would not only be victorious through their courage and the
sword, but the Assyrians, distrusting their own forces, would flee away.

<span id="v.2.ix-p13"></span>It afterwards follows, *Stand ye, stand ye,
and no one regards*. Here the Prophet places, as it were, before our
eyes, the effect of the dread of which he speaks. He might have given a
single narrative, — that though one called them back they would not dare
to look behind; and that, thinking that safety alone was in flight, they
would pursue their course. The Prophet might have formed this sort of
narrative: this he has not done; but he assumes the person of one
calling back the fugitives, as though he saw them fleeing away, and
tried to bring them back: *No one,* he says, *regards* We now see what
the Prophet meant.

<span id="v.2.ix-p14"></span>But from this passage we ought to learn
that no trust is to be put in the number of men, nor in the defenses and
strongholds of cities, nor in ancientness; for when men excel in power,
God will hence take occasion to destroy them, inasmuch as pride is
almost ever connected with strength. It can hardly be but that men
arrogate too much to themselves when they think that they excel in any
thing. Thus it happens, that on account of their strength they run
headlong into ruin; not that God has any delight, as profane men
imagine, when he turns upside down the face of the earth, but because
men cannot bear their own success, nor keep themselves within moderate
bounds, but many triumph against God: hence it is that human power
recoils on the head of those who possess it. The same things must also
be said of ancientness: for they who boast of their antiquity, know not
for how long a time they have been provoking the wrath of God; for it
cannot be otherwise but that abundance of itself generates
licentiousness, or that it at least leads to excess; and further, they
who are the most powerful are the most daring in corrupting others.
Hence the increase at putridity; for men are like the dead when not
ruled by the fear of God. A dead body becomes more and more fetid the
longer it continues putrifying; and so it is with men. When they have
been for a long time sinning, and still continue to sin, the fetidness
of their sins increases, and the wrath of God is more and more provoked.
There is then no reason why ancientness should deceive us. And if, at
any time, we are tempted to think that men are sufficiently fortified by
their own strength, or by numerous auxiliaries, or that they are, as it
were sacred through their own ancientness, let what is said here come to
our minds, — that Nineveh had been like a pool of waters from the
ancient days; but that, when it was given up to destruction, it fled
away; and that, when their enemies did not rout them, they yet, being
driven by their own fear, ran away and would not stop, though one called
them to return.

<span id="v.2.x"></span>

<span id="v.2.x-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="v.2.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou constantly
remindest us, in thy word, and teachest us by so many examples, that
there is nothing permanent in this world, but that the things which seem
the firmest tend to ruin, and instantly fall and of themselves vanish
away, when by thy breath thou shakest that strength in which men trust,
— O grant, that we being really subdued and humbled, may not rely on
earthly things, but raise up our hearts and our thoughts to heaven, and
there fix the anchor of our hope; and may all our thoughts abide there,
and at length, when thou hast led us through our course on earth we
shall be gathered into that celestial kingdom, which has been obtained
for us by the blood of thy only-begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="v.2.x-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.2.xi"></span>

<span id="v.2.xi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Third

<span id="v.2.xii"></span>

<span id="v.2.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.2.xii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#009)<span id="v.2.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xii-p2"></span>**9.** Take ye the spoil of silver, take
the spoil of gold: for *there is* none end of the store *and* glory out
of all the pleasant furniture.

<span id="v.2.xii-p3"></span>**9.** Diripite argentum, diripite aurum;
et non finis (quia non est, copula debet resolvi in causalem particulam;
quia nullus finis) praeparationis ejus (sic vertunt, sed proprie <span
id="v.2.xii-p3.1"></span>תכונה significat locum;) gloria ex omni vase
desiderabili.

<span id="v.2.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.xii-p5"></span><span id="v.2.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet, as it were, by the
command and authority of God, gives up Nineveh to the will of its
enemies, that they might spoil and plunder it. Some think that this
address is made in the name of a general encouraging his soldiers; but
we know that the Prophets assume the person of God, when they thus
command any thing with authority; and it is a very emphatical mode of
speaking. It is adopted, that we may know that the Prophets pour not
forth an empty sound when they speak, but really testify what God here
determined to do, and what he in due time will execute. As then we know,
that this manner of speaking is common to the Prophets there is no
reason to apply this to the person of Nebuchadnezzar or of any other.
God then shows here that Nineveh was given up to ruin; and therefore he
delivered it into the hands of enemies.

<span id="v.2.xii-p7"></span>It is indeed certain, that the Babylonians,
in plundering the city, did not obey God’s command; but yet it is true,
that they punished the Assyrians through the secret influence of God:
for it was his purpose to visit the Ninevites for the cruelty and
avarice for which they had been long notorious, and especially for
having exercised unexampled barbarity toward the Jews. This is the
reason why God now gives them up to the Babylonians and exposes them to
plunder. But as I have spoken at large elsewhere of the secret judgments
of God, I shall only briefly observe here, — that God does not command
the Babylonians and Chaldeans in order to render them excusable, but
shows by his Prophet, that Nineveh was to be destroyed by her enemies,
not by chance, but that it was his will to avenge the wrongs done to his
people. At the same time, we must bear in mind what we have said
elsewhere, — that the Prophets thus speak when the execution is already
prepared; for God does not in vain or without reason terrify men, but he
afterwards makes it manifest by the effect: as he created the world from
nothing by his word, so also by his word he executes and fulfill his
judgments. It is then no wonder, that the Prophet does here, as though
he ruled the Chaldeans according to his will, thus address them, *Take
ye away, take ye away* But this must be viewed as having a reference to
the faithful; for the Babylonians, in plundering the city Nineveh, did
not think that they obeyed God, nor did they give to God the praise due
for the victory; but the faithful were thus reminded, that all this was
done through the secret providence of God, and that it was also a clear,
and, as it were, a visible evidence of God’s paternal love towards his
Church, when he thus deigned to undertake the cause of his distressed
people.

<span id="v.2.xii-p8"></span>It then follows, *There is no end of
preparations*: Some render <span id="v.2.xii-p8.1"></span>תכונה,
*techune,* treasure, or hidden wealth, and derive it from <span
id="v.2.xii-p8.2"></span>כון, *cun*, which is to prepare; but <span
id="v.2.xii-p8.3"></span>תכונה, *tacune,* is almost always taken for a
measure. <span id="v.2.xii-p8.4"></span>תכנות, *tacanut,* from <span
id="v.2.xii-p8.5"></span>תכון, *tacun* means a sum, for <span
id="v.2.xii-p8.6"></span>תכש, *tacan,* is to number or to count; and
this meaning suits the passage.  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231)
But there is no need of laboring much about this word; if we take it
simply for place, the meaning would be, that there was no plot of ground
in that city which was not as it were a gulf filled up; for it had
amassed all the wealth of the nations: and this sense would harmonize
well with the subject of the Prophet, — that the soldiers were to
plunder until they were satiated; for the place was, as it were, a deep
abyss.

<span id="v.2.xii-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *There is glory from
every desirable vessel*. Those who think <span
id="v.2.xii-p14.1"></span>מ, *mem*, a particle of comparison in this
place are much mistaken, and misapply the meaning of the Prophet; their
rendering is, In comparison with every desirable vessel; but this, as
all must see, is very frigid. The Prophet, I have no doubt, declares
that the wealth of Nineveh consisted of every desirable vessel; for they
had for a long time heaped together immense wealth, and that of every
kind. The Hebrews call what is precious a desirable thing; and their
vessels we include under the term furniture. We now then perceive what
the Prophet means. Some take <span id="v.2.xii-p14.2"></span>כבד,
*cabed,* as a participle, and give this version, It is burdened, or
adorned, (for it means both,) with every desirable vessel. But the
simpler mode of speaking is what we have explained, — that its glory was
from every desirable vessel.

<span id="v.2.xii-p15"></span>And here the Prophet condemns what the
Assyrians had done in heaping together so much wealth from all quarters;
for they had committed indiscriminate plunder, and gathered for
themselves all the riches of the nations. They had indeed plundered all
their neighbors, yea, and wholly stripped them. The Prophet now shows,
in order to expose them to ridicule, that other robbers would be made
rich, whom the Lord would raise up against them. The same is said by
Isaiah,

<span id="v.2.xii-p16"></span>‘O thou plunderer, shalt not thou also be
exposed to plunder?’ (<span id="v.2.xii-p16.1"></span>[Isaiah
33](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#000)<span id="v.2.xii-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.2.xii-p17"></span>So also the Prophet shows in this passage,
that men foolishly burn with so much avidity for money, and with so much
anxiety heap together great wealth; for God will find out some who in
their turn will plunder those who have plundered. It follows—

<span id="v.2.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiii-p1"></span><span id="v.2.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010)<span id="v.2.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiii-p2"></span>**10.** She is empty, and void, and waste:
and the heart melteth, and the knees smite together, and much pain *is*
in all loins, and the faces of them all gather blackness.

<span id="v.2.xiii-p3"></span>**10.** Exinanita etexinanita est, et
nudata; et cor liquefactum, et collisio genuum, et terror in omnibus
lumbis; et facies omnium contraxerunt nigredinem (vel, splendorem, ut
alii vertunt.)

<span id="v.2.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.xiii-p5"></span><span id="v.2.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet here confirms what the last
verse contains; for he shows why he had called the Chaldeans to take
away the spoil, — because it was to be so. He did not indeed (as I have
already said) command the Chaldeans in such a way as that their
obedience to God was praiseworthy: but the Prophet speaks here only of
His secret counsel. Though then the Chaldeans knew not that it was God’s
decree, yet the Prophet reminds the faithful that the Ninevites, when
made naked, suffered punishment for their cruelty, especially for having
so hostilely conducted themselves towards the Jews: and hence he
declares, that Nineveh is *emptied, is emptied, and made naked.*  <span
id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232) By repeating the same word, he
intimates the certainty of the event: Emptied, emptied, he says, as when
one says in our language, <span id="v.2.xiii-p13.1"></span>*videe et
revidee* We hence see that by this repetition what the Prophet meant is
more distinctly expressed that the faithful might not doubt respecting
the event: and then for the same purpose he adds, she is made naked.

<span id="v.2.xiii-p14"></span>We now then perceive the Prophet’s
design. As in the last verse he shows that he had power given him from
above to send armies against Nineveh, and to give up the city to them to
be spoiled and plundered; so he now shows that he had not so commanded
the Chaldeans, as though they were the legitimate servants of God, and
could pretend that they rendered service to Him. He therefore points out
for what end he had commanded the Chaldeans to plunder Nineveh; and that
was, because God had so decreed; and he had so decreed and commanded,
because he would not bear the many wrongs done to his people whom he had
taken under his protection. As then Nineveh had so cruelly treated God’s
chosen people, it was necessary that the reward she deserved should be
repaid to her. But the repetition, which I have noticed, ought to be
especially observed; for it teaches us that God’s power is connected
with his word, so that he declares nothing inconsiderately or in vain.

<span id="v.2.xiii-p15"></span>He then adds, that *knees smite
together;* and every *heart* is dissolved, or melted, and also, that
*all loins tremble* We hence learn, that there is in men no courage,
except as far as God supplies them with vigor. As soon then as He
withdraws his Spirit, those who were before the most valiant become
faint-hearted, and those who breathed great ferocity are made soft and
effeminate: for by the word heart is meant inward boldness or courage;
and by the knees and loins the strength of body is to be understood.
There is indeed no doubt but the Assyrians, while they ruled, were a
very courageous people, as power ever generates boldness; and it is also
probable that they were a warlike people, since all their neighbors had
been brought under their power. But the Prophet now shows, that there
would be no vigor in their hearts, and no strength in their loins, or in
any part of their body. *The heart,* then, he says, *is melted* And
hence we learn how foolishly men boast of their courage, while they seem
to be like lions; for God can in a moment so melt their hearts, that
they entirely lose all firmness. Then as to external vigor, we see that
it is in God’s hand; there will be, he says, *a confriction,* or the
knees will knock one against another, as they do when they tremble. And
he says afterwards, *And trembling shall be in all loins*  <span
id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) He at last adds*, And the faces of all
shall gather blackness* The word <span id="v.2.xiii-p18.2"></span>פארור,
*parur,* some derive from <span id="v.2.xiii-p18.3"></span>פאר, *par*;
and so the rendering would be, “all faces shall draw in or withdraw
their beauty,” and so also they explain <span
id="v.2.xiii-p18.4"></span>[Joe
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006)<span id="v.2.xiii-p18.4"></span>,
for the sentence there is the same. But they who disapprove of this
meaning say, that <span id="v.2.xiii-p18.5"></span>קבף, *kobets,* cannot
mean to draw in or to withdraw; and so they render the noun, blackness.
But this is a strained explanation. <span
id="v.2.xiii-p18.6"></span>פארור, *parur*, \[they say,\] does not mean a
black color but a pot: when therefore a caldron or a kettle contracts
blackness from smoke, it is then called <span
id="v.2.xiii-p18.7"></span>פארור, *parur*: but in this place these
interpreters are constrained to take it metaphorically for that color;
which is, as I have said, strained and far-fetched. I am therefore
inclined to adopt their opinion who render the sentence, all faces shall
withdraw their beauty, or their brightness: but as to the import of the
passage, there is little or no difference; let then every one have his
free choice.  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) With regard to the
Prophet’s design, he evidently means, that the faces of all would be
sad, for the Lord would fill their minds and thoughts with dread. The
withdrawing then of beauty signifies an outward appearance of sorrow, or
paleness, or whatever may appear in the countenance of men, when
dejected with grief. In short, the Prophet means, that how much soever
the Assyrians might have hitherto raised on high their crests, and
breathed great swelling words, and conducted themselves insolently, they
would now be dejected; for the Lord would prostrate their courage and
melt their strength: he would, by casting down their high spirits,
constrain them to undergo shame. This is the import of the whole. It now
follows —

<span id="v.2.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiv-p1"></span><span id="v.2.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011)<span id="v.2.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiv-p2"></span>**11.** Where *is* the dwelling of the
lions, and the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion, *even*
the old lion, walked, *and* the lion’s whelp, and none made *them*
afraid?

<span id="v.2.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** Ubi domicilium leonum, et locus
pascui leonibus, quo veniebant leo, leo, catulus leonis, et nemo
exterrens?

<span id="v.2.xiv-p4"></span>**12.** The lion did tear in pieces enough
for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his holes
with prey, and his dens with ravin.

<span id="v.2.xiv-p5"></span>**12.** Leo rapiebat quantum sufficeret
catulis suis, et strangulabat leanis suis, et replebat repina speluncas
suas et lustra sua praeda.

<span id="v.2.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.2.xiv-p7"></span><span id="v.2.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiv-p8"></span>Here the Prophet triumphs over the
Assyrians, because they thought that the city Nineveh was remote from
every danger: as lions, who fear nothing, when they are in their dens,
draw thither their prey in their claws or in their mouths: so also was
the case with the Assyrians; thinking themselves safe, while Nineveh
flourished, they took the greater liberty to commit plunders everywhere.
For Nineveh was not only the receptacle of robbers but was also like a
den of lions. And the Prophet more fully expresses the barbarous cruelty
of the Assyrians by comparing them to lions, than if he had simply
called them lions. We now then see what he means, when he says, *Where
is the place of lions?* And he designedly speaks thus of the Assyrians:
for no one ever thought that they could be touched by even the least
injury; the fear of them had indeed so seized all men, that of
themselves they submitted to the Assyrians. As then no one dared to
oppose them, the Prophet says, *Where?* as though he had said that
though all thought it incredible that Nineveh could be overthrown, it
would yet thus happen. But he assumes the character of one expressing
his astonishment, in order to intimate, that when the Lord should
execute such a judgment, it would be a work of wonder, which would fill
almost all with amazement. This question then proves that those are very
foolish who form a judgment of God’s vengeance, of which the Prophet
speaks, according to the appearance of things at the time; for the ruin
of Nineveh and of that empire was to be the incomprehensible work of
God, and which was to fill all minds with astonishment.

<span id="v.2.xiv-p9"></span>He says first, *Where is the place of
lions?* The feminine gender is indeed here used; but all agree that the
Prophet speaks of male lions.  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235)
He then adds*, the place of feeding for lions?* <span
id="v.2.xiv-p13.1"></span>כפרים, *caphrim,* mean young lions as we shall
hereafter see; and <span id="v.2.xiv-p13.2"></span>אריות, *ariut,* are
old lions. He afterwards adds, *Where* <span
id="v.2.xiv-p13.3"></span>אריה, *arie came*: and then comes <span
id="v.2.xiv-p13.4"></span>לביא, *labia*, which some render, lioness; but
<span id="v.2.xiv-p13.5"></span>לביא, *labia,* properly means an old
lion; the Prophet, no doubt, uses it in the next verse in the feminine
gender for lionesses. I therefore do not deny, but that we may fitly
render the terms here, lion and lioness; afterwards, and the whelp of
lions, and none terrifying. He then adds, Seize did the lion (the word
is <span id="v.2.xiv-p13.6"></span>אריה, *arie*) for his whelps to
satiety, that is, sufficiently; and strangle did he for his lionesses,
<span id="v.2.xiv-p13.7"></span>ללבאתיו, *lalabatiu*. Here no doubt the
Prophet means lionesses; there would otherwise be no consistency in the
passage. He afterwards says,

<span id="v.2.xiv-p14"></span><span id="v.2.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiv-p15"></span> *And filled has he with prey his dens and
his recesses with ravin;* it is the same word with a different
termination, <span id="v.2.xiv-p15.1"></span>טרף, *thereph*, and <span
id="v.2.xiv-p15.2"></span>טרפה, *therephe*

<span id="v.2.xiv-p16"></span>Now the repetition, made here by the
Prophet, of lion, young lion, and lioness, was not without its use; for
he meant by this number of words to set forth the extreme ferocity of
the Assyrians, while they were dominant. He no doubt compares their
kings, their counselors, and their chief men, to lions: and he calls
their wives lionesses, and their children he calls young lions or whelps
of lions. The sum of the whole is, that Nineveh had so degenerated in
its opulence, that all in power were like ferocious wild beasts,
destitute of every kind feeling. And I wish that this could have only
been said of one city and of one monarchy! But here, as in a mirror, the
Prophet represents to us what we at this day observe, and what has
always and in all ages been observed in great empires; for here great
power exists, there great licentiousness prevails; and when kings and
their counselors become once habituated to plunder, there is no end of
it; nay, a kind of fury is kindled in their hearts, that they seek
nothings else but to devour and to tear in pieces to rend and to
strangle. The Prophet indeed wished here to console both the Israelites
and the Jews by showing, that the injustice of their enemies would not
go unpunished: but at the same time he intended to show how great, even
to the end of the world, would be the cruelty of those who would rule
tyrannically: and as I have said, experience proves, that there are too
many like the Ninevites. It is indeed unquestionable, that the Prophet
does not without reason speak so often here of lions and lionesses.

<span id="v.2.xiv-p17"></span>Hence he says, “Come thither did the lion,
the lioness, and the whelp of the lion.” He means that when justice was
sought in that city, it was found to be the den of cruel beasts; for the
king had put off all humanity, as well as his counselors; their wives
were also like lionesses, and their children and domestics were as young
lions or the whelps of lions. And cruelty creeps in, somewhat in this
manner: When a king takes to himself too much liberty, his counselors
follow him; and then every one follows the common example, as though
every thing received as a custom was lawful. This is the representation
which the Prophet in these words sets before us; and we with our own
eyes see the same things. Then he adds, ‘The lion did tear what sufficed
his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses; he filled with prey his
dens and his recesses with plunder. He goes on with the same subject, —
that the Assyrians heaped for themselves great wealth by unjust spoils,
because they had no regard for what was right. The lion, he says, did
tear for his whelps: as lions accustom their whelps to plunder, and when
they are not grown enough, so as to be able to attack innocent animals,
they provide a prey for them, and also bring some to the lionesses; so
also, as the Prophet informs us, was the case at Nineveh; the habits of
all men were formed for cruelty by the chief men and the magistrates. By
the word <span id="v.2.xiv-p17.1"></span>בדי, *bedi*, sufficiency, he
means not that the Ninevites are satisfied with their prey, for they
were insatiable; but it rather refers to the abundance which they had.
And he says, that the lion strangled for his lionesses: I wish there
were no lionesses to devour at this day; but we see that there are some
who surpass their husbands in boldness and cruelty. But the Prophet says
here what is natural, — that the lion strangles the prey and gives it
afterwards to his lionesses. He then adds, that the Ninevites were not
satisfied with daily rapines, as many robbers live for the day; but he
says, that their plunder was laid up in store. Hence they filled their
secret places and dens with their booty and spoils. Still further,
though the Prophet speaks not here so plainly, as we shall see he does
in what follows, it is yet certain, that the reason is here given, why
God visited the Ninevites with so severe a vengeance, and that was,
because they had ceased to be like men, and had degenerated into savage
beasts. It follows —

<span id="v.2.xv"></span>

<span id="v.2.xv-p1"></span><span id="v.2.xv-p1.1"></span>[Nahum
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013)<span id="v.2.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xv-p2"></span>**13.** Behold, I *am* against thee, saith
the Lord of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the
sword shall devour thy young lions: and I will cut off thy prey from the
earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.

<span id="v.2.xv-p3"></span>**13.** Ecce Ego ad te dicit Jehova
exercituum, et comburam in fumo currum ejus, et leunculos tuos comedet
gladius, et excidam e terra praedam tuam, et non audietur amplius vox
nunciorum tuorum (aut, dentium molarium.)

<span id="v.2.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="v.2.xv-p5"></span><span id="v.2.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xv-p6"></span>To give more effect to what he says, the
Prophet introduces God here as the speaker. *Behold,* he says, *I am
against thee* He has been hitherto, as it were, the herald of God, and
in this character gave an authoritative command to the Chaldeans to
plunder Nineveh: but when God himself comes forward, and uses not the
mouth of man, but declares himself his own decrees, it is much more
impressive. This then is the reason why God now openly speaks: *Behold,
I am,* he says, against thee. We understand the emphatical import of the
demonstrative particle, *Behold;* for God, as if awakened from sleep,
shows that it will be at length his work, to undertake the cause of his
people, and also to punish the world for its wickedness, Behold, I am
against thee, he says. We have elsewhere seen a similar mode of
speaking; there is therefore no need of dwelling on it here.

<span id="v.2.xv-p7"></span>*I will burn,* he says, *with smoke her
chariots* Here by smoke some understand a smoky fire; but the Prophet, I
think, meant another thing, — that at the first onset God would consume
all the chariots of Nineveh; as though he had said, that as soon as the
flame burst forth, it would be all over with all the forces of Nineveh;
for by chariots he no doubt means all their warlike preparations; and we
know that they fought then from chariots: as at this day there are
employed in wars horsemen in armor, so there were then chariots. But the
Prophet, by taking a part for the whole, includes all warlike forces: *I
will burn* then *the chariots*  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236)
— How? By smoke alone, that is as soon as the first flame begins to
emerge; for the smoke rises before the fire appears or gathers strength:
in short, the Prophet shows that Nineveh would be, as it were, in a
moment, reduced to nothing, as soon as it pleased God to avenge its
wickedness.

<span id="v.2.xv-p9"></span>He then adds in the third person, *And thy
young lions shall the sword devour* He indeed changes the person here;
but the discourse is more striking, when God manifests his wrath in
abrupt sentences. He had said, *Behold, I am against thee;* then, *I
will burn her chariots,* he now hardly deigns to direct his speech to
Nineveh; but afterwards he returns to her, *and thy young lions shall
the sword devour* Then God, by speaking thus in broken sentences, more
fully expresses the dreadful vengeance which he had determined to
execute on the Ninevites. He then says, *And I will exterminate from the
earth thy prey;* that is, it will not now be allowed thee to go on as
usual; for I will put a stop to thy inhuman cruelty. Thus *prey* may be
taken for the act itself; or it may be fitly explained of the spoils
taken from the nations, for the Ninevites, by their tyrannical ravening,
had everywhere plundered; and thus it may be applied to the pillaging of
the city. I *will* then *exterminate* from the land, that is from thy
country, those riches which have been hitherto heaped together as though
a lion had been everywhere gathering a prey.

<span id="v.2.xv-p10"></span>*And heard no more shall be the voice of
thy messengers* They who understand <span
id="v.2.xv-p10.1"></span>מלאכים, *melakim,* to be messengers, apply the
word to the heralds, by whom the Assyrians were wont to proclaim wars on
neighboring nations. As then they sent here and there their heralds to
announce war, and as their terrible voice sounded everywhere, the words
of the Prophet have this meaning given them, — that God would at length
produce silence, so that they should not hereafter disturb all their
neighboring countries with the clamor of war. But as this explanation is
strained, I am inclined to adopt what others think, — that the grinding
teeth are here intended. The word is not written, if it be taken for
messengers, according to grammar; it is <span
id="v.2.xv-p10.2"></span>מלאככה, *melakke*; there ought not to have been
the <span id="v.2.xv-p10.3"></span>ה, *he* at the end, and <span
id="v.2.xv-p10.4"></span>י, *jod,* ought to have been inserted before
the last letter but one: and if it be deemed as meaning the king, it
ought then to have been written <span id="v.2.xv-p10.5"></span>מלכך,
*melkak*. All then confess, that the word is not written according to
the rule of grammar; and as the Persians call the grinders <span
id="v.2.xv-p10.6"></span>מלאככה, *melakke,* we may give this version,
which well suits the context, ‘No more shall be heard the sound of
grinders.’ For since lions seize the prey with their teeth,  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) and also break the bones, and thus
make a great noise when they tear an animal or a man with their teeth,
this rendering seems to be the most suitable, *Heard no more shall be
the sound of teeth,* that is, heard shall not be the noise made by thy
teeth; for when thou now tearest thy prey, thy teeth make a noise. No
more heard then shall the noise from that breaking, or the clashing or
the crashing of the teeth. But as to the chief point, this is no matter
of importance.

<span id="v.2.xv-p12"></span>The Prophet simply teaches us here that it
could not be, but that God would at length restrain tyrants; for though
he hides himself for a time, he yet never forgets the groans of those
whom he sees to be unjustly afflicted: and particularly when tyrants
molest the Church, it is proved here by the Prophet that God will at
length be a defender; and hence we ought to consider well these words,
*Behold, I am against thee* For though God addresses these words only to
the Assyrians, yet as he points out the reasons why he rises up with so
much displeasure against them, they ought to be extended to all tyrants,
and to all who exercise cruelty towards distressed and innocent men. But
this is more clearly expressed in the following verse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc28020.htm#fr_222) <span
id="v.2.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.iii-p3"></span> That the Babylonian power is meant by “the
destroyer,” or disperser, or scatterer, is the opinion if *Jerome,
Drusius, Grotius, Marckius,* and *Newcome.* But *Kimchi, Dathius,
Henderson,* and some others, regard the “destroyer” as the king of
Assyria. What agrees best with the context is the former opinion. Having
in the preceding verse announced the release of the people of Israel
from the rule of Assyria, the Prophet now introduces its destroyer, and
then proceeds with the main object of his prophecy, and describes the
fall of Nineveh. *Marckius* considers the whole verse as addressed to
the Babylonian power under the person of the king, while *Calvin*
regards it, with the exception of the first line or clause, as addressed
ironically to Nineveh. The verbs are either participles or preterites
indicative; but they are construed by the former as gerunds; most of
them imperatives. <span id="v.2.iii-p3.1"></span>נצור is rendered as a
passive participle by the Septuagint, and so it appears to be, and the
three which follow, as imperatives. But in two copies it is without the
<span id="v.2.iii-p3.2"></span>ו; then all the verbs in the verse appear
to be in the same form, and may be considered to be either preterites
indicative or participles; and participles are often used in Hebrew to
express the present tense: and the Prophet may be considered as seeing
the Babylonian ascending and laying siege to Nineveh, for <span
id="v.2.iii-p3.3"></span>מצורה means a siege as well as a fortress: then
the rendering would be as follows, —

<span id="v.2.iii-p4"></span>Ascend does the waster before thee;  
He watches the siege, guards the way,  
Makes firm the loins, exerts strength mightily.

<span id="v.2.iii-p5"></span>But if “fortress” be preferred to “siege,”
it may be adopted consistently with the context. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc28020.htm#fr_223) <span
id="v.2.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.2.iii-p9"></span> *Drusius* confessed that he did not
understand this verse. The view given of it by *Calvin* seems plain, and
*Marckius* has taken the same view of it: but *Newcome*, as well as
*Henderson*, differ widely, and give a rendering which seems not to
comport with the context. It is like that of *Drusius,* which no doubt
made him to say that he did not understand the passage.

<span id="v.2.iii-p10"></span>For Jehovah restoreth the excellency of
Jacob  
As the excellency of Israel.

<span id="v.2.iii-p11"></span>In this connection, this can have no
meaning. The version of *Henderson* is the same, only he puts the verb
in the future tense. The verb <span id="v.2.iii-p11.1"></span>שב has the
meaning of turning away, as well as of restoring, and *Marckius* renders
it <span id="v.2.iii-p11.2"></span>*avertit,* he turned away. Then <span
id="v.2.iii-p11.3"></span>גאון, rising, swelling, <span
id="v.2.iii-p11.4"></span>*elatio*, is more commonly taken in a bad than
in a good sense, as meaning pride, haughtiness. The latter part of the
verse sets before us distinctly the means which had been adopted to take
away this pride. The passage is evidently parenthetic. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc28020.htm#fr_224) <span
id="v.2.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.iv-p7"></span> <span id="v.2.iv-p7.1"></span>גבוריהו, of
his heroes, — “<span id="v.2.iv-p7.2"></span>heroum.” — *Dathius.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc28020.htm#fr_225) <span
id="v.2.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.2.iv-p8"></span> <span id="v.2.iv-p8.1"></span>אנשי-חיל, men
of war, — “warriors,” *Henderson;* “the valiant men.” — *Newcome.*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc28020.htm#fr_226) <span
id="v.2.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.iv-p10"></span> The most satisfactory explanation of this
word is what is offered by *Parkhurst,* and adopted by *Henderson.* He
says that <span id="v.2.iv-p10.1"></span>פלד, in Arabic, is to *cut,* or
*cut in pieces,* and that <span id="v.2.iv-p10.2"></span>פלדות may have
been the *scythes* or cutting instruments with which the chariots were
armed. Then in eight or nine MSS. The <span id="v.2.iv-p10.3"></span>ב,
*beth,* before <span id="v.2.iv-p10.4"></span>אש, is <span
id="v.2.iv-p10.5"></span>כ, *caph.* If this reading be adopted, and the
poetical singular number be retained as to the word chariot, the clause
may be thus translated: —

<span id="v.2.iv-p11"></span>*Like fire* are *the scythes of the
chariot,  
In the day of his preparation.*

<span id="v.2.iv-p12"></span>To which shall be added the line which
follows, —

<span id="v.2.iv-p13"></span>And the fir-trees (spears) tremulously
shake.

<span id="v.2.iv-p14"></span>Fir-trees are rendered “cypresses” by
*Henderson;* and *Newcome,* following the Septuagint, changes to the
word into what signifies “horsemen.” The figure is bold, but it is no
unusual thing in poetry to call an instrument by the name of the
material of which it is made. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc28020.htm#fr_227) <span
id="v.2.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.v-p7"></span> <span id="v.2.v-p7.1"></span>מראיהן, three
MSS. Have the masculine suffix <span id="v.2.v-p7.2"></span> הם— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc28020.htm#fr_228) <span
id="v.2.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.vi-p8"></span> This verse is applied by *Grotius* and
*Newcome* to the Babylonian and not to the Assyrian king. The last
clause seems to favor this opinion, but the second, the other. To render
<span id="v.2.vi-p8.1"></span>יכשלו as a Hiphil, “They cast down,”
without an objective case, cannot be approved; but they may have been
said to “stumble,” as the word means, from their great haste, afterwards
mentioned. *Piscator, Marckius,* and *Henderson,* agree in the view
given here. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc28020.htm#fr_229) <span
id="v.2.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.viii-p8"></span> Various have been the opinions respecting
the construction of this verse. The Rabbins have generally considered
the first word as the name of the queen of Nineveh: but this opinion has
been adopted but by a few. *Newcome* joins the word with the last verse,
and changes it into <span id="v.2.viii-p8.1"></span>מצב, on no authority
but that of conjecture, and renders it “fortress.” What *Henderson* has
adopted seems the best: he also joins it to the last verse, but makes no
change in it, only he gives the <span id="v.2.viii-p8.2"></span>ו an
adversative meaning, which it often has. The evident gender, as he
rightly says, of <span id="v.2.viii-p8.3"></span>הצב proves its
connection with the former verse, it being masculine, while the verbs in
this verse are feminines. His version of the two verses is the
following, —

<span id="v.2.viii-p9"></span>7. The floodgates are opened,  
And the palace is dissolved,  
Though firmly established.

<span id="v.2.viii-p10"></span>8. She is made bare, she is carried up,  
While her handmaids moan like doves,  
And smite upon their hearts.

<span id="v.2.viii-p11"></span>With the exception of the word <span
id="v.2.viii-p11.1"></span>הצב, this version is liable to several
objections. The verb <span id="v.2.viii-p11.2"></span>גלה is often used
in Kal intransitively, “is removed;” and this meaning enables us better
to understand that of the next verb, “she is made to ascend,” that is,
into captivity, even into Babylon, the seat of empire, being ever
considered as the highest place. <span id="v.2.viii-p11.3"></span>מנהגות
is a word which in some form or another often occurs in Hebrew, and has
never the meaning here given to it. Here it is a participle in Hophal,
and “carried away” is its evident meaning, and is rendered <span
id="v.2.viii-p11.4"></span>ηγοντο, led away, by the Septuagint. “Like,”
or, as “the voice of doves,” are literally the words which follow this
verb. However connected, they must be considered as elliptical — “as
*with* the voice, or, with a voice as that of doves.” They might then be
construed with the next line. The whole verse would then be this, —

<span id="v.2.viii-p12"></span>She is removed, she is made to ascend;  
Yea, her handmaids are led away,  
Who with a voice as that of doves, tabor on their breasts.

<span id="v.2.viii-p13"></span>They were accompanying the tabering with
a voice like that of doves. “Tabor” is literally the original, and “on
their breasts” is an English idiom, as “on their hearts” is a Hebrew
idiom. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc28020.htm#fr_230) <span
id="v.2.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.ix-p7"></span> The original is in a singular form, <span
id="v.2.ix-p7.1"></span>מימי היא, “from the days of it,” or, of her.
*Henderson* says, that “it is an antiquated mode of expressing the
feminine pronominal affix — the absolute form of the pronoun being
retained instead of the fragmental <span id="v.2.ix-p7.2"></span>ה.” The
verse may be thus rendered: —

<span id="v.2.ix-p8"></span>*Though Nineveh* has been *like a pool of
water during her days,  
Yet they flee;* — — *“Stand, stand;”  
But none is looking back.*

<span id="v.2.ix-p9"></span>*Newcome’s* version of the first line is as
follows, —

<span id="v.2.ix-p10"></span>And the waters of Nineveh are as a pool of
water:

<span id="v.2.ix-p11"></span>And he says, that the pronoun sometimes is
at the end of a clause: but it cannot be so considered here, because
<span id="v.2.ix-p11.1"></span>היא is in *regimine* with <span
id="v.2.ix-p11.2"></span>מימי It is to be noticed, that the Prophet
throughout represents the whole transaction as an eye-witness, as it had
been shown to him in a vision. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc28020.htm#fr_231) <span
id="v.2.xii-p8.7"></span>

<span id="v.2.xii-p9"></span> *Buxtorf* derives the word from <span
id="v.2.xii-p9.1"></span>כון, to prepare, and *Parkhurst* from <span
id="v.2.xii-p9.2"></span>תכן, to regulate, to measure. It is rendered
“store” by *Newcome* and *Henderson.* What is meant is evidently the
vast treasure amassed by the Assyrians. The next words are more
variously rendered. *Newcome* connects the word <span
id="v.2.xii-p9.3"></span>כבד with “store,” and renders the two lines
thus, —

<span id="v.2.xii-p10"></span>*And there is no end of the glorious
store,  
Because of all* kinds *of pleasant vessels.*

<span id="v.2.xii-p11"></span>But more consistent with the character of
the language, and agreeably to what Dr. Wheeler suggests, is this, —

<span id="v.2.xii-p12"></span>And there is no end to her store,  
It is more precious than all desirable vessels.

<span id="v.2.xii-p13"></span>The preposition <span
id="v.2.xii-p13.1"></span>מ, after <span id="v.2.xii-p13.2"></span>כבד,
may be viewed as the comparative degree. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc28020.htm#fr_232) <span
id="v.2.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiii-p7"></span> The three words in Hebrew form a very
striking alliteration; and they present another peculiarity, — they
increase in length or in syllables, somewhat similar to what follows, —

<span id="v.2.xiii-p8"></span>She is made void, and empty, and desolate:

<span id="v.2.xiii-p9"></span>or,

<span id="v.2.xiii-p10"></span>She is empty, and emptied, and desolated.

<span id="v.2.xiii-p11"></span><span id="v.2.xiii-p11.1"></span>bwqh
wmbwqh wmblqh

<span id="v.2.xiii-p12"></span>Buke, umebuke, umebelake.

<span id="v.2.xiii-p13"></span>Some consider the words as nouns, but
they are evidently participles. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc28020.htm#fr_233) <span
id="v.2.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiii-p16"></span> These three lines are literally as
follows, —

<span id="v.2.xiii-p17"></span>*And the heart is melted,  
And* there is *tottering of the knees,  
And anguish in all loins.*

<span id="v.2.xiii-p18"></span>The word <span
id="v.2.xiii-p18.1"></span>חלחלה is not trembling, but violent pain,
pang, or anguish as that of a woman in travail. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc28020.htm#fr_234) <span
id="v.2.xiii-p18.8"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiii-p19"></span> *Parkhurst* and others agree with
*Calvin,* as to the construction of this line. The idea adopted seems to
have been first suggested by *Aben-Ezra,* as it appears from *Marckius*,
but was strongly opposed by *Kimchi,* and on apparently a good ground —
the meaning of the verb here used. <span id="v.2.xiii-p19.1"></span>קבף,
as a verb and as a noun, in all its variations, has invariably the idea
of collecting or gathering, and in no instance that of withdrawing,
except as it is said, in this sentence, and in Joel. *Dathius,
Marckius,* and *Newcome,* retain the idea contained in our version; and
consistent with this is the paraphrase of the clause given by the
Septuagint, “<span id="v.2.xiii-p19.2"></span>και το προσωπον (<span
id="v.2.xiii-p19.3"></span>τα προσωπα, comp.) <span
id="v.2.xiii-p19.4"></span>παντων ως προσκαυμα χυτρας — and the face
(or, the faces) of all as the burning on the pot.” This idea is much
more expressive and striking than the other. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc28020.htm#fr_235) <span
id="v.2.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xiv-p10"></span> It is better to retain the gender as it
is in Hebrew: and this makes the passage more consistent, and
corresponds better with the “feeding-place” in the next line. The
recesses of the lionesses and the whelps are here mentioned, and in the
next verse is stated what the lions did for them: —

<span id="v.2.xiv-p11"></span>*11. Where* is *the haunt of the
lionesses,  
And the feeding-place,* even *that for the whelps,  
Where did go the lion, the lioness, the cub of the lion,  
And none made* them *afraid?*

<span id="v.2.xiv-p12"></span>12. The lion ravined for the supply of his
cubs,  
And strangled for his lionesses,  
And filled with ravin his dens,  
And his haunts by ravining.

<span id="v.2.xiv-p13"></span>“The allegory,” says *Newcome,* “is beyond
measure beautiful. Where are the inhabitants of Nineveh, who were strong
and rapacious like lions?” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc28020.htm#fr_236) <span
id="v.2.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.2.xv-p8"></span> *Jerome* renders the clause, “<span
id="v.2.xv-p8.1"></span>Succendam usque ad fumum — I will burn to smoke”
the chariots: and the version of *Henderson* is the same. But the most
natural supposition is, that smoke here is mentioned instead of fire.
And so *Dathius* renders it — “<span id="v.2.xv-p8.2"></span>igni — with
fire.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc28020.htm#fr_237) <span
id="v.2.xv-p10.7"></span>

<span id="v.2.xv-p11"></span> The context undoubtedly favors this
rendering. The Septuagint has “<span id="v.2.xv-p11.1"></span>τα εργα
σοι — thy works,” which cannot consist with the word, “voice,” which
precedes, though *Newcome,* following the Septuagint, renders it, “the
fame of thy deeds.” There is but one different reading, except as to
points, and that is, <span id="v.2.xv-p11.2"></span>מלאככם, “their
messenger,” in two copies, and this comes nearest to the received text
of any that has been conjectured: and to render “messenger” in the
singular number comports better with the usual style of the Prophets,
than in the plural. Perhaps the <span id="v.2.xv-p11.3"></span>ה may be
deemed redundant at the end of the sentence; and then it would be
literally, “thy messenger,” taken in a collective sense. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Nahum](cc28021)
