[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc28006)  [Next](cc28008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.4"></span>

<span id="iii.4-p1"></span>Chapter 4.

<span id="iii.4.i"></span>

<span id="iii.4.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.i-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.4.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.i-p2"></span>**1.** But it displeased Jonah exceedingly,
and he was very angry.

<span id="iii.4.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et displicuit Jonae dolore magno, et
succensuit apud se.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md)

<span id="iii.4.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.i-p9"></span><span id="iii.4.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.i-p10"></span>Jerome commends this grief of Jonah, and
compares it to the holy zeal of Paul when he wished himself to be an
anathema for his brethren, (<span id="iii.4.i-p10.1"></span>[Ro
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="iii.4.i-p10.1"></span>:.md)
for he denies that he grieved because God had showed mercy to so
illustrious a city; but because the conversion of the Gentiles was a
certain presage of the destruction of the chosen people. As then Jonah
perceived as in a mirror the near ruin of Israel, he on this account
grieved, if we believe Jerome: but this notion is extremely frivolous;
for, immediately after, God reproved Jonah. What then will the foolish
and puerile apology of Jerome avail the Prophet, since God has declared
that he acted perversely in grieving? Nay, the dullness of Jerome is
thus become evident; (thus indeed do I speak of a man, who, though
learned and laborious, has yet deprived himself of that praise, which
otherwise he might have justly earned.) His wayward disposition
everywhere betrayed itself; and he is evidently disproved in this very
context, where Jonah shows clearly that the cause of his grief was
another, even this, — that he was unwilling to be deemed a false or a
lying prophet: hence was his great grief and his bitterness. And this we
see, had God not expressed his mind, was unjust and inconsistent with
every reason.

<span id="iii.4.i-p11"></span>We may then conclude that Jonah was
influenced by false zeal when he could not with resignation bear that
the city of Nineveh should have been delivered from destruction: and he
also himself amplifies the greatness of his sin. He might have said, in
one word, that it displeased Jonah; but not satisfied with this simple
form, he adds, that he felt great displeasure or grief; and he
afterwards adds, that he was very angry. Though the beginning may not
have been wrong, yet excess was sinful. But he confesses that there was
excess, and want of moderation in his grief: since then he accuses
himself in plain words what good is it, by false and invented pretenses,
to cover what we clearly see cannot be excused? But that it may be more
evident why the deliverance of the city of Nineveh displeased Jonah, let
us go on with the context —

<span id="iii.4.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.4.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.4.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.ii-p2"></span>**2.** And he prayed unto the Lord, and
said, I pray thee, O Lord, *was* not this my saying, when I was yet in
my country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou
*art* a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et oravit ad Jehovam et dixit,
Obsecro Jehova, an non hic sermo meus, quum adhuc essem in terra mea?
Propterea festinavi fugere in Tharsis, quia noveram quod tu sis Deus
propitius (vel, plenus gratiae,) et misericors, tardus ad iram, multus
clementia, et qui poenitentia duceris super malo.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.4.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.ii-p6"></span>It seems by no means befitting that Jonah
should have said here that he prayed; for prayer ought to be calm; but
he confesses that his mind was in a state of excitement. As then anger
was burning within the Prophet, how could he come before God and utter a
suitable prayer? And further, what is the end of praying, but to confess
that whatever good is to be obtained resides in God, and is to be sought
humbly from him? But Jonah here, on the contrary, expostulates and
clamors against God; for he seems in a manner to be contending that he
had a just reason for his flight, and also that God ought not to have
pardoned the Ninevites. He then accuses God, that he might free himself
from every blame. But all this is foreign and remote from what is
required in prayer. How then must we understand this passage, in which
he says that he prayed? My answer is — that the faithful often in a
disturbed state of mind approach God with a desire to pray, and that
their prayers are not wholly rejected, though they are not altogether
approved and accepted. And hence also it appears more evident how the
works of the godly are regarded by God, though they are sprinkled with
many stains. Whenever the Papists read that any work has pleased God,
they imagine that all was perfection and cleanness: but there is no work
which is not infected with some pollution, unless it be purified by a
free pardon. This I say is evident to us in this prayer, which was not
so rejected by God, as though it retained not the character of prayer:
and yet it is certain that Jonah was by no means rightly influenced when
he prayed so clamorously, finding fault, as it were, with God, and
retaining still some portion of his own obstinacy; for he boasted of his
flight. But this flight, as we have stated, was a proof of manifest
rebellion, since, by shaking off the yoke, he despised the call of God.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p7"></span>We must therefore acknowledge that there
was some piety in this prayer of Jonah, as well as many faults. It was
an act of piety that he addressed his complaints to God. For though
hypocrites may pray to God, they yet are wholly averse to him, and
freely give vent to their bitterness against God: but Jonah, while he
here complains, and observes no moderation, but is carried away by a
blind and perverse impulse, is yet prepared to submit to God, as we
shall hereafter see. This is the reason why he says that he prayed: for
he would not have been ashamed to confess any grievous sin of which he
might have been conscious. He did not then extenuate his fault by using
the word prayer as hypocrites are wont to do, who ever set up some
pretenses or veils when they seek to cover their own baseness: such was
not the object of Jonah. When therefore he says that he prayed, he
declares generally that he did not so speak against God, but that he
still retained some seed of piety and obedience in his heart. *Jonah*
then *prayed.* Hence it follows, as I have before stated, that many of
the prayers of the saints are sinful, (*vitiosas* — faulty) which, when
tried by the right rule, deserve to be rejected. But the Lord, according
to his own mercy, pardons their defects so that these confused and
turbulent prayers yet retain their title and honor.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p8"></span>Now he says, *I pray thee, Jehovah is not
this what I said?* Here Jonah openly declares why he bore so ill the
deliverance of Nineveh from destruction, because he was thus found to
have been false and lying. But it may seem strange that the Prophet had
more regard for his own reputation than for the glory of God; for in
this especially shines forth the glory of God, that he is reconcilable
as soon as men return to the right way, and that he offers himself to
them as a father. Ought then Jonah to have preferred his own honor to
the glory of God? I answer, — that the Prophet was not so devoted to
himself, but that a concern for the glory of God held the first place in
his soul; this is certain. For he connected, and justly so, his own
ministry with the glory of God; as it proceeded from his authority. When
Jonah entered Nineveh, he cried not as a private man, but avowed that he
was sent by God. Now if the preaching of Jonah is found to be false,
reproach will recoil on the author of his call, even on God. Jonah then
no doubt could not bear that the name of God should be exposed to the
reproaches of the Gentiles, as though he had spoken dissemblingly, now
opening hell, then heaven: and there is nothing so contrary to the glory
of God as such a dissimulation. We hence see why Jonah was seized with
so much grief; he did not regard himself; but as he saw that an occasion
would be given to ungodly blasphemers, if God changed his purpose, or if
he did not appear consistent with his word, he felt much grieved.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p9"></span>But however specious this reason may be,
we yet learn of how much avail are good intentions with God. Whatever
good intention can be imagined, it was certainly a good intention in
Jonah, worthy of some praise, that he preferred dying a hundred times
rather than to hear these reproachful blasphemies — that the word of God
was a mere sport, that his threatening were no better than fables, that
God made this and that pretense, and transformed himself into various
characters. This was certainly the very best intention, if it be
estimated by our judgment. But we shall presently see that it was
condemned by the mouth of God himself. Let us hence learn not to
arrogate to ourselves judgment in matters which exceed our capacities,
but to subject our minds to God, and to seek of him the spirit of
wisdom. For whence was it that Jonah so fretted against God, except that
he burned with a desire for his glory? But his zeal was inconsiderate,
for he would be himself the judge and arbitrator, while, on the
contrary, he ought to have subjected himself altogether to God. And the
same rule ought to be observed also by us. When we see many things
happening through a Divine interposition, that is, through the secret
providence of God, and things which expose his name to the blasphemies
of the ungodly, we ought indeed to feel grief; but in the meantime let
us ask of the Lord to turn at length these shameful reproaches to his
own glory; and let us by no means raise an uproar, as many do, who
immediately begin to contend with God, when things are otherwise ordered
than what they wish or think to be useful. Let us learn by the example
of Jonah not to measure God’s judgments by our own wisdom, but to wait
until he turns darkness into light. And at the same time let us learn to
obey his commands, to follow his call without any disputing: though
heaven and earth oppose us, though many things occur which may tend to
avert us from the right course, let us yet continue in this resolution,
— that nothing is better for us than to obey God, and to go on in the
way which he points out to us.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p10"></span>But by saying that he *hastened to go to
Tarshish,* he does not altogether excuse his flight; but he now more
clearly explains, that he did not shun trouble or labor, that he did not
run away from a contest or danger, but that he only avoided his call,
because he felt a concern for the glory of God. The import, then, of
Jonah’s words is, — that he makes God here, as it were, his witness and
judge, that he did not withdraw himself from obedience to God through
fear of danger, or through idleness, or through a rebellious spirit, or
through any other evil motive, but only because he was unwilling that
his holy name should be profaned, and would not of his own accord be the
minister of that preaching, which would be the occasion of opening the
mouth of ungodly and profane men, and of making them to laugh at God
himself. Since then I cannot hope, he says, for any other issue to my
preaching than to make the Gentiles to deride God, yea, and to revile
his holy name, as though he were false and deceitful, I chose rather to
flee to Tarshish. Then Jonah does not here altogether clear himself; for
otherwise that chastisement, by which he ought to have been thoroughly
subdued, must have failed in its effect. He had been lately restored
from the deep, and shall we say that he now so extols himself against
God, that he wishes to appear wholly free from every blame? This
certainly would be very strange: but, as I have said, he declares to
God, that he fled at the beginning for no other reason, but because he
did not expect any good fruit from his preaching, but, on the contrary,
feared what now seemed to take place, — that God’s name would be
ridiculed.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p11"></span>For he immediately adds, *For I know that
thou art a God full of grace, and merciful, slow to wrath,* etc. It is a
wonder that Jonah withdrew from his lawful call; for he knew that God
was merciful, and there is no stronger stimulant than this to stir us
on, when God is pleased to use our labor: and we know that no one can
with alacrity render service to God except he be allured by his paternal
kindness. Hence no one will be a willing Prophet or Teacher, except he
is persuaded that God is merciful. Jonah then seems here to reason very
absurdly when he says, that he withdrew himself from his office, because
he knew that God was merciful. But how did he know this? By the law of
God; for the passage is taken from <span id="iii.4.ii-p11.1"></span>[Ex
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.4.ii-p11.1"></span>,
where is described that remarkable and memorable vision, in which God
offered to Moses a view of himself: and there was then exhibited to the
holy Prophet, as it were, a living representation of God, and there is
no passage in the law which expresses God’s nature more to the life; for
God was then pleased to make himself known in a familiar way to his
servant.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p12"></span>As then Jonah had been instructed in the
doctrine of the law, how could he discharge the office of a Prophet
among his own people? And why did not this knowledge discourage his
mind, when he was called to the office of a Teacher? It is then certain
that this ought to be confined to the sort of preaching, such as we have
before explained. Jonah would not have shrunk from God’s command, had he
been sent to the Ninevites to teach what he had been ordered to do among
the chosen people. Had then a message been committed to Jonah, to set
forth a gracious and merciful God to the Ninevites, he would not have
hesitated a moment to offer his service. But as this express
threatening, *Nineveh shall be destroyed*, was given him in charge, he
became confounded, and sought at length to flee away rather than to
execute such a command. Why so? Because he thus reasoned with himself,
“I am to denounce a near ruin on the Ninevites; why does God command me
to do this, except to invite these wretched men to repentance? Now if
they repent, will not God be instantly ready to forgive them? He would
otherwise deny his own nature: God cannot be unlike himself, he cannot
put off that disposition of which he has once testified to Moses. Since
God, then, is reconcilable, if the Ninevites will return to the right
way and flee to him, he will instantly embrace them: thus I shall be
found to be false in my preaching.”

<span id="iii.4.ii-p13"></span>We now then perceive how this passage of
Jonah is to be understood, when he says that he fled beyond the sea, at
least that he attempted to do so, because he knew that God was gracious;
for he would not have deprived God of his service, had not this
contrariety disturbed and discouraged his mind, “What! I shall go there
as God’s ambassador, in a short time I shall be discovered to be a liar:
will not this reproach be cast on the name of God himself? It is
therefore better for me to be silent, than that God, the founder of my
call, should be ridiculed.” We see that Jonah had a distinct regard to
that sort of preaching which we have already referred to. And it hence
appears that Jonah gave to the Ninevites more than he thought; for he
supposed that he was sent by God, only that the Ninevites might know
that they were to be destroyed: but he brought deliverance to them; and
this indeed he partly suspected or knew before; for he retained this
truth — that God cannot divest himself of his mercy, for he remains ever
the same. But when he went forth to execute the duty enjoined on him he
certainly had nothing to expect but the entire ruin of the city Nineveh.
God in the meantime employed his ministry for a better end and purpose.
There is indeed no doubt but that he exhorted the Ninevites to
repentance; but his own heart was as it were closed up, so that he could
not allow them the mercy of God. We hence see that Jonah was seized with
perplexities, so that he could not offer deliverance to the Ninevites,
and it was yet offered them by God through his instrumentality.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p14"></span>We now then understand how God often
works by his servants; for he leads them as the blind by his own hand
where they think not. Thus, when he stirs up any one of us, we are
sometimes <span id="iii.4.ii-p14.1"></span>ὀλιγόπίστοι — very weak in
faith; we think that our labor will be useless and without any fruit, or
at least attended with small success. But the Lord will let us see what
we could not have expected. Such was the case with Jonah; for when he
came to Nineveh, he had no other object but to testify respecting the
destruction of the city; but the Lord was pleased to make him the
minister of salvation. God then honored with remarkable success the
teaching of Jonah, while he was unworthy of so great an honor; for, as
we have already said, he closed up in a manner every access to the
blessing of God. We now then apprehend the meaning of this passage, in
which Jonah says that he fled from the call of God, because he knew that
God was ready to be gracious and merciful.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p15"></span>I come now to the great things which are
said of God. <span id="iii.4.ii-p15.1"></span>חנון, *chenun,* properly
means a disposition to show favor, as though it was said that God is
gratuitously benevolent; we express the same in our language by the
terms, *benin, gratieux, debonnaire.* God then assumes to himself this
character; and then he says, *merciful;* and he adds this that we may
know that he is always ready to receive us, if indeed we come to him as
to the fountain of goodness and mercy. But the words which follow
express more clearly his mercy, and show how God is merciful, — even
because he is abundant in compassion and slow to wrath. God then is
inclined to kindness; and though men on whom he looks are unworthy, he
is yet merciful; and this he expresses by the word <span
id="iii.4.ii-p15.2"></span>רחום, *rechum*

<span id="iii.4.ii-p16"></span>It is at the same time necessary to add
these two sentences that he is *abundant* in compassion and slow to
wrath, — why so? For we ever seek in ourselves some cause for God’s
favor; when we desire God to be kind to us, we inquire in ourselves why
he ought to favor us: and when we find nothing, all the faith we before
had respecting God’s grace at once vanishes. The Lord therefore does
here recall us to himself, and testifies that he is kind and merciful,
inasmuch as he is abundant in compassion; as though he said, “I have in
myself a sufficient reason, why I should be accessible to you, and why I
should receive you and show you favor.” Hence the goodness of God alone
ought to be regarded by us, when we desire his mercy, and when we have
need of pardon. It is as though he had said, that he is not influenced
by any regard for our worthiness, and that it is not for merits that he
is disposed to mercy when we have sinned, and that he receives us into
favor; but that he does all this because his goodness is infinite and
inexhaustible. And it is also added, that he is *slow to wrath* This
slowness to wrath proves that God provides for the salvation of mankind,
even when he is provoked by their sins. Though miserable men provoke God
daily against themselves, he yet continues to have a regard for their
salvation. He is therefore slow to wrath, which means, that the Lord
does not immediately execute such punishment as they deserve who thus
provoke him. We now then see what is the import of these words.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p17"></span>Let us now return to this — that Jonah
thrust himself from his office, because he knew that God was slow to
wrath, and merciful, and full of grace: he even had recourse to this
reasoning, “Either God will change his nature, or spare the Ninevites if
they repent: and it may be that they will repent; and then my preaching
will be found to be false; for God will not deny himself, but will
afford an example of his goodness and mercy in forgiving this people.”
We may again remark, that we act perversely, when we follow without
discrimination our own zeal: it is indeed a blind fervor which then
hurries us on. Though then a thousand inconsistencies meet us when God
commands any thing, our eyes ought to be closed to them, and we ought
ever to follow the course of our calling; for he will so regulate all
events, that all things shall redound to his glory. It is not for us in
such a case to be over-wise; but the best way is, to leave in God’s hand
the issue of things. It becomes us indeed to fear and to feel concerned;
but our anxiety ought, at the same time, to be in submission to God, so
that it is enough for us to pray. This is the import of the whole.

<span id="iii.4.ii-p18"></span>Now as to what he says that God *repents
of the evil,* we have already explained this: it means, that though God
has already raised his hand, he will yet withdraw it, as soon as he sees
any repentance in men; for evil here is to be taken for punishment. The
Lord then, though he might justly inflict extreme punishment on men, yet
suspends his judgment, and when they come to him in true penitence he is
instantly pacified. This is God’s repentance; he is said to repent when
he freely forgives whatever punishment or evil men have deserved
whenever they loathe themselves.  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md)
It now follows —

<span id="iii.4.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#003.md)<span id="iii.4.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iii-p2"></span>**3.** Therefore now, O LORD, take, I
beseech thee, my life from me; for *it is* better for me to die than to
live.

<span id="iii.4.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Et tu Jehova, tolle, quaeso,
animam meam a me; quia melius mori meum quam vivere.

<span id="iii.4.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.4.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iii-p6"></span>We here see how angry Jonah was in his
zeal: for this prayer cannot certainly be ascribed to his faith, as some
think, who say that Jonah took a flight as it were in his soul to
heaven, when he made this prayer, as though he dreaded not death, but
having been divested of all fear, being free and disengaged, he
presented himself to God. I do not think that the mind of Jonah was so
heroic. There is indeed no doubt, as I have already said, but that he
still retained some seed of piety; and this, I said, is sufficiently
proved by the word prayer; for if Jonah had burst out in the strain of
one in despair, it would not have been a prayer. Since then he prayed by
thus speaking, it follows that it was not the cry of despair, but of too
much displeasure, which Jonah did not restrain. In short, this prayer
proceeded from a pious and holy zeal; but Jonah sinned as to its measure
or excess; for he had in a manner forgotten himself, when *he preferred
death to life*

<span id="iii.4.iii-p7"></span>*Thou Jehovah,* he says, *take me away.*
He was first not free from blame in hastily wishing to die; for it is
not in our power to quit this world; but we ought with submissive minds
to continue in it as long as God keeps us in the station in which we are
placed. whosoever, then, hastens to death with so great an ardor no
doubt offends God. Paul knew that death was desirable in his case,
(<span id="iii.4.iii-p7.1"></span>[Php
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.4.iii-p7.1"></span>;) but when he understood that his labor
would be useful to the Church, he was contented with his lot, and
preferred the will of God to his own will; and thus he was prepared both
to live and to die, as it seemed good to God. It was otherwise with
Jonah, “Now,” he says, “take away my life.” This was one fault; but the
other was, — that he wished to die, because God spared the Ninevites.
Though he was touched with some grief, he ought not yet to have gone so
far as this, or rather to rush on, so as to desire death on account of
the weariness of his life.

<span id="iii.4.iii-p8"></span>But we hence learn to what extremes men
are carried, when once they give loose reins to inconsiderate zeal. The
holy Prophet Jonah, who had been lately tamed and subdued by so heavy a
chastisements is now seized and carried away by a desire to die, — and
why? because he thought that it was hard that he denounced destruction
on the Ninevites, and that still their city remained safe. This example
ought to check us, that we express not too boldly our opinion respecting
the doings of God, but, on the contrary, hold our thoughts captive, lest
any presumption of this kind be manifested by us; for there is none of
us who does not condemn Jonah, as also he condemned himself; for he does
not here narrate his own praise, but means to show how foolishly he had
judged of God’s work. Jonah then confesses his own folly; and therefore
his experience is to us an evidence that there is nothing more
preposterous than for us to settle this or that according to our own
wisdom, since this is alone true wisdom, to submit ourselves wholly to
the will of God.

<span id="iii.4.iii-p9"></span>Now if any one raises a question here, —
whether it is lawful to desire death; the answer may be briefly this, —
that death is not to be desired on account of the weariness of life;
this is one thing: and by the weariness of life I understand that state
of mind, when either poverty, or want, or disgrace, or any such thing,
renders life hateful to us: but if any, through weariness on account of
his sins and hatred to them, regrets his delay on earth, and can adopt
the language of Paul,

<span id="iii.4.iii-p10"></span>“Miserable am I, who will free me from
the body of this death!” (<span id="iii.4.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.4.iii-p10.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.4.iii-p11"></span> — he entertains a holy and pious wish,
provided the submission, to which I have referred, be added so that this
feeling may not break forth in opposition to the will of God; but that
he who has such a desire may still suffer himself to be detained by his
hand as long as he pleases. And further, when any one wishes to die,
because he fears for himself as to the future, or dreads to undergo any
evil, he also struggles against God; and such was the fault of Jonah;
for he says that death was better to him than life, — and why? because
the Lord had spared the Ninevites. We hence see how he was blinded, yea,
carried away by a mad impulse to desire death.

<span id="iii.4.iii-p12"></span>Let us then learn so to love this life
as to be prepared to lay it down whenever the Lord pleases: let us also
learn to desire death, but so as to live to the Lord, and to proceed in
the race set before use until he himself lead us to its end. Now follows
the reproof of God —

<span id="iii.4.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#004.md)<span id="iii.4.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iv-p2"></span>**4.** Then said the LORD, Doest thou well
to be angry?

<span id="iii.4.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Et dixit Jehova, An bene facis
excandescendo apud te?  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md)

<span id="iii.4.iv-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.iv-p8"></span><span id="iii.4.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iv-p9"></span>There is no doubt but that God by thus
reproving Jonah condemns his intemperate warmth. But since God alone is
a fit judge of man’s conduct, there is no reason for us to boast that we
are influenced by good intentions; for there is nothing more fallacious
than our own balances. When therefore we weigh facts, deeds, and
thoughts by our own judgment, we deceive ourselves. Were any disposed
rhetorically to defend the conduct of Jonah, he might certainly muster
up many specious pretenses; and were any one inclined to adduce excuses
for Jonah, he might be made to appear to us altogether innocent: but
though the whole world absolved him, what would it avail, since he was
condemned by the mouth of God himself, who alone, as I have already
stated, is the judge? We ought then to feel assured, that Jonah had done
foolishly, even if no reason was apparent to us; for the authority of
the Supreme Judge ought to be more than sufficient.

<span id="iii.4.iv-p10"></span>Now God expressly condemns his wrath. Had
Jonah modestly expostulated, and unburdened his griefs into the bosom of
God, it would have been excusable; though his ardor would not have been
free from blame, it might yet have been borne with. But now, when he is
angry, it is past endurance; for wrath, as one says, is but short
madness; and then it blinds the perceptions of men, it disturbs all the
faculties of the soul. God then does not here in a slight manner condemn
Jonah, but he shows how grievously he had fallen by allowing himself to
become thus angry. We must at the same time remember, that Jonah had
sinned not only by giving way to anger; he might have sinned, as we have
said, without being angry. But God by this circumstance — that he thus
became turbulent, enhances his sin. And it is certainly a most unseemly
thing, when a mean creature rises up against God, and in a boisterous
spirit contends with him: this is monstrous; and Jonah was in this state
of mind.

<span id="iii.4.iv-p11"></span>We hence see why an express mention is
made of his anger, — God thus intended to bring conviction home to
Jonah, that he might no more seek evasions. Had he simply said, “Why!
how is it that thou dost not leave to me the supreme right of judging?
If such is my will, why dost not thou submissively acknowledge that what
I do is rightly done? Is it thy privilege to be so wise, as to dictate
laws to me, or to correct my decisions?” — had the Lord thus spoken,
there might have remained still some excuse; Jonah might have said,
“Lord, I cannot restrain my grief, when I see thy name so profaned by
unseemly reproaches; can I witness this with a calm mind?” He might thus
have still sought some coverings for his grief; but when the Lord
brought forward his anger, he must have been necessarily silenced; for
what could be found to excuse Jonah, when he thus perversely rebelled,
as I have said, against God, his Judge and Maker? We now then understand
why God expressly declares that Jonah did not do well in being thus
angry.

<span id="iii.4.iv-p12"></span>But I wonder how it came into Jerome’s
mind to say that Jonah is not here reproved by the Lord, but that
something of an indifferent kind is mentioned. He was indeed a person
who was by nature a sophister, (cavillator — a caviler;) and thus he
wantonly trifled with the work of falsifying Scripture; he made no
conscience of perverting passages of holy writ. As, for instance, when
he writes about marriage, he says that they do not ill who marry, and
yet that they do not well. What a sophistry is this, and how vapid! So
also on this place, “God,” he says, “does not condemn Jonah, neither did
he intend to reprove his sin; but, on the contrary, Jonah brings before
us here the person of Christ, who sought death that the whole world
might be saved; for when alive he could not do good to his own nation,
he could not save his own kindred; he therefore preferred to devote
himself and his life for the redemption of the world.” These are mere
puerilities; and thus the whole meaning of this passage, as we clearly
see, is distorted. But the question is more emphatical than if God had
simply said, “Thou hast sinned by being thus angry;” for an affirmative
sentence has not so much force as that which is in the form of a
question.

<span id="iii.4.iv-p13"></span>God then not only declares as a Judge
that Jonah had not done well, but he also draws from him his own
confession, as though he said, “Though thou art a judge in thine own
cause, thou can’t not yet make a cover for thy passion, for thou art
beyond measure angry.” For when he says <span
id="iii.4.iv-p13.1"></span>לך, *la*k, with, or, *in thyself,* he reminds
Jonah to examine his own heart, as though he said, “Look on thyself as
in a mirror: thou wilt see what a boisterous sea is thy soul, being
seized as thou art by so mad a rage.” We now then perceive not only the
plain sense of the passage, but also the emphasis, which is contained in
the questions which Jerome has turned to a meaning wholly contrary. I
will not proceed farther;  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) for what
remains will be sufficient for to-morrow’s lecture.

<span id="iii.4.v"></span>

<span id="iii.4.v-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.4.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou sees us
implicated in so many errors, that we often fall through want of
thought, and as thou also sees that the violent emotions of our flesh
wholly blind whatever reason and judgment there is in us, — O grant,
that we may learn to give up ourselves altogether to obey thee, and so
honor thy wisdom as never to contend with thee, though all things may
happen contrary to our wishes, but patiently to wait for such an issue
as it may please thee to grant; and may we never be disturbed by any of
the hindrances which Satan may throw in our way, but ever go on towards
the mark which thou hast set before us, and never turn aside from thee,
until, having gone through all dangers and overcome all impediments, we
shall at length reach that blessed rest, which has been obtained for us
by the blood of thy Son. Amen.

<span id="iii.4.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.4.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Eightieth

<span id="iii.4.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.4.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#005.md)<span id="iii.4.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.vii-p2"></span>**5.** So Jonah went out of the city, and
sat on the east side of the city, and there made him a booth, and sat
under it in the shadow, till he might see what would become of the city.

<span id="iii.4.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et egressus est Jonas ex urbe, et
sedit ab oriente contra urbem, et fecit sibi illic tabernaculum, et
sedit sub eo in umbra, quousque videret quid fieret in urbe.

<span id="iii.4.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.vii-p5"></span><span id="iii.4.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.vii-p6"></span>It may be here doubted whether Jonah had
waited till the forty days had passed, and whether that time had
arrived; for if we say that he went out of the city before the fortieth
day, another question arises, how could he have known what would be? for
we have not yet found that he had been informed by any oracular
communication. But the words which we have noticed intimate that it was
then known by the event itself, that God had spared the city from
destruction; for in the last lecture it was said, that God had repented
of the evil he had declared and had not done it. It hence appears that
Jonah had not gone out of the city until the forty days had passed. But
there comes again another question, what need had he to sit near the
city, for it was evident enough that the purpose of God had changed, or
at least that the sentence Jonah had pronounced was changed? he ought
not then to have seated himself near the city as though he was doubtful.

<span id="iii.4.vii-p7"></span>But I am inclined to adopt the
conjecture, that Jonah went out after the fortieth day, for the words
seem to countenance it. With regard to the question, why he yet doubted
the event, when time seemed to have proved it, the answer may be readily
given: though indeed the forty days had passed, yet Jonah stood as it
were perplexed, because he could not as yet feel assured that what he
had before proclaimed according to God’s command would be without its
effect. I therefore doubt not but that Jonah was held perplexed by this
thought, “Thou hast declared nothing rashly; how can it then be, that
what God wished to be proclaimed by his own command and in his own name,
should be now in vain, with no corresponding effect?” Since then Jonah
had respect to God’s command, he could not immediately extricate himself
from his doubts. This then was the cause why he sat waiting: it was,
because he thought that though God’s vengeance was suspended, his
preaching would not yet be in vain, but that the ruin of the city was at
hand. This therefore was the reason why he still waited after the
prefixed time, as though the event was still doubtful.

<span id="iii.4.vii-p8"></span>Now that this may be more evident, let us
bear in mind that the purpose of God was hidden, so that Jonah
understood not all the parts of his vocation. God, then, when he
threatened ruin to the Ninevites, designed to speak conditionally: for
what could have been the benefit of the word, unless this condition was
added, — that the Ninevites, if they repented, should be saved? There
would otherwise have been no need of a Prophet; the Lord might have
executed the judgment which the Ninevites deserved, had he not intended
to regard their salvation. If any one objects by saying that a preacher
was sent to render them inexcusable, — this would have been unusual; for
God had executed all his other judgments without any previous
denunciation, I mean, with regard to heathen nations: it was the
peculiar privilege of the Church that the Prophets ever denounced the
punishments which were at hand; but to other nations God made it known
that he was their Judge, though he did not send Prophets to warn them.
There was then included a condition, with regard to God’s purpose, when
he commanded the Ninevites to be terrified by so express a declaration.
But Jonah was, so to speak, too literal a teacher; for he did not
include what he ought to have done, — that there was room for
repentance, and that the city would be saved, if the Ninevites repented
of their wickedness. Since then Jonah had learned only one half of his
office, it is no wonder that his mind was still in doubt, and could not
feel assured as to the issue; for he had nothing but the event, God had
not yet made known to him what he would do. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iii.4.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.4.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.4.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And the Lord God prepared a
gourd, and made *it* to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shadow
over his head, to deliver him from his grief. So Jonah was exceeding
glad of the gourd.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et paravit Jehova Deus cucurbitam
(vel, hederam,) et ascendere fecit ad Jonam, ut esset umbra super caput
ejus, atque liberaret eum a molestia sua; et gavisus est Jonas super
hedera (vel, cucurbita) gaudio magno.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p4"></span>**7.** But God prepared a worm when the
morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that it withered.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p5"></span>**7.** Et paravit Deus vermem quum
ascenderet aurora postridie, qui percussit hederam et exaruit.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p6"></span>**8.** And it came to pass, when the sun
did arise, that God prepared a vehement east wind; and the sun beat upon
the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and wished in himself to die, and
said, *It is* better for me to die than to live.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p7"></span>**8.** Et accidit, quum exoriretur sol,
ut pararet Deus ventum impetuosum (qui obsurdescere facit homines; <span
id="iii.4.viii-p7.1"></span>חרש significat obsurdescere; alii vertunt,
ventum arationis, quia verbum illud etiam significat arare; et
intelligunt, ventum siccum et frigidum, qualis grassari solet arationis
tempore,) et percussit sol super caput Jonae, et defecit; et optavit pro
anima sua, ut moreretur; et dixit, Melior mors mea quam vita.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.viii-p9"></span><span id="iii.4.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.viii-p10"></span>Before I proceed to treat on the
contents of these verses, I will say a few things on the word <span
id="iii.4.viii-p10.1"></span>קיקיון, *kikiun*; for there were formerly
some disputes respecting this word. Some render it, a gourd;
(*eucurbitam*) others think it to have been a cucumber. Free conjectures
are commonly made respecting obscure and unknown things. However, the
first rendering has been the received one: and Augustine says, that a
tumult arose in some church, when the Bishop rend the new interpretation
of Jerome, who said that it was the ivy. Those men were certainly
thoughtless and foolish who were so offended for a matter so trifling;
for they ought to have more carefully inquired which version was the
best and most correct. And Augustine did not act so very wisely in this
affair; for superstition so possessed him, that he was unwilling that
the received version of the Old Testament should be changed. He indeed
willingly allowed Jerome to translate the New Testament from the Greek
original; but he would not have the Old Testament to be touched; for he
entertained a suspicion of the Jews, — that as they were the most
inveterate enemies of the faith, they would have tried to falsify the
Law and the Prophets. As then Augustine had this suspicion, he preferred
retaining the common version. And Jerome relates that he was traduced at
Rome, because he had rendered it ivy instead of gourd; but he answered
Augustine in a very severe and almost an angry manner; and he inveighed
in high displeasure against some Cornelius and another by the name of
Asinius Polio, who had accused him at Rome as one guilty of sacrilege,
because he had changed this word. I cannot allege in excuse, that they
peevishly rejected what was probable. But as to the thing itself, I
would rather retain in this place the word gourd, or cucumber, than to
cause any disturbance by a thing of no moment. Jerome himself confesses,
that it was not ivy; for he says, that it was a kind of a shrub, and
that it grows everywhere in Syria; he says that it was a shrub supported
by its own stem, which is not the case with ivy; for the ivy, except it
cleaves to a wall or to a tree, creeps on the ground. It could not then
have been the ivy; and he ought not to have so translated it. He excuses
himself and says, that if he had put down the Hebrew word, many would
have dreamt it to have been a beast or a serpent. He therefore wished to
put down something that was known. But he might also have caused many
doubts: “Why! ivy is said to have ascended over the head of Jonah, and
to have afforded him a shade; how could this have been?” Now I wonder
why Jerome says in one place that the shrub was called in his time
Cicion in the Syrian language; and he says in another place in his
Commentaries, that it was called in the same language Elkeroa; which we
see to be wholly different from the word <span
id="iii.4.viii-p10.2"></span>קיקיון, *kikiun*. Now when he answered
Augustine I doubt not but that he dissembled; for he knew that Augustine
did not understand Hebrew: he therefore trifled with him as with a
child, because he was ignorant. It seems to have been a new gloss, I
know not what, invented at the time for his own convenience: I doubt not
but that he at the moment formed the word, as there is some affinity
between <span id="iii.4.viii-p10.3"></span>קיקיון, *kikiun,* and cicion.
However it may have been, whether it was a gourd or a shrub, it is not
necessary to dispute much how it could have grown so soon into so great
a size. Jerome says, that it was a shrub with many leaves, and that it
grew to the size of a vine. Be it so; but this shrub grows not in one
day, nor in two, nor in three days.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p11"></span>It must have therefore been something
extraordinary. Neither the ivy, nor the gourd, nor any shrub, nor any
tree, could have grown so quickly as to afford a cover to the head of
Jonah: nor did this shrub alone give shelter to Jonah’s head; for it is
more probable, that it was derived also from the booth which he had made
for himself. Jonah then not only sheltered himself under the shrub, but
had the booth as an additional cover, when he was not sufficiently
defended from the heat of the sun. Hence God added this shrub to the
shade afforded by the booth: for in those regions, as we know, the sun
is very hot; and further, it was, as we shall see, an extraordinary
heat.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p12"></span>I wished to say thus much of the word
ivy; and I have spoken more than I intended; but as there have been
contentions formerly on the subject, I wished to notice what may be
satisfactory even to curious readers. I come now to what is contained in
this passage.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p13"></span>Jonah tells us that a gourds or a
cucumber, or an ivy, was prepared by the Lord. There is no doubt but
that this shrub grew in a manner unusual, that it might be a cover to
the booth of Jonah. So I view the passage. But God, we know, approaches
nature, whenever he does anything beyond what nature is: this is not
indeed always the case; but we generally find that God so works, as that
he exceeds the course of nature, and yet from nature he does not wholly
depart. For when in the desert he intended to collect together a great
quantity of quails, that he might give meat to the people, he raised
wind from the east, (<span id="iii.4.viii-p13.1"></span>[Nu
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031.md)<span
id="iii.4.viii-p13.1"></span>.) How often the winds blew without
bringing such an abundance of birds? It was therefore a miracle: but yet
God did not wholly cast aside the assistance of nature; hence he made
use of the wind; and yet the wind could not of itself bring these birds.
So also in this place, God had chosen, I have no doubt, a herb, which
soon ascended to a great height, and yet far surpassed the usual course
of nature. In this sense, then, it is that God is said to have prepared
the <span id="iii.4.viii-p13.2"></span>קיקיון, *kikiun,*  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md) and to have made it to ascend over
Jonah’s head, that it might be for a shade to his head and free him from
his distress.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p15"></span><span id="iii.4.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.viii-p16"></span>But it is said afterwards that *a worm
was prepared*. We see here also, that what seemed to happen by chance
was yet directed by the hidden providence of God. Should any one say,
that what is here narrated does not commonly happen, but what once
happened; to this I answer, — that though God then designed to exhibit a
wonderful example, worthy of being remembered, it is yet ever true that
the gnawing even of worms are directed by the counsel of God, so that
neither a herb nor a tree withers independently of his purpose. The same
truth is declared by Christ when he says, that without the Father’s
appointment the sparrows fall not on the ground, (<span
id="iii.4.viii-p16.1"></span>[Mt
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.4.viii-p16.1"></span>.) Thus much as to the worm.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p17"></span><span id="iii.4.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.viii-p18"></span>It is now added, *that when the sun
arose the day following, a wind was prepared.* We here learn the same
thing, — that winds do not of themselves rise, or by chance, but are
stirred up by a Divine power. There may indeed be found causes in nature
why now the air is tranquil, and then it is disturbed by winds; but
God’s purpose regulates all these intermediate causes; so that this is
ever true — that nature is not some blind impulse, but a law settled by
the will of God. God then ever regulates by his own counsel and hand
whatever happens. The only difference is, that his works which flow in
the usual course have the name of nature; and they are miracles and
retain not the name of nature, when God changes their wonted course; but
yet they all proceed from God as their author. Therefore with regard to
this wind, we must understand that it was not usual or common; and yet
that winds are daily no less stirred up by God’s providence than this
wind of which Jonah speaks. But God wrought then, so to speak, beyond
the usual course of nature, though he daily preserves the regular order
of nature itself.

<span id="iii.4.viii-p19"></span>Let us now see why this whole narrative
has been set down. Jonah confesses that he *rejoiced with great joy,*
when he was sheltered from the extreme heat of the sun: but when the
shrub withered, he was touched with so much grief that he wished to die.
There is nothing superfluous here; for Jonah shows, with regard to his
joy and his grief, how tender he was and how susceptible of both. Jonah
here confesses his own sensibility, first by saying that he greatly
rejoiced, and then by saying that he was so much grieved for the
withered shrub, that through weariness of life he instantly desired
death. There is then here an ingenuous confession of weakness; for Jonah
in a very simple manner has mentioned both his joy and his grief. But he
has distinctly expressed the vehemence of both feelings, that we might
know that he was led away by his strong emotions, so that in the least
things he was either inflamed with anger, or elated with joy beyond any
bounds. This then was the case with him in his grief as well as in his
joy. But he does not say that he prayed as before; but he adopts the
word <span id="iii.4.viii-p19.1"></span>שאל, *shal*, which signifies to
desire or wish. *He desired,* it is said, *for his soul that he might
die.* It is hence probable that Jonah was so overwhelmed with grief that
he did not lift up his heart to God; and yet we see that he was not
neglected by God: for it immediately follows —

<span id="iii.4.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.4.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#009.md)<span id="iii.4.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.ix-p2"></span>**9.** And God said to Jonah, Doest thou
well to be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry,
*even* unto death.

<span id="iii.4.ix-p3"></span>**9.** Et dixit Deus ad Jonam, An bene
facis excandescendo apud te super cucurbitam? Et dixit, Bene facio
irascendo apud me usque ad mortem.

<span id="iii.4.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.4.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.ix-p6"></span>We see here that God had concealed himself
for a time, but did not yet forsake his servant. He often looks on us
from behind; that is, though we think that he has forgotten us, he yet
observes how we go on, that he may in due time afford help: and hence it
is that he recovers and raises up the falling, before we perceive that
he is near. This was his manner with Jonah, when he began to address
him: for, as we have said, grief had so oppressed the mind of the holy
Prophets that it could no longer be raised up to God. Hence he desired
to die; and still God did not forsake him. This was no common example of
the invaluable mercy of God, with which he favors his own people, even
when they precipitate themselves into ruin: such was the case with
Jonah, who rushed headlong into a state of despair, and cared not for
any remedy. God then did not wait until he was sought, but anticipated
miserable Jonah, who was now seeking destruction to himself.

<span id="iii.4.ix-p7"></span>He says, *Doest thou well that thou art
thus angry for the gourd?* As though he had said, that he was too
violently disturbed for a matter so trifling. And we must ever bear that
in mind, of which we spoke more fully yesterday, — that God did not
merely reprove his servant, because he did not patiently bear the
withering of the gourd — what then? but because he became angry; for in
anger there is ever an excess. Since then Jonah was thus grieved beyond
measure, and without any restraint, it was justly condemned by God as a
fault. I will now not repeat what I said yesterday respecting the
enhancing of the crime, inasmuch as Jonah not only murmured on account
of the withering of the shrub, but also disregarded himself, and boiled
over with displeasure beyond all due limits.

<span id="iii.4.ix-p8"></span>And the answer of Jonah confirms this, *I
do well,* he says, *in being angry even to death.* We here see how
obstinately the holy Prophet repelled the admonition of God, by which he
ought to have been restored to a right mind. He was not ignorant that
God spoke. Why then was he not smitten with shame? Why was he not moved
by the authority of the speaker, so as immediately to repress the
fierceness of his mind? But thus it commonly happens, when the minds of
men are once blinded by some wrong feeling; though the Lord may thunder
and fulminate from heaven, they will not hear, at least they will not
cease violently to resist, as Jonah does here. Since then we find such
an example of perverseness in this holy man, how much more ought every
one of us to fear? Let us hence learn to repress in time our feelings,
and instantly at the beginning to bridle them, lest if they should burst
forth to a greater extent, we become at last altogether obstinate. I do
well, he says, in being angry even to death. God charged his servant
Jonah with the vice of anger; Jonah now indulges himself in his own
madness, so that he says that desperation is not a vice: I do not sin,
he says, though I am despairing; though I abandon myself to death as
with mad fury, I do not yet sin.

<span id="iii.4.ix-p9"></span>Who could have thought that the holy
Prophet could have been brought into this state of mind? But let us be
reminded, as I have already said, by this remarkable example, how
furious and unreasonable are the passions of our flesh. There is,
therefore, nothing better than to restrain them, before they gather more
strength than they ought; for when any one feeds his vices, this
obstinacy and hardness always follow. But to be angry, or to be in a
fume even to death, is to feel such a weariness of life, as to give
ourselves up of our own accord to death. It was not indeed the design of
Jonah to lay violent hands on himself; but though he abstained from
violence, he yet, as to the purpose of his mind, procured death to
himself; for he submitted not to God, but was carried away by a blind
impulse, so that he wished to throw away his life. It now follows —

<span id="iii.4.x"></span>

<span id="iii.4.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.4.x-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
4:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#010.md)<span id="iii.4.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.x-p2"></span>**10.** Then said the Lord, Thou hast had
pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest
it grow; which came up in a night, and perished in a night:

<span id="iii.4.x-p3"></span>**10.** Et dixit Jehova, Tu pepercisti
cucurbitae, in qua non laborasti, et quam non extulisti; filia noctis
fuit, et filia noctis transiit (hoc est nata fuit, vel, exorta una
nocte, et nocte etiam una emarcuit.)

<span id="iii.4.x-p4"></span>**11.** And should not I spare Nineveh,
that great city, wherein are more than sixscore thousand persons that
cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand; and *also*
much cattle?

<span id="iii.4.x-p5"></span>**11.** Et ego non parcerem Nineveh urbi
magnae, in qua sunt duodecies decem millia hominum, quorum quisque non
novit inter dexteram suam et sinistram suam, et animalia etiam multa?

<span id="iii.4.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.4.x-p7"></span><span id="iii.4.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.x-p8"></span>Here God explains the design he had in
suddenly raising up the gourd, and then in causing it to perish or
wither through the gnawing of a worm; it was to teach Jonah that
misconduct towards the Ninevites was very inhuman. Though we find that
the holy Prophet had become a prey to dreadful feelings, yet God, by
this exhibition, does in a manner remind him of his folly; for, under
the representation of a gourd, he shows how unkindly he desired the
destruction of so populous a city as Nineveh.

<span id="iii.4.x-p9"></span>Yet this comparison may appear ill suited
for the purpose. Jonah felt sorry for the gourd, but he only regarded
himself: hence he was displeased, because the relief with which he was
pleased was taken away from him. As then this inconvenience had driven
Jonah to anger, the similitude may not seem appropriate when God thus
reasons, Thou wouldest spare the gourd, should I not spare this great
city? Nay, but he was not concerned for the gourd itself: if all the
gourds of the world withered, he would not have been touched with any
grief; but as he felt the greatest danger being scorched by the extreme
heat of the sun, it was on this account that he was angry. To this I
answer, — that though Jonah consulted his own advantage, yet this
similitude is most suitable: for God preserves men for the purpose for
which he has designed them. Jonah grieved for the withering of the
gourd, because he was deprived of its shade: and God does not create men
in vain; it is then no wonder that he wishes them to be saved. We hence
see that Jonah was not unsuitably taught by this representation, how
inhumanely he conducted himself towards the Ninevites. He was certainly
but one individual; since then he made such an account of himself and
the gourd only, how was it that he cast aside all care for so great and
so populous a city? Ought not this to have come to his mind, that it was
no wonder that God, the Creator and Father, had a care for so many
thousands of men? Though indeed the Ninevites were alienated from God,
yet as they were men, God, as he is the Father of the whole human race,
acknowledged them as his own, at least to such an extent as to give them
the common light of day, and other blessings of earthly life. We now
then understand the import of this comparison: “Thou wouldest spare,” he
says, “the gourd, and should I not spare this great city?”

<span id="iii.4.x-p10"></span>It hence appears how frivolous is the
gloss of Jerome, — that Jonah was not angry on account of the
deliverance of the city, but because he saw that his own nation would,
through its means, be destroyed: for God repeats again that Jonah’s
feeling was quite different, — that he bore with indignity the
deliverance of the city from ruin. And less to be endured it is still,
that Jerome excuses Jonah by saying that he nobly and courageously
answered God, that he had not sinned in *being angry even to death.*
That man dared, without any shame or discernment, to invent a pretense
that he might excuse so disgraceful an obstinacy. But it is enough for
us to understand the real meaning of the Prophet. Here then he shows,
according to God’s representation, that his cruelty was justly condemned
for having anxiously desired the destruction of a populous city.

<span id="iii.4.x-p11"></span>But we ought to notice all the parts of
the similitudes when he says, *Thou wouldest have spared,* etc. There is
an emphasis in the pronoun <span id="iii.4.x-p11.1"></span>אתה, *ate,*
for God compares himself with Jonah; “Who art thou? Doubtless a mortal
man is not so inclined to mercy as I am. But thou takest to thyself this
right — to desire to spare the gourd, even thou who art made of clay.
Now this gourd is not thy work, *thou hast not labored for it,* it has
not proceeded from thy culture or toil; and further, *thou hast not
raised it up,* and further still, *it was the daughter of a night, and
in one night it perished;* it was an evanescent shrub or herb. If then
thou regardest the nature of the gourd, if thou regardest thyself, and
joinest together all the other circumstances, thou wilt find no reason
for thy hot displeasure. But should not I, who am God, in whose hand are
all things, whose prerogative and whose constant practice it is
mercifully to bear with men — should not I spare them, though they were
worthy of destruction? and should not I spare a great city? The matter
here is not concerning a little plant, but a large number of people.
And, in the last place, it is a city, *in which there are a hundred and
twenty thousand men who know not how to distinguish between their right
hand and the left.”*

<span id="iii.4.x-p12"></span>We now then see how emphatical are all the
parts of this comparison. And though God’s design was to reprove the
foolish and sinful grief of Jonah, we may yet further collect a general
instruction by reasoning in this manner, “We feel for one another, and
so nature inclines us, and yet we are wicked and cruel. If then men are
inclined to mercy through some hidden impulse of nature, what may not be
hoped from the inconceivable goodness of God, who is the Creator of the
whole world, and the Father of us all? and will not he, who is the
fountain of all goodness and mercy spare us?”

<span id="iii.4.x-p13"></span><span id="iii.4.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.x-p14"></span>Now as to the number, Jonah mentions here
twelve times ten thousand men, and that is as we have said, one hundred
and twenty thousand. God shows here how paternally he cares for mankind.
Every one of us is cherished by him with singular care: but yet he
records here a large number, that it might be more manifest that he so
much regards mankind that he will not inconsiderately fulminate against
any one nation. And what he adds, that they could not distinguish
between the right hand and the left, is to be referred, I have no doubt,
to their age; and this opinion has been almost universally received.
Some one, however has expressed a fear lest the city should be made too
large by allowing such a number of men: he has, therefore, promiscuously
included the old, as well as those of middle age and infants. He says
that these could not distinguish between the right hand and the left,
because they had not been taught in the school of God, nor understood
the difference between right and wrong; for the unbelieving, as we know,
went astray in their errors. But this view is too strained; and besides,
there is no reason for this comment; for that city, we know, was not
only like some great cities, many of which are at this day in Europe,
but it surpassed most of the principal cities at this day. We know that
in Paris there are more than four hundred thousand souls: the same is
the case with other cities. I therefore reject this comment, as though
Jonah was here speaking of all the Ninevites. But God, on the contrary,
intended to show, that though there was the justest reason for
destroying entirely the whole city, there were yet other reasons which
justified the suspension of so dreadful a vengeance; for many infants
were there who had not, by their own transgressions, deserved such a
destruction.

<span id="iii.4.x-p15"></span>God then shows here to Jonah that he had
been carried away by his own merciless zeal. Though his zeal, as it has
been said, arose from a good principle, yet Jonah was influenced by a
feeling far too vehement. This God proved, by sparing so many infants
hitherto innocent. And to infants he adds the brute animals. Oxen were
certainly superior to shrubs. If Jonah justly grieved for one withering
shrub, it was far more deplorable and cruel for so many innocent animals
to perish. We hence see how apposite are all the parts of this
similitude, to make Jonah to loathe his folly, and to be ashamed of it;
for he had attempted to frustrate the secret purpose of God, and in a
manner to overrule it by his own will, so that the Ninevites might not
be spared, who yet labored by true repentance to anticipate the divine
judgment.

<span id="iii.4.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.4.xi-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.4.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast, in
various ways, testified, and daily continues to testify, how dear and
precious to thee are mankind, and as we enjoy daily so many and so
remarkable proofs of thy goodness and favor, — O grant, that we may
learn to rely wholly on thy goodness, many examples of which thou
settest before us, and which thou wouldest have us continually to
experience, that we may not only pass through our earthly course, but
also confidently aspire to the hope of that blessed and celestial life
which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.4.xi-p3"></span>End of the commentaries on Jonah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc28007.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iii.4.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.i-p4"></span> The two verbs used here are evidently to
be construed as impersonals. The most literal rendering would be thus, —

<span id="iii.4.i-p5"></span>“And it was an evil to Jonah, a great
evil;  
and wrath was to him,” or, “he was wroth.”

<span id="iii.4.i-p6"></span>Evil means often grief or distress, and so
it is here: but the verb <span id="iii.4.i-p6.1"></span>חרה, properly
rendered in our version, “very angry,” seldom if ever, means grief. It
is sometimes rendered “grieved” in our version; but in every instance
that I can find, it means the grief of anger or displeasure. It occurs
twice in <span id="iii.4.i-p6.2"></span>[Genesis
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#000.md)<span id="iii.4.i-p6.2"></span>, in
exactly similar form as we find it here, followed by the preposition
<span id="iii.4.i-p6.3"></span>ל, <span id="iii.4.i-p6.4"></span>ויחר
לקין מאד, “and Cain was very wroth,” or literally, “and there was wrath
to Cain very much,” version 5. And then in the following verse we have
the like form, <span id="iii.4.i-p6.5"></span>למה חרה לד, “Why are thou
wroth?” or, “Why is wrath to thee?” The phrase here is, <span
id="iii.4.i-p6.6"></span>לו ויחר, “and wrath was to him.” What seems to
have made some commentators to change wrath or anger to grief, as has
been a desire to screen the guilt of Jonah. But the whole narrative
clearly shows that he was so displeased as to be angry. His pettish
request to die is a sufficient proof of this. Calvin was not a man to
trifle with the word of God for this purpose, or for any other: nor was
he at a loss to account for the sin of Jonah, without denying his piety.
It is only shallow Christians, and such as have only the outward shell
of religion, who are reduced to this dilemma.

<span id="iii.4.i-p7"></span>*Marckius* very justly observes, “That
though all the works of God are altogether blameless (<span
id="iii.4.i-p7.1"></span>*irreprehensibilia*,) yet there is hardly
anything which is not sometimes blamed by our most foolish flesh (<span
id="iii.4.i-p7.2"></span>*carne* *insipientissima*.) Thus not only the
world, God’s enemy, sins against him; but even his own people, who honor
him, openly show, one while, that his severity, and at another time that
his kindness, displease them, as though they were not befitting.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc28007.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iii.4.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.4.ii-p19"></span> Added here shall be *Marckius’*
excellent explanation of this passate, as given in <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.1"></span>[Joe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md)<span id="iii.4.ii-p19.1"></span>.
It corresponds materially with that of *Calvin,* — “<span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.2"></span>Ipse est <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.3"></span>חנון, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.4"></span>*gratiosus,* apud LXX., et Hieronymum, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.5"></span>ελεημων, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.6"></span>*benignus*, h. e. ut voces junctas sic
distinguamus commodé, in creaturas praeter omne earum meritum
*benefictus;* deinde <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.7"></span>רחום, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.8"></span>*misericors,* apud LXX., <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.9"></span>οικτίρμων, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.10"></span>h.e. tenerrimo amore motus in miseros ad
illus succurrendum et indulgendum; tum <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.11"></span>ארך אפים <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.12"></span>*longanumis,* apud LXX., et Hieronymum,
<span id="iii.4.ii-p19.13"></span>μακροθυμος, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.14"></span>*patiens,* h.e. tardus ad iram, seu judicia
sua satis facilé et satis diu differens; adhuc <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.15"></span>רב-חסד, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.16"></span>*amplus benignitate,* apud LXX., et
hieronymum, <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.17"></span>πολυελεος, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.18"></span>*multae misericordiae,* h.e. bonitatem
demonstrans intensissime, latissime et diutissime, inter homines; tandem
quod aliis vocibus in Exodo exprimitur, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.19"></span>נחם על הרעת, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.20"></span>non *consolabilis,* sed *poenitens super
malo,* apud LXX., <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.21"></span>μετανοων επὶ ταις
κακιαις, <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.22"></span>apud Hieronymum,
*praestabilis super malitia,* sive *poenitens,* — h.e. malum non culpae
ab hominibus commissum, sed poenae, seu afflictionis, juxta Hieronymum,
coll <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.23"></span>[Mt
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034.md)<span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.23"></span>, <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.24"></span>à se
immittendum aut immissum homini, ad hujus resipiscentiam facilé arcens
vel auferens, adeoque *placabilis,* juxta propositum suum immutabile et
promissa generalia, <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.25"></span>[Jer.
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#008.md), [Jer.
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#003.md)<span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.25"></span>, etc., <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.26"></span>et
finem judicii omnis, qui est, malum peccati dedocere. Quomodo
poenitentia Deo, respectu mutati operis sui, et verbi sui absque
explicita conditione antea propositi, saepe tribuitur, <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.27"></span>[Ge
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.4.ii-p19.27"></span>;
<span id="iii.4.ii-p19.28"></span>[Ex
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014.md)<span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.28"></span>; <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.29"></span>[1Sa
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.29"></span> etc.; <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.30"></span>alias respectu decreti longissimi ab eo
arcenda, <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.31"></span>[Nu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.31"></span>; <span id="iii.4.ii-p19.32"></span>[1Sa
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029.md)<span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.32"></span>; Jac. 1:17, etc.; <span
id="iii.4.ii-p19.33"></span>notante dudum *Theodoreto,* et praeunte
*Jonathane,* apud quem dicitur, *revocens verbum suam ab inducendo
malo*. Ita haec bonitatis nomina Deo, per Scripturae testimonia et
clarissima rerum documenta, verissimé competunt.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc28007.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iii.4.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iv-p4"></span> This clause has been variously rendered.
The original words are these, <span id="iii.4.iv-p4.1"></span>ההיטב חרה
לך. It is not to the point to say, as *Dr. Henderson* does, that the
first word is sometimes rendered adverbially, as meaning “greatly,”
etc.; for in other places it is rendered as a verb, “to be good,” or “to
do good.” It depends wholly on the form of the sentence what rendering
is the most suitable. Both the construction of the words and the
connection of the passage seem to favor the literal rendering. The first
<span id="iii.4.iv-p4.2"></span>ה is the <span
id="iii.4.iv-p4.3"></span>*an* of the Latin, *whether,* it is an
interrogation. Then the rendering is, “Whether it is good,” or, “Is that
good?” Jonah had said before that it was “good” for him to die rather
than to live; for it is the same word in a different form — <span
id="iii.4.iv-p4.4"></span>כי טוב מותי מחיי, “for good my death rather
than my life.” Then the question to him is, “Is it good *that* thou art
wrathful,” or literally, “*that* wrath is to thee?” the verb <span
id="iii.4.iv-p4.5"></span>חרה, as in the first verse, is to be construed
impersonally.

<span id="iii.4.iv-p5"></span>The rendering, “Art thou much vexed?” is
pointless and vapid. It is indeed countenanced by the Septuagint; but we
must remember that on some points there is a wrong leaning in that
version, and this is one of those points. As in the case of Jerome and
the early Fathers, there was a disposition and an attempt to lessen and
even to obliterate all the faults and defects of the ancient saints, so
it was evidently with the authors of this version. Superstition and
Pharisaism must have all their saints perfect, while the word of God
represents all true saints as imperfect in the present state, but aiming
at, and longing for, perfection, and fully expecting to enjoy it
hereafter.

<span id="iii.4.iv-p6"></span>The version of *Newcome* is, “Doest thou
well that *thine anger* is kindled?” Kindling or heat, that is, of anger
or wrath, is the ideal meaning of the verb. *Junius* and *Tremelius,* as
well as *Dathius,* consider that anger, and not grief is meant. *Dr.
Adam Clarke’s* version is this, “Is anger good for thee?” which is
certainly very literal; or, as the verb is in the causative mood, it
might be rendered, “Can anger do good to thee?” It may be doubted
whether here, and in the ninth verse, where the same phrase twice
occurs, this rendering is the most obvious and natural. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc28007.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iii.4.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.4.iv-p14"></span> Appended here is this note in the
margin, — “<span id="iii.4.iv-p14.1"></span>Putavit, cessante horologio,
se ante tempus finire;” — “He thought that, through the clock stopping,
he had finished before the time.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc28007.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iii.4.viii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iii.4.viii-p14"></span> Much has been written on the character
of this plant. Modern critics have pretended to determine that it was
the <span id="iii.4.viii-p14.1"></span>*Ricinus,* commonly called <span
id="iii.4.viii-p14.2"></span>*Palma Christi*. It matters not what it
was: its growth was doubtless miraculous. It may have been an indigenous
plant, it may have been such a plant as never grew before or after. Two
things are evident — God prepared it, and prepared it to shelter Jonah.
In a translation it would have been better either to retain the original
name, or to give it the general name of a plant or shrub. To call it a
gourd, an ivy, or a cucumber, is to convey an incorrect idea. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Micah](cc28008.md)
