[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28017)  [Next](cc28019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>Calvin’s Preface to Nahum

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>The time in which Nahum prophesied cannot with
certainty be known. The Hebrews, ever bold in conjectures, say that he
discharged his office of teaching under Manasseh, and that the name of
that king was suppressed, because he was unworthy of such an honor, or,
because his reign was unfortunate, as he had been led into captivity.
When any one asks the Jews a reason, they only say, that it appears so
to them. As then there is no reason for this conjecture, we must come to
what seems probable.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>They who think that he prophesied under Jotham
are no doubt mistaken, and can easily be disproved; for he here
threatens ruin to the city Nineveh because the Assyrians had cruelly
laid waste the kingdom of Israel; and it is for these wrongs that he
denounces vengeance: but under Jotham the kingdom of Israel had not been
laid waste. We indeed know that the Assyrians were suborned by Ahab,
when he found himself unequal to resist the attacks of two neighboring
kings, the king of Syria, and the king of Israel. It was then that the
Assyrians penetrated into the land of Israel, and in course of time,
they desolated the whole kingdom. At this period it was that Nahum
prophesied; for it was his object to show, that God had a care for that
kingdom, on account of his adoption or covenant; though the Israelites
had perfidiously separated themselves from the people of God, yet God’s
covenant remained in force. His design then was to show, that God was
the father and protector of that kingdom. As this was the Prophet’s
object, it is certain that he taught either after the death of Ahab
under Hezekiah, or about that time.  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203)

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>He followed Jonah at some distance,  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) as we may easily learn. Jonah, as we
have already seen, pronounced a threatening on the city Nineveh; but the
punishment was remitted, because the Ninevites humbled themselves, and
suppliantly deprecated the punishment which had been announced. They
afterwards returned to their old ways, as it is usually the case. Hence
it was, that God became less disposed to spare them. Though indeed they
were aliens, yet God was pleased to show them favor by teaching them
through the ministry and labors of Jonah: and their repentance was not
altogether feigned. Since then they were already endued with some
knowledge of the true God, the less excusable was their cruelty, when
they sought to oppress the kingdom of Israel. They indeed knew, that
that nation was sacred to God: what they did then was in a manner an
outrage against God himself.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>We now understand at what time it is probable
that Nahum performed his office as a teacher; though nothing certain, as
I have said at the beginning, can be known: hence it was, that I
condemned the Rabbis for rashness on the subject; for they are bold
enough to bring any thing forward as a truth, respecting which there is
no certainty.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>I have already in part stated the design of the
Prophet. The sum of the whole is this: When the Assyrians had for some
time disturbed the kingdom of Israel, the Prophet arose and exhorted the
Israelites to patience, that is, those who continued to be the servants
of God; because God had not wholly forsaken them, but would undertake
their cause, for they were under his protection. This is the substance
of the whole.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>With regard to Nineveh, we have already stated
that it was the capital of the empire, as long as the Assyrians did bear
rule: for Babylon was a province; that is, Chaldea, whose metropolis was
Babylon, was one of the provinces of the empire. The kingdom was
afterwards taken away from Meroc-baladan. Some think that Nabuchodonosor
was the first monarch of Chaldea. But I bestow no great pains on this
subject. It may be, that Meroc-baladan had two names, and this was very
common; as we know that the kings of Egypt were called Pharaohs; so the
Assyrians and Chaldeans, though otherwise called at first, might have
taken a common royal name. Now Nineveh was so celebrated, that another
kingdom could not have been established by the Babylonians without
demolishing that city. We indeed know that it was very large, as we have
stated in explaining Jonah. It was, as profane writers have recorded,
nearly three days’ journey in circumference. Then its walls were one
hundred feet high, and so wide, that chariots could pass one another
without coming in contact: there were one thousand and five hundred
towers. We hence see that it was not without reason that this city was
formerly so celebrated.

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>They say that Ninus was its founder, but this
is proved to be a mistake by the testimony of Moses in <span
id="v.i-p10.1"></span>[Ge 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#000)<span
id="v.i-p10.1"></span>. They also imagine that emiramis was the first
queen of Babylon, and that the city was built by her: but this is a
fable. It may have been that she enlarged the city; but it was Babylon
many ages before she was born. So also Ninus may have increased and
adorned Nineveh; but the city was founded before his birth. Profane
authors call it Ninus, not Nineveh; probably the Hebrew name was
corrupted by them, as it is often the case. However this may be, it is
evident, that when Meroc-baladan, or his son, who succeeded him, wished
to fix the seat of the empire at Babylon, he was under the necessity of
destroying Nineveh to prevent rivalry. It thus happened, that the city
was entirely demolished. Of this destruction, as we shall see, Nahum
prophesied.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc28018.htm#fr_203) <span
id="v.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p4"></span> “I conclude from <span
id="v.i-p4.1"></span>[Na 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002)<span
id="v.i-p4.1"></span>, that Nahum prophesied after the captivity of the
ten tribes. Josephus places him in the reign of Jotham, and says that
his predictions came to pass one hundred and fifteen hears afterwards.
*Ant.* IX. 11. 3. According to our best chronologers, this date would
bring us to the year in which Samaria was taken. And I agree with those
who think Nahum uttered this prophecy in the reign of Hezekiah, and not
long after the subversion of the kingdom of Israel by Shalmaneser.” —
*Newcome.*

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc28018.htm#fr_204) <span
id="v.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p6"></span> The distance is supposed by chronologers to
have been about 150 years. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Nahum](cc28019)
