[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28013)  [Next](cc28015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.5"></span>

<span id="iv.5-p1"></span>Chapter 5

<span id="iv.5.i"></span>

<span id="iv.5.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.i-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)<span id="iv.5.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now gather thyself in troops, O
daughter of troops: he hath laid siege against us: they shall smite the
judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.

<span id="iv.5.i-p3"></span>**1.**  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) Nunc colligas te (vel, obsidione
cingeris, ut alii vertunt) filia congregationis (hoc est, turmae;)
obsidionem posuit contra nos; in virga percutient ad maxillam judicem
Israel.

<span id="iv.5.i-p5"></span>**2.** But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah,
*though* thou be little among the thousands of Judah, *yet* out of thee
shall he come forth unto me *that is* to be ruler in Israel; whose
goings forth *have been* from of old, from everlasting.

<span id="iv.5.i-p6"></span>**2.** Et tu Beth-lehem Ephrata, parva ad
essendum (ut ita loquar) inter millia Jehudah; ex te mihi egredietur ad
essendum dominatorem (sic transfero durius, ut sit dominator) in Israel:
et egressus ejus ab initio, a diebus seculi.

<span id="iv.5.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.i-p8"></span><span id="iv.5.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.i-p9"></span>To encourage the faithful to patience, the
Prophet again reminds them that hard and severe time was nigh; for it
was needful to put them in mind often of the approaching calamity, lest
terror should wholly discourage them. As then there was danger from
despair, the Prophet often repeats what he has already said of God’s
judgment, which was then suspending over the people of Israel. And this
mode and order of teaching ought to be observed. When the Prophets
threaten us, or denounce the punishment we have deserved, we either
become torpid, or grow angry with God, and murmur: but when they set
forth any thing of comfort, we then indulge ourselves and become too
secure. It is therefore necessary to connect threatening with promises,
so that we may be always ready to endure temporal evils, and that our
minds, sustained by hope, may, at the same time, depend on the Lord, and
recomb on him. It was for this reason that the Prophet again mentions
what he had already several times stated, — that the Jews would be
surrounded by a siege. How do these two things agree, — that the
enemies, assembled together, would be like sheaves which are taken to
the floor to be trodden by the feet of animals, — and that the Jews
would be besieged? I answer, that these things harmonize, because the
temporary punishment, which God would inflict on his Church, would not
prevent him to restore it again whenever it pleased him. Lest,
therefore, security should creep over the minds of the godly, the
Prophet designed often to remind them of that dreadful calamity which
might have entirely upset them, had no support been afforded them, that
is, had not God sustained them by his word.

<span id="iv.5.i-p10"></span>*Now* then *thou shalt assemble thyself,*
he says, *O daughter of a troop* The verb <span
id="iv.5.i-p10.1"></span>התגדדי, *etgaddi,* and the noun <span
id="iv.5.i-p10.2"></span>גדוד, *gadud,* sound alike; as though he said,
Thou shalt he collected, O daughter of collection. The Prophet addresses
Jerusalem: but we must see why he calls her the daughter of collection.
Some think that by this word is designated the splendid and wealthy
state of Jerusalem; as though the Prophet said, — “This city has been
hitherto populous, but now it shall be reduced to such straits that none
shall dare to go forth beyond its gates, for they shall on every side be
surrounded.” But the Prophet calls Jerusalem the daughter of a troop in
another sense, — because they were wont to occasion great troubles: as
thieves agree together, and meet in troops for the purpose of committing
plunder; so also the Prophet calls Jerusalem the daughter of a troop,
for its citizens were wont willfully to do great evils, and like robbers
to use violence. Thou then, he says, *shalt now be collected;* that is,
thou shalt not send forth thy troops, but enemies shall assemble thee
together by a severe siege, so that thou shalt contract thyself like a
bundle.

<span id="iv.5.i-p11"></span>There are, then, two clauses in this verse,
— that though the Lord resolved to help his Church, he would yet
straiten her for a time, — and then the Prophet shows the reason, lest
they complained that they were too severely treated: “You have been
hitherto,” he says, “without a cause oppressive to others: the time then
is come when the Lord will return to you your recompense.” As Isaiah
says

<span id="iv.5.i-p12"></span>‘Woe to thee, plunderer!  
Shalt thou not also be exposed to plunder?’  
<span id="iv.5.i-p12.3"></span>[Isa
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001)<span id="iv.5.i-p12.3"></span>;

<span id="iv.5.i-p13"></span>so also in this place, — “Ye have assembled
in troops, that ye might pillage innocent men; therefore other troops
shall now encircle you; nay, ye shall be beset by your own fear.” The
verb is in Hithpael: he says not, “Thou daughter of a troop shalt be now
encircled;” but he says “Thou shalt gather thyself.”

<span id="iv.5.i-p14"></span>He then adds, *A siege has he set against
thee.* This may refer to God; but it must be understood only of enemies:
for the Prophet immediately adds, *They shall strive with the rod,* etc.
in the pleural number, — *They shall then strike with the rod the cheek
of the judge of Israel*. He means that the Jews would be subdued by
their enemies that their judges and governors would be exposed to every
kind of contumely and dishonor, for to strike on the cheek is to offer
the greatest indignity; as indeed it is the greatest contempt, as
Demosthenes says, and is so mentioned by the lawyers. We now then
perceive, that the Prophet’s object was to show, — that the Jews in vain
boasted of their kingdom and civil constitution, for the Lord would
expose the governors of that kingdom to extreme contempt. The enemies
then *shall strike their judges even on the cheek.*  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140)

<span id="iv.5.i-p19"></span>But there follows immediately a
consolation: we hence see that the Prophet, at one time, humbles the
children of God: and prepares them for enduring the cross; and then he
mitigates all sorrow; yea, and makes them to rejoice in the midst of
their evils. For this purpose he adds what follows —

<span id="iv.5.i-p20"></span><span id="iv.5.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.i-p21"></span>*Thou Bethlehem Ephratah, art small, that
thou shouldest be among the thousands of Judah* As Matthew quotes this
passage differently, some think that it ought to be read as a question,
And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, art thou the least among the provinces of
Judah? Matthew says “Thou art by no means the least, thou excellest.
 <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) ” But what need there is of
distorting the words of the Prophet, as it was not the design of the
Evangelist to relate the expressions of the Prophet, but only to point
out the passage. As to the words, Matthew had regards to the condition
of the town Bethlehem, such as it was at the coming of Christ. It then
indeed began to be eminent: but the Prophet represents here how ignoble
and mean a place Bethlehem then was, *Thou,* he says, *art the least
among the thousands of Judah.* Some, not very wisely, give this
explanation, “Thou art the least among the thousands of Judah”; that is,
“Though there might be a thousand towns in the tribe of Judah, yet thou
couldest hardly have a place among so great a number.” But this has been
said through ignorance of a prevailing custom: for the Jews, we know,
were wont to divide their districts into thousands or chiliads. As in
the army there are centurions, so also in the divisions of every nation
there are hundreds; there are also in an army tribunes, who preside over
a thousand men. Thus the Prophet calls them thousands, that is,
tribunes; for the districts are so arranged, that the town, which, with
its villages, could bring forth three thousand men, had three
prefectures; and it had three tribunes, or four or five, if it was
larger. The Prophet then, in order to show that this town was small and
hardly of any account, says, Thou, Bethlehem, art hardly sufficient to
be one province. And it was a proof of its smallness that hardly a
thousand men could be made up from Bethlehem and its neighboring
villages. There were not, we know, many towns in the tribe of Judah; and
yet a large army could be there collected. Since then the town of
Bethlehem was so small, that it could hardly attain the rank of a
province, it is hence no doubt evident that it was but a mean town. We
now perceive what the Prophet had in view.

<span id="iv.5.i-p27"></span>*Thou, Bethlehem,* he says, *art small
among the cities of Judah;* yet *arise,* or go forth, *for me shall one
from thee, who is to be a Ruler in Israel.* He calls it Bethlehem
Ephratah; for they say that there was another Bethlehem in the tribe of
Zebulon, and we know that Ephratah in meaning is nearly the same with
Bethlehem; for both designate an abundance of fruit or provisions: and
there David was born.

<span id="iv.5.i-p28"></span>I will now proceed to the second clause,
*From thee shall go forth for me one who is to be a Ruler* Here the
Prophet introduces God as the speaker, *go forth,* he says, *shall one
for me.* God declares in this passage that it was not his purpose so to
destroy his people, but that he intended, after a season, to restore
them again. He therefore recalls the attention of the faithful to
himself and to his eternal counsel; as though he said, — “I have thus
for a time cast you away, that I may yet manifest my care for you.” *For
me* then *shall go forth one who is to be a Ruler in Israel.* Now there
is no doubt but that the Prophet at the sable time recalls the attention
of the faithful to the promise which had been given to David. For whence
arises the hope of salvation to the chosen people, except from the
perpetuity of that kingdom? The Prophet now says, — “There is indeed a
reason, according to the perception of the flesh, why the faithful
should despond; for whence does their confidence arise, except from the
kingdom of David? and from what place is David to arise? Even from
Bethlehem; for Bethlehem has been called the city of David; and yet it
is an obscure and a small town, and can hardly be considered a common
province. Since it is so, the minds of the faithful may be depressed;
but this smallness shall be no hindrance to the Lord, that he should not
bring forth from thence a new king.”

<span id="iv.5.i-p29"></span>Even before the time of David Bethlehem was
a small town, and one of the most common provinces. Who could have
expected that a king would have been chosen from such a hamlet, and
then, that he should come from a hut? for David belonged to a pastoral
family; his father was a shepherd, and he was the least among his
brethren. Who then could have thought that light would have arisen from
such a corner, yea, from so mean a cottage? This was done contrary to
the expectations of men. Hence the Prophet sets here before the faithful
a similar expectation for their comfort; as though he said, — “Has not
God once formed a most perfect state of things by making David a king,
so that the people became in every respect happy and blessed? And whence
did David come? It was from Bethlehem. There is then no reason why your
present miseries should over-much distress you; for God can again from
the same place bring forth a king to you, and he will do so.”

<span id="iv.5.i-p30"></span>*Thou* then *Bethlehem, small art thou,
etc.* The prophet doubtless intended here that the faithful should
consider of what kind was the beginning of that most perfect state, when
David was chosen king. David was a shepherd, a man in humble life,
without reputation, without influence, and even the humblest among his
brethren. Since then God had drawn light out of darkness there was no
cause for the faithful to despair of a future restoration, considering
what had been the beginning of the previous happy condition of the
people. We now understand the Prophet’s meaning. But the rest I cannot
finish today; I must therefore defer it till tomorrow.

<span id="iv.5.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.5.ii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.5.ii-p2"></span>Greet, Almighty God, that as we cease not
to provoke thy wrath against us, and as it is needful for us to be often
chastised by thy hand, that we may be humbled and learn to submit
ourselves to thee in true and willing obedience, — O grant, that we
faint not under thy scourges, but ever raise up our minds to the hope of
deliverance, which thou givest to us through our Mediator; whom thou
hast once for all sent into the world, that thou mightest through him
reconcile us to thyself, and through whom also thou bringest help
whenever we need it and may we at the same time learn to rely on thy
only-begotten Son, so that with courageous minds we may pass through all
the miseries of this world, and never at any time grow weary, until
having at length obtained the victory, we come to that blessed rest and
enjoy the fruit of our victory, through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.5.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Ninety-first

<span id="iv.5.iii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the promise
by which our Prophet designed to sustain the minds of the faithful, lest
they should despair in their heavy trial. He reminds them, as it has
been stated, of the commencement of the kingdom: as David had been
raised as it were from nothing, and God has given in him an example of
his wonderful grace, the Prophet reminds the godly, that the same is now
to be expected, that God will again raise up the fallen kingdom. “*Go
forth then from Bethlehem,* he says, *shall one who is to be a Ruler in
Israel,* though it was but a mean town. He calls him a Ruler in Israel;
for he had before declared that there would be such a dreadful judgment,
that the enemy would strike with the hand the face of the judge; and
this was the same as though the Prophet had said, that no honor would be
shown to the people, for the chief himself would be beaten. He therefore
now promises a new Ruler, he promises that there would be again some
civil order to be found among the people; for a governor could not have
been struck on the check, except all authority and honor had departed.
We then see what the Prophet intended by mentioning the word, Ruler; it
was to show, that God would again cause that a new Prince would arise to
govern the people. It was therefore a remedy to their devastation.

<span id="iv.5.iii-p3"></span>But the Prophet subjoins, *His going forth
is from the beginning,* or from far antiquity *and from the days of
ages,* that is from the days of eternity. He intimates here that it
would not be a sudden thing, that a prince should arise to govern the
people; for it had been already long ago determined by God. This is the
plain meaning. Some, I know, pertinaciously maintain, that the Prophet
speaks here of the eternal existence of Christ; and as for myself I
willingly own that the divinity of Christ is here proved to us; but as
this will never be allowed by the Jews, I prefer taking the words simply
as they are, — that Christ will not come forth unexpectedly from
Bethlehem, as though God had previously determined nothing respecting
him. *His goings forth, then, are from the beginning.* But others bring
a new refinement, — that the Prophet uses the plural number, his goings
forth, to designate the twofold nature of Christ: but there is in this
an absurdity; for the Prophet could not properly nor wisely mention the
human nature of Christ with the divine, with reference to eternity. The
Word of God, we know, was eternal; and we know, that when the fullness
of time came, as Paul says, Christ put on our nature, (<span
id="iv.5.iii-p3.1"></span>[Ga 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.5.iii-p3.1"></span>.) Hence the beginning of Christ as to the
flesh was not so old, if his existence be spoken of: to set them
together then would have been absurd. It is a common thing in Hebrew to
use the plural for the singular number. He says then, that the going
forth of Christ is from eternity; for he will not go forth suddenly from
Bethlehem, as one who rises unexpectedly to bring help, when things are
in a hopeless state, and so rises, when nothing had been foreseen. But
the Prophet declares that the going forth of Christ would be different,
— that God had from the beginning determined to give his people an
eternal king.

<span id="iv.5.iii-p4"></span>At the same time, we must repudiate that
gloss with which the Rabbis are pleased; for they say that the Messiah
was created before the creation of the world, and also the throne of
eternity, and the Law, and other things; but these are insipid fables.
The Prophet shows simply, that even before the world was made Christ was
chief, no he is also called the Firstborn of every creature, for by him
all things were created, (<span id="iv.5.iii-p4.1"></span>[Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="iv.5.iii-p4.1"></span>)
and the same Word of God, by whom the world was created, is to be the
Head of the Church and by him what has been lost is to be recovered. We
now then comprehend what the Prophet meant by saying, *the goings forth*
of Christ *are from eternity* But I would not concede to the Jews, that
only by the perpetual appointment of God the going forth of Christ has
been from the beginning, or from all ages: but two things must be
noticed by us, — that Christ, who was manifested in the flesh that he
might redeem the Church of God, was the eternal Word, by whom the world
was created, — and then, that he ass destined by the eternal counsel of
God to be the first-born of every creature, and especially to be the
Head of the Church, that he might restore a fallen world by his grace
and power.

<span id="iv.5.iii-p5"></span>We now then see the reason why the Prophet
connects together these two things, — that there would go forth one from
Bethlehem who would rule among Israel, — and yet that his goings forth
have been from eternity: for if he had only said what I explained
yesterday, an objection might easily have been made, and this might have
come into the mind of some, — “Why dost thou say that one will come from
Bethlehem who will govern the chosen people, as though God were to
contrive a new remedy on seeing that it is all over with respect to the
deliverance of his Church?” The Prophet here anticipates this objection,
and reminds us, that his goings forth have been from eternity, that they
have been already decreed, even from the beginning; for with God there
is nothing new, so that he should stand in need of holding any unlooked
for consultation; as is the case with us when any thing happens which we
in no degree apprehended; we then find it necessary to devise some new
measures. The Prophet shows that nothing of this kind can happen to God:
but all this, — that people are reduced to nothing, — and that they are
again restored by Christ, — all this is overruled by his secret and
incomprehensible providence. His goings forth then are from the
beginning, and from the days of eternity. Let us proceed —

<span id="iv.5.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.iv-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003)<span id="iv.5.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Therefore will he give them up,
until the time *that* she which travaileth hath brought forth: then the
remnant of his brethren shall return unto the children of Israel.

<span id="iv.5.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Propterea  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) dabit eos (hoc est, ponet eos, vel,
relinquet) usque ad tempus quo parturiens pariet; et revertentur ad
filios Israel residuum fratrum ejus.

<span id="iv.5.iv-p5"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.iv-p6"></span><span id="iv.5.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iv-p7"></span>The Prophet here again so moderates his
words, that the Jews might understand, that they were to endure many
evils before God relieved their miseries. He wished then here to prepare
the minds of the godly to bear evils, that they might not despair in
great troubles, nor be depressed by extreme fear. He then states these
two things, — that the people, as they deserved, would be heavily
afflicted, — and then that God, notwithstanding such severe punishment,
would be mindful of his covenant, so as to gather at length some
remnants and not to suffer his people to be wholly destroyed. He
therefore promises a middle course between a prosperous state and
destruction. The people, says the Prophet, shall not continue entire. —
How so? For God will cut off the kingdom and the city; and yet he will
afford relief to the miserable: When they shall think that they are
given up to entire ruin, he will stretch forth his hand to them. This is
the sum of the whole.

<span id="iv.5.iv-p8"></span>He then says that they shall be delivered
up, that is, forsaken by God, *until she who is in travail bringeth
forth*  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) There are those who
apply this to the blessed virgin; as though Micah had said that the Jews
were to look forward to the time when the Virgin would bring forth
Christ: but all may easily see that this is a forced interpretation. The
Prophet, I have no doubt, in using this similitude, compares the body of
the people to a woman with child. The similitude of a woman in travail
is variously applied. The wicked, when they promise to themselves
impunity, are suddenly and violently laid hold on: thus their
destruction is like the travail of a woman with child. But the meaning
of this passage is different; for the Prophet says that the Jews would
be like pregnant women, for this reason, — that though they would have
to endure the greatest sorrows, there yet would follow a joyful and
happy issue. And Christ himself employs this example for the same
purpose,

<span id="iv.5.iv-p11"></span>‘A woman,’ he says, ‘has sorrow when she
brings forth, but immediately rejoices when she sees a man born into the
world,’ (<span id="iv.5.iv-p11.1"></span>[Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021)<span
id="iv.5.iv-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.5.iv-p12"></span>So Micah says in this place, that the
chosen people would have a happy deliverance from their miseries, for
they would bring forth. There shall indeed be the most grievous sorrows,
but their issue will be joy, that is, when they shall know that they and
their salvation had been the objects of God’s care, when they shall
understand that their chastisements had been useful to them. *Until*
*then she who is in travail bringeth forth, God, he says, will forsake
them*

<span id="iv.5.iv-p13"></span>There are then two clauses in this verse;
— the first is, that the Jews were for a time to be forsaken, as though
they were no longer under the power and protection of God; — the other
is that God would be always their guardian, for a bringing forth would
follow their sorrows. The following passage in Isaiah is of an opposite
character;

<span id="iv.5.iv-p14"></span>‘We have been in sorrow, we have been in
travail,  
and we brought forth wind,’ (<span id="iv.5.iv-p14.2"></span>[Isa
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018)<span
id="iv.5.iv-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.5.iv-p15"></span>The faithful complain there that they had
been oppressed with the severest troubles, and had come to the birth,
but that they brought forth nothing but wind, that is, that they had
been deceived by vain expectation, for the issue did not prove to be
what they had hoped. But the Lord promises here by Micah something
better, and that is, that the end of all their evils would be the happy
restoration of the people, as when a woman receives a compensation for
all her sorrows when she sees that a child is born.

<span id="iv.5.iv-p16"></span>And he confirms this sentence by another,
when he says, *To the children of Israel shall return, or be converted,
the residue of his brethren*  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144)
The Prophet then intimates that it could not be otherwise but that God
would not only scatter, but tread under foot his people, so that their
calamity would threaten an unavoidable destruction. This is one thing;
but in the meantime he promises that there would be some saved. But he
speaks of a remnant, as we have observed elsewhere, lest hypocrites
should think that they could escape unpunished, while they trifled with
God. The Prophet then shows that there would come such a calamity as
would nearly extinguish the people, but that some would be preserved
through God’s mercy and that beyond ordinary expectation.  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) We now perceive the intention of the
Prophet. It now follows —

<span id="iv.5.v"></span>

<span id="iv.5.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.v-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004)<span id="iv.5.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.v-p2"></span>**4.** And he shall stand and feed in the
strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God;
and they shall abide: for now shall he be great unto the ends of the
earth.

<span id="iv.5.v-p3"></span>**4.** Et stabit et pascet in virtute
Jehovae, in magnificentia nominis Jehovae Dei sui; et habitabunt, quia
nunc magnificabitur usque ad fines terrae.

<span id="iv.5.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.5.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.v-p6"></span>There is no doubt but that the Prophet
continues here to speak of Christ; and though the Jews shamelessly
pervert the whole Scripture, they yet cannot deny that Micah calls here
the attention of all the godly to the coming of Christ, yea, of all who
hope or desire to obtain salvation. This is certain. Let us now see what
the Prophet ascribes to Christ.

<span id="iv.5.v-p7"></span>*He shall stand,* he says, *and feed in the
power of Jehovah* The word, stand, designates perseverance, as though he
had said, that it would not be for a short time that God would gather by
Christ the remnant of the people; that it would not be, as it often
happens, when some rays of joy shine, and then immediately vanish. The
Prophet shows here that the kingdom of Christ would be durable and
permanent. It will then proceed; for Christ will not only rule his
Church for a few days, but his kingdom will continue to stand through
unbroken series of years and of ages. We nor then understand the
Prophet’s object.

<span id="iv.5.v-p8"></span>He adds in the second place, *He shall feed
in the strength of Jehovah, in the greatness of the name of Jehovah his
God;* by which words he means, that there would be sufficient power in
Christ to defend his Church. The Church, we know, is in this world
subject to various troubles, for it is never without enemies; for Satan
always finds those whom he induces, and whose fury he employs to harass
the children of God. As then the Church of God is tossed by many
tempests, it has need of a strong and invincible defender. Hence this
distinction is now ascribed by our Prophet to Christ, — that *he shall
feed in the strength of Jehovah, and in the majesty of his God.* As to
the word feed, it no doubt expresses what Christ is to his people, to
the flock committed to him and to his care. Christ then rules not in his
Church as a dreaded tyrant, who distresses his subjects with fear; but
he is a Shepherd who gently deals with his flock. Nothing therefore can
exceed the kindness and gentleness of Christ towards the faithful, as he
performs the office of a Shepherd: and he prefers to be adorned with
this, title, rather than to be called and deemed a kings, or to assume
authority to himself. But the Prophet, on the other hand, shows, that
the power of Christ would be dreadful to the ungodly and wicked. He
shall feed, he says, — with regard to his flock, Christ will put on a
character full of gentleness; for nothing, as I have said can imply more
kindness than the word shepherd: but as we are on every side surrounded
by enemies, the Prophet adds, —

<span id="iv.5.v-p9"></span>He shall feed *in the power of Jehovah and
in the majesty of the name of Jehovah;* that is as much power as there
is in God, so much protection will there be in Christ, whenever it will
be necessary to defend and protect the Church against her enemies. Let
us hence learn that no less safety is to be expected from Christ, than
there is of power in God. Now, since the power of God, as we confess, is
immeasurable, and since his omnipotence far surpasses and swallows up
all our conceptions, let us hence learn to extend both high and low all
our hopes. — Why so? Because we have a King sufficiently powerful, who
has undertaken to defend us, and to whose protection the Father has
committed us. Since then we have been delivered up to Christ’s care and
defense, there is no cause why we should doubt respecting our safety. He
is indeed a Shepherd, and for our sake he thus condescended and refused
not so mean a name; for in a shepherd there is no pomp nor grandeur. But
though Christ, for our sake, put on the character of a Shepherd, and
disowns not the office, he is yet endued with infinite power. — How so?
Because he governs not the Church after a human manner, *but in the
majesty of the name of his God*  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146)

<span id="iv.5.v-p11"></span>Now, that he subjects Christ to God, he
refers to his human nature. Though Christ is God manifested in the
flesh, he is yet made subject to God the Father, as our Mediator and the
Head of the Church in human nature: he is indeed the middle Person
between God and us. This then is the reason why the Prophet now says,
that Christ has power, as it were, at the will of another; not that
Christ is only man, but as he appears to us in the person of man, he is
said to receive power from his Father; and this, as it has been said,
with respect to his human nature. There is yet another reason why the
Prophet has expressly added this, — that we may know that Christ, as the
protector of the Church, cannot be separated from his Father: as then
God is God, so Christ is his minister to preserve the Church. In a word,
the Prophet means that God is not to be viewed by the faithful, except
through the intervening Mediator; and he means also that the Mediator is
not to be viewed, except as one who receives supreme power from God
himself and who is armed with omnipotence to preserve his people.

<span id="iv.5.v-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *They shall dwell; for
he shall now be magnified to the extremities of the earth* He promises a
secure habitation to the faithful; for Christ shall be extolled to the
utmost regions of the world. We here see that he is promised to foreign
nations: for it would have been enough for Christ to exercise his
supreme power within the borders of Judea, had only one nation been
committed to his safe keeping. But as God the Father intended that he
should be the author of salvation to all nations, we hence learn that it
was necessary that he should be extolled to the utmost borders of the
earth. But with regard to the word dwell, it is explained more fully in
the next verse, when the Prophet says—

<span id="iv.5.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.vi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005)<span id="iv.5.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vi-p2"></span>**5.** And this *man* shall be the peace,
when the Assyrian shall come into our land: and when he shall tread in
our palaces, then shall we raise against him seven shepherds, and eight
principal men.

<span id="iv.5.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Et erit hic pax: Assur quum venerit
in terram nostram, et quum calcaverit in palatiis nostris, tunc
constituemus super eum septem pastores et octo principes hominum.

<span id="iv.5.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.vi-p5"></span><span id="iv.5.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vi-p6"></span>Micah, as I have said, confirms his former
statement. By the word *dwell,* he no doubt meant a quiet and peaceable
inhabitation; as though he had said, that the children of God would,
under Christ, be safe and secure. Now he adds, *And he shall be our
peace*. It might have been asked, “Whence will come this secure
dwelling? For the land has been very often wasted, and the people have
been at length driven to exile. How then can we now venture to hope for
what thou promises, that we shall be quiet and secure?” Because, he
says, *He shall be our peace;* and we ought to be satisfied with the
protection of the King whom God the Father has given us. Let his shadow,
then, suffice us, and we shall be safe enough from all troubles. We now
see in what sense the Prophet calls Christ the Peace of his people or of
his Church; he so calls him because he will drive far away all hurtful
things, and will be armed with strength and invincible power to check
all the ungodly, that they may not make war on the children of God, or
to prevent them in their course, should they excite any disturbances.

<span id="iv.5.vi-p7"></span>We further know, that Christ is in another
way our peace; for he has reconciled us to the Father. And what would it
avail us to be safe from earthly annoyances, if we were not certain that
God is reconciled to us? Except then our minds acquiesce in the paternal
benevolence of God, we must necessarily tremble at all times, though no
one were to cause us any trouble: nay, were all men our friends, and
were all to applaud us, miserable still would be our condition, and we
should toil with disquietude, except our consciences were pacified with
the sure confidence that God is our Father. Christ then can be our peace
in no other way than by reconciling God to us. But at the same time the
Prophet speaks generally, — that we shall lie safely under the shadow of
Christ, and that no evil ought to be feared, — that though Satan should
furiously assail us, and the whole worth become mad against us, we ought
yet to fear nothing, if Christ keeps and protects us under his wings.
This then is the meaning, when it is said here that Christ is our peace.

<span id="iv.5.vi-p8"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *When the Assyrian
shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our palaces then we
shall raise up against him or on him, seven shepherds and eighty princes
of the people*  <span id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) The Prophet
intimates that the Church of God would not be free from troubles, even
after the coming of Christ: for I am disposed to refer this to the
intervening time, though interpreters put another construction on the
words of the Prophet. But this meaning, is far more suitable, — that
while the help which God promised was expected and yet suspended, the
Assyrians would come, who would pass far and wide through the land of
Israel. Hence he says, that though Assur should come to our land, and
break through, with such force and violence that we could not drive him
out, we shall yet set up for ourselves shepherds and princes against
him. It must at the same time be observed, that this prophecy is not to
be confined to that short time; for the Prophet speaks generally of the
preservation of the Church before as well as after the coming of Christ;
as though he said, — “I have said that the king, who shall be born to
you, and shall go forth from Bethlehem, shall be your peace; but before
he shall be revealed to the world, God will gather his Church, and there
shall emerge as from a dead body Princes as well as Shepherds, who will
repel unjust violence, nay, who will subdue the Assyrians.”

<span id="iv.5.vi-p12"></span>We now see what the prophet had in view:
After having honored Christ with this remarkable commendation — that he
alone is sufficient to give us a quiet life, he adds that God would be
the preserver of his Church, so as to deliver it from its enemies. But
there is a circumstance here expressed which ought to be noticed: Micah
says, that when the Assyrians shall pass through the land and tread down
all the palaces, God would then become the deliverer of his people. It
might have been objected, and said, “Why not sooner? Would it have been
better to prevent this? Why! God now looks as it were indifferently on
the force of the enemies, and loosens the reins to them, that they
plunder the whole land, and break through to the very middle of it. Why
then does not God give earlier relief?” But we see the manner in which
God intends to preserve his Church: for as the faithful often need some
chastisement, God humbles them when it is expedient, and then delivers
them. This is the reason why God allowed such liberty to the Assyrians
before he supplied assistance. And we also see that this discourse is so
moderated by the Prophet, that he shows, on the one hand, that the
Church would not always be free from evils, — the Assyrians shall come,
they shall tread down our palaces, — this must be endured by God’s
children, and ought in time to prepare their minds to bear troubles;
but, on the other hand, a consolation follows; for when the Assyrians
shall thus penetrate into our land, and nothing shall be concealed or
hidden from them, then the Lord will cause new shepherds to arise.

<span id="iv.5.vi-p13"></span>The Prophet means that the body of the
people would be for some time mutilated and, as it were, mangled; and so
it was, until they returned from Exile. For he would have said this to
no purpose, *We shall set up for ourselves,* if there had been an
unbroken succession of regular government; he could not have said in
that case, After Assur shall come into our land, we shall set up
princes; but, There shall be princes when Assur shall come. The word
*set up* denotes then what I have stated, — that the Church would be for
a time without any visible head. Christ indeed has always been the Head
of the Church; but as he designed himself to be then seen in the family
of David as in an image or picture, so the Prophet shows here, that
though the faithful would have to see the head cut off and the Church
dead, and like a dead body cast aside, when torn from its head; yea,
that though the Church would be in this state dreadfully desolated,
there is yet a promise of a new resurrection. *We shall* then *set up,*
or choose for ourselves shepherds.

<span id="iv.5.vi-p14"></span>If any one raises an objection and says
that it was God’s office to make shepherds for his people, — this indeed
I allow to be true: but this point has not been unwisely mentioned by
the Prophet; for he extols here the favor of God, in granting again
their liberty to his people. In this especially consists the best
condition of the people, when they can choose, by common consent, their
own shepherds: for when any one by force usurps the supreme power, it is
tyranny; and when men become kings by hereditary right, it seems not
consistent with liberty.  <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) We
shall then set up for ourselves princes, says the Prophet; that is, the
Lord will not only give breathing time to his Church, and will also
cause that she may set up a fixed and a well-ordered government, and
that by the common consent of all.

<span id="iv.5.vi-p16"></span>By *seven* and *eight,* the Prophet no
doubt meant a great number. When he speaks of the calamities of the
Church, it is aid, ‘There shall not be found any to govern, but children
shall rule over you.’ But the Prophet says here that there would be many
leaders to undertake the care of ruling and defending the people. The
governors of the people shall therefore be seven shepherds and eight
princes; that is, the Lord will endure many by his Spirit, that they
shall be suddenly wise men: though before they were in no repute, though
they possessed nothing worthy of great men, yet the Lord will enrich
them with the spirit of power, that they shall become fit to rule. The
Prophet now adds —

<span id="iv.5.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.vii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006)<span id="iv.5.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vii-p2"></span>**6.** And they shall waste the land of
Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances thereof:
thus shall he deliver *us* from the Assyrian, when he cometh into our
land, and when he treadeth within our borders.

<span id="iv.5.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Et pascent terram Assur (hoc est,
vastabunt; nam metaphorice hic pascere accipitur pro perdere quemadmodum
dicuntur pecora pascere agrum, hoc est quum denudant herba sua; atque
ita pastorum ingluviem notat in vorando populo; et alludit ad nomen
illud quo usus fuerat: dixerat enim <span
id="iv.5.vii-p3.1"></span>רועים septem pastores; nunc dicit <span
id="iv.5.vii-p3.2"></span>רעה; Videmus ergo Prophetam alludere ad nomen
illud quod posuerat: pascent ergo terram Assur) gladio, et terram Nimrod
in gladiis suis: et liberabit ab Assur, ubi venerit in terram nostram,
et ubi calcaverit in finibus nostris.

<span id="iv.5.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.5.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vii-p6"></span>In this verse the Prophet says, that the
shepherds, chosen by the Church, after it had been miserably oppressed
by the tyranny of its enemies, would have a twofold office. They shall
first *feed;* that is, nourish the Church of God; — and, secondly, they
shall *feed;* that is, destroy the land of Asshur, so that nothing may
remain there whole and entire. God will then arm these shepherds with
warlike courage; for they must fight boldly and courageously against
their enemies: he says, *They shall feed on the land of Nimrod with
their swords* Nimrod, we know, reigned in Chaldea; and we know also that
the ten tribes were led away by Shalmanezer, and that the kingdom of
Israel was thus demolished: when the Chaldeans obtained the empire, the
kingdom of Judah was also laid waste by them. Now the import of the
words is, that these shepherds would be sufficiently strong to oppose
all the enemies of the Church, whether they were the Babylonians or the
Assyrians. And he names the Assyrians and Babylonians, because they had
then a contest with the people of God; and this continued to the coming
of Christ, though it is certain that they suffered more troubles from
Antiochus than from others: but as he was one of the successors of
Alexander, the Prophet here, taking a part for the whole, means, by the
Assyrians and Chaldeans, all the enemies of the Church, whoever they
might be. *Waste,* he says, *shall these shepherds the land of Asshur by
the sword, and the land of Nimrod, and that by their swords*  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149)

<span id="iv.5.vii-p11"></span>But this shall not be until the Chaldeans
and the Assyrians *shall penetrate into our land, and tread in our
borders* The Prophet again reminds the faithful, that they stood in need
of patience, and that they were to know that God had not made a vain
promise. The import of the whole is, that no deliverance was to be
expected from God’s hand until the faithful yielded their necks to his
yoke, and patiently sustained the evils which were then approaching. The
Prophet then mentions the intervening time between that state in which
the Jews gloried and their deliverance. Why so? Because they were soon
after to be smitten heavily by God’s hand; but this, as we have seen,
they did not think would take place. Hence he says, — “Since you cannot
yet be made to believe that merited punishment is nigh you, experience
shall be your teacher. In the meantime, let the faithful provide
themselves with courage and, with a meek heart, patiently to submit to
God, the righteous Judge: but, at the same time, let them expect a sure
deliverance, when they shall have gone through all their evils; for when
the ripened time shall come, the Lord will look on his Church; but she
must be first afflicted.”

<span id="iv.5.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.5.viii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.5.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
from the beginning so defended thy Church, that thou hast never wholly
forsaken her, and though it had nearly rejected thee by its defections,
yet it has been thy pleasure to stand firm to thy covenant, and to show
to it thy favor through all ages, until at length the everlasting
Redeemer of the whole world appeared, — O grant, that we may experience
the same favor at this day, and though we have in various ways provoked
thy wrath against us, yet do thou so humble us, that thou mayest sustain
us by thy hand; and may we so recumb on those promises which we find in
Scripture, that we may at length by our patience overcome our enemies,
and in patience possess our souls, until thou raisest up thine hand, and
slowest that invincible power which thou hast given to thy only-begotten
Son, that he might repress the devil and all the wicked, and preserve us
safe and secure from all injuries. Amen.

<span id="iv.5.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.5.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Ninety-second

<span id="iv.5.x"></span>

<span id="iv.5.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.x-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007)<span id="iv.5.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.x-p2"></span>**7.** And the remnant of Jacob shall be in
the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the
grass, that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men.

<span id="iv.5.x-p3"></span>**7.** Et erit residuum Jacobin gentibus, in
medio populorum multorum (vel, magnorum,) sicut ros a Jehova, sicut
stillae super herbam, quae non expectat hominem, neque sperat in filiis
hominum.

<span id="iv.5.x-p4"></span>**8.** And the remnant of Jacob shall be
among the Gentiles in the midst of many people as a lion among the
beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep: who, if
he go through, both treadeth down, and teareth in pieces, and none can
deliver.

<span id="iv.5.x-p5"></span>**8.** Et erit residuum Jacob in gentibus,
in medio populorum multorum (vel, magnorum, ut diximus,) sicut leo inter
animalia sylvae, sicut leunculus inter greges ovium, qui si transierit
et discerpserit et repuerit, nemo eripiet.

<span id="iv.5.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.x-p7"></span><span id="iv.5.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.x-p8"></span>Micah promises here two things as to the
future state of the Church, — that God shall defend it without the help
and aid of men, — and that he will supply it with strength, so that it
will become superior to all enemies. In the first place, to show that
the preservation of the Church depends on the mere favor of God, and
that there is no need of any earthly aids, he makes use of a most
suitable similitude; he says, that the people of God are like a dewy
meadow. The Prophet speaks not what is strictly correct; for what he
says of the rain and dew is to be applied to the grass or the meadow.
 <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) *The residue of Jacob, he says,
shall be as dew from Jehovah, and drops of rain on the grass*. This
cannot be applied according to the design of the Prophet, except you
take the dew, as I have already said, for the dewy meadows or for the
grass, which draws moisture and vigor from the rains. The sense indeed
is by no means obscure, which is, — that God will make his people to
grow like the grass, which is fed only by celestial dew, without any
culture or labor on the part of men: and this is also what the Prophet
expressly mentions; for he says, that the grass of which he speaks waits
not for men, nor grows through men’s care, but grows through the dew of
heaven.

<span id="iv.5.x-p10"></span>But that we may better understand the
Prophet’s intention, I shall briefly notice the words. *There shall be,*
he says, *the residue of Jacob* He shows here that the whole people
would not he preserved; for he had before spoken of their destruction.
We hence see that this promise is to be confined to the seed, which God
had wonderfully preserved in the calamitous state of the Church, yea,
even in its almost total destruction. Then this promise belongs not to
the whole body of the people, but to a small number; and hence he uses
as before, the word <span id="iv.5.x-p10.1"></span>שארית, *sharit*, a
remnant or residue. *There shall then be the residue of Jacob;*  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) that is, though the people shall
nearly all perish, yet there shall be some residue.

<span id="iv.5.x-p12"></span>He then adds, *Among great* or *many
nations* There is here a contrast between the remnants and great
nations: and the Prophet has not unnecessarily added the expression
<span id="iv.5.x-p12.1"></span>בקרב, *bekoreb,* in the midst. There are
then three things to be observed here, — that God does not promise
deliverance to the whole people, but to a residue only, — and then, that
he promises this deliverance among powerful or many nations, as though
he said, — “Though the Church of God shall not excel in number, nay, so
great may be the number of its enemies, as to be sufficient to overwhelm
it, yet God will cause it to grow and to propagate: in a word, its
enemies, though many in number, and strong in force and power, shall not
yet hinder the Lord, that he should not increase his Church more and
more;” — and the third particular is what the expression, *in the
midst,* intimates, and that is, that the people of God shall be besieged
on every side. When enemies come upon us only from one part, it is not
so very distressing, but when they surround us, being in front, and
behind, and on both sides, then our condition seems miserable indeed;
for when they thus press on us on all sides, they hardly allow us time
to draw our breath. But the Prophet declares, that though surrounded on
all sides by enemies, yet the Church would be safe.

<span id="iv.5.x-p13"></span>He now adds, <span
id="iv.5.x-p13.1"></span>כטל מאת יהוה, *cathel meat Ieve*, *As a dew
from Jehovah;* that is, it shall be, as I have said, as the grass, which
is nourished and grows by means of dew from heaven, and as grass, which
flourishes, not through the culture or labor of men, but which God
himself makes to grow. He might have merely said, as the dew, but he
adds, from Jehovah, that he might make a distinction between God and
man, and show that the power of God is alone sufficient to support and
sustain the Church, though men brought no assistance. And this is
expressed more clearly in the next clause, when he says, *As drops of
rain on the grass, which waits not for man, nor tarries for the sons of
men.* We now then see that the faithful have their attention called to
God alone, that they may understand that they are to be safe through his
favor, that if all helps on earth failed, they ought not to fear, since
they can be effectually sustained by the power of God alone: for God
makes grass to grow on mountains and in meadows without the help and
labor of man; and thus he can defend his Church without any foreign aid,
but by his own hidden, and, so to speak, his own intrinsic power.

<span id="iv.5.x-p14"></span><span id="iv.5.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.x-p15"></span>Then follows this promise, — that God will
arm his people with invincible and irresistible power, that they may be
superior to all their enemies. Hence he says, that *the residue of
Israel shall be like a lion among the beasts of the forests and like a
young lion among a flock of sheep* As a strong lion then is superior to
other beasts, and as a young lion dares ferociously to attack a flock of
sheep; so he says, the people of Israel shall be; they shall be like
lions, filling their enemies with terror, yea, and plundering and
scattering them, so that no one will dare to resist them. The Prophet,
by speaking thus, does not mean, that the people of God would be cruel
and sanguinary: for we know that when the Prophets use similes of this
kind, they express something not strictly suitable; for who would be so
foolish as to select every thing that belongs to a lion, and apply it to
the Church of God. Then the reason for this similitude must be observed;
it was to show, that the faithful shall be endued with a power so
superior to that of their enemies, that they shall be a terror to them.
It does not hence follow that they shall be cruel.

<span id="iv.5.x-p16"></span>But we must, at the same time, see what the
Lord promises to his Church. Though God then recommends to his children
the spirit of meekness, yet the faithful may still be a thread to their
enemies; they ought, however, to observe what is just towards them, and
to keep themselves within proper bounds. And yet Micah says, that they
shall be endued with such power that they shall drive their enemies afar
off; yea, that they shall plunder and tear them in pieces, while no one
will be able to resist them.  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152)
But these two things are necessary as to the preservation of the Church,
that God may make it grow; for except it be miraculously increased, it
can never grow; and then it has need of a strong and powerful defense
against her enemies; for we know that there are always wicked men who
oppose the Church, yea, who apply all their powers to destroy it: it is
therefore necessary that it should be supplied by the Lord with
invincible strength, as our Prophet declares here. Let us proceed —

<span id="iv.5.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.xi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#009)<span id="iv.5.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Thine hand shall be lifted up upon
thine adversaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off.

<span id="iv.5.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Exaltabitur manus tua super hostes
tuis, et cuncti, adversarii tui excidentur.

<span id="iv.5.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.5.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xi-p6"></span>He confirms what is said in the last verse,
and expresses in other words what he meant, and what we have explained,
— that though the Church must contend with many strong and violent
enemies, it will not yet fail, for the Lord will supply it with strength
from heaven. *Exalted, he says, shall be thy hand, that all thine
enemies may be cut off* He promises not that the Church shall be in a
quiet state, but victorious, and declares also that there will never be
wanting enemies. This promise, then, ought to arm us for enduring
patiently, as we cannot conquer except by fighting. As then there will
be always enemies to oppose the Church of God; yea, to attempt its ruin,
the Prophet says here, *Exalted shall be thy hand above thine enemies.*

<span id="iv.5.xi-p7"></span>But it may be asked, When has this promise
been fulfilled? For we know that since the people had been led away into
the Babylonian exile, they had always been either tributaries, or kept
under cruel tyranny, or at least had been unequal to their enemies. But
this principle ought ever to be remembered, — that the faithful ought to
be satisfied with victory, — that however hard they may be pressed, and
however constant may be the contests which they have to carry on, and
however wearisome, this one thing ought still to be sufficient for them
— that they shall not wholly perish. And it appears evident, that God’s
people have always been preserved by his invincible hand, however
numerous have been their opposing enemies. We must also keep in mind
what we have just heard, — that the promise here is not made to the
whole people, but to a residue only. And it surpasses the expectation of
the whole world, that even a small member could have survived so many
slaughters, by which they might have been swallowed up a hundred times.
Now then we see that it had not been without reason promised to the
faithful, that they should be made conquerors over all their enemies.
But this has not been really fulfilled, except under the conflict of the
cross. It now follows —

<span id="iv.5.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p1"></span><span id="iv.5.xii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
5:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.5.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, saith the Lord, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of
thee, and I will destroy thy chariots:

<span id="iv.5.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et accidet in die illo, dicit
Jehova, excidam equos tuos e medio tui, et perdam quadrigas tuas;

<span id="iv.5.xii-p4"></span>**11.** And I will cut off the cities of
thy land, and throw down all thy strong holds:

<span id="iv.5.xii-p5"></span>**11.** Et excidam urbes terrae tuae, et
evertam cunctas munitiones tuas;

<span id="iv.5.xii-p6"></span>**12.** And I will cut off witchcrafts out
of thine hand; and thou shalt have no *more* soothsayers:

<span id="iv.5.xii-p7"></span>**12.** Et excidam angures (vel, divinos)
e manu tua; et praestigiatores non erunt tibi (haec lengenda sunt in uno
contextu;)

<span id="iv.5.xii-p8"></span>**13.** Thy graven images also will I cut
off, and thy standing images out of the midst of thee; and thou shalt no
more worship the work of thine hands.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p9"></span>**13.** Et excidam scuptilia tua et
statuas tuas e medio tui; et non adorabis amplius opus manuum tuarum;

<span id="iv.5.xii-p10"></span>**14.** And I will pluck up thy groves
out of the midst of thee: so will I destroy thy cities.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p11"></span>**14.** Et delebo lucos tuos e mediotui,
et detraham hostes tuos (vel, urbes tuas; utroque enim verti potest;)

<span id="iv.5.xii-p12"></span>**15.** And I will execute vengeance in
anger and fury upon the heathen, such as they have not heard.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p13"></span>**15.** Et faciam in ira et furore
vindictam in gentibus quae non audierunt (vel, quam non audierunt; dicam
de utroque.)

<span id="iv.5.xii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.5.xii-p15"></span><span id="iv.5.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p16"></span>There is introduced here a most necessary
admonition, in order that the faithful may know, how they are to be
preserved by the hand and favor of God, even when they shall be stripped
of all their helps, yea, even when God shall take away all those
impediments, which would otherwise close up the way against his favor.
The sum of the whole then is, — that the Church shall not otherwise be
saved by God’s kindness than by being deprived of all her strength and
defenses, and also by having her obstacles removed by God, even those
which in a manner prevented his hand from being put forth to save his
people. For the Prophet mentions here cities, then fortified places, he
mentions horses and chariots. These, we know, are not in themselves to
be condemned: but he means, that as the people foolishly placed
confidence in earthly things, the salvation of God could not otherwise
come to them than by stripping them of all vain and false confidence.
This is one thing. Then, on the other hand, he mentions groves, he
mentions carved images and statues, he mentions augurs and diviners:
these were corruptions, which closed the door against the favor of God;
for a people, given to idolatry, could not call upon God nor hope in him
as the author of salvation. We now then perceive the Prophet’s design.
It now remains for me to run over the words.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p17"></span>He says first*, It shall be in that day,
saith Jehovah, that I will cut off thine horses*  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) Here the Prophet enumerates those
things which could not in themselves be ascribed to any thing wrong: for
as God has created horses for the use of men, so also he allows them to
be for our service. Why then does the Prophet say, that the Church could
not be delivered, except horses were taken away? It was owing to an
accidental fault; for when men abound in forces, they instantly fix
their hope on them. As then such an abuse of God’s gifts had prevailed
among the people of Israel, it was necessary that horses should be taken
away. God indeed could have humbled their minds or withdrawn their
confidence from their horses and chariots: but it hence appears how deep
are the roots of presumption in the hearts of men, that they cannot be
otherwise torn up, than by having the things themselves cut off. To have
horses and to have chariots is the bounty of God: for how can we have
chariots and horses and other things, except through God’s kindness? And
yet God cannot find a way by which he can do us good, except by taking
away his former gifts. Here then Micah touches the hearts of the people
much more sharply than before, when he says, that salvation cannot
proceed from the Lord, except their horses were destroyed; as though he
said, — “Ye see how great is your wickedness; God has hitherto dealt
bountifully with you, since he has enriched you, and has also given you
horses. Now as he sees that you abuse these gifts, he complains that all
ways of access to you are closed up, as ye do not receive his kindness.
Inasmuch as your horses and your chariots engross your attention, ye in
a manner drive God far away from you. That he may therefore come to you,
he will open a way for himself by removing all the obstacles and
hindrances.”

<span id="iv.5.xii-p19"></span>We hence learn, that though all God’s
benefits ought to raise us up to heaven, serving as kinds of vehicles,
they are yet turned, through our wickedness, to another purpose, and are
made intervening obstacles between us and God. Hereby then is our
ingratitude proved; and hence it comes, that God, when he intends to
make his salvation known to us is in a manner constrained to take away
and remove from us his benefits. We now then understand what the Prophet
had in view when he mentioned horses and chariots. For he does not
threaten here, as some think, that the people would be merely deprived
of all God’s gifts that they might see in their destitution and want
only signs of a curse; by no means, but it is rather a promise, that is,
that God will turn aside all impediments by which he was for a time
prevented from bringing help to his people. This doctrine ought at the
same time to avail for bringing no ordinary comfort. It is hard and
bitter to the flesh to be brought down. Hence the people of Israel were
little able at first to bear their lot with submission, when they saw
themselves stripped of God’s benefits: but the Prophet sets before them
a compensations which was capable of soothing all their grief, — “This,”
he says, “shall be for your chief good — that God will deprive you of
horses and chariots; for the way which your horses and chariots now
occupy shall be cleared. While ye are replenished with abundant forces,
ye drive away God far from you, and there is no way open for him. He
will therefore prepare a way for himself; and this will be the case when
your land shall be made naked, when nothing will intervene to prevent
him from coming to you.”

<span id="iv.5.xii-p20"></span><span id="iv.5.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p21"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *I will cut off
the cities of thy land,* and I will destroy all *thy fortresses* This
verse is to be taken in the same sense. That the people dwelt in
fortified cities, and had defenses and fortified places, was not of
itself displeasing to God. But as the people habituated themselves to a
false confidence, and as it were hardened themselves in it, so that this
evil could not be remedied without taking away those things to which it
is attached, the Prophet says here, *I will cut off the cities of your
land,* and then, I will cut off your defenses and fortified places. Is
it that they may be plundered with impunity by their enemies? By no
means, but that the favor of God may be made glorious in their
deliverance. For they could not ascribe it to their cities that they
kept off enemies, but were constrained to acknowledge the hand of God,
and to confess him to have been their only deliverer; for they were
exposed to enemies, and there was no aid for them in the land. God then
will thus render more evident his favor, when their cities and fortified
places shall be cut off. We hence learn that the faithful at this day
have no cause to murmur if they are without great riches, and if they
are not formidable for the multitude of their horses, nor for the number
and strength of their men. Why so? Because it is the Lord’s will that we
should be like sheep, that we might depend wholly on his power, and know
that we cannot be otherwise safe than under his protection. This reason
then ought to comfort us, that it may not be grievous to us, when we
find that we are in the midst of wolves, and that we have no equal
strength to contend with them; for even this destitution hardly extorts
from us a real confession that our safety is in the hand of God. We are
always proud. How would it be, were the Church at this day in a
flourishing state and all enemies subdued, were there no danger, no
fear? Surely earth and heaven could not bear the foolish self-confidence
of men. There is therefore no wonder that God thus holds us in, and that
while he supports us by his grace, he deprives us of all earthly helps
and aids, that we may learn that he alone is the author of our
salvation.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p22"></span>This truth ought to be carefully
contemplated by us. Whenever we see that the Church of God, though not
possessing any great power, is yet diminished daily, yea, and becomes,
so to speak, like a naked land, without any defenses, it so happens, in
order that the protection of God may be alone sufficient for us, and
that he may wholly tear away from our hearts all haughtiness and pride,
and dissipate all those vain confidences by which we not only obscure
the glory of God, but, as far as we can, entirely cover it over. In
short, as there is nothing better for us than to be preserved by the
hand of God, we ought to bear patiently the removal of all those
impediments which close up the way against God, and, in a manner, keep
off his hand from us, when he is ready to extend it for the purpose of
delivering us. For when our minds are inflated with foolish
self-confidence, we neglect God; and thus a wall intervenes, which
prevents him to help us. Who would not wish, seeing himself in extreme
danger and help not far distant, that an intercepting wall should
immediately fall down? Thus God is near at hand, as he has promised; but
there are many walls and many obstacles, from the ruin of which, if we
would be safe, we must desire and seek, that God may find an open and
free way, in order that he may be able to afford us aid.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p23"></span>The Prophet comes now to the second kind
of impediments. We have already said that some things become
impediments, as it were, accidentally, when, through our wickedness and
misapplication, we turn God’s benefits to an end contrary to what he has
designed. If, for instance, horses and chariots are given us, to possess
them is not in itself an evil, but becomes so through our blindness,
that is, when we, blinded by earthly possessions, think ourselves safe,
and thus neglect God. But there are other impediments, which are, in
their nature, and in themselves, vicious. To these the Prophet now leads
us.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p24"></span><span id="iv.5.xii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p25"></span>*I will cut off,* he says, *the
sorcerers,* <span id="iv.5.xii-p25.1"></span>כשפים*, cashephim*  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) Some render the word jugglers, and
others, augurs or diviners. We cannot know of a certainty what kind of
superstition it was, nor the other which immediately follows:  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) for the Prophet mentions here two
words which mean nearly the same thing. There is no doubt but that some,
in that age, were called augurs or diviners, and others called jugglers
or astrologers who are now called fortune-tellers. But on this subject
there is no necessity of much labor; for the Prophet simply shows here
that the people could not be preserved by Gods unless they were cleansed
from these defilements. These superstitions, we know, were forbidden and
condemned by God’s Law: but the Law was not able to restrain the
wickedness of that people; for they continually turned aside to these
evils. God then here shows, that until they had purged the Church, it
could not continue safe. Now, in these words, the Prophet reminds the
Jews, and also the Israelites, for their benefit, that it was, and had
been, through their own fault, that they labored under constant miseries
and were not helped by the hand of God. — How so? Because there was no
room, as God shows here, for the exercise of his favor; for they were
full of auguries and divinations, and of other diabolical arts. “How,”
he says, “can I help you, for I have no agreement with Satan? As you are
wholly given to wicked superstitions, my favor is rejected by you.”
 <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)

<span id="iv.5.xii-p29"></span>One thing is, that the Prophet intended
to humble the people, so that every one might know that it had been
through their fault, that God had not brought them help as they wished:
but there is another thing, — God promises a cleansing, which would open
a way for his favor, — I will take away, he says, *all the diviners* Let
us then know, that it ought to be deemed the greatest benefit when God
takes away from us our superstitions and other vices. For since a
diminution, however hard and grievous it may be at first, is useful to
us, as we see, when we willfully and openly drive away God from us; is
it not a singular favor in God when he suffers us not to be thus
separated from him, but prepares a way for himself to be connected with
us, and has ever his hand extended to bring us help? Thus much as to
these two kinds of impediments.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p30"></span><span id="iv.5.xii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p31"></span>He now adds, *I will cut off thy graven
images and thy statues from the midst of thee; and thou shalt not
hereafter bend down before the works of thine hands* This verse is plain
and contains nothing new: for the Prophet teaches that God cannot become
propitious to his Church, to keep and make her safe, until he purges her
from her filth, even from idolatry and other vices, by which the worship
of God was corrupted, or even entirely subverted. *I will,* therefore,
*cut off thy graven images and statues*  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) *from the midst of thee* We see that
God anticipates us by his gratuitous goodness, not only by forgiving us,
but also by calling us back, when wandering, into the right way. Since
then we have deviated from the right way, and God thus withdraws his
hand that it might appear that he has cast us away it is certain that we
ought not only to pray him to have mercy on us, but also to ascribe to
him a higher favor, inasmuch as he takes away the very impediments which
separate us from him, and suffer him not to come nigh us. We hence see
that God is not only inclined to pardon when men repent, but that it is
his peculiar office to remove the obstacles.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p33"></span>This ought to be carefully noticed, that
we may know that our salvation, from the first beginning, proceeds from
the mere favor of God, — and that we may also learn, that all those
things, of which the Papists vainly talk respecting preparations, are
mere figments.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p34"></span>He then adds, *thou shalt not bend
hereafter before the work of thine hands*. God expresses here the cause
why he so much abominates idols, even because he sees that his honor is
transferred to them: this is one thing. He further arraigns the Jews as
guilty, while he makes evident their defection: for surely nothing could
have been more shameful, than to take away from God his honor and
worship, and to transfer them to dead things; and he says here by way of
reproach, that they were the work of their hands. What can be more
insane, than for men to ascribe divinity to their own inventions, or to
believe that it is in the power of men to make a god from wood or stone?
This is surely monstrous in the extreme. Then the Prophet by this form
of speaking aggravates the sin of the people of Israel, that is, when he
says that they bowed the head before the work of their oven hands.

<span id="iv.5.xii-p35"></span><span id="iv.5.xii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p36"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *I will take away
thy groves*. The groves, we know, formed a part of their idolatry: they
are therefore mentioned here as an addition by the Prophet. For he
speaks not simply of trees, but refers to the wicked practices of the
people: for wherever there were high and lofty trees, they thought that
something divine was hid under their shade; hence their superstition.
When therefore the Prophet mentions groves, it must be understood of
vicious and false modes of worship; for they thought that those places
acquired a sort of sanctity from the trees; as they also thought that
they were nearer to God when they were on a hill. We hence see that this
verse is to be connected with the last; as though the Prophet had said,
that the Church could not be in safety and recover her pristine vigor,
without being well cleansed from all the filth of idolatry. For we
indeed know that some pious kings when they took away idols did not cut
down the groves; and this exception to their praise is added, that they
worshipped God, but that the high places were suffered to stand. We see
that the Holy Spirit does not fully commend those kings who did not
destroy the groves. — Why? Because they were the materials of
corruption. And further, had the Jews been really penitent, they would
have exterminated those groves by which they had so shamefully abused
and profaned the worship of God. The sum of the whole then is, that when
God shall have well cleansed his Church and wiped away all its stains,
he will then become the unfailing preserver of its safety.  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="iv.5.xii-p38"></span>He afterwards subjoins, And *I will
destroy thy enemies* <span id="iv.5.xii-p38.1"></span>עריך, *orik,* may
be rendered, enemies, and many so render it: but others translate it,
cities; and the word, cities, would be the most suitable, were it not
that the Prophet had previously mentioned cities. I do not therefore see
that it would be proper to render it here by this term. The word <span
id="iv.5.xii-p38.2"></span>עריך, *orik,* then, ought doubtless to be
rendered, thy enemies. Let us inquire why the prophet says, that the
enemies of the Church were to be destroyed. This sentence ought to be
thus explained, (I leave the former ones, and take only this the last,)
*And I will demolish thy groves from the midst of thee, that I may
destroy thine enemies:*  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) the
copulative is then to be considered as a final particle; and this
meaning is the most suitable; as though the Prophet had said, as I have
already often stated, that the door was closed against God, so that he
could bring no aid to his Church, and deliver it from enemies, as long
as it held to false confidence, and was attached to the filth of
idolatry, which was still worse. “That I may then destroy thine enemies,
it is necessary first that every thing in thee that prevents or hinders
my favor should be taken away and removed.”

<span id="iv.5.xii-p42"></span><span id="iv.5.xii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p43"></span>At last he adds, *And I will execute
vengeance in wrath and in fury* He goes on with what I have just said of
enemies; “I will then execute vengeance in wrath and in fury on the
nations”. Here God mentions his wrath and his fury, that the faithful
might feel greater confidence, that though now their enemies poured
forth grievous threatening, yet this could not prevent God from aiding
his people. — How so? Because if we compare the wrath and fury of God
with all the terrors of men, doubtless the threats of men would appear
as nothing but smoke. We now perceive the Prophet’s meaning in these
words. And he says in the last place, I will execute vengeance on the
nations who have not heard. Almost all interpreters join the relative,
<span id="iv.5.xii-p43.1"></span>אשר, *asher* with the preceding word,
<span id="iv.5.xii-p43.2"></span>גוים, *guim,* — I will then take
vengeance on the *nations who have not heard,* that is, who have been
rebellious against God: not to hear, as they explain, is obstinately to
despise the power of God, and not to be moved by his promises or by his
threatenings. But a fitter sense may perhaps be elicited, if we refer
<span id="iv.5.xii-p43.3"></span>אשר, *asher,* to vengeance, — I will
then execute vengeance on the nations which they have not heard, that
is, I will take vengeance on all the nations in a manner unheard of and
incredible: and by nations, he understands indiscriminately all the
enemies of the Church, as we have elsewhere seen.

<span id="iv.5.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xiii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.5.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou so
kindly invites us to thy self, and promises that thy aid should never be
wanting to us, provided we do not close the door against thee, — O
grant, that though many earthly benefits may be granted to us, we may
not yet trust in them and depart from thee, but, on the contrary, recomb
on thy grace only: and then should it happen to us to be deprived of all
helps, that our minds may be awakened, and that we may thus learn to
hasten to thee, may nothing impede our course, that we may not, with the
greatest haste and ardent desire, long to deliver up and devote
ourselves wholly to thee, that we may be made safe under the care and
protection of thy only-begotten Son, whom thou hast appointed to be the
guardian of our safety. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc28014.htm#fr_139) <span
id="iv.5.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.i-p4"></span> *Calvin* has, in this division, followed
the Septuagint, and so have the translators of our version. This verse,
in Hebrew, belongs to the last chapter. *Marckius, Dathius,* and
*Henderson,* follow the Hebrew division; *Junius,* and *Tremelius,* and
*Newcome,* that of our version.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc28014.htm#fr_140) <span
id="iv.5.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.i-p15"></span> This verse has been variously interpreted.
It is considered by most as connected with the last chapter. Some, as
*Marckius*, consider it as an address to the Roman power; some, to the
Babylonian; and others, to Jerusalem. The construction of it is the main
point. The first verb, <span id="iv.5.i-p15.1"></span>תתגדדי, is found
in six other places, and rendered in all, except in <span
id="iv.5.i-p15.2"></span>[Jer 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.5.i-p15.2"></span>, to cut one’s self; but its other meaning, as
in <span id="iv.5.i-p15.3"></span>[Jer
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007)<span id="iv.5.i-p15.3"></span>,
and evidently here is to troop or band together; and the noun <span
id="iv.5.i-p15.4"></span>גדוד, which follows, commonly means a band or a
troop. The participle <span id="iv.5.i-p15.5"></span>שם, in the next
clause, can refer to nothing in the text but to “the daughter of a
troop.” The obvious and natural rendering of the verse would be the
following, —

<span id="iv.5.i-p16"></span>*Band thyself together, thou daughter of a
band,  
Laying against us a siege:* —*  
With the rod shall they strike on the cheek  
The judge of Israel.*

<span id="iv.5.i-p17"></span>The daughter of a band or a troop means a
military power, which collects bands or troops for warlike purposes. It
is certainly more obvious to apply this to the Babylonian power than to
Jerusalem, especially as the next line, “Laying against us a siege,”
necessarily refers to the latter.

<span id="iv.5.i-p18"></span>“The judge” is, as Calvin seems to take it,
a poetical singular for the plural. No particular person is meant, as
*Newcome* and others seem to think, but judges in general. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc28014.htm#fr_141) <span
id="iv.5.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.i-p22"></span> This does not follow; for to say that it
was “not the least,” is not to deny that it was “small.” There is, in
fact, no contradiction in the expressions. Matthew quotes literally
neither the Hebrew nor the Septuagint version. The latter, in this case,
agrees with the former. He gives the sense, but not the words, even in
two instances besides this. Instead of “Ephratah,” he has, “in the land
of Judah;” and instead of “Ruler,” he has, “Governor that shall rule,”
or feed. The meaning in these three instances is the same, though the
words are different. The place was, in former times, called
Bethlehem-Judah, and also Ephratah. See <span
id="iv.5.i-p22.1"></span>[Ge
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019)<span id="iv.5.i-p22.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.5.i-p22.2"></span>[Jud
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007)<span id="iv.5.i-p22.2"></span>;
and <span id="iv.5.i-p22.3"></span>[Ru
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011)<span id="iv.5.i-p22.3"></span>.

<span id="iv.5.i-p23"></span>The attempt by a question to produce
similarity of expressions in the second line, according to what is done
by *Marckius* and *Newcome*, is by no means to be approved. The literal
rendering is the following: —

<span id="iv.5.i-p24"></span>*And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah!  
Small to be among the thousands of Judah,* —*  
From thee shall* one *to me come forth,  
To be a Ruler in Israel:  
And his going forth* has been *  
From of old, from the days of ages.*

<span id="iv.5.i-p25"></span>The word for “going forth” is plural,
which, as Calvin says, is sometimes used for the singular; but two MSS.
Have it in the singular number, <span id="iv.5.i-p25.1"></span>מצאתו.
The last line in the Septuagint is as follows, — <span
id="iv.5.i-p25.2"></span>απ αρχης, <span id="iv.5.i-p25.3"></span>εξ
ημερων αιωνος

<span id="iv.5.i-p26"></span>“In every age, from the foundation of the
world, there has been some manifestation of the Messiah. He was the
hope, as he was the salvation, of the world, from the promise to Adam in
paradise, to his manifestation in the flesh *four thousand* years
after.” — *Adam Clarke.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc28014.htm#fr_142) <span
id="iv.5.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iv-p4"></span> <span id="iv.5.iv-p4.1"></span>לכן,
*Grotius* renders it <span id="iv.5.iv-p4.2"></span>*certè* — surely:
but *nevertheless,* as proposed by *Scott,* is the most suitable
particle here. *Dathius* gives this paraphrase — <span
id="iv.5.iv-p4.3"></span>*Verum quidem est* — True indeed it is. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc28014.htm#fr_143) <span
id="iv.5.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iv-p9"></span> Until the time the begetting shall beget,
(<span id="iv.5.iv-p9.1"></span>יולדה ילדה)  
And the remnant of his brethren shall be converted  
Together with the children of Israel.

<span id="iv.5.iv-p10"></span>*Newcome* gives this explanation of the
verse, — “The sense is: God will not fully vindicate and exalt his
people, till the Virgin-mother shall have brought forth her Son; and
till Judah and Israel, and all the true sons of Abraham among their
brethren, the Gentiles, be converted to Christianity.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc28014.htm#fr_144) <span
id="iv.5.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iv-p17"></span> By this arrangement of the sentence,
*Calvin* evidently meant, that “his,” before “brethren,” refers to
“Israel.” In the original, the latter clause is before the former, but
in Hebrew, as well as in other languages, the antecedent sometimes comes
after its pronoun. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc28014.htm#fr_145) <span
id="iv.5.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.iv-p18"></span> Most commentators differ from Calvin in
their view of this verse, regarding it as a distinct prophecy of the
Savior’s birth. There are difficulties on both sides: but taking the
whole context, especially the following verse, we can hardly resist the
conclusion, that Christ, born of a Virgin, is the subject. Indeed, the
whole of this chapter, notwithstanding the reference to the Assyrian, is
not capable of a satisfactory explanation, without applying what is said
to Christ and his Church. Some things, no doubt, in the history of the
Jews, may be alluded to, or incidentally mentioned; but the full
accomplishment must be looked for in the new dispensation. And it is a
splendid prophecy, in words often derived from customs and incidents
among the Jews, of the birth of the Savior, and the character and
extent, and blessedness of his kingdom, and the destruction of his
enemies.

<span id="iv.5.iv-p19"></span>*Newcome* and *Adam Clarke* propose to
divide the chapter after the first line in verse 5, thinking that a new
subject is there introduced: but evidently the same subject, the Gospel
dispensation, is continued to the end of the chapter. The Assyrian, the
especial enemy of the ancient Church, designates the enemies of the
Christian Church in all ages.

<span id="iv.5.iv-p20"></span>“As Sennacherib’s invasion,” says *Scott,*
“was not repelled by the ruler or chieftains of Israel: nor did the Jews
ever invade or waste the Assyrian dominions; it seems evident, that
these expressions must be understood as mystically intending other
enemies and persecutors of the Church, who should be of the same spirit
with Sennacherib and the Assyrians.” *Henry*, who is much more learned
critic and much profounder divine than what is commonly thought, agrees
with *Scott,* and many others, in the interpretation of this chapter. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc28014.htm#fr_146) <span
id="iv.5.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.v-p10"></span> “The Prophets prefaced their messages
with, *Thus saith the Lord;* but Christ spoke not as a servant, but as a
Son, *Verily, verily, I say unto you:* this was feeding in the majesty
of the name of the Lord his God; all power was given him in heaven and
earth, a power over all flesh, by the virtue of which he still rules in
the majesty of the name of the Lord his God.” — *Henry.*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc28014.htm#fr_147) <span
id="iv.5.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vi-p9"></span> The order of the words in Hebrew is not
strictly observed in this instance. There is here an example, not
infrequent in the prophets, of the nominative case absolute, —

<span id="iv.5.vi-p10"></span>*And he shall be* our *peace:  
The Assyrian*—*when he shall come into our land,  
And when he shall tread in our palaces,  
The raise shall we against him  
Seven shepherds and eight anointed men.*

<span id="iv.5.vi-p11"></span><span id="iv.5.vi-p11.1"></span>נסיכי אדם,
literally anointed of men; but it is a phrase signifying men in
authority, princes or sovereigns. <span id="iv.5.vi-p11.2"></span>נסיכים
is rendered *dukes* in <span id="iv.5.vi-p11.3"></span>[Jos
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#021)<span id="iv.5.vi-p11.3"></span>,
and *princes* in <span id="iv.5.vi-p11.4"></span>[Ps
83:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#011)<span id="iv.5.vi-p11.4"></span>,
and <span id="iv.5.vi-p11.5"></span>[Eze
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#030)<span id="iv.5.vi-p11.5"></span>.
It is not necessary to say “eight princes of men,” but, “eight princes,”
or “eight anointed men.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc28014.htm#fr_148) <span
id="iv.5.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vi-p15"></span> It is by no means a safe rule, to draw a
conclusion from the spiritual government as to what a temporal
government should be. The subjects are guided by very different
principles; and the same sort of government will not suit countries
under different degrees of civilization. To theorize on this subject, as
on many others, leads often to wrong conclusions. An hereditary
sovereignty may seem to trench on liberty; but our own country exhibits
an example where both exist to an extent unknown in the present or in
any former age. Under no democracy has liberty ever been so freely and
so fully enjoyed as in this land, which has been so wonderfully favored
by a kind and gracious Providence. We owe, perhaps, far more than we are
aware to an hereditary sovereignty. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc28014.htm#fr_149) <span
id="iv.5.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.vii-p7"></span> <span id="iv.5.vii-p7.1"></span>כפתחיה,
in its openings or entrances: so most render the word. <span
id="iv.5.vii-p7.2"></span>Εντος πολων αυτης — within its gates. —
*Symmachus. Marckius, Newcome,* and *Henderson,* agree with our version.
Calvin has, in this instance, followed Kimchi and Aben-Ezra: but the
affix <span id="iv.5.vii-p7.3"></span>ה prevents us from adopting this
meaning; besides, the word itself is nowhere found in this sense.

<span id="iv.5.vii-p8"></span>This verse is connected with the
preceding, and ought to be separated from it only be a semicolon, and
may be thus rendered: —

<span id="iv.5.vii-p9"></span>And they shall waste the land of the
Assyrian by the sword,  
And the land of Nimrod at its entrances:  
Thus shall he cause a deliverance from the Assyrian,  
When he shall come into our land,  
And when he shall tread on our borders.

<span id="iv.5.vii-p10"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc28014.htm#fr_150) <span
id="iv.5.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.x-p9"></span> There seems to be no necessity for this
supposed inaccuracy in this comparison; it indeed changes the obvious
meaning of the passage. The Jews are compared to the dew and rain,
through which the grass grows; and then it is said, that the growth of
the grass, not the dew or the rain, is not dependent on man, but on the
dew or rain. The comparison is thus in every way suitable. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc28014.htm#fr_151) <span
id="iv.5.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.5.x-p11"></span> We have the residue or remnant of Joseph
in <span id="iv.5.x-p11.1"></span>[Am
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#015)<span
id="iv.5.x-p11.1"></span>,—the remnant of Israel in <span
id="iv.5.x-p11.2"></span>[Mic
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012)<span id="iv.5.x-p11.2"></span>, —
and here in the following verse, the remnant of Jacob. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc28014.htm#fr_152) <span
id="iv.5.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.x-p17"></span> “They shall be bold as a lion in
witnessing against the corruptions of the times and places they live in,
and strong as a lion in the strength of the Lord, to resist and overcome
their spiritual enemies. *The weapons of their warfare* are *mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strongholds,* <span
id="iv.5.x-p17.1"></span>[2 Cor. 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span id="iv.5.x-p17.1"></span>.
They shall have courage which all their adversaries shall not be able to
resist, <span id="iv.5.x-p17.2"></span>[Lu
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015)<span id="iv.5.x-p17.2"></span>.”
— *Henry.*

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc28014.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iv.5.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p18"></span> As a curious instance of ingenuity and
extravagance in allegorizing, practiced by some of the Fathers,
*Jerome’s* interpretation of this verse may be mentioned: the *horses*
were lascivious lusts; the *chariots,* sins joined together in which the
wicked, as it were, ride and triumph; the *cities,* such as that built
by Cain, not like the heavenly Jerusalem; and the *strongholds,* were
riches and the pomps of the world, the eloquence of orators and the
tenterhooks of dialecticians! — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc28014.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iv.5.xii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p26"></span> From <span
id="iv.5.xii-p26.1"></span>כשף. “In Arabic,” says Parkhurst, “the verb
signifies to *discover, disclose, reveal,* and is always in the Hebrew
Bible applied to some species of *conjuring.*” The Septuagint render the
word here <span id="iv.5.xii-p26.2"></span>φαρμακα, drugs or charms.
They were enchanters or sorcerers, who applied drugs to magical
purposes. See <span id="iv.5.xii-p26.3"></span>[2Ch
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006)<span id="iv.5.xii-p26.3"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc28014.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iv.5.xii-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p27"></span> The word here is <span
id="iv.5.xii-p27.1"></span>מעוננים, from <span
id="iv.5.xii-p27.2"></span>ענן, a cloud. Parkhurst renders it
*cloudmongers,* who looked upwards to the clouds either on the flight of
birds, or on the stars, or on meteors, and thereby pretended to foretell
future things. <span id="iv.5.xii-p27.3"></span>Αποφθεγγομενους —
oraclers — *Sept. Theodoret* renders it <span
id="iv.5.xii-p27.4"></span>μαντεις — soothsayers; and *Cyril* <span
id="iv.5.xii-p27.5"></span>ψευδομαντεις — false prophets. Some derive it
from <span id="iv.5.xii-p27.6"></span>ענה, to answer; and others from
<span id="iv.5.xii-p27.7"></span>עין, the eye; and hence, eyers or
observers, either of times, or dreams, or of stars, or of birds. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc28014.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iv.5.xii-p27.8"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p28"></span> “Many of them depended much upon the
conduct and advice of their conjurors, diviners, and fortune-tellers,
and these God will cut off, not only as weak things, and insufficient to
relieve them, but as wicked things, and sufficient to ruin them.” —
*Henry.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc28014.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iv.5.xii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p32"></span> <span id="iv.5.xii-p32.1"></span>מצבות,
rather pillars or columns than statues: <span
id="iv.5.xii-p32.2"></span>τας στηλας in the *Sept.* The pillar of stone
which Jacob set up is called by this name, <span
id="iv.5.xii-p32.3"></span>[Ge
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018)<span
id="iv.5.xii-p32.3"></span>. They were commemorative pillars at which
the Canaanites, and afterwards the Jews, offered idolatrous worship.
There was a pillar of this kind in the house of Baal, <span
id="iv.5.xii-p32.4"></span>[2 Kings
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#027)<span id="iv.5.xii-p32.4"></span>.
They were not altars, though altars might have been reared by them, for
both are mentioned together in <span id="iv.5.xii-p32.5"></span>[De
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#003)<span id="iv.5.xii-p32.5"></span>.
The word is derived from <span id="iv.5.xii-p32.6"></span>יצב, to set,
to fix firmly. The noun is rendered by *Parkhurst, a standing pillar.* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc28014.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.5.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p37"></span> *Scott,* speaking of the latter part of
this chapter, says, “The reformation of the Jews after their return from
Babylon might be alluded to; but the purification of the Christian
Church from all antichristian corruptions of faith and worship, and all
idolatry and superstition, seems more immediately to be predicted.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc28014.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iv.5.xii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.5.xii-p39"></span> *Newcome* renders the word <span
id="iv.5.xii-p39.1"></span>עריך, thine enemies, and not, thy cities,
though he connects the verse differently, — more with the last than with
the former portion of this, —

<span id="iv.5.xii-p40"></span>I will also destroy thine enemies:

<span id="iv.5.xii-p41"></span>*15. And I will execute vengeance, in
anger and in fury,  
Upon the nations which have not hearkened* unto me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Micah](cc28015)
