[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28005)  [Next](cc28007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.3"></span>

<span id="iii.3-p1"></span>Chapter 3.

<span id="iii.3.i"></span>

<span id="iii.3.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.3.i-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001)<span id="iii.3.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the word of the LORD came unto
Jonah the second time, saying,

<span id="iii.3.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et factum fuit verbum Jehovae ad
Jonam secundo, dicendo, —

<span id="iii.3.i-p4"></span>**2.** Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great
city, and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee.

<span id="iii.3.i-p5"></span>**2.** Surge, proficiscere Nineven in urbem
magnam, et praedica ad eam praedicationem quam ego mando tibi.

<span id="iii.3.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.i-p7"></span><span id="iii.3.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.i-p8"></span>There is here set before us a remarkable
proof of God’s grace, — that he was pleased to bestow on Jonah his
former dignity and honor. He was indeed unworthy of the common light,
but God not only restored him to life, but favored him again with the
office and honor of a prophet. This, as I have said, Jonah obtained
through the wonderful and singular favor of God. As he had previously
fled, and by disobedience deprived himself in a manner of all God’s
favor, the recovery of his prophetic office was certainly not obtained
through his own merit.

<span id="iii.3.i-p9"></span>It must, in the first place, be observed,
that this phrase, *The word of Jehovah came the second time,* ought to
be noticed; for the word of God comes to men in different ways. God
indeed addresses each of us individually; but he spoke to his Prophets
in a special manner; for he designed them to be witnesses and heralds of
his will. Hence, whenever God sets a man in some peculiar office, his
word is said to come to him: as the word of God is addressed to
magistrates because they are commanded to exercise the power committed
to them; so also the word of God ever came to the Prophets, because it
was not lawful for them to thrust in themselves without being called.

<span id="iii.3.i-p10"></span><span id="iii.3.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.i-p11"></span>The command now follows, *Arise, go to
Nineveh, to that great city, and preach there the preaching which I
command thee.*  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) God again repeats
what we have observed at the be ginning, — that Nineveh was a great
city, that Jonah might provide himself with an invincible courage of
mind, and come there well prepared: for it often happens, that many
boldly undertake an office, but soon fail, because difficulties had not
been sufficiently foreseen by them. Hence, when men find more hardships
than they thought of at the beginning, they nearly faint, at least they
despond. The Lord, therefore, expressly foretold Jonah how difficult
would be his employment; as though he said, “I send thee, a man unknown,
and of no rank, and a stranger, to denounce ruin on men, not a few in
number, but on a vast multitude, and to carry on a contest with the
noblest city, and so populous, that it may seem to be a region of
itself.”

<span id="iii.3.i-p15"></span>We now then understand why this character
of the city was added; it was, that Jonah might gird up himself for the
contest, that he might not afterwards fail in the middle of his course.
This fear indeed frightened him at the beginning, so that he shunned the
call of God; but he is not now moved in any degree by the greatness of
the city, but resolutely follows where the Lord leads. We hence see,
that faith, when once it gains the ascendancy in our hearts, surmounts
all obstacles and despises all the greatness of the world; for it is
immediately added —

<span id="iii.3.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.3.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.3.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003)<span id="iii.3.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.ii-p2"></span>**3.** So Jonah arose, and went unto
Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord. Now Nineveh was an exceeding
great city of three days’ journey.

<span id="iii.3.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Et surrexit Jonah et profectus est
Nineven, secundum mandatum Jehovae: Nineveh autem erat urbs magna Dei
(Deo, ad verbum) itinere trium dierum.

<span id="iii.3.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.3.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.ii-p6"></span>Jonah, by saying that he went to Nineveh
according to God’s command, proves in the first place, as I have said,
how great was the power and energy of his faith; for though Jonah had
considered the greatness and pride of the city, he seems to have
forgotten that he was an obscure man, alone, and unarmed; but he had
laid hold on weapons capable of destroying all the power of the world,
for he knew that he was sent from above. His conviction was, that God
was on his side; and he knew that God had called him. Hence then it was,
that with a high and intrepid mind he looked down on all the splendor of
the city Nineveh. Hence John does not without reason say, that the
victory, by which we overcome the world, proceeds from faith, (<span
id="iii.3.ii-p6.1"></span>[1Jo
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004)<span id="iii.3.ii-p6.1"></span>.)
Jonah also proves, at the same time, how much he had improved under
God’s scourges. He had been severely chastised; but we know that most of
the unbelieving grow hardened under the rod, and vomit forth their rage
against God; Jonah, on the contrary, shows here that chastisement had
been useful to him for he was subdued and led to obey God.

<span id="iii.3.ii-p7"></span>*He went,* then, *according to the command
of Jehovah;* that is, nothing else did he regard but to render obedience
to God, and to suffer himself to be wholly ruled by him. We hence learn
how well God provides for us and for our salvation, when he corrects our
perverseness; though sharp may be our chastisements, yet as this benefit
follows we know that nothing is better for us than to be humbled under
God’s hand, as David says in <span id="iii.3.ii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)<span id="iii.3.ii-p7.1"></span>.
This change then, *he went,* is to us a remarkable example; and this is
what the Lord has ever in view whenever he roughly handles us; for he
cannot otherwise subdue either the haughtiness or the rebellion, or the
slowness and indolence of our flesh. We must now also take notice how
Jonah attained so much strength; it was, because he had found by
experience in the bowels of the fish, that even amidst thousand deaths
there is enough in God’s protection to secure our safety. As then he had
by experience known that the issues of death are at the will and in the
hand of God, he is not now touched with fear so as to shun God’s
command, even were the whole world to rise up against him. Hence the
more any one has found the kindness of God, the more courageously he
ought to proceed in the discharge of his office, and confidently to
commit to God his life and his safety, and resolutely to surmount all
the perils of the world.

<span id="iii.3.ii-p8"></span>He then says, *that Nineveh was a great
city*  <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) *, even a journey of three
days.* Some toil much in untying a knot, which at last is no knot at
all; for it seems to them strange that one city should be in compass
about thirty leagues according to our measure. When they conceive this
as being impossible, then they invent some means to avoid the
difficulty, — that no one could visit the whole city so as to go through
all the alleys, all the streets, and all the public places, except in
three days; nay, they add, that this is not to be understood as though
one ran or quickly passed through the city, but as though he walked
leisurely and made a stay in public places: but these are mere
puerilities. And if we believe profane writers, Nineveh must have been a
great city, as Jonah declares here: for they say that its area was about
four hundred *stadia;* and we know what space four hundred *stadia*
include. A *stadium* is one hundred and twenty-five paces; hence eight
*stadia* make a mile. Now if any one will count he will find that there
are twelve miles in a hundred *stadia;* there will then be in four
hundred *stadia* forty-eight miles. This account well agrees with the
testimony of Jonah. And then Diodorus and Herodotus say that there were
1500 towers around the city. Since it was so, it could not certainly be
a smaller city than what it is represented here by Jonah. Though these
things may seem to exceed what is commonly believed, writers have not
yet reported them without some foundation: for however false are found
to be many things in Diodorus and Herodotus, yet as to Babylon and
Nineveh they could not have dared to say what was untrue; for the first
was then standing and known to many; and the ruins of the other were
still existing, though it had been for some time destroyed. We shall
farther see about the end of the book that this city was large, and so
populous, that there were there 120,000 children. If any one receives
not this testimony, let him feed on the lies of the devil. But since
there were so many children there, what else can we say but that the
circumference of the city was very great?

<span id="iii.3.ii-p10"></span>But this seems inconsistent with what
immediately follows; for Jonah says, that when he entered the city, he
performed a journey in the city for one day and preached. The answer is
this, — that as soon as he entered the city, and began to proclaim the
command of God, some conversions immediately followed: so Jonah does not
mean that he went through the city in one day. He then in the first day
converted a part of the city; he afterwards continued to exhort each one
to repentance: thus the conversion of the whole city followed; but not
in the second or the third day, as it may be easily gathered. Let us now
proceed to what remains —

<span id="iii.3.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.3.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004)<span id="iii.3.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iii-p2"></span>**4.** And Jonah began to enter into the
city a day’s journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty days, and
Nineveh shall be overthrown.

<span id="iii.3.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Et coepit Jonah ingredi in urbem
itinere diei unius, et clamavit et dixit, Adhuc quadraginta dies et
Nineveh subversa.

<span id="iii.3.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.3.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iii-p6"></span>Jonah here relates what had briefly been
said before, — that he went to Nineveh according to the command of God.
He shows then how faithfully he executed the duty enjoined on him, and
thus obeyed the word of God. Hence Jonah came and began to enter the
city and to preach on the first day. This promptness proves clearly how
tractable Jonah had become, and how much he endeavored to obey God in
discharging his office: for had there been still a timidity in his
heart, he would have inspected the city, as careful and timid men are
wont to do, who inquire what is the condition of the place, what are the
dispositions of the people, and which is the easiest access to them, and
what is the best way, and where is the least danger. If Jonah then had
been still entangled by carnal thoughts he would have waited two or
three days, and then have began to exercise his office as a Prophet.
This he did not, but entered the city and I cried. We now then see how
prompt he was in his obedience, who had before attempted to pass over
the sea: he now takes hardly a moment to breathe, but he begins at the
very entrance to testify that he had come in obedience to God.

<span id="iii.3.iii-p7"></span>We hence see with what emphasis these
words ought to be read. The narrative is indeed very simple; Jonah uses
here no rhetorical ornaments, nor does he set forth his entrance with
any fine display of words. *Jonah,* he says, *entered into the city* He
who is not well versed in Scripture might say that this is frigid: but
when we weigh the circumstances, we see that this simple way of speaking
possesses more force and power than all the displays of orators.

<span id="iii.3.iii-p8"></span>He entered then the city *a day’s
journey, and cried and said,* etc. By saying that he cried, he again
proves the courage of his soul; for he did not creep in privately, as
men are wont to do, advancing cautiously when dangers are apprehended.
He says that he cried: then this freedom shows that Jonah was divested
of all fear, and endued with such boldness of spirit, that he raised
himself up above all the hindrances of the world. And we ought, in the
meantime, to remember how disliked must have been his message: for he
did not gently lead the Ninevites to God, but threatened them with
destruction, and seemed to have given them no hope of pardon. Jonah
might have thought that his voice, as one says, would have to return to
his own throat, “Can I denounce ruin on this populous city, without
being instantly crushed? Will not the first man that meets me stone me
to death?” Thus might Jonah have thought within himself. No fear was,
however, able to prevent him from doing his duty as a faithful servant,
for he had been evidently strengthened by the Lord. But it will be
better to join the following verse —

<span id="iii.3.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.3.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005)<span id="iii.3.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iv-p2"></span>**5.** So the people of Nineveh believed
God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of
them even to the least of them.

<span id="iii.3.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Et crediderunt viri Ninevae Deo, et
indixerunt jejunium, et induerunt saccos a magno eorum usque ad parvum
eorum.

<span id="iii.3.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.3.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iv-p6"></span>One thing, escaped me in the third verse:
Jonah said that Nineveh was a city *great to God*. This form of speech
is common in Scripture: for the Hebrews call that Divine, whatever it
be, that is superior or excellent: so they say, the cedars of God, the
mountains of God, the fields of God, when they are superior in height or
in any other respect. Hence a city is called the city of God, when it is
beyond others renowned. I wished briefly to allude to this subject,
because some, with too much refinement and even puerility says that it
was called the city of God, because it was the object of God’s care, and
in which he intended to exhibit a remarkable instance of conversion.
But, as I have said, this is to be taken as the usual mode of speaking
in similar cases.

<span id="iii.3.iv-p7"></span>I now return to the text: Jonah says, that
the citizens of Nineveh *believed God*  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) . We hence gather that the preaching of
Jonah was not so concise but that he introduced his discourse by
declaring that he was God’s Prophet, and that he did not proclaim these
commands without authority; and we also gather that Jonah so denounced
ruin, that at the same time he showed God to be the avenger of sins that
he reproved the Ninevites, and, as it were, summoned them to God’s
tribunal, making known to them their guilt; for had he spoken only of
punishment, it could not certainly have been otherwise, but that the
Ninevites must have rebelled furiously against God; but by showing to
them their guilt, he led them to acknowledge that the threatened
punishment was just, and thus he prepared them for humility and
penitence. Both these things may be collected from this expression of
Jonah, that the Ninevites believed God; for were they not persuaded that
the command came from heaven, what was their faith? Let us then know,
that Jonah had so spoken of his vocation, that the Ninevites felt
assured that he was a celestial herald: hence was their faith: and
further, the Ninevites would never have so believed as to put on
sackcloth, had they not been reminded of their sins. There is,
therefore, no doubt but that Jonah, while crying against Nineveh, at the
same time made known how wickedly the men lived, and how grievous were
their offenses against God. Hence then it was that they put on
sackcloth, and suppliantly fled to God’s mercy: they understood that
they were deservedly summoned to judgment on account of their wicked
lives.

<span id="iii.3.iv-p11"></span>But it may be asked, how came the
Ninevites to believe God, as no hope of salvation was given them? for
there can be no faith without an acquaintance with the paternal kindness
of God; whosoever regards God as angry with him must necessarily
despair. Since then Jonah gave them no knowledge of God’s mercy, he must
have greatly terrified the Ninevites, and not have called them to faith.
The answer is, that the expression is to be taken as including a part
for the whole; for there is no perfect faith when men, being called to
repentance, do suppliantly humble themselves before God; but yet it is a
part of faith; for the Apostle says, in <span
id="iii.3.iv-p11.1"></span>Hebrew 11:7, that Noah through faith feared;
he deduces the fear which Noah entertained on account of the oracular
word he received, from faith, showing thereby that it was faith in part,
and pointing out the source from which it proceeded. At the same time,
the mind of the holy Patriarch must have been moved by other things
besides threatening, when he built an ark for himself, as the means of
safety. We may thus, by taking a part for the whole, explain this,
place, — that the Ninevites believed God; for as they knew that God
required the deserved punishment, they submitted to him, and, at the
same time, solicited pardon: but the Ninevites, no doubt, derived from
the words of Jonah something more than mere terror: for had they only
apprehended this — that they were guilty before God, and were justly
summoned to punishment, they would have been confounded and stunned with
dread, and could never have been encouraged to seek forgiveness.
Inasmuch then as they suppliantly prostrated themselves before God, they
must certainly have conceived some hope of grace. They were not,
therefore, so touched with penitence and the fear of God, but that they
had some knowledge of divine grace: thus they believed God; for though
they were aware that they were most worthy of death, they yet despaired
not, but retook themselves to prayer. Since then we see that the
Ninevites sought this, remedy, we must feel assured that they derived
more advantage from the preaching of Jonah than the mere knowledge that
they were guilty before God: this ought certainly to be understood. But
we shall speak more on the subject in our next lecture.

<span id="iii.3.v"></span>

<span id="iii.3.v-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.3.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as there is so
much timidity in us, that none of us is prepared to follow where thou
mayest call us, we may be so instructed by the example of thy servant
Jonah, as to obey thee in every thing, and that though Satan and the
world may oppose us with all their terrors, we may yet be strengthened
by a reliance on thy power and protection, which thou hast promised to
us, and may go on in the course of our vocation, and never turn aside,
but thus contend against all the hindrances of this world, until we
reach that celestial kingdom, where we shall enjoy thee and Christ thy
only begotten Son, who is our strength and our salvation: and may thy
Spirit quicken us, and strengthen all our faculties, that we may obey
thee, and that at length thy name may be glorified in us, and that we
may finally become partakers of that glory to which thou invites us
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.3.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-eighth

<span id="iii.3.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.3.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
3:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006)<span id="iii.3.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p2"></span>**6.** For word came unto the king of
Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him,
and covered *him* with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Et pervenit verbum (sermo, vel,
res) ad regem Nineveh; et surrexit e solio suo, et abjecit splendidam
suam vestem a seipso, et induit saccum, et sedit super pulverem:

<span id="iii.3.vii-p4"></span>**7.** And he caused *it* to be
proclaimed and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and
his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any
thing: let them not feed, nor drink water:

<span id="iii.3.vii-p5"></span>**7.** Et promulgavit ac dixit per
Nineveh ex consilio regis et magnatum ejus, dicendo, Homo et jumentum
(vel, bestia,) bos et ovis, ne gustent quidpiam, ne pascantur, et ne
aquas bibant;

<span id="iii.3.vii-p6"></span>**8.** But let man and beast be covered
with sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one
from his evil way, and from the violence that *is* in their hands.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p7"></span>**8**. Et induantur saccis homo et
bestia, et clament ad Deum in fortitudine; et revertatur quisque a via
sua mala, et a rapacitate quae est in manibus eorum.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.vii-p9"></span><span id="iii.3.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p10"></span>It is uncertain whether Jonah had
preached for some days in the city before it was known to the king. This
is indeed the common opinion; for interpreters so expound the verse,
which says that word was brought to the king, as though the king himself
knew, that the whole city was in commotion through the preaching of
Jonah: but the words admit of a different sense, that is that the
preaching of Jonah immediately reached the king; and I am disposed to
take this view, as Jonah seems here to explain how the Ninevites were
led to put on sackcloth. He had before spoken briefly on the subject,
but he now explains what took place more fully; and we know that it was
commonly the manner of the Hebrews — to relate the chief points in few
words, and then to add an explanation. As then Jonah had said in the
last verse that the Ninevites had put on sackcloth, and proclaimed a
fast, so he now seems to express more distinctly how this happened, that
is, through the royal edict. And it is by no means probable that a fast
was proclaimed in the royal city by the mere consent of the people, as
the king and his counselors were there present. Inasmuch then as it
appears more reasonable that the edict respecting the fast had proceeded
from the king, I am therefore inclined so to connect the two verses, as
that the first briefly mentions the fruit which followed the preaching
of Jonah, and that the second is added as an explanation, for it gives a
fuller account of what took place.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p11"></span>Jonah then now says, that a fast was
proclaimed by the Ninevites, for the king and his council had so
appointed: and I regard the verb <span id="iii.3.vii-p11.1"></span>ויגע,
*uigo,* as being in the pluperfect tense, *When word had come to the
king;*  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) for Jonah now states the
reason why the Ninevites proclaimed a fast; it was because the king had
been apprised of the preaching of Jonah, and had called together his
counselors. It was then a public edict, and not any movement among the
people, capriciously made, as it sometimes happens. He says, that it was
an edict published by the authority of the king and his council, or his
nobles. At the same time, some take <span
id="iii.3.vii-p12.3"></span>טעם, *thom*, as meaning reason or
approbation. <span id="iii.3.vii-p12.4"></span>טעם, *thom,* means to
taste, and Jonah afterwards uses the verb in this sense; but it is to be
taken here in a metaphorical sense for counsel; And I think this meaning
is more suitable to this passage. I come now to the subject.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p13"></span>It is worthy of being noticed, that the
king of so splendid a city  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) , nay,
at that time the greatest monarch, should have rendered himself so
submissive to the exhortation of Jonah: for we see how proud kings are;
as they think themselves exempt from the common lot of men, so they
carry themselves above all laws. Hence it comes, that they will have all
things to be lawful for them; and while they give loose reins to their
lusts they cannot bear to be admonished, even by their equals. But Jonah
was a stranger and of a humble condition: that he therefore so touched
the heart of the king, must be ascribed to the hidden power of God,
which he puts forth through his word whenever he pleases. God does not
indeed work alike by the preaching of his word, he does not always keep
to the same course; but, when he pleases, he so efficaciously touches
the hearts of men, that the success of his word exceeds all expectation,
as in the memorable example presented to us here. Who could have said
that a heathen king, who had ever lived according to his own will, who
had no feeling as to true and genuine religion, would have been thus in
an instant subdued? For he put aside his royal dress, laid himself in
the dust, and clothed himself in sackcloth. We hence see that God not
only spoke by the mouth of Jonah, but added power to his word.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p15"></span>We must also bear in mind what Christ
says, that the men of Nineveh would rise up in judgment against that
generation, as they had repented at the preaching of Jonah; and
“Behold,” he said, “a greater than Jonah is here,” (<span
id="iii.3.vii-p15.1"></span>[Mt
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041)<span
id="iii.3.vii-p15.1"></span>.) Christ, at this day, proclaims the voice
of his Gospel; for though he is not here in a visible form among us, he
yet speaks by his ministers. If we despise his doctrine, how can our
obstinacy and hardness be excused, since the Ninevites, who had no
knowledge of the true doctrine of religion, who were imbued with no
religious principles, were so suddenly converted by the preaching of
Jonah? And that their repentance was sincere we may conclude from this
circumstance — that the preaching of Jonah was severe, for he denounced
destruction on a most powerful city; this might have instantly inflamed
the king’s mind with rage and fury; and that he was calmly humbled, was
certainly a proof of no common change. We have then here a remarkable
instance of penitence, — that the king should have so forgotten himself
and his dignity, as to throw aside his splendid dress, to put on
sackcloth, and to lie down on ashes.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p16"></span>But as to fasting and sackcloth, it is
very true, as we have observed in our remarks on Joel, that repentance
consists not in these external things: for God cares not for outward
rites, and all those things which are resplendent in the sight of men
are worthless before him; what indeed he requires, is sincerity of
heart. Hence what Jonah here says of fasting, and other outward
performances, ought to be referred to their legitimate end, — that the
Ninevites intended thus to show that they were justly summoned as guilty
before God’s tribunal, and also, that they humbly deprecated the wrath
of their judge. Fasting then and sackcloth were only an external
profession of repentance. Were any one to fast all his life, and to put
on sackcloth, and to scatter dust on himself, and not to connect with
all this a sincerity of heart, he would do nothing but mock God.  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) Hence these outward performances are, in
themselves, of small or of no value, except when preceded by an interior
feeling of heart, and men be on this account led to manifest such
outward evidences. Whenever then Scripture mentions fasting, and ashes,
and sackcloth, we must bear in mind that these things are set before us
as the outward signs of repentance which when not genuine do nothing
else but provoke the wrath of God; but when true, they are approved of
God on account of the end in view, and not that they avail, of
themselves, to pacify his wrath, or to expiate sins.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p18"></span>If now any one asks whether penitence is
always to be accompanied with fasting, ashes, and sackcloth, the answer
is at hand, — that the faithful ought through their whole life to
repent: for except everyone of us continually strives to renounce
himself and his former life, he has not yet learned what it is to serve
God; for we must ever contend with the flesh. But though there is a
continual exercise of repentance, yet fasting is not required of us
always. It then follows that fasting is a public and solemn testimony of
repentance, when there appears to be some extraordinary evidence of
God’s wrath. Thus have we seen that the Jews were by Joel called to lie
in ashes, and to put on sackcloth because God had come forth, as it
were, armed against them; and all the Prophets had declared that
destruction was nigh the people. In the same manner the Ninevites, when
terrified by this dreadful edict, put on sackcloth proclaimed a fasts
because this was usually done in extremities. We now then perceive why
the king, having himself put on sackcloth, enjoined on the whole people
both fasting and other tokens of repentance.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p19"></span><span id="iii.3.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p20"></span>But it seems strange, and even
ridiculous, that the king should bid animals, as well as men, to make a
confession of repentance; for penitence is a change in man, when he
returns to God after having been alienated from him: this cannot comport
with the character of brute animals. Then the king of Nineveh acted
foolishly and contrary to all reason in connecting animals with men when
he spoke of repentance. But, in answer to this, we must bear in mind
what I have before said — that destruction had been denounced, not only
on men, but also on the whole city, even on the buildings: for as God
created the whole world for the sake of men, so also his wrath, when
excited against men, includes the beasts, and trees, and every thing in
heaven and on earth. But the question is not yet solved; for though God
may punish animals on account of men’s sins, yet neither oxen nor sheep
can pacify the wrath of God. To this I answer — that this was done for
the sake of men: for it would have been ridiculous in the king to
prohibit food and drink to animals, except he had a regard to men
themselves. But his object was to set before the Ninevites, as in a
mirror or picture, what they deserved. The same was done under the law;
for, whenever they slew victims, they were reminded of their own sins;
for it ought to have come to their minds, that the sheep or any other
animal sacrificed was innocent, and that it stood at the altar in his
stead who had sinned. They therefore saw in the ox, or the lamb, or the
goat, a striking emblem of their own condemnation. So also the
Ninevites, when they constrained the oxen, the asses and other animals,
to fast, were reminded of what grievous and severe punishment they were
worthy: inasmuch as innocent animals suffered punishment together with
them. We hence see that no expiation was sought for by the king, when he
enjoined a fast on brute animals, but that, on the contrary, men were
roused by such means seriously to acknowledge the wrath of God, and to
entertain greater fear, that they might be more truly humbled before
him, and be displeased with themselves, and be thus more disposed and
better prepared and moulded to seek pardon.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p21"></span>We now then see that this must be
considered as intended to terrify the consciences of men, that they, who
had long flattered themselves, might by such a remedy be roused from
their insensibility. The same was the intention of different washings
under the law, the cleansing of garments and of vessels; it was, that
the people might know that every thing they touched was polluted by
their filth. And this ought to be especially observed; for the Papists,
wedded as they are to external rites, lay hold on anything said in
Scripture about fasting, and ashes, and sackcloth, and think that the
whole of religion consists in these outward observances: but bodily
exercise, as Paul says, profiteth but littler (<span
id="iii.3.vii-p21.1"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span
id="iii.3.vii-p21.1"></span>.) Therefore this rule ought ever to be our
guide — that fasting and such things are in themselves of no value, but
must be estimated only by the end in view. So then, when the animals
were constrained by the Ninevites to suffer want, the men themselves,
being reminded of their guilt, learned what it was to dread God’s wrath;
and on this account it was that fasting was approved by God.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p22"></span>Now, if any one objects and says that
nothing ought to be done in the worship of God beyond what his word
warrants, the answer is — that the king of Nineveh had not appointed any
kind of expiation, neither did he intend that they should thus worship
God, but regarded only the end which I have mentioned; and that end
fully harmonizes with the word of God and his command. Hence the king of
Nineveh attempted nothing that was inconsistent with the word of God,
since he had in every thing this in view — that he and his people might
go humbly before God’s tribunal, and with real penitential feelings
solicit his forgiveness. This then is an answer sufficiently plain.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p23"></span>When therefore Jonah afterwards
subjoins,  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) that the king commanded
both the people and the beasts to put on sackcloth, let us know, that if
any one now were to take this as an example, he would be nothing else
but a mountebank; for this reason ought ever to be remembered, — that
the king sought aids by which he might lead himself and his people to
true repentance. But the disposition of man is prone to imitate what is
evil: for we are all very like apes; we ought therefore always to
consider by what spirit those were actuated whom we wish to imitate,
lest we should be contented with the outward form and neglect the main
things.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p25"></span><span id="iii.3.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p26"></span>Jonah afterwards adds, *And they cried
mightily*  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) *to God* This must be
confined to men; for it could not have been applied to brute animals.
Men then, as well as the beasts, abstained from meat and drink, and they
cried to God. This crying could not have proceeded except from fear and
a religious feeling: hence, as I have said, this cannot be applied
indiscriminately to the beasts as well as to men.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) But it deserves to be noticed, that the
king of Nineveh commanded the people to cry mightily to God; for we
hence learn that they were really frightened, inasmuch as he speaks not
here of ordinary crying, but he adds mightily, as when we say, with all
our power, or as we say in French, A *force,* or, *fort et ferme.* Jonah
then expresses something uncommon and extraordinary, when he tells us
that it was contained in the king’s edict, that men should cry mightily
to God; for it was the same as though he said, “Let all men now awake
and shake off their indifference; for every one of us have hitherto
greatly indulged ourselves in our vices: it is now time that fear should
possess our minds, and also constrain us to deprecate the wrath of God.”
And it is also worthy of being observed, that the king proposes no other
remedy, but that the people should have recourse to prayer. It might
indeed have been, that Jonah exhorted the Ninevites to resort to this
duty of religion, etc. We may, however, undeniably conclude that it is a
feeling implanted in us by nature, that when we are pressed by
adversities, we implore the favor of God. This then is the only remedy
in afflictions and distresses, to pray to God. But when we, taught by
the Law and by the Gospel, use not this remedy, whenever God warns us
and exhorts us to repentance, what shadow of excuse can we have, since
heathens, even those who understood not a syllable of true religion, yet
prayed to God, and the king himself commanded this with the consent of
his nobles? Hence this edict of the king ought to fill us with more
shame than if one adduced the same doctrine only from the word of God:
for though the authority of that king is not the same with that of God,
yet when that miserable and blind prince acknowledged through the
dictates of nature, that God is to be pacified by prayer, what excuse,
as I have said, can remain for us?

<span id="iii.3.vii-p29"></span>But Jonah shows more clearly afterwards,
that it was no feigned repentance when the Ninevites put on sackcloth,
and abstained also from meat and drink; for it follows in the kings
edict, *And let every one turn from his own wicked ways and from the
plunder which is in their hands* Here the heathen king shows for what
purpose and with what design he had given orders respecting fasting and
other things; it was done that the Ninevites might thus more effectually
stimulate themselves to fear God; for he here exhorts them to turn from
their evil way. By “way” the Scripture usually means the whole course or
manner of man’s life; it was as though he said, “Let every one of you
change his disposition and his conduct; let us all become new
creatures.” And this is true penitence, the conversion of man to God;
and this the heathen king meant. The more shameful then is their
dullness who seek to pacify God by frivolous devices, as the Papists do;
for while they obtrude on God trifles, I know not what, they think that
these are so many expiations, and they tenaciously contend for them.
They need no other judge than this heathen king, who shows that true
penitence is wholly different, that it then only takes place when men
become changed in mind and heart, and wholly turn to a better course of
life.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p30"></span>*Let every one then turn, he says, from
his evil way, and from the plunder*  <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) *which is in their hand.* One kind of
evil is here subjoined, a part being stated for the whole, for plunders
were not the only things which stood in need of amendment among the
Ninevites, as it is probable that they were polluted by other vices and
corruptions. In a city so large, drunkenness probably prevailed, as well
as luxury, and pride, and ambition, and also lusts. It cannot indeed be
doubted, but that Nineveh was filled with innumerable vices: but the
king, by mentioning a part for the whole, points out here the principal
vice, when he says, *Let every one turn from his evil way, and from his
rapacity.* It was the same as though he had said that the principal
virtue is equity or justice, that is, when men deal with one another
without doing any hurt or injury: and well would it be were this
doctrine to prevail at this day among all those who falsely assume the
Christian name. For the Papists, though they accumulate expiations, pass
by charity; and in the whole course of life equity has hardly any place.
Let them then learn, from the mouth of a heathen king, what God
principally requires from men, and approves of in their life, even to
abstain from plunder and from the doing of any injury. We now then
perceive why rapacity was especially mentioned. But we must bear in mind
that the king, as yet a novice, and hardly in a slight degree imbued
with the elements of religion, through hearing what Jonah preached, gave
orders to his people according to the measure of his faith and
knowledge: but if he made such progress in so short a time, what excuse
can we pretend, whose ears have been stunned by continual preaching for
twenty or thirty years, if we yet come short of the novitiate of this
king? These circumstances ought then to be carefully observed by us. Let
us now proceed —

<span id="iii.3.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.3.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.3.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009)<span id="iii.3.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.viii-p2"></span>**9.** Who can tell *if* God will turn
and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?

<span id="iii.3.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Quis novit an convertatur et
poenitentia ducatur Deus, et revertatur a furore irae suae, ut non
pereamus?

<span id="iii.3.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.viii-p5"></span><span id="iii.3.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.viii-p6"></span>The mind and design of the king are here
more distinctly stated, — that he thus endeavored to reconcile himself
and the people to God. Some give a rendering somewhat different, “He who
knows will turn and be led by penitence,” etc.; they read not
interrogatively; but this rendering cannot stand. There is in the
meaning of the Prophet nothing ambiguous, for he introduces the king
here as expressing a doubt, *Who knows whether God will be reconciled to
us?* We hence see that the king was not overwhelmed with despair for he
still thought of a remedy; and this is the purport of the verse.

<span id="iii.3.viii-p7"></span>But this may seem contrary to the nature
of faith; and then if it be opposed to faith, it follows that it must be
inconsistent with repentance; for faith and repentance are connected
together, as we have observed in other places; as no one can willingly
submit to God, except he has previously known his goodness, and
entertained a hope of salvation; for he who is touched only with fear
avoids God’s presence; and then despair prevails, and perverseness
follows. How then was it that the king of Nineveh had seriously and
undissemblingly repented, while yet he spoke doubtfully of the favor of
God? To this I answer, that it was a measure of doubt, which was yet
connected with faith, even that which does not directly reject the
promise of God, but has other hindrances: as for instance, when any ones
cast down with fear, afterwards receives courage from the hope of pardon
and salvation set before him, he is not yet immediately freed from all
fear; for as long as he looks on his sins, and is entangled by various
thoughts, he vacillates, he fluctuates. There is, therefore, no doubt
but that the king of Nineveh entertained hope of deliverance; but at the
same time his mind was perplexed, both on account of the sermon of Jonah
and on account of the consciousness of his own sins: there were then two
obstacles, which deprived the king’s mind of certainty, or at least
prevented him from apprehending immediately the mercy of God, and from
perceiving with a calm mind that God would be gracious to him. The first
obstacle was the awful message, — that Nineveh would be destroyed in
forty days. For though Jonah, as we have said, might have added
something more, yet the denunciation was distinct and express, and
tended to cast down the minds of all. The king then had to struggle, in
order to overcome this obstacle, and to resist this declaration of Jonah
as far as it was found to be without any comfort. And then the king,
while considering his own sins, could not but vacillate for some time.
But yet we see that he strove to emerge, though he had these obstacles
before his eyes, for he says, *Who knows whether God will turn from the
fury of his wrath, and repent?* We hence see that the king was in a hard
struggle; for though Jonah seemed to have closed the door and to shut
out the king from any hope of deliverance, and though his own conscience
held him fast bound, he yet perseveres and encourages himself; in short,
he aspires to the hope of pardon.

<span id="iii.3.viii-p8"></span>And it must be further noticed, that
this form of expression expresses a difficulty rather than a mistrust.
The king then here asks, as it were doubtingly, Who knows whether God
will turn? for it was a difficult thing to be believed, that God, after
a long forbearance, would spare the wicked city. Hence the king
expresses it as a difficulty; and such an interrogation was no proof of
the absence of faith. A similar expression is found in Joel, “Who
knows,” etc.? We then stated several things in explaining that passage:
but it is enough here briefly to state, that the king here does not
betray a mistrust, but sets forth a difficulty. And it was an evidence
of humility that he acknowledged himself and his people to be sunk as it
were, in the lowest hell, and yet ceased not to entertain some hope: for
it is a strong proof of hope, when we still entertain it, though this be
contrary to the whole order of nature, and wholly inconsistent with
human reason. We now then see the meaning of the words. Of the
repentance of God we shall speak hereafter, either to-morrow or the day
after.

<span id="iii.3.viii-p9"></span>*Lest we perish,* he says. We see how a
heathen king thought of redeeming himself from destruction’ it was by
having God pacified. As soon then as any danger threatens us, let us
bear this in mind, that no deliverance can be found except the Lord
receives us into favor; such was the conviction of the king of Nineveh,
for he concluded that all things would be well as soon as God should be
propitious. We hence see how much this new and untrained disciple had
improved; for he understood that men cannot escape miseries until God be
pacified towards them, and that when men return into favor with him,
though they ought to have perished a hundred times before, they yet
shall be delivered and made safe; for the grace or the favor of God is
the fountain of life and salvation, and of all blessings. It afterwards
follows —

<span id="iii.3.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.3.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.3.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010)<span id="iii.3.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.ix-p2"></span>**10.** And God saw their works, that they
turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he had
said that he would do unto them; and he did *it* not.

<span id="iii.3.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Et vidit Deus opera eorum, quod
conversi essent a via sua mala; et poenituit Deum super malo, quod
pronuntiaverat se facturum illis, et non fecit.

<span id="iii.3.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.3.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.3.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.ix-p6"></span>Jonah now says, that the Ninevites
obtained pardon through their repentance: and this is an example worthy
of being observed; for we hence learn for what purpose God daily urges
us to repentance, and that is, because he desires to be reconciled to
us, and that we should be reconciled to him. The reason then why so many
reproofs and threatening resound in our ears, whenever we come to hear
the word of God, is this, — that as God seeks to recover us from
destruction he speaks sharply to us: in short, whatever the Scripture
contains on repentance and the judgment of God ought to be wholly
applied for this purpose — to induce us to return into favor with him;
for he is ready to be reconciled, and is ever prepared to embrace those
who without dissimulation turn to him. We then understand by this
example that God has no other object in view, whenever he sharply
constrains us, than that he may be reconciled to us, provided only we be
our own judges, and thus anticipate his wrath by genuine sorrow of
heart, provided we solicit the pardon of our guilt and sin, and loathe
ourselves, and confess that we are worthy of perdition.

<span id="iii.3.ix-p7"></span>But Jonah seems to ascribe their
deliverance to their repentance, and also to their works: for he says
that the Ninevites obtained pardon, because God looked on their works.

<span id="iii.3.ix-p8"></span>We must first see what works he means,
that no one may snatch at a single word, as hypocrites are wont to do;
and this, as we have said, is very commonly the case under the Papacy.
*God had respect to their works* — what works? not sackcloth, not ashes,
not fasting; for Jonah does not now mention these; but he had respect to
their works — because they turned from their evil way. We hence see that
God was not pacified by outward rites only, by the external profession
of repentance, but that he rather looked on the true and important
change which had taken place in the Ninevites, for they had become
renewed. These then were their works, even the fruits of repentance. And
such a change of life could not have taken place, had not the Ninevites
been really moved by a sense of God’s wrath. The fear of God then had
preceded; and this fear could not have been without faith. We hence see
that he chiefly speaks here not of external works, but of the renovation
of men.

<span id="iii.3.ix-p9"></span>But if any one objects and says that still
this view does not prevent us from thinking that good works reconcile us
to God, and that they thus procure our salvation: to this I answer —
that the question here is not about the procuring cause of forgiveness.
It is certain that God was freely pacified towards the Ninevites, as he
freely restores his favor daily to us. Jonah then did not mean that
satisfactions availed before God, as though the Ninevites made
compensations for their former sins. The words mean no such thing; but
he shows it as a fact which followed, that God was pacified, because the
Ninevites repented. But we are to learn from other parts of Scripture
how God becomes gracious to us, and how we obtain pardon with him, and
whether this comes to us for our merits and repentance or whether God
himself forgives us freely. Since the whole Scripture testifies that
pardon is gratuitously given us, and that God cannot be otherwise
propitious to us than by not imputing sins, there is no need, with
regard to the present passage, anxiously to inquire why God looked on
the works of the Ninevites, so as not to destroy them: for this is said
merely as a consequence. Jonah then does not here point out the cause,
but only declares that God was pacified towards the Ninevites, as soon
as they repented. But we shall speak more on this subject.

<span id="iii.3.x"></span>

<span id="iii.3.x-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iii.3.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are loaded
with so many vices, and so many sins, yea, and scandalous crimes break
out daily among us, — O grant, that we may not be hardened against so
many exhortations, by which thou invites us to thyself, but that being
made contrite in spirit, whenever thou denounces on us thy wrath, we may
be really humbled, and so place ourselves before thy tribunal, that we
may, by a true confession and genuine fear, anticipate the judgment
which would otherwise have been prepared for us; and that in the
meantime relying on Christ our Mediator, we may entertain such a hope of
pardon as may raise us up to thee, and not doubt but that thou art ready
to embrace us, when we shall be moved by a true and real feeling of fear
and penitence, since it is a proof of thy favor, when thou art pleased
to anticipate us, and by thy Spirit testifies that thou art a Father to
us; and, in a word, may we be so cast down in ourselves, as to raise up
our hope even to heaven, through Jesus Christ one Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.3.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.3.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-ninth

<span id="iii.3.xi-p2"></span>We stated yesterday how God remitted to
the Ninevites the punishment which he had threatened by the mouth of
Jonah, and that the remission both of the punishment and of the guilt
was gratuitous. For whenever God sets forth pardon to sinners, the
condition of repentance is at the same time added: it does not yet
follow that repentance is the procuring cause of obtaining pardon; for
God offers it freely, nor is he otherwise induced than by his own mere
bounty. But as he would not have men to abuse his indulgence and
forbearance, he lays down this condition, — that they must repent of
their former life and change for the better. So then he regards the
works of those who testify that they hate sin, and who, with a sincere
and real desire, flee to His mercy; and no man from the heart desires
God to be propitious to him, but he who loathes himself on account of
his sin. This is the reason why Isaiah also says, that God would be
merciful to the remnants of his people, even because every one would
turn away from his iniquity. God does not certainly mean by these words
that repentance, as already stated, is the cause of our salvation; but
he requires a change for the better, for no one will really seek grace,
except he loathes himself on account of his sins.

<span id="iii.3.xi-p3"></span>Now as to what Jonah adds, *that God was
led to repent,* it is a mode of speaking that ought to be sufficiently
known to us. Strictly speaking, no repentance can belong to God: and it
ought not to be ascribed to his secret and hidden counsel. God then is
in himself ever the same, and consistent with himself; but he is said to
repent, when a regard is had to the comprehension of men: for as we
conceive God to be angry, whenever he summons us to his tribunal, and
shows to us our sins; so also we conceive him to be placable, when he
offers the hope of pardon. But it is according to our perceptions that
there is any change, when God forgets his wrath, as though he had put on
a new character. As then we cannot otherwise be terrified, that we may
be humbled before God and repent, except he sets forth before us his
wrath, the Scripture accommodates itself to the grossness of our
understanding. But, on the other hand, we cannot confidently call on
God, unless we feel assured that he is placable. We hence see that some
kind of change appears to us, whenever God either threatens or gives
hope of pardon and reconciliation: and to this must be referred this
mode of speaking which Jonah adopts, when he says that God repented.

<span id="iii.3.xi-p4"></span>We hence see that there is a twofold view
of God, — as he sets himself forth in his word, — and as he is as to his
hidden counsel. With regard to his secret counsel, I have already said
that God is always like himself, and is subject to none of our feelings:
but with regard to the teaching of his word, it is accommodated to our
capacities. God is now angry with us, and then, as though he were
pacified, he offers pardon, and is propitious to us. Such is the
repentance of God.

<span id="iii.3.xi-p5"></span>Let us then remember that it proceeds from
his word, that God is said to repent; for the Ninevites could form no
other opinion but that it was God’s decree that they were to be
destroyed, — how so? because he had so testified by his word. But when
they rose up to an assurance of deliverance, they then found that a
change had taken place, that is, according to the knowledge of their own
faith: and the feelings both of fear and of joy proceeded from the word:
for when God denounced his wrath, it was necessary for the wretched men
to be terrified; but when he invited them to a state of safety by
proposing reconciliation to them, he then put on a new character; and
thus they ascribed a new feeling to God. This is the meaning. Let us now
proceed —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc28006.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iii.3.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.i-p12"></span> Literally, “And proclaim to or against
her the proclamation which I declare to thee.” The Septuagint is, “<span
id="iii.3.i-p12.1"></span>Και κηρυξον εν αυτη κατα το κηρυγμα το
εμπροσθεν ὸ̔ εγω ελαλησα προς σε — And preach in it the former preaching
which I have spoken to thee.” <span id="iii.3.i-p12.2"></span>עליה in
five MSS., as in chapter 1:2, “against her,” and not <span
id="iii.3.i-p12.3"></span>אליה, “to her.” <span
id="iii.3.i-p12.4"></span>אשר אנכי דבר אליד, “which I *am* speaking or
declaring to thee.” <span id="iii.3.i-p12.5"></span>דבר is a participle;
being preceded by a nominative, it will admit of an auxiliary verb
either in the past, present or future tense, according to the context;
though it is often used to express the present time.

<span id="iii.3.i-p13"></span>*Newcome* renders the sentence thus — “And
cry unto her *in* the words which I *shall* speak unto thee;”
*Henderson* more paraphrastically thus — “And make the proclamation to
it which I order thee;” and adds the following remarks, — “Be my herald,
and faithfully deliver my message. The word <span
id="iii.3.i-p13.1"></span>κηρυξ in Greek answers to the Hebrew <span
id="iii.3.i-p13.2"></span>קורא, *kore*, both signifying a *crier,* a
*herald,* a *preacher;* one that makes proclamation with a *loud* and
*earnest* cry. Such was John Baptist, <span
id="iii.3.i-p13.3"></span>[Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)<span id="iii.3.i-p13.3"></span>;
such was Jesus Christ, <span id="iii.3.i-p13.4"></span>[Joh
7:18-37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018)<span
id="iii.3.i-p13.4"></span>; and such were all his apostles. And such
earnestness becomes a ministry that has to do with immortal souls,
asleep and dead in sin, hanging on the brink of perdition, and
insensible of their state. The soft speaking, gentle toned, unmoved
preacher, is never likely to awaken souls.”

<span id="iii.3.i-p14"></span>*Henry* considers that the commission was
not specifically explained to him then. “Jonah must go,” he says, “with
implicit faith: he shall not know till he comes thither what message he
must deliver.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc28006.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iii.3.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.ii-p9"></span> The original is, “And Nineveh was a city
great to God” — <span id="iii.3.ii-p9.1"></span>לאלהים עיר-גדולה. The
remark of *Henry* is, “So the Hebrew phrase is, meaning no more than as
we render it, *exceeding great;* this honor that language doth to the
great God, that great things derive their denomination from him” Though
the form of the expression here is different from what we find in other
places, when God is taken in this sense, as in <span
id="iii.3.ii-p9.2"></span>[Ps
80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010)<span id="iii.3.ii-p9.2"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.ii-p9.3"></span>ארזי-אל, cedars of God, that is, tall or
great cedars, — yet there is no other sense that comports with this
place. This is the view of *Dathius, Drusius, Newcome,* and many others.
Some render it, *great through God,* and *Grotius* seems to have taken
it in this sense, for he explains it by “<span
id="iii.3.ii-p9.4"></span>Deo eam augente — God having increased it.”
*Henderson* considers <span id="iii.3.ii-p9.5"></span>ל here in the
sense of <span id="iii.3.ii-p9.6"></span>לפגי, *before,* and refers to
<span id="iii.3.ii-p9.7"></span>[Ge
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#009)<span id="iii.3.ii-p9.7"></span>.
But this has hardly a meaning in this connection. — *Ed..*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc28006.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iii.3.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iv-p8"></span> <span id="iii.3.iv-p8.1"></span>ויאמינו
באלהים, “And they believed in God. The verb <span
id="iii.3.iv-p8.2"></span>אמן in Hiphil is ever followed by <span
id="iii.3.iv-p8.3"></span>ב or <span id="iii.3.iv-p8.4"></span>ל, except
in one instance by <span id="iii.3.iv-p8.5"></span>את in <span
id="iii.3.iv-p8.6"></span>[Jud
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#020)<span id="iii.3.iv-p8.6"></span>.
When followed by <span id="iii.3.iv-p8.7"></span>ב it seems to mean, to
give credit to what is said, to believe one’s testimony, or the truth of
what is referred to. To believe then in God is to believe the truth of
what he declares, to believe his word. Hence in <span
id="iii.3.iv-p8.8"></span>[2Ch
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#020)<span id="iii.3.iv-p8.8"></span>,
Jehosophat said to the people, “Believe in the Lord your God,” <span
id="iii.3.iv-p8.9"></span>האמינו ביהוה אלהיכם; and he adds, “Believe
\[in\] his Prophets,” <span id="iii.3.iv-p8.10"></span>האמינו בנביאיו.
It is the word of God, and the word of the Prophets, which was the same,
or the truth or veracity of God and of his Prophets, that they For I
have believed \[in\] thy commandments,” <span
id="iii.3.iv-p8.11"></span>במצותיך, that is, in the truth of thy
commandments. — When the verb in Hiphil is followed by <span
id="iii.3.iv-p8.12"></span>ל, the idea of reliance or dependance is more
especially conveyed, though in many instances there is hardly a
difference tobe recognized, except the context be minutely observed.

<span id="iii.3.iv-p9"></span>Among other passages, the verb in its
Hiphil form is followed by <span id="iii.3.iv-p9.1"></span>ב, in <span
id="iii.3.iv-p9.2"></span>[Ge
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.2"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.3"></span>[Ex
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.3"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.4"></span>[Nu
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.4"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.5"></span>[2Ki
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#014)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.5"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.6"></span>[Pr
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#025)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.6"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.7"></span>[Jer
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.7"></span>;
— and by <span id="iii.3.iv-p9.8"></span>ל in <span
id="iii.3.iv-p9.9"></span>[Ex
4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.9"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.10"></span>[De
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#023)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.10"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.11"></span>[1Ki
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#007)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.11"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.12"></span>[Ps
106:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#024)<span
id="iii.3.iv-p9.12"></span>, <span id="iii.3.iv-p9.13"></span>[Isa
43:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010)<span
id="iii.3.iv-p9.13"></span>, <span id="iii.3.iv-p9.14"></span>[Jer
40:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#014)<span id="iii.3.iv-p9.14"></span>

<span id="iii.3.iv-p10"></span>The Septuagint renders believing *in* God
by <span id="iii.3.iv-p10.1"></span>επίστευσαν τω θεω: so does Paul in
<span id="iii.3.iv-p10.2"></span>[Ro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)<span id="iii.3.iv-p10.2"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p10.3"></span>[Ga
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)<span id="iii.3.iv-p10.3"></span>;
but he retains the Hebrew form in <span id="iii.3.iv-p10.4"></span>[Ro
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="iii.3.iv-p10.4"></span>,
<span id="iii.3.iv-p10.5"></span>πιστευοντι επι τον, etc. *Calvin* here
conveys the same meaning by “<span
id="iii.3.iv-p10.6"></span>crediderunt Deo — believed God:” that is, the
Ninevites gave credit to what God declared by Jonah, they believed God’s
word. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc28006.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iii.3.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p12"></span> *Grotius,* as well as *Junius* and
*Tremelius,* had the same view of the verse, by rendering the verb in
the tense here proposed. *Quia pervenerat* is the version of the former;
and the version of the latter is, <span id="iii.3.vii-p12.1"></span>*Quu
enim pervenisset* Our own version and that of *Newcome* seem also to
favor this view, by rendering <span id="iii.3.vii-p12.2"></span>ו “for,”
as giving a reason for what is said in the preceding verse: but
*Henderson* has “and,” and *Marckius* the same, and also the Septuagint.
What *Calvin* states as to the manner of speaking often adopted in
Hebre, is no doubt true. But *Henry* thinks that the people “led the
way,” and that what they commenced was afterwards enforced and made
general by the order of the king and his nobles. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc28006.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iii.3.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p14"></span> Who this king was is a matter of
conjecture. “About thirteen years,” says *Newcome,* “after the death of
Jeroboam II., king of Israel, Pul, king of Assyria, invaded Israel. So
that Pul, or his predecessor, may have been the king here mentioned.”
Others think that he was Sardanapalus, a character notorious in history
for his luxurious, effeminate, and debauched life. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc28006.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iii.3.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p17"></span> <span id="iii.3.vii-p17.1"></span>Ον τη
νηστεια προσεσχεν, <span id="iii.3.vii-p17.2"></span>αλλα τη αποχη των
κακων — “He \[God\] did not regard fasting, but abstinence from evils.”
— *Theodoret*. “It is not enough,” says *Henry,* “to fast for sin, but
we must fast from sin, and in order to the success of our prayers, must
no more regard iniquity in our hearts... The work of a fast-day is not
done with the day; no, then the hardest and most needful part of the
work begins, which is to turn from sin, and to live a new life, and not
to return with the dog to his vomit.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc28006.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iii.3.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p24"></span> *Calvin* has omitted to notice the
words at the beginning of the seventh verse. His version is, <span
id="iii.3.vii-p24.1"></span>*Et promulgavit ac dixit,* etc., but this
rendering comports not with what follows. The verbs are evidently in
future Niphal, preceded by a <span id="iii.3.vii-p24.2"></span>ו
conversive, and ought to be rendered impersonally, “And it was
proclaimed and published,” etc. And so *Newcome* renders them; and this
is in conformity with the Septuagint, <span
id="iii.3.vii-p24.3"></span>Και εκηρυχθη και ερρεθη εν τη Νινευὴ — “And
it was proclaimed and published in Nineveh.” *Henderson* gives a
paraphrase, “And a proclamation was made through Nineveh.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc28006.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iii.3.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p27"></span> <span
id="iii.3.vii-p27.1"></span>בחזקח, with vigor. “<span
id="iii.3.vii-p27.2"></span>Εκτεςῶς — intensely, earnestly.” — *Sept.*
<span id="iii.3.vii-p27.3"></span>*Vehementer* — vehemently.” —
*Grotius.* “<span id="iii.3.vii-p27.4"></span>*Totis viribus* — with all
their powers.” — *Mercerius.* “<span id="iii.3.vii-p27.5"></span>*Cum
intensione valida* — with strong intensity” — *Marckius.* “In prayer,”
says *Henry,* “we must cry mightily, with a fixedness of thought,
firmness of faith, and fervor of pious and devout affections. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc28006.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iii.3.vii-p27.6"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p28"></span> Yet *Henry* does in a manner apply this
mighty crying to the beasts. “Let even the brute creatures do it
according to their capacity; let their cries and moans for want of food
be graciously construed as cries to God; as the cries of young ravens
are, <span id="iii.3.vii-p28.1"></span>[Job
38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041)<span
id="iii.3.vii-p28.1"></span>; and of the young lions, <span
id="iii.3.vii-p28.2"></span>[Ps
104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)<span
id="iii.3.vii-p28.2"></span>.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc28006.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iii.3.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.3.vii-p31"></span> <span id="iii.3.vii-p31.1"></span>A
*rapacite,* from robbery, extortion, plunder <span
id="iii.3.vii-p31.2"></span>מז-החמס, from violence, outrage, or
injustice done by force or violence: it means tyrannical injustice.
“<span id="iii.3.vii-p31.3"></span>Απο της αδικιας — from injustice,”
wrong, iniquity. — *Sept.* But as it is said to be in their hand, it
means, by a metonymy, the plunder got by injustice, exercised
tyrannically.

<span id="iii.3.vii-p32"></span> *Marckius* observes that the similitude
here is first taken from the feet, and then taken from the hands. The
feet are no to go in the evil way, nor the hands employed in doing what
is unjust. *Henry* explains the passage very fully and yet concisely,
“*let them turn every one from his evil way* — the evil way of his heart
— and the evil way of his conversation; and particularly *from the
violence that is in their hands,* — let them restore what they have
unjustly taken, and make reparation for the wrong they have done, — and
let them not any more oppress those they have power over, or defraud
those they have dealings with.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Jonah](cc28007)
