[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28011)  [Next](cc28013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.3"></span>

<span id="iv.3-p1"></span>Chapter 3

<span id="iv.3.i"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.3.i-p1.1"></span>[Micah
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001)<span id="iv.3.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p2"></span>**1.** And I said, Hear, I pray you, O heads
of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel; *Is it* not for you to
know judgment?

<span id="iv.3.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et dixi, Audite quaeso principes
Jacob et gubernatores domus Israel; annon vestrum est (vel, ad vos
spectat) scire judicium?

<span id="iv.3.i-p4"></span>**2.** Who hate the good, and love the evil;
who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their
bones;

<span id="iv.3.i-p5"></span>**2.** Atqui oderunt bonum et dilligunt
malum, rapiunt pellem ab ipsis, et carnem ab ossibus eorum;

<span id="iv.3.i-p6"></span>**3.** Who also eat the flesh of my people,
and flay their skin from off them; and they break their bones, and chop
them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.

<span id="iv.3.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et tunc vorant carnem populi mei, et
pellem ipsorum ab ipsis excoriant; et ossa eorum frangunt, et
comminuunt; sicuti ad ollam (vel, ac si destinata essent ollae,) et
carnem eorum in medio aheni.

<span id="iv.3.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.i-p9"></span><span id="iv.3.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p10"></span>The Prophet in this chapter assails and
severely reproves the chief men as well as the teachers; for both were
given to avarice and cruelty, to plunder, and, in short, to all other
vices. And he begins with the magistrates, who exercised authority among
the people; and briefly relates the words in which he inveighed against
them. We have said elsewhere, that the Prophets did not record all that
they had spoken, but only touched shortly on the heads or chief points:
and this was done by Micah, that we might know what he did for forty or
more years, in which he executed his office. He could have related, no
doubt, in half-an-hour, all that exists of his writings: but from this
small book, however small it is, we may learn what was the Prophet’s
manner of teaching, and on what things he chiefly dwelt. I will now
return to his words.

<span id="iv.3.i-p11"></span>He says that the chief men of the kingdom
had been reproved by him. It is probable, that these words were
addressed to the Jews; for though at the beginning he includes the
Israelites, we yet know that he was given as a teacher to the Jews, and
not to the kingdom of Israel. It was as it were accidental, that he
sometimes introduces the ten tribes together with the Jews. This address
then was made, as I think, to the king as well as to his counselors and
other judges, who then ruled over the people of Judah.

<span id="iv.3.i-p12"></span>*Hear this, I pray,* he says. Such a
preface betokens carelessness in the judges; for why does he demand a
hearing from them, except that they had become so torpid in their vices,
that they would attend to nothing? Inasmuch then as so brutal a stupor
had seized on them, he says, *Hear now ye chiefs, or heads, of Jacob,
and ye rulers*  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) *of the house of
Israel* But why does he still speak of the house of Israel? Because that
name was especially known and celebrated, whenever a mention was made of
the posterity of Abraham: and the other Prophets, even while speaking of
the kingdom of Judah, often make use of this title, “ye who are called
by the name of Israel;” and they did this, on account of the dignity of
the holy Patriarch; and the meaning of the word itself was no ordinary
testimonial of excellency as to his whole race. And this is what is
frequently done by Isaiah. But the name of Israel is not put here, as
elsewhere, as a title of distinction: on the contrary, the Prophet here
amplifies their sin, because they were so corrupt, though they were the
chief men among the chosen race, being those whom God had honored with
so much dignity, as to set them over his Church and elect people. It was
then an ingratitude, not to be endured to abuse that high and sacred
authority, which had been conferred on them by God.

<span id="iv.3.i-p14"></span>*Does it not belong to you, he says, to
know judgment?* Here he intimates that rectitude ought to have a place
among the chief men, in a manner more especial than among the common
people; for it behaves them to excel others in the knowledge of what is
just and right: for though the difference between good and evil be
engraven on the hearts of all, yet they, who hold supremacy among the
people, and excel in power, are as it were the eyes of the community; as
the eyes direct the whole body, so also they, who are placed in any
situation of honor, are thus made eminent, that they may show the right
way to others. Hence by the word, to *know,* the Prophet intimates that
they wickedly subverted the whole order of nature, for they were blind,
while they ought to have been the luminaries of the whole people. *Is it
not for you, he says, to know judgment* and equity? But why was this
said, especially to the chief men? Because they, though they of
themselves knew what was right, having the law engraven within ought yet
as leaders to have possessed superior knowledge, so as to outshine
others. It is therefore your duty to know judgment. We hence learn that
it is not enough for princes and magistrates to be well disposed and
upright; but it is required of them to know judgment and wisdom that
they may discern matters above the common people. But if they are not
thus endued with the gift of understanding and wisdom let them ask of
the Lord. We indeed know, that without the Spirit of God, the acutest
men are wholly unfit to rule; nor is it in vain, that the free Spirit of
God is set forth, as holding the supreme power in the world; for we are
thus reminded, that even they who are endued with the chief gifts are
wholly incapable of governing except the Spirit of God be with them.
This passage then shows that an upright mind is not a sufficient
qualification in princes; they must also excel in wisdom, that they may
be, as we have already said, as the eyes are to the body. In this sense
it is that Micah now says that it belonged to the leaders of the people
to know judgment and justice.  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)

<span id="iv.3.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.3.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p17"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *But they hate
good, and love evil, and pull off the skin*  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) *from my people, the flesh from their
bones;* that is, they leave nothing, he says, sound and safe, their
rapacity being so furious. The Prophet conveys first a general reproof,
— that they not only perverted justice, but were also given to
wickedness and hated good. He means then that they were openly wicked
and ungodly, and also that they with a fixed purpose carried on war
against every thing just and right. We hence learn how great and how
abominable was the corruption of the people, when they were still the
peculiar possession and heritage of God. Inasmuch then as the state of
this ancient people had become so degenerated, let us learn to walk in
solicitude and fear, while the Lord governs us by pious magistrates and
faithful pastors: for what happened to the Jews might soon happen to us,
so that wolves might bear rule over us, as indeed experience has proved
even in this our city. The Prophet afterwards adds the kinds of cruelty
which prevailed; of which he speaks in hyperbolical terms, though no
doubt he sets before our eyes the state of things as it was. He compares
the judges to wolves or to lions, or to other savage beasts. He says not
that they sought the property of the people, or pillaged their houses;
but he says that they devoured their flesh even to the very bones; he
says that they pulled off their skin: and this he confirms in the next
verse.

<span id="iv.3.i-p21"></span><span id="iv.3.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p22"></span>*They devour*, he says, *the flesh of my
people, and their skin they strip off from them, and their bones they
break in pieces and make small, as that which into the pot is thrown,
and which is in the midst of the caldron*  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) For when any one throws meat into the
pot, he does not take the whole ox, but cuts it into pieces, and having
broken it, he then fills with these pieces his pot or his caldron. The
Prophet then enhances the cruelty of the princes; they were not content
with one kind of oppression, but exercised every species of barbarous
cruelty towards the people, and were in every respect like bears, or
wolves, or lions, or some other savage beasts, and that they were also
like gluttons. We now then perceive the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iv.3.i-p24"></span>Now this passage teaches us what God
requires mainly from those in power, — that they abstain from doing
injustice: for as they are armed with power, so they ought to be a law
to themselves. They assume authority over others; let them then begin
with themselves, and restrain themselves from doing evil. For when a
private man is disposed to do harm, he is restrained at least by fear of
the laws, and dares not to do any thing at his pleasure; but in princes
there is a greater boldness; and they are able to do greater injustice:
and this is the reason why they ought to observe more forbearance and
humanity. Hence levity and paternal kindness especially become princes
and those in power. But the Prophet here condemns the princes of his age
for what deserved the highest reprehension; and their chief crime was
cruelty or inhumanity, inasmuch as they spared not their own subjects.

<span id="iv.3.i-p25"></span>We now see that the Prophet in no degree
flattered the great, though they took great pride in their own dignity.
But when he saw that they wickedly and basely abused the power committed
to them, he boldly resisted them, and exercised the full boldness of the
Spirit. He therefore not only calls them robbers or plunderers of the
people; but he says, that they were cruel wild beasts; he says, that
they devoured the flesh, tore and pulled it in pieces, and made it
small; and he says all this, that he might convey an idea of the various
kinds of cruelty which they practiced. Now follow threatenings —

<span id="iv.3.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.3.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.3.ii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#004)<span id="iv.3.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.ii-p2"></span>**4.** Then shall they cry unto the LORD,
but he will not hear them: he will even hide his face from them at that
time, as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings.

<span id="iv.3.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Tunc clamabunt ad Jehovam, et non
respondebit illis; sed abscondet faciem suam ab ipsis tempore illo,
quemadmodum perverse egerunt in factis suis.

<span id="iv.3.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.3.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.ii-p6"></span>Micah now denounces judgment on the chief
men, such as they deserved. He says, *They shall cry then to Jehovah*
The adverb <span id="iv.3.ii-p6.1"></span>אז, *az,* is often put
indefinitely in Hebrew, and has the force of a demonstrative, and may be
taken as pointing out a thing, (<span id="iv.3.ii-p6.2"></span>δεικτικως
— demonstratively,) *then,* or there, as though the Prophet pointed out
by his finger things which could be seen, though they were far away from
the sight of men. But in this place, the Prophet seems rather to pursue
the subject to which I have already referred: for he had before stated
that God would take vengeance on that people. This adverb of time then
is connected with the other combinations, which have been already
explained.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) If, however, any one
prefer a different meaning, namely that the Prophet meant here to hold
them in suspense, as to the nearness of God’s vengeance, I do not oppose
him, for this sense is not unsuitable. However this may be, the Prophet
here testifies that the crimes of the chief men would not go unpunished,
though they did not think themselves to be subject either to laws or to
punishment. As then the princes and magistrates regarded themselves as
exempt, by some imaginary privilege, from the lot of other people, the
Prophet declares here expressly, that a distress was nigh at hand, which
would extort a cry from them: for by the word, cry, he means the
miseries which were nigh at hand. *They shall* then *cry* in their
distress. I have now explained the design of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.3.ii-p8"></span>We indeed see how at this day those who are
in high stations swell with arrogance; for as they abound in wealth, and
as honor is as it were an elevated degree, so that being propped up by
the shoulders of others they seem eminent, and as they are also feared
by the rest of the people, they are on these accounts led to think that
no adversity can happen to them. But the Prophet says, that such would
be their distress, that it would draw a cry from them.

<span id="iv.3.ii-p9"></span>*They shall* then *cry,* but Jehovah *will
not hear;* that is, they shall be miserable and without any remedy.
Jehovah *will not answer them, but will hide from them his face, as they
have done perversely;* that is, God will not hear their complaints; for
he will return on their own heads all the injuries with which he now
sees his own people to be afflicted. And thus God will show that he was
not asleep, while they were with so much effrontery practicing all kinds
of wrong.

<span id="iv.3.ii-p10"></span>It may however be asked here, how it is
that God rejects the prayers and entreaties of those who cry to him? It
must first be observed, that the reprobate, though they rend the air
with their cries, do not yet direct their prayers to God; but if they
address God himself, they do this clamorously; for they expostulate with
him, and contend with him, yea, they vomit out their blasphemies, or at
least they murmur and complain of their evils. The ungodly then cry, but
not to the Lord; or if they address their cries to God, they are, as it
has been said, full of glamour. Hence, except one is guided by the
Spirit of God, he cannot pray from the heart. And we know that it is the
peculiar office of the Spirit to raise up our hearts to heaven: for in
vain we pray, except we bring faith and repentance: and who is the
author of these but the Holy Spirit? It appears then that the ungodly so
cry, that they only violently contend with God: but this is not the
right way of praying. It is therefore no wonder that God rejects their
clamors. The ungodly do indeed at times pour forth a flood of prayers
and call on God’s name with the mouth; but at the same time they are, as
we have said, full of perverseness, and they never really humble
themselves before God. Since then they pour forth their prayers from a
bitter and a proud heart, this is the reason why the Prophet says now,
that the Lord *would not then hear, but hide his face from them at that
time, inasmuch as they acted perversely*  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="iv.3.ii-p14"></span>He shows here that God would not be
reconciled to men wholly irreclaimable, who could not be restored by any
means to the right way. But when any one falls \[and repents\] he will
ever find God propitious to him, as soon as he cries to him; but when
with obstinate minds we pursue our own course, and give no place to
repentance, we close up the door of mercy against ourselves; and so what
the Prophet teaches here necessarily takes place, — the Lord hides his
face in the day of distress. And we also hear what the Scripture says, —
that judgment will be without mercy to those who are not merciful,
(<span id="iv.3.ii-p14.1"></span>[Jas
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)<span id="iv.3.ii-p14.1"></span>.)
Hence if any one be inexorable to his brethren, (as we see at this day
many tyrants to be, and we also see many in the middle class to be of
the same tyrannical and wholly sanguinary disposition,) he will at
length, whoever he may be, meet with that judgment which Micah here
denounces. The sentence then is not to be taken in a general sense, as
though he had said, that the Lord would not be reconciled to the wicked;
but he points out especially those irreclaimable men, who had wholly
hardened themselves, so that they had become, as we have already seen,
altogether inflexible. The Prophet now comes to his second reproof.

<span id="iv.3.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.3.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.3.iii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005)<span id="iv.3.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.iii-p2"></span>**5.** Thus saith the Lord concerning the
prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry,
Peace; and he that putteth not into their mouths, they even prepare war
against him.

<span id="iv.3.iii-p3"></span>**5.** sic dicit Jehova super (vel, ad)
prophetas, qui decipiunt populum meum, et mordent dentibus suis, et
clamant, Paz; et si quis non dederit in os ipsorum, edicunt contra eum
proelium:

<span id="iv.3.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.iii-p5"></span><span id="iv.3.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.iii-p6"></span>Micah accuses here the Prophets, in the
first place, of avarice and of a desire for filthy lucre. But he begins
by saying that he spoke by God’s command, and as it were from his mouth,
in order that his combination might have more weight and power. *Thus*
then *saith Jehovah against the Prophets:* and he calls them the
deceivers of the people: but at the same time he points out the source
of the evil, that is, why or by what passion they were instigated to
deceive, and that was, because the desire of gain had wholly possessed
them, so that they made no difference between what was true and what was
false, but only sought to please for the sake of gain. And he shows
also, on the other hand, that they were so covetous of gain, that they
*declared war,* if any one did not feed them. And God repeats again the
name of his people: this had escaped my notice lately in observing on
the words of Micah, that the princes devoured the flesh of God’s people;
for the indignity was increased when this wrong, was done to the people
of God. Had the Assyrians, or the Ethiopians, or the Egyptians, been
pillaged by their princes, it would have been more tolerable; but when
the very people of God were thus devoured, it was, as I have said, less
to be borne. So when the people of God were deceived, and the truth was
turned to a lie, it was a sacrilege the more hateful.

<span id="iv.3.iii-p7"></span>This then was the reason why he said, *Who
deceive my people*  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) “This people is
sacred to me, for I have chosen them for myself; as then they are
destroyed by frauds and deceptions, is not my majesty in a manner
dishonored — is not my authority lessened?” We now then see the reason
why the Prophet says, *They deceive my people.* It is indeed certain,
that the Jews were worthy of such deceptions; and God elsewhere
declares, that whenever he permitted false prophets to come among them,
it was to try them to see what sort of people they were, (<span
id="iv.3.iii-p8.1"></span>[De 13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#000)<span
id="iv.3.iii-p8.1"></span>.) It was then their just reward, when liberty
was given to Satan to prevent sound doctrine among the people. And no
one is ever deceived, except through his own will. Though their own
simplicity seems to draw many to destruction, yet there is ever in them
some hypocrisy. But it does not extenuate the sin of false teachers,
that the people deserve such a punishment: and hence the Prophet still
goes on with his reproof and says, that they were the people of God, —
in what respect? By adoption. Though then the Jews had rendered
themselves unworthy of such an honor, yet God counts them his people,
that he might punish the wickedness of the false teachers, of which he
now accuses them. It now follows, that they did *bite with their teeth*
But I cannot finish today.

<span id="iv.3.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.3.iv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.3.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou wouldest
have the image of thy justice to shine in princes, and whom thou arrest
with the sword, that they might rule in thy name, and be really thy
ministers, — O grant, that this thy blessing may openly appear among us,
and that by this evidence thou mayest testify that thou art not only
propitious to us, but hadst also a care for our safety, and watches over
our welfare and well-being: and do thou so shine by thy word, that it
may never be obscured or clouded among us through any depraved cupidity,
but ever retain its own clear purity, so that we may proceed in the
right path of salvation, which thou hast discovered and prescribed,
until we be at length gathered into thy celestial kingdom, to enjoy that
eternal inheritance, which has been procured for us by the blood of thy
only-begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="iv.3.v"></span>

<span id="iv.3.v-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-sixth

<span id="iv.3.v-p2"></span>Let us proceed to explain that sentence of
the Prophet, in which he shows the cause why the teachers deceived the
people and turned the truth of God to a lie; and this was, because they
were greedy of gains and were wholly given to avarice. We hence see,
according to the testimony of Paul, that avarice affords a cause to all
evils, (<span id="iv.3.v-p2.1"></span>[1Ti
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="iv.3.v-p2.1"></span>;)
and that wherever this contagion comes, all things necessarily fall into
decay: for when avarice reigns in the hearts of men, the truth of God
especially is ever adulterated.

<span id="iv.3.v-p3"></span>But Micah adduces two evidences of avarice,
— that they *cried, Peace,* when well fed and filled, — and that they
proclaimed war, when they were hungry. Then as to the first points he
says, <span id="iv.3.v-p3.1"></span>הנשכים בשניהם וקראו שלום, that is,
“who bite with their teeth,  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) and
cry, Peace.” But the sentence is to be so understood, that when they did
*bite* well, they announced peace with full confidence: for by the word,
bite, the Prophet means their gormandizing; for they who, under the
guise of God’s name, sought only their own advantage, were not satisfied
with a moderate support, inasmuch as they were like hungry dogs. They
therefore devoured, and gorged themselves, without any limits or
moderation. This is the reason why he says that they did bite: for he
compares them either to lions or to bears; and we know that wild beasts
are not satiated with a small quantity of food, but that they gnash as
it were their teeth except they are always pampered. So also Micah says,
that the false teachers of his age were voracious men, who demanded a
large proportion of food. We see the same thing in our day as to the
monks under the Papacy, especially those who, under the name of
mendacity, devour the substance of all people. Except they are pampered,
they always murmur; nay, they are not content with murmurs, they
proclaim war, as the Prophet says here. We indeed see at the same time,
that they are insatiable; for when they come to tables well furnished,
no one would say that they are men, but beasts, for they devour every
thing. We now then understand the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iv.3.v-p6"></span>But it is not voracity alone that is
reprehended: he says, that they sold their blessings. when they were
well filled and had their stomach well supplied. In the same manner the
monks also are wont to pronounce peace when they are well fed, — “O! ye
do good, when ye take care of the brethren; for they are careful of you:
when ye sleep in your beds, they watch, and their prayers make you rich;
for how could the world stand, were it not that the brethren make amends
for it? As then ye are so kind to our community, all things shall turn
out well and prosperously to you, and God also will bless you.” This
then is the practice of those who for reward sell their blessings; they
cry, Peace, that is, they confidently declare that all things shall be
well, they make God propitious, provided such liberality towards their
order be ever continued.

<span id="iv.3.v-p7"></span>But, on the other hand, he also says, *If
any one gives not to their mouth, they instantly sanctify war against
you*  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) *:* but I give a different
rendering, as the passage requires, — that they reclaim war; though the
word is literally to sanctify. But we have seen in <span
id="iv.3.v-p10.1"></span>[Joe 2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#000)<span
id="iv.3.v-p10.1"></span>, that the word is used to designate any solemn
proclamation, — “Sanctify a fast”, that is, Proclaim a fast. So also in
this place, They sanctify war, that is, they proclaim war, when any one
does not feed them, nor satisfy their gormandizing; for they could not
bear want. In short, the Prophet shows, that these false teachers were
so blinded by avarice, that they discerned not the difference between
right and wrong; but only praised those who fed them: and, on the other
hand, when they found that they and their stomach were not cared for nor
satisfied, they cursed, fulminated, and uttered nothing but anathemas;
as we see to be done at this day by the monks under the Papacy. The
Prophet now says —

<span id="iv.3.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.3.vi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#006)<span id="iv.3.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vi-p2"></span>**6.** Therefore night *shall be* unto you,
that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that ye
shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets, and the
day shall be dark over them.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Propterea nox vobis erit a visione
(vel, pro visione, vel propter visionem; dicemus postea de sensu,) et
tenebrae vobis a divinatione (vel, propter divinationem,) et occumbet
sol super prophetas, et obtenebrabitur super eos dies;

<span id="iv.3.vi-p4"></span>**7.** Then shall the seers be ashamed, and
the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all cover their lips; for
*there is* no answer of God.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p5"></span>**7.** Et pudefient videntes (hoc est,
prophetae,) et erubescent divini, et velabunt (hoc est, velum opponent)
super labium suum omnes; quia non erit responsum Dei.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.vi-p7"></span><span id="iv.3.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vi-p8"></span>God declares here to the false teachers by
the mouth of Micah, that he would inflict punishment on them, so that
they should be exposed to the reproach of all. Hence the kind of
punishment of which the Prophet speaks is — that he would strip the
false teachers of all their dignity, so that they should hereafter in
vain put on an appearance, and claim the honorable name which they had
so long abused. We indeed know, when ungodly and profane men clothe
themselves with the dignified titles of being the princes, or bishops,
or prelates of the Church, how audaciously they pervert every thing, and
do so with impunity. There is then no other remedy, except God pulls off
the mask from them, and openly discovers to all their baseness. Of this
punishment Micah now speaks.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p9"></span>*There shall be to you a night from
vision;* so is the phrase literally, but the particle <span
id="iv.3.vi-p9.1"></span>מ, *mem,* means often, for, or, on account of;
and we can easily see that the Prophet represents night as the reward
for visions and darkness for divination. “As then my people have been
deceived by your fallacies, for your visions and divinations have been
nothing but lies and deceits, I will repay you with the reward which you
have deserved: for instead of a vision you shall have night, and instead
of divination you shall have thick darkness.”  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) It is indeed certain, that the false
teachers, even when they were, as they say, in great reputation, that
is, when they retained the honor and the title of their office, were
blind and wholly destitute of all light: but the Prophet here declares,
that as their baseness did not appear to the common people, God would
cause it to be made at length fully evident. As for instance, there is
nothing at this day more stupid and senseless than the bishops of the
Papacy: for when any one draws from them any expression about religion,
they instantly betray not only their ignorance, but also their shameful
stupidity. With regard to the monks, though they be the most audacious
kind of animals, (*audacissimum animalium genus,*) yet we know how
unlearned and ignorant they are. Therefore at this time the night has
not yet passed away, nor the darkness, of which Micah speaks here.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p13"></span>We now then understand what the Holy
Spirit teaches here, and that is, — that God would at length strip those
false teachers of that imaginary dignity, on account of which no one
dared to speak against them, but received as an oracle whatever they
uttered. *Night,* then, *shall be to you instead of a vision;* that is,
“The whole world shall understand that you are not what you boast
yourselves to be: for I will show that there is not in you, no, not a
particle of the prophetic spirit, but that ye are men as dark as night,
and darkness shall be to you instead of divination. Ye boast of great
acuteness and great perspicuity of mind; but I will discover your
baseness, so that the very children may know that you are not endued
with the spirit.”

<span id="iv.3.vi-p14"></span>To the same purpose is what he adds, *Go
down shall the sun upon you, and darkened over you shall be the day;*
that is, such will be that darkness, that even at noon they will see
nothing; the sun will shine on all, but they shall grope as in the dark;
so that Gods vengeance would be made so manifest, that it might be
noticed by all, from the least to the greatest.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p15"></span><span id="iv.3.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vi-p16"></span>He confirms the same thing in the next
verse, *And ashamed shall be the seers and confounded the diviners,*
 <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) *and they shall cover their
lip;* that is they will put veils on their mouths. In short, he means,
that they would become a reproach to all, so that they would be ashamed
of themselves, and no more dare to boast with so much confidence of
their name and of the prophetic office.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p18"></span>As to this form of expression, <span
id="iv.3.vi-p18.1"></span>ועטו על-שפם, *uothu ol shephim,* some think
that the practice of mourners is referred to; but this interpretation is
frigid. I have therefore no doubt but that Micah intimates that the
mouths of the false teachers would be closed. There is nearly the same
denunciation mentioned by Zechariah; for speaking of the restoration of
the Church, he says, — They who before went about boasting greatly, and
gloried in the name of Prophets, shall cast away their mantle, and will
no longer dare to show themselves; yea, when they shall come abroad,
they shall be as it were herdsman or private persons, and shall say, “I
am not a prophet, nor the son of a prophet, I am chastised by my
father;” that is, they shall profess themselves unworthy of being called
prophets; but that they are scholars under discipline, (<span
id="iv.3.vi-p18.2"></span>[Zec
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#005)<span id="iv.3.vi-p18.2"></span>.)
So also in this place, “They deceive at this day my people,” saith the
Lord; “I will reward them as they deserve; I will fill them with
disgrace and contempt. They shall not then dare hereafter to show
themselves as they have been wont to do; they shall not presume
boastingly to profess themselves to be the pillars of the Church, that
the whole world may be made subject to them; they shall not dare with
tyrannical force to oppress the common and ignorant portions of society
*Veil, then, shall they their mouth;* that is, “I will cause their mouth
to be closed, so that they shall not dare hereafter to utter even a
word.”  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)

<span id="iv.3.vi-p20"></span>It follows, *For there will be no answer
from God.* Some so explain this sentence, as though the Prophet
upbraided them with their old deceits, which they boasted were the words
of God: as then they were not faithful to God, but lied to miserable
men, when they said, that they were sent from above, and brought
messages from heaven, while they only uttered their own inventions or
fables, they should on these accounts be constrained to cover their
mouth. But different is the meaning of the Prophet, and it is this, —
that they were to be deprived of any answer, so that their want of
knowledge might be easily perceived even by the most ignorant: for false
teachers, though they possess nothing certain, yet deceive the simple
with disguises, and render plausible their absurdities, that they may
seem to be the interpreters of God; and they further add great
confidence: and then the stupidity of the people concedes to them such
great power, according to what is said by <span
id="iv.3.vi-p20.1"></span>[Jeremiah
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#000)<span id="iv.3.vi-p20.1"></span>
where he says that the priests received gifts and that for gifts the
Prophets divined, and that the people loved such deprivations. But Micah
declares here that such delusions would no longer be allowed, for God
would dissipate them. It will then be made evident, that *you have no
answer from God;* that is, “All will perceive that you are void and
destitute of every celestial truth, and that you were formerly but gross
cheats, when ye passed yourselves as God’s servants, though you had no
ground for doing so.”

<span id="iv.3.vi-p21"></span>We now perceive what the Prophet means.
But this punishment might have then contributed to the benefit of the
people: for as it is a cause of ruin to the world, when there is no
difference made between light and darkness; so when the baseness of
those is discovered, who abuse God’s name and adulterate his pure truth,
there is then a door open to repentance. Rightly then is this
combination addressed to false prophets. It now follows —

<span id="iv.3.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vii-p1"></span><span id="iv.3.vii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#008)<span id="iv.3.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vii-p2"></span>**8.** But truly I am full of power by the
spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare unto Jacob
his transgression, and to Israel his sin.

<span id="iv.3.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Atqui vere ego repletus sum virtute
a Spiritu Jehovae, et judicio, et fortitudine, ad annuntiandum Jacob
scelus suum, et Israeli peccatum suum.

<span id="iv.3.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.3.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vii-p6"></span>Here Micah, in a courageous spirit, stands
up alone against all the false teachers even when he saw that they were
a large number, and that they appealed to their number, according to
their usual practice, as their shield. Hence he says, *I am filled with
power by the Spirit of Jehovah*  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103)
This confidence is what all God’s servants should possess, that they may
not succumb to the empty and vain boastings of those who subvert the
whole order of the Church. Whenever then, God permits his pure truth to
be corrupted by false teachers, and them to be popular among those high
in honor, as well as the multitude, let this striking example be
remembered by us, lest we be discouraged, lest the firmness and
invincible power of the Holy Spirit be weakened in our hearts, but that
we may proceed in the course of our calling, and learn to oppose the
name of God to all the deceptions of men, if indeed we are convinced
that our service is approved by him, as being faithful. Since, then,
Micah says, that he was *filled with power,* he no doubt stood, as it
were, in the presence of the whole people, and alone pitched his camp
against the whole multitude; for there were then false teachers going
about every where, as the devil sows always seed enough, whenever God
lets loose the reins. Though then their number was not small, yet Micah
hesitated not to go forth among them: I, he says; there is stress to be
laid on the pronoun <span id="iv.3.vii-p7.6"></span>אנכי, *anki,* — Ye
despise me, being one man, and ye despise a few men; ye may think that I
alone serve the Lord; but I am a match for a thousand, yea, for an
innumerable multitude; for God is on my side, and he approves of my
ministry as it is. from him, nor do I bring any thing to you but what he
has commanded: It is then I.

<span id="iv.3.vii-p8"></span>He further expresses a fuller confidence
by using the word <span id="iv.3.vii-p8.1"></span>אולם, *aulam*  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) ; *Verily*, he says, *I am filled with
power*. This “verily” or truly is opposed to those lofty boastings by
which the false prophets were ever wont to attain a name and honor among
the people. But Micah intimates that all that they uttered was only
evanescent: “Ye are,” he says, “wonderful prophets; nay, ye are superior
to the angels, if you are to be believed; but show that you are so in
reality; let there be some proof by which your calling can be confirmed.
There is no proof. It then follows, that ye are only men of wind, and
not really spiritual: but there is really in me what ye boast of with
your mouths.” And he says, that he was *filled,* that he might not be
thought one of the common sort: and Micah no doubt shows here, on
account of the necessity of the occasion, that he was not supplied with
ordinary or usual power; for, according as God employs the labors of his
servants, so is he present with them, and furnishes them with suitable
protection. When any one is not exercised with great difficulties in
discharging his office of teaching, a common measure of the Spirit is
only necessary for the performance of his duties; but when any one is
drawn into arduous and difficult struggles, he is at the same time
especially strengthened by the Lord: and we see daily examples of this;
for many simple men, who have never been trained up in learning, have
yet been so endued by the celestial Spirit, when they came to great
trials, that they have closed the mouths of great doctors, who seemed to
understand all oracles. By such evidences God openly proves at this day,
that he is the same now as when he formerly endued his servant Micah
with a power so rare and so extraordinary. This then is the reason why
he says, that he was filled with power.

<span id="iv.3.vii-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *By the Spirit of
Jehovah* Here the Prophet casts aside every suspicious token of
arrogance; lest he should seem to claim anything as his own, he says,
that this power was conferred on him from above: and this circumstance
ought to be particularly noticed. Though Micah rightly and justly
claimed to himself the name of a teacher, he yet had nothing different
from others before the world; for all his opponents discharged the same
office, and obtained the same honor: the office was common to both
parties. Micah was either alone, or connected with Isaiah and a few
others. Since then he here dares to set up himself, we see that his call
alone must be regarded; for we know how great is the propensity of Satan
to oppose the kingdom of Christ, and also how proud and fierce are false
teachers. Since then the rage of Satan is well known and the presumption
of false teachers, there is no reason why the faithful should make much
of mere naked titles: and when they, who lived at that time, declared,
as Papists do at this day, that they had no discrimination nor judgment
to know, whether of them ought to have been deemed impostors or the
ministers of God, inasmuch as Micah was alone and they were many, and
also that the others were prophets that at least they had the name and
repute of being so, — what was to be done? This was the reason why I
have said that this circumstance was worthy of special notice, — that
though their vocation was common, yet as they had acted perfidiously,
and Micah alone, or with few others, had faithfully performed what the
Lord had commanded, he alone is to be deemed a Prophet and a teacher: in
short, there is no reason for false prophets to set up against us a mere
coveting, when they cannot prove that they are endued with the Spirit of
God. Whosoever then desires to be deemed a servant of God, and a teacher
in his Church, must have this seal which Micah here adduces; he must be
endued with the Spirit of God; honor then will be given to God. But if
any one brings nothing but the name, we see how vain before God it is.

<span id="iv.3.vii-p11"></span>He afterwards subjoins *With judgment and
courage*. (<span id="iv.3.vii-p11.1"></span>*fortitudine*) By judgment,
I have no doubt, he understands discernment, as this is also the common
meaning of the word. He then adds *courage* These two things are
especially necessary for all ministers of the word, — that is, to excel
in wisdom, to understand what is true and right, and to be also endued
with inflexible firmness, by which they may overcome both Satan and the
whole world, and never turn aside from their course, though the devil
may in all ways assail them. We hence see what these two words import.
He had put <span id="iv.3.vii-p11.2"></span>כח, *kech,* first, power;
but now he mentions <span id="iv.3.vii-p11.3"></span>גבורה, *gebure,*
courage or magnanimity. By the term, power, he meant generally all the
endowments, with which all who take upon them the office of teaching
ought to be adorned. This qualification is then first required, and it
is a general one: but Micah divides this power of the prophets into two
kinds, even into wisdom or judgment, and into courage; and he did this,
that they might understand what God intended: Let them excel in
doctrine; and then that they may be confirmed, let them not yield to any
gales that may blow, nor be overcome by threats and terrors; let them
not bend here and there to please the world; in a word, let them not
succumb to any corruptions: it is therefore necessary to add courage to
judgment.

<span id="iv.3.vii-p12"></span>He then adds, *To declare to Jacob his
wickedness,*  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) *and to Israel his
sin*. We here see that the Prophet did not hunt for the favor of the
people. Had he courted their approbation, he must have soothed with
flatteries those who sought flatteries; and were already seized with
such hatred and malignant feelings, that they had rejected Micah. He
must then have spoken softly to them, to please them; but this he did
not do. “On the one hand,” he says, “these men sell to you their
blessings and deceive you with the hope of peace; and, on the other,
they denounce war, except their voracity is satisfied; and thus it is
that they please you; for so ye wish, and ye seek such teachers as will
promise you wine and strong drink: but I am sent to you for another
purpose; for the Lord has not deposited flatteries with me, such as may
be pleasant to you; but he has deposited reproofs and threatenings. I
shall therefore uncover your crimes, and will not hesitate to condemn
you before the whole world, for ye deserve to be thus treated.” We now
perceive why the Prophet says, that he was endued with power to *declare
his wickedness to Jacob, etc.*

<span id="iv.3.vii-p14"></span>But we hence learn how necessary it is
for us to be supported by celestial firmness, when we have to do with
insincere and wicked men; and this is almost the common and uniform lot
of all God’s servants; for all who are sent to teach the word are sent
to carry on a contest. It is therefore not enough to teach faithfully
what God commands, except we also contend: and though the wicked may
violently rise up against us, we must yet put on a brazen front, as it
is said in <span id="iv.3.vii-p14.1"></span>[Ezek.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)<span id="iv.3.vii-p14.1"></span>;
nor must we yield to their fury, but preserve invincible firmness. Since
then we have a contest with the devil, with the world, and with all the
wicked, that we may faithfully execute our office, we must be furnished
with this courage of which Micah speaks.

<span id="iv.3.vii-p15"></span>As I have already shown that God’s
servants ought courageously to break through all those obstacles by
which Satan may attempt either to delay or to force them backward; so
also the doctrine taught here ought to be applied to all the godly: they
ought wisely to distinguish between the faithful servants of God and
impostors who falsely pretend his name. Then no one, who desires truly
and from the heart to obey God, will be deceived; for the Lord will ever
give the spirit of judgment and discrimination. And the reason why at
this day many miserable souls are led to endless ruin is, because they
either shut their eyes, or willfully dissemble, or designedly involve
themselves in such subterfuges as these, — “I cannot form any judgment;
I see on both sides learned and celebrated men, at least those who are
in some repute and esteem: some call me to the right hand, and others to
the left, where am I to retake myself? I therefore prefer to close my
mouth and my ears.” Thus many, seeking a cloak for their sloth, often
manifest their ignorance: for we see that the eyes must be opened when
the Lord exercises and tries our faith: and he suffers discords and
contentions to arise in the Church that some may choose this, and others
that. Though God then relaxes the reins of Satan, that contests and
turmoils of this kind may be excited in the Church, there is yet no
excuse for us, if we follow not what the Lord prescribes; for he will
ever guide us by his Spirit, provided we foster not our own
slothfulness. It follows—

<span id="iv.3.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.3.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.3.viii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
3:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.3.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.viii-p2"></span>**9.** Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of
the house of Jacob, and princes of the house of Israel, that abhor
judgment, and pervert all equity.

<span id="iv.3.viii-p3"></span>**9.** Audite hoc, quaeso, principes
domus Jacob, et gubernatores domus Israel, qui abominantur (est mutatio
personae) judicium, et recitudinem omnem pervertunt;

<span id="iv.3.viii-p4"></span>**10.** They build up Zion with blood,
and Jerusalem with iniquity.

<span id="iv.3.viii-p5"></span>**10.** Qui aedificat  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) (*nunc est mutatio numeri*) Sionem in
sanguinibus, et Jerusalem in iniquitate.

<span id="iv.3.viii-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.viii-p8"></span><span id="iv.3.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.viii-p9"></span>The Prophet begins really to prove what
he had stated, — that he was filled with the power of the Holy Spirit:
and it was, as they say, an actual proof, when the Prophet dreaded no
worldly power, but boldly addressed the princes and provoked their rage
against him, *Hear,* he says, *ye heads, ye rulers of the house of
Jacob,* ye men who are cruel, bloody, and iniquitous. We then see that
the Prophet had not boasted of what he did not without delay really
confirm. But he began with saying, that he was filled with the Spirit of
God, that he might more freely address them, and that he might check
their insolence. We indeed know that the ungodly are so led on headlong
by Satan, that they hesitate not to resist God himself: but yet the name
of God is often to them a sort of a hidden chain. However much then the
wicked may rage, they yet become less ferocious when the name of God is
introduced. This is the reason why the Prophet had mentioned the Spirit
of God; it was, that there might be a freer course to his doctrine.

<span id="iv.3.viii-p10"></span>When he now says, *Ye heads of the house
of Jacob, ye rulers of the house of Israel,* it is by way of concession,
as though he had said, that these were indeed splendid titles, and that
he was not so absurd as not to acknowledge what had been given them by
God, even that they were eminent, a chosen race, being the children of
Abraham. The Prophet then concedes to the princes what belonged to them,
as though he had said, that he was not a seditious man, who had no care
nor consideration for civil order. And this defense was very necessary,
for nothing is more common than for the ungodly to charge God’s servants
with sedition, whenever they use a freedom of speech as it becomes them.
Hence all who govern the state, when they hear their corruptions
reproved, or their avarice, or their cruelty, or any of their other
crimes, immediately cry out, — “What! if we suffer these things, every
thing will be upset: for when all respect is gone, what will follow but
brutal outrage? for every one of the common people will rise up against
the magistrates and the judges.” Thus then the wicked ever say, that
God’s servants are seditious whenever they boldly reprove them. This is
the reason why the Prophet concedes to the princes and judges of the
people their honor; but a qualifying clause immediately follows, — Ye
are indeed the heads, ye are rulers; but yet *they hate judgment:*” he
does not think them worthy of being any longer addressed. He had indeed
bidden them to hear as with authority; but having ordered them to hear,
he now uncovers their wickedness, *They hate,* he says, *judgments and
all rectitude pervert:*  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) each of
them *builds Zion by blood, and Jerusalem by iniquity;* that is, they
turn their pillages into buildings: “This, forsooth, is the splendor of
my holy city even of Zion! where I designed the ark of my covenant to be
placed, as in my only habitation, even there buildings are seen
constructed by blood and by plunder! See, he says, how wickedly these
princes conduct themselves under the cover of their dignity!”  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108)

<span id="iv.3.viii-p16"></span>We now see that the word of God is not
bound, but that it puts forth its power against the highest as well as
the lowest; for it is the Spirit’s office to arraign the whole world,
and not a part only.

<span id="iv.3.viii-p17"></span>‘When the Spirit shall come,’ says
Christ,  
‘it will convince the world,’ (<span id="iv.3.viii-p17.2"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span
id="iv.3.viii-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.3.viii-p18"></span>He speaks not there of the common people
only, but of the whole world, of which princes and magistrates form a
prominent part. Let us then know, that though we ought to show respect
to judges, (as the Lord has honored them with dignified titles, calling
them his vicegerents and also gods,) yet the mouths of Prophets ought
not to be closed; but they ought, without making any difference, to
correct whatever is deserving of reproof, and not to spare even the
chief men themselves. This is what ought in the first place to be
observed.

<span id="iv.3.viii-p19"></span><span id="iv.3.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.viii-p20"></span>Then when he says, that Zion *was built
by blood, and Jerusalem by iniquity,* it is the same as though the
Prophet had said, that whatever the great men expended on their palaces
had been procured, and, as it were, scraped together from blood and
plunder. The judges could not have possibly seized on spoils on every
side, without being bloody, that is, without pillaging the poor: for the
judges were for the most part corrupted by the rich and the great; and
then they destroyed the miserable and the innocent. He then who is
corrupted by money will become at the same time a thief; and he will not
only extort money, but will also shed blood. There is then no wonder
that Micah says, that Zion was *built by blood* He afterwards extends
wider his meaning and mentions *iniquity,* as he wished to cast off
every excuse from hypocrites. The expression is indeed somewhat strong,
when he says, that Zion was built by blood. They might have objected and
said, that they were not so cruel, though they could not wholly clear
themselves from the charge of avarice. “When I speak of blood,” says the
Prophet, “there is no reason that we should contend about a name; for
all iniquity is blood before God: if then your houses have been built by
plunder, your cruelty is sufficiently proved; it is as though miserable
and innocent men had been slain by your own hands.” The words, *Zion*
and *Jerusalem,* enhance their sin; for they polluted the holy city and
the mount on which the temple was built by the order and command of God.

<span id="iv.3.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.3.ix-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.3.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou wouldest
have us to be ruled by the preaching of thy word, — O grant, that those
who have to discharge this office may be really endued with thy
celestial power, that they may not attempt any thing of themselves, but
with all devotedness spend all their labors for thee and for our
benefit, that through them we may be thus edified, so that thou mayest
ever dwell among us, and that we through our whole life may become the
habitation of thy Majesty, and that finally we may come to thy heavenly
sanctuary, where thou daily invites us, as an entrance there has been
once for all opened to us by the blood of thy only-begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="iv.3.ix-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.x"></span>

<span id="iv.3.x-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-seventh

<span id="iv.3.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.3.xi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
3:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#011)<span id="iv.3.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p2"></span>**11.** The heads thereof judge for reward,
and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets thereof divine
for money: yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, *Is* not the Lord
among us? none evil can come upon us.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p3"></span>**11.** Principes ejus pro munere judicant,
et sacerdotes ejus mercede docent, et prophetae ejus pecunia divinant,
et super Jehova nituntur, dicendo, Annon Jehova in medio nostri? Non
veniet super nos malum.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p4"></span>**12.** Therefore shall Zion for your sake
be plowed *as* a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the
mountain of the house as the high places of the forest.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p5"></span>**12.** Itaque propter vos Sion ut ager
arabitur, et Jerusalem acervus erit, et mons domus in excelsa sylvae.
 <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109)

<span id="iv.3.xi-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.3.xi-p8"></span><span id="iv.3.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p9"></span>The Prophet shows here first, how gross and
supine was the hypocrisy of princes as well as of the priests and
prophets: and then he declares that they were greatly deceived in thus
soothing themselves with vain flatteries; for the Lord would punish them
for their sins since he had in his forbearance spared them, and found
that they did not repent. But he does not address here the common people
or the multitude, but he attacks the chief men: for he has previously
told us, that he was endued with the spirit of courage. It was indeed
necessary for the Prophet to be prepared with invincible firmness that
he might freely and boldly declare the judgment of God, especially as he
had to do with the great and the powerful, who, as it is well known,
will not easily, or with unruffled minds, bear their crimes to be
exposed; for they wish to be privileged above the ordinary class of men.
But the Prophet not only does not spare them, but he even arraigns them
alone, as though the blame of all evils lodged only with them, as indeed
the contagion had proceeded from them; for though all orders were then
corrupt, yet the cause and the beginning of all the evils could not have
been ascribed to any but to the chief men themselves.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p10"></span>And he says, *Princes for reward judge,
priests teach for reward,*  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) *the
prophets divine for money:* as though he had said, that the
ecclesiastical as well as the civil government was subject to all kinds
of corruptions, for all things were made matters of sale. We know that
what the Holy Spirit declares elsewhere is ever true, — that by gifts or
rewards the eyes of the wise are blinded and the hearts of the just are
corrupted, (<span id="iv.3.xi-p12.1"></span>[Ecclus.
20:29](../../../bib/apo/sir020.htm#029)<span
id="iv.3.xi-p12.1"></span>,) for as soon erg judges open a way for
rewards, they cannot preserve integrity, however much they may wish to
do so. And the same is the case with the priests: for if any one is
given to avarice, he will adulterate the pure truth: it cannot be, that
a complete liberty in teaching should exist, except when the pastor is
exempt from all desire of gain. It is not therefore without reason that
Micah complains here, that the princes as well as the priests were
hirelings in his day; and by this he means, that no integrity remained
among them, for the one, as I have said, follows from the other. He does
not say, that the princes were either cruel or perfidious, though he had
before mentioned these crimes; but in this place he simply calls them
mercenaries. But, as I have just said, the one vice cannot be separated
from the other; for every one who is hired will pervert judgment,
whether he be a teacher or a judge. Nothing then remains pure where
avarice bears rule. It was therefore quite sufficient for the Prophet to
condemn the judges and the prophets and the priests for avarice; for it
is easy hence to conclude, that teaching was exposed to sale, and that
judgments were bought, so that he who offered most money easily gained
his cause. *Princes* then *judge for reward,* and *priests* also *teach
for reward*

<span id="iv.3.xi-p13"></span>We can learn from this place the
difference between prophets and priests. Micah ascribes here the office
or the duty of teaching to the priests and leaves divination alone to
the prophets. We have said elsewhere, that it happened through the
idleness of the priests, that prophets were added to them; for
prophesying belonged to them, until being content with the altar, they
neglected the office of teaching: and the same thing, as we find, has
taken place under the Papacy. For though it be quite evident for what
reason pastors were appointed to preside over the Church, we yet see
that all, who proudly call themselves pastors, are dumb dogs. Whence is
this? Because they think that they discharge their duties, by being only
attentive to ceremonies; and they have more than enough to occupy them:
for the priestly office under the Papacy is laborious enough as to
trifles and scenic performances: (<span id="iv.3.xi-p13.1"></span>*ritus
histrionicos* — stage-playing rites) but at the same time they neglect
the principal thing — to feed the Lord’s flock with the doctrine of
salvation. Thus degenerated had the priests become under the Law. What
is said by Malachi ought to have been perpetuated, — that the law should
be in the mouth of the priest, that he should be the messenger and
interpreter of the God of hosts, (<span id="iv.3.xi-p13.2"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iv.3.xi-p13.2"></span>;)
but the priests cast from them this office: it became therefore
necessary that prophets should be raised up, and as it were beyond the
usual course of things while yet the regular course formally remained.
But the priests taught in a cold manner; and the prophets divined, that
is professed that oracles respecting future things were revealed to
them.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p14"></span>This distinction is now observed by the
Prophet, when he says, *The priests teach for reward,* that is, they
were mercenaries, and hirelings in their office: and the *prophets
divined for money* It then follows, that they yet *leaned on Jehovah,*
and said, *Is not Jehovah in the midst of us? Come then shall not evil
upon us.* The Prophet shows here, as I have said at the beginning, that
these profane men trifled with God: for though they knew that they were
extremely wicked, nay, their crimes were openly known to all; yet they
were not ashamed to lay claim to the authority of God. And it has, we
know, been a common wickedness almost in all ages, and it greatly
prevails at this day, — that men are satisfied with having only the
outward evidences of being the people of God. There was then indeed an
altar erected by the command of God; there were sacrifices made
according to the rule of the Law; and there were also great and
illustrious promises respecting that kingdom. Since then the sacrifices
were daily performed, and since the kingdom still retained its outward
form, they thought that God was, in a manner, bound to them. The same is
the case at this day with the great part of men; they presumptuously and
absurdly boast of the external forms of religion. The Papists possess
the name of a Church, with which they are extremely inflated; and then
there is a great show and pomp in their ceremonies. The hypocrites also
among us boast of Baptism, and the Lord’s Supper, and the name of
Reformation; while, at the same time, these are nothing but mockeries,
by which the name of God and the whole of religion are profaned, when no
real piety flourishes in the heart. This was the reason why Micah now
expostulated with the prophets and the priests, and the king’s
counselors; it was, because they falsely pretended that they were the
people of God.  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111)

<span id="iv.3.xi-p16"></span>But by saying; that *they relied on
Jehovah,* he did not condemn that confidence which really reposes on
God; for, in this respect, we cannot exceed the bounds: as God’s
goodness is infinite, so we cannot trust in his word too much, if we
embrace it in true faith. But the Prophet says, that hypocrites leaned
on Jehovah, because they flattered themselves with that naked and empty
distinction, that God had adopted them as his people. Hence the word,
*leaning* or recumbing, is not to be applied to the real trust of the
heart, but, on the contrary, to the presumption of men, who pretend the
name of God, and so give way to their own will, that they shake off not
only all fear of God, but also thought and reason. When, therefore, so
great and so supine thoughtlessness occupies the minds of men, stupidity
presently follows: and yet it is not without reason that Micah employs
this expression, for hypocrites persuade themselves that all things will
be well with them, as they think that they have God propitious to them.
As then they feel no anxiety while they have the idea that God is
altogether at peace with them, the Prophet declares, by way of irony,
that they *relied on Jehovah;* as though he had said, that they made the
name of God their support: but yet the Prophet speaks in words contrary
to their obvious meaning, (<span id="iv.3.xi-p16.1"></span>καταχρηστικῶς
*loquitur* — speaks catachrestically;) for it is certain that no one
relies on Jehovah except he is humbled in himself. It is penitence that
leads us to God; for it is when we are cast down that we recumb on him;
but he who is inflated with self-confidence flies in the air, and has
nothing solid in him. And our Prophet, as I have said, intended
indirectly to condemn the false security in which hypocrites sleep,
while they think it enough that the Lord had once testified that they
would be his people; but the condition is by them disregarded.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p17"></span>He now recites their words, *Is not
Jehovah in the midst of us? Come will not evil upon us* This question is
a proof of a haughty self-confidence; for they ask as of a thing
indubitable, and it is an emphatic mode of speaking, by which they meant
to say, that Jehovah was among them. He who simply affirms a thing, does
not show so much pride as these hypocrites when they set forth this
question, “Who shall deny that Jehovah dwells in the midst of us?” God
had indeed chosen an habitation among them for himself; but a condition
was interposed, and yet they wished that he should be, as it were, tied
to the temple, though they considered not what God required from them.
They hence declared that Jehovah was in the midst of them; nay, they
treated with disdain any one who dared to say a word to the contrary:
nor is there a doubt but that they poured forth blasts of contempt on
the Prophets. For whenever any one threatened what our Prophet
immediately subjoins, such an answer as this was ever ready on their
lips, — “What! will God then desert us and deny himself? Has he in vain
commanded the temple to be built among us? Has he falsely promised that
we should be a priestly kingdom? Dost thou not make God a
covenant-breaker, by representing him as approving of the terrors of thy
discourse? But he cannot deny himself:” We hence see why the Prophet had
thus spoken; it was to show that hypocrites boasted so to speaks of
their proud confidence, because they thought that God could not be
separated from them.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p18"></span>Now this passage teaches us how
preposterous it is thus to abuse the name of God. There is indeed a
reason why the Lord calls us to himself, for without him we are
miserable; he also promises to be propitious to us, though, in many
respects, we are guilty before him: he yet, at the same time, calls us
to repentance. Whosoever, then, indulges himself and continues sunk in
his vices, he is greatly deceived, if he applies to himself the promises
of God; for, as it has been said, the one cannot be separated from the
other.  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) But when God is
propitious to them, they rightly conclude, that all things will be well
with them, for we know that the paternal favor of God is a fountain of
all felicity. But in this there was a vicious reasoning, — that they
promised to themselves the favor of God through a false imagination of
the flesh, and not through his word. Thus we see that there is ever in
hypocrisy some imitation of piety: but there is a sophistry
(*paralogismus*) either in the principle itself or in the argument.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p20"></span><span id="iv.3.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p21"></span>Now follows a threatening, *Therefore, on
your account, Zion as a field shall be plowed, and Jerusalem a heap
shall be, and the mount of the house as the high places of a forest* We
here see how intolerable to God hypocrites are; for it was no ordinary
proof of a dreadful vengeance, that the Lord should expose to reproach
the holy city, and mount Zion, and his own temple. This revenge, then,
being so severe, shows that to God there is nothing less tolerable than
that false confidence with which hypocrites swell, for it brings
dishonor on God himself; for they could not boast that they were God’s
people without aspersing him with many reproaches. What then is the
meaning of this, “God is in the midst of us,” except that they thereby
declared that they were the representatives (*vicarios*) of God, that
the kingdom was sacred and also the priesthood? Since then they boasted
that they did not presumptuously claim either the priesthood or the
regal power, but that they were divinely appointed, we hence see that
their profanation of God’s name was most shameful. It is then no wonder
that God was so exceedingly displeased with them: and hence the Prophet
says, *For you shall Zion as a field be plowed;* as though he said,
“This is like something monstrous, that the temple should be subverted,
that the holy mount and the whole city should be entirely demolished,
and that nothing should remain but a horrible desolation, — who can
believe all this? It shall however, take place, and it shall take place
on your account; you will have to bear the blame of this so monstrous a
change.” For it was as though God had thrown heaven and earth into
confusion; inasmuch as he himself was the founder of the temple; and we
know with what high encomiums the place was honored. Since then the
temple was built, as it were, by the hand of God, how could it be
otherwise, but that, when destroyed, the waste and desolate place should
be regarded as a memorable proof of vengeance? There is therefore no
doubt but that Micah intended to mark out the atrocity of their guilt,
when he says, *For you shall Zion as a field be plowed, Jerusalem shall
become a heap of stones;* that is, it shall be so desolated, that no
vestige of a city, well formed and regularly built, shall remain.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p22"></span>*And the mount of the house, etc.* He
again mentions Zion, and not without reason: for the Jews thought that
they were protected by the city Jerusalem; the whole country rested
under its shadow, because it was the holy habitation of God. And again,
the city itself depended on the temple, and it was supposed, that it was
safe under this protection, and that it could hardly be demolished
without overthrowing the throne of God himself: for as God dwelt between
the cherubim, it was regarded by the people as a fortress incapable of
being assailed. As then the holiness of the mount deceived them, it was
necessary to repeat what was then almost incredible, at least difficult
of being believed. He therefore adds, *The mount of the house* shall be
*as the high places of a forest;* that is, trees shall grow there.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p23"></span>Why does he again declare what had been
before expressed with sufficient clearness? Because it was not only a
thing difficult to be believed, but also wholly inconsistent with
reason, when what the Lord had said was considered, and that overlooked
which hypocrites ever forget. God had indeed made a covenant with the
people; but hypocrites wished to have God, as it were, bound to them,
and, at the same time, to remain themselves free, yea, to have a full
liberty to lead a wicked life. Since then the Jews were fixed in this
false opinion, — that God could not be disunited from his people, the
Prophet confirms the same truth, that the mount of the house would be as
the high places of a forest. And, by way of concession, he calls it the
mount of the house, that is, of the temple; as though he said, “Though
God had chosen to himself a habitation, in which to dwell, yet this
favor shall not keep the temple from being deserted and laid waste; for
it has been profaned by your wickedness.”

<span id="iv.3.xi-p24"></span>Let us now see at what time Micah
delivered this prophecy. This we learn from <span
id="iv.3.xi-p24.1"></span>[Jer 26](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#000)<span
id="iv.3.xi-p24.1"></span>; for when Jeremiah prophesied against the
temple, he was immediately seized and cast into prison; a tumultuous
council was held, and he was well nigh being brought forth unto
execution. All the princes condemned him; and when now he had no hope of
deliverance, he wished, not so much to plead his own cause, as to
denounce a threatening on them, that they might know that they could
effect no good by condemning an innocent man. “Micah, the Morasthite,”
he said, “prophesied in the days of Hezekiah, and said thus, ‘Zion as a
field shall be plowed, Jerusalem shall be a heap, and the mount of the
house as the high placers of a forest.’” Did the king and the people, he
said, consult together to kill him? Nay, but the king turned, and so God
repented; that is, the Lord deferred his vengeance; for king Hezekiah
humbly deprecated the punishment which had been denounced. We now then
know with certainty the time.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p25"></span>But it was strange that under such a holy
king so many and so shameful corruptions prevailed, for he no doubt
tried all he could to exercise authority over the people, and by his own
example taught the judges faithfully and uprightly to discharge their
office; but he was not able, with all his efforts, to prevent the
Priests, and the Judges, and the Prophets, from being mercenaries. We
hence learn how sedulously pious magistrates ought to labor, lest the
state of the Church should degenerate; for however vigilant they may be,
they can yet hardly, even with the greatest care, keep things (as
mankind are so full of vices) from becoming very soon worse. This is one
thing. And now the circumstance of the time ought to be noticed for
another purpose: Micah hesitated not to threaten with such a judgment
the temple and the city, though he saw that the king was endued with
singular virtues. He might have thought thus with himself, “King
Hezekiah labored strenuously in the execution of his high office: now if
a reproof so sharp and so severe will reach his ears, he will either
despond, or think me to be a man extremely rigid, or, it may be, he will
become exasperated against sound doctrine.” The Prophet might have
weighed these things in his mind; but, nevertheless, he followed his
true course in teaching, and there is no doubt but that his severity
pleased the king, for we know that he was oppressed with great cares and
anxieties, because he could not, by all his striving, keep within proper
bounds his counselors, the priests and the prophets. He therefore wished
to have God’s servants as his helpers. And this is what pious
magistrates always desire, that their toils may in some measure be
alleviated by the aid of the ministers of the word; for when the
ministers of the word only teach in a cold manner, and are not intent on
reproving vices, the severity of the magistrates will be hated by the
people. “Why, see, the ministers say nothing, and we hence conclude that
they do not perceive so great evils; and yet the magistrates with the
drawn sword inflict new punishments daily.” When, therefore, teachers
are thus silent, a greater odium no doubt is incurred by the
magistrates: it is hence, as I have said, a desirable thing for them,
that the free reproofs of teachers should be added to the punishments
and judgments of the law.

<span id="iv.3.xi-p26"></span>We further see how calm and meek was the
spirit of the king, that he could bear the great severity of the
Prophet: *Behold,* he said, *on your accounts etc.:* “Thou oughtest at
least to have excepted” me.” For the king was not himself guilty. Why
then did he connect him with the rest? Because the whole body was
infected with contagion, and he spoke generally; and the good king did
not retort nor even murmur, but, as we have recited from Jeremiah, he
humbly deprecated the wrath of God, as though a part of the guilt
belonged to him. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc28012.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.3.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p13"></span> <span id="iv.3.i-p13.1"></span>קצינים,
from <span id="iv.3.i-p13.2"></span>קצה, to cut off to sever, to
separate: they were those who were *separated* from others, as leaders
of an army, rendered in our version, captains, rulers, <span
id="iv.3.i-p13.3"></span>[Jos
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#024)<span id="iv.3.i-p13.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.3.i-p13.4"></span>[Isa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#003)<span id="iv.3.i-p13.4"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc28012.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.3.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p15"></span> Some, such as *Marckius,* and also
*Grotius*, take another view of this sentence: Is it not for you, who
judge and punish others, to know the judgment of God, which awaits you?
But most agree in the view given here. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc28012.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.3.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p18"></span> *Their* skin, literally. The antecedent
(which is not unusual in Hebrew) is mentioned afterwards: it is the
word, people, which follows.

<span id="iv.3.i-p19"></span>The idea of sheep or flock, to which the
people are compared in the last chapter, is still retained here. *Adam
Clarke* quotes from *Suetonius* a striking answer of Tiberius, the
Emperor, to some governors, who solicited him to increase the taxes, —
“It is the property of a good shepherd to shear his sheep, not to *skin*
them” — <span id="iv.3.i-p19.1"></span>*Boni pastoris esse tondere
pectus, non deglubere*

<span id="iv.3.i-p20"></span>To “hate good, and to love evil,” in the
former sentence, betokens a character dreadful in the extreme; for good
here, <span id="iv.3.i-p20.1"></span>טוב means kindness, benevolence,
the doing of good to others; this they *hated*: and evil, <span
id="iv.3.i-p20.2"></span>רעה, means wrong, mischief, injury, the doing
of harm, of wrong, and of injustice to others; and this they *loved.*
How transmuted they were in their spirit into that of very fiends! “They
hate to do good, hate to have any good done, and hate those that are
good; and they love the evil, delight in mischief, and in those that do
mischief.” These words of *Henry,* no doubt, convey a correct view of
the sentence. It might therefore be rendered, “Haters of benevolence,
and lovers of mischief.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc28012.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.3.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.i-p23"></span> “Under the similitude of butchers the
Prophet sets forth their savage cruelty: 1. They take off the skin; 2.
They eat the flesh; 3. They break the bones, to pick out the marrow. The
insatiable avarice of the princes is described.” — *Cocceius.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc28012.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.3.ii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.3.ii-p7"></span> There is nothing in the context to which
<span id="iv.3.ii-p7.1"></span>אז, then, or at that time, can be
referred, except to the two concluding verses of the last chapter, which
ought not to have been separated from this. And this connection confirms
the view, that these two verses contain not a promise but a threatening.
The same time is meant by <span id="iv.3.ii-p7.2"></span>אז as by <span
id="iv.3.ii-p7.3"></span>בעת ההיא in the following part of the verse;
for it is usual with the Prophets to express generally or indefinitely
at first what they afterwards more distinctly specify. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc28012.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.3.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.ii-p11"></span> Literally, “As they have rendered evil
their deeds,” or, to coin a corresponding word, As they have evilized
their deeds. To render their deeds evil was to render them afflictive,
injurious, and oppressive to others, according to what has been
previously described. Hence the following version of *Henderson* is
incorrect, —

<span id="iv.3.ii-p12"></span>Because they have corrupted their doings.

<span id="iv.3.ii-p13"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc28012.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.3.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.iii-p8"></span> “Who deceive my people,” is better than,
“Who cause my people to err,” according to *Newcome* and *Henderson;*
for what is referred to is the “peace,” promised by the false prophets.
*Marckius’* version is, “Who seduce my people,” and he makes this
remark, —that the people had three seducers, — the devil, their own
deceitful hearts, and the false prophets. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc28012.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.3.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.3.v-p4"></span> The expression, “to bite with the teeth,”
is singular, when understood to signify voraciousness, as evidently it
does here; for the corresponding words in the next distich, “who put not
into their mouth,” seem to require this meaning. Almost all critics,
except some of the Greek Fathers, who followed the Septuagint, agree in
attaching to this import to the sentence. The paraphrase of Rabbi
*Jonathan* is, “To him who offers to them a feast of meat, they prophesy
peace.” *Jerome’s* view is the same. *Dathias* gives this paraphrase,
<span id="iv.3.v-p4.1"></span>*dum illis datur quod edunt* — “While is
given them something to eat.”

<span id="iv.3.v-p5"></span>*Henry’s* comment is much to the purpose, —
“They will flatter and compliment those who will feed them with good
bits, will give them something to eat; but as for those who put not into
their mouths, who are not continually cramming them, they look upon them
as their enemies; to them they do not cry, Peace, but even prepare war
against them; against them they denounce the judgments of God: they
preach either comfort or terror to men, not according as they are to
God, but as they are to them; as the crafty priests of the Church of
Rome, in some places, make their image either to smile or to frown upon
the offerer, according as his offering is.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc28012.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.3.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.v-p8"></span> The original may be thus rendered,—

<span id="iv.3.v-p9"></span>But whosoever will not put into their
mouth,  
Even against him they will proclaim war.

<span id="iv.3.v-p10"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc28012.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.3.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vi-p10"></span> That this is the meaning is evident from
the two last lines of the verse. It is a kind of parallelism, in which
the four lines contain the same idea or ideas, announced in the two
first lines in one form, and in the two last another, with more
clearness, and sometimes with something additional. The preposition
<span id="iv.3.vi-p10.1"></span>מ has sometimes the meaning of *rather
than,* but here, *instead of.* I would render the verse thus, —

<span id="iv.3.vi-p11"></span>Therefore night shall be to you instead of
vision,  
And darkness shall be to you instead of divination:  
Yea, set shall the sun upon the Prophets,  
And darken upon them shall the day.

<span id="iv.3.vi-p12"></span>*Piscator* gives the sense when he says,
<span id="iv.3.vi-p12.1"></span>*Visio vestra mutabitur in noctem* —
“Your vision shall be changed into night.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc28012.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.3.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vi-p17"></span> <span id="iv.3.vi-p17.1"></span>רסמים,
<span id="iv.3.vi-p17.2"></span>μαντεις, Sept. <span
id="iv.3.vi-p17.3"></span>*fatidici,* sootsayers, diviners. It is used
generally in a bad sense, while <span id="iv.3.vi-p17.4"></span>חזים,
seers is commonly used in a good sense; but here both words denote
pretenders, the false prophets. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc28012.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iv.3.vi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vi-p19"></span> The version of Newcome is, “They shall
cover the mouth;” that is, as he adds in a note, “with part of the long
eastern vesture. This action was a sign of being put to silence, of
disgrace and dejection, <span id="iv.3.vi-p19.1"></span>[Le
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045)<span id="iv.3.vi-p19.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.3.vi-p19.2"></span>[Ezek.
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#017),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#022)<span id="iv.3.vi-p19.2"></span>.”
There is no reason to render mouth, beard, as some have done. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc28012.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iv.3.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vii-p7"></span> *Jerome* renders “the Spirit of Jehovah”
in the genitive case, which in meaning amounts to the same thing; but
*Newcome* puts the words in apposition with “power.” The <span
id="iv.3.vii-p7.1"></span>את before Spirit seems to betoken a difference
in its connection with “filled.” It appears to be here a preposition,
*ab,* by. The “power,” <span id="iv.3.vii-p7.2"></span>כח, is the <span
id="iv.3.vii-p7.3"></span>δυναμις of the New Testament; and “judgment,”
<span id="iv.3.vii-p7.4"></span>משפט, is discernment or discrimination;
and “might” or courage, <span id="iv.3.vii-p7.5"></span>גבורה, is “an
intrepid firmness of mind,” as *Marckius* observes, “against all
opposing evils and hindrances.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc28012.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iv.3.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vii-p9"></span> *Marckius* renders it the same, <span
id="iv.3.vii-p9.1"></span>*verè,* and says, that it is of the same
import with *Amen, Amen,* so often used by our Savior. *Truly* is
adopted by *Newcome* and *Henderson.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc28012.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iv.3.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.vii-p13"></span> *Scelus,* <span
id="iv.3.vii-p13.1"></span>פשע; it means defection, apostacy, rebellion,
a willful transgression, and a proud contempt of divine law and
institutions; it is <span id="iv.3.vii-p13.2"></span>ανομια —
lawlessness, as it is sometimes rendered by the Septuagint. But “sin,”
<span id="iv.3.vii-p13.3"></span>חטאה, is a deviation from what is right
through delusion, mistaken views, error, ignorance, or infirmity. The
first included idolatry and gross acts of imposture and oppression; the
second, the superstition of the people, and their common vices. *Muis,*
as quoted by *Leigh,* says that <span id="iv.3.vii-p13.4"></span>פשע is
“defection from God or rebellion, and prevarication towards God,” —
<span id="iv.3.vii-p13.5"></span>*defectio à Deo seu rebellio, ac
praevaricatio in Deum* And he quotes also *Mollerius* as describing
<span id="iv.3.vii-p13.6"></span>חטאה as including not only sins of
error, ignorance, and infirmity, but also those of omission, — <span
id="iv.3.vii-p13.7"></span>*Ea potissimum peccata significat, quae vel
errore, vel per ignorantiam, vel per infirmitatem carnis, committuntur;
item peccata omissionis* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc28012.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iv.3.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.viii-p6"></span> It is <span
id="iv.3.viii-p6.1"></span>בנה, in the singular number, with no
variation as to number in the MSS. The Septuagint gives it a plural
participle, <span id="iv.3.viii-p6.2"></span>οἱοικοδομουντες. It may be
rendered as a participial noun, “The building of Zion *is* by blood,”
etc., for <span id="iv.3.viii-p6.3"></span>ה, when radical, does not
always turn into <span id="iv.3.viii-p6.4"></span>ת, when in *regimine.*
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc28012.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iv.3.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.viii-p11"></span> It often happens, as in the present
case, that the relative <span id="iv.3.viii-p11.1"></span>ה, in Hebrew,
prefixed to a participle, has after it a verb in the future connected by
<span id="iv.3.viii-p11.2"></span>ו, and in person different from that
to which the relative refers. The relative here refers to a noun in the
second, and the verb connected with the participle is in the third
person. It is an idiom, of which there are frequent instances. We find
the same to be the case with the relative <span
id="iv.3.viii-p11.3"></span>אשר, in the third verse. It refers to the
chiefs, who are addressed, and must therefore be viewed as in the second
person, and all the verbs which follow it are in the third. Some render
the participle, “who hate,” which is in Hiphil, in a causative sense.
See <span id="iv.3.viii-p11.4"></span>[Amos
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#007), [Amos
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012)<span
id="iv.3.viii-p11.4"></span>. The distich may then be rendered thus, —

<span id="iv.3.viii-p12"></span>*Who render judgment hateful, (or,
abominable,)  
And distort everything that is right,* or more literally,  
*And make crooked everything that is straight.*

<span id="iv.3.viii-p13"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc28012.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iv.3.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.viii-p14"></span> “They pretend,” says *Henry,* “in
justification of their extortion and oppressions, that they build up
Zion and Jerusalem; they add new streets and squares to the holy cities
and adorn them; they establish and advance the public interests both in
church and state, and think therein they do God and Israel good service;
but it is with blood and with iniquity, and therefore it cannot prosper;
nor will their intentions of good to the city of God justify their
contradictions to the law of God.” A flaming zeal for a good cause can
never consecrate extortion, injustice, and murder.

<span id="iv.3.viii-p15"></span>It may be asked, What is the difference
between *Zion* and *Jerusalem?* Zion was the church, Jerusalem was the
state; or it may be, that, according to the usual style of the Prophets,
the more limited idea is given first, and the more extensive one is
added to it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc28012.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iv.3.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p6"></span> “As the *Masoretes,* in their division of
the Bible, reckon the *Twelve Minor Prophets* but as *one* Book, they
mark this verse (*twelfth* of chapter 3) the *middle* verse of these
Prophets.” — *Adam Clarke.*

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc28012.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iv.3.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p11"></span> *Calvin* has <span
id="iv.3.xi-p11.1"></span>*mercede* in both instances. The first in
Hebrew is <span id="iv.3.xi-p11.2"></span>שחד, a gift, a bribe; this was
given to the princes: and the second is <span
id="iv.3.xi-p11.3"></span>מחיר, a commutation, barter, price, something
in exchange; this was given to the priests: and then what was given to
the prophets is literally silver, <span id="iv.3.xi-p11.4"></span>כסף;
but it often means money in general. The Septuagint renders the first,
<span id="iv.3.xi-p11.5"></span>μετα δωρων — for gifts; the second,
<span id="iv.3.xi-p11.6"></span>μετα μισθου — for reward; and the last,
<span id="iv.3.xi-p11.7"></span>μετα αργυριου — for money. The princes
decided matters according to the bribes given them, the priests, not
satisfied with the regular allowance given them according to the law,
did not teach except they were paid, had something in exchange, a reward
for their trouble. And while the true prophets, who were extraordinary
teachers sent by God, delivered their messages freely, without any pay,
as they received them; the false prophets, who pretended that they came
from God, required money for performing their office; see <span
id="iv.3.xi-p11.8"></span>[Jer
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013)<span id="iv.3.xi-p11.8"></span>.
And notwithstanding all their gains, all things were done badly. Money
was extracted for doing wrong. The princes determined cases unjustly,
the priests taught erroneous doctrine, and the prophets prophesied
falsely: and yet for all these evils, money was required! How ignorant
and infatuated the people must have been!

<span id="iv.3.xi-p12"></span>*Cocceius* enumerated *six* things as
chargeable on the persons mentioned in this verse: 1. Avarice—the
seeking of wealth instead of doing God’s will; 2. A mercenary
disposition, influenced by gain and not by sense of duty; 3. The
exacting of unlawful reward; 4. The doing, even for reward, of what was
evil and wicked; 5. A false pretense of trust in God; and, 6. The tying
of God’s favor to external privileges. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc28012.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iv.3.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p15"></span> In unison with the foregoing are these
striking remarks of *Henry,*—”Many are rocked sleep in a fatal security
by their church privileges, as if these would protect them in sin and
shelter them from punishment, which are really, and will be, the
greatest aggravations both of their sin and of their punishment. If
men’s having the Lord among them will not restrain them from doing evil,
it can never secure them from suffering evil for so doing; and it is
very absurd for sinners to think that their impudence will be their
impunity.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc28012.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iv.3.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.3.xi-p19"></span> That is, the promise from repentance. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Micah](cc28013)
