[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28012)  [Next](cc28014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.4"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p1"></span>Chapter 4

<span id="iv.4.i"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.i-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)<span id="iv.4.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p2"></span>**1.** But in the last days it shall come to
pass, *that* the mountain of the house of the LORD shall be established
in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills;
and people shall flow unto it.

<span id="iv.4.i-p3"></span>**1.** Accidet ultimis diebus, ut sit mons
domus Jehovae dispositus in capite montium, et extollentur ipse prae
sublimitatibus; et venient ad eum populi:

<span id="iv.4.i-p4"></span>**2.** And many nations shall come, and say,
Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, and to the house of
the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in
his paths: for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the LORD
from Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.4.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et proficiscentur gentes multae et
dicent, Venite, et ascendemus ad montem Jehovae, et ad domum Dei Jacob;
et docebit nos de viis suis, et ambulabimus in semitis ejus; quia ex
Sion prodibit lex, et verbum Jehovae ex Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.4.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.4.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p8"></span>Here Micah begins his address to the
faithful, who were a remnant among that people; for though the infection
had nearly extended over the whole body, there were yet a few, we know,
who sincerely worshipped God. Hence Micah, that he might not dishearten
God’s children by extreme terror, reasonably adds what we have now
heard, — that though for a time the temple would be demolished and laid
waste, it would yet be only for a season, for the Lord would be again
mindful of his covenant. When, therefore, the Prophet had hitherto
spoken of God’s dreadful vengeance, he directed his discourse to the
whole people and to the princess; but now, especially, and as it were
apart, addresses the pious and sincere servants of God; as though he
said, “There is now a reason why I should speak to the few: I have
hitherto spoken of the near judgment of God on the king’s counselors,
the priests and the prophets; in short, on the whole community, because
they are all become wicked and ungodly; a contempt of God and an
irreclaimable obstinacy have pervaded the whole body. Let them therefore
have what they have deserved. But now I address the children of God by
themselves, for I have something to say to them.”

<span id="iv.4.i-p9"></span>For though the Prophet publicly proclaimed
this promise, there is yet no doubt but that he had regard only to the
children of God, for others were not capable of receiving this
consolation; nay, he had shortly before condemned the extreme security
of hypocrites, inasmuch as they leaned upon God; that is, relied on a
false pretense of religion, in thinking that they were redeemed by a
lawful price when they had offered their sacrifices. And we know that we
meet with the same thing in the writings of the Prophets, and that it is
a practice common among them to add consolations to threatening, not for
the sake of the whole people, but to sustain the faithful in their hope,
who would have despaired, had not a helping hand been stretched forth to
them: for the faithful, we know, tremble, as soon as God manifests any
token of wrath; for the more any one is touched with the fear of God,
the more he dreads his judgment, and fears on account of his
threatening. We hence see how necessary it is to moderate threatenings
and terrors, when prophets and teachers have a regard to the children of
God; for, as I have said, they are without these fearful enough. Let us
then know that Micah has hitherto directed his discourse to the wicked
despisers of God, who yet put on the cloak of religion; but now he turns
his address to the true and pious worshipers of God. And he further so
addresses the faithful of his age, that his doctrine especially belongs
to us now; for how has it been, that the kingdom of God has been
propagated through all parts of the earth? How has it been, that the
truth of the gospel has come to us, and that we are made partakers with
the ancient people of the same adoption, except that this prophecy has
been fulfilled? Then the calling of the Gentiles, and consequently our
salvation, is included in this prophecy.

<span id="iv.4.i-p10"></span>But the Prophet says, *And it shall be in
the extremity of days,*  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) *that
the mount of the house of Jehovah shall be set in order*  <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) *on the top of mountains* The
extremity of days the Prophet no doubt calls the coming of Christ, for
then it was that the Church of God was built anew; in short, since it
was Christ that introduced the renovation of the world, his advent is
rightly called a new age; and hence it is also said to be the extremity
of days: and this mode of expression very frequently occurs in
Scripture; and we know that the time of the gospel is expressly called
the last days and the last time by John, (<span
id="iv.4.i-p12.7"></span>[Joh
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018)<span id="iv.4.i-p12.7"></span>,)
as well as by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (<span
id="iv.4.i-p12.8"></span>[Heb 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.4.i-p12.8"></span>,) and also by Paul, (<span
id="iv.4.i-p12.9"></span>[2Ti 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.4.i-p12.9"></span>;) and this way of speaking they borrowed from
the prophets. On this subject some remarks were made on <span
id="iv.4.i-p12.10"></span>[Joel 2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#000)<span
id="iv.4.i-p12.10"></span>. Paul gives us the reason for this mode of
speaking in <span id="iv.4.i-p12.11"></span>[1Co
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="iv.4.i-p12.11"></span>:
“Upon whom,” he says, “the ends of the world are come.” As Christ then
brought in the completion of all things at his coming, the Prophet
rightly says that it would be the last days when God would restore his
Church by the hand of the Redeemer. At the same time, Micah no doubt
intended to intimate that the time of God’s wrath would not be short,
but designed to show that its course would be for a long time.

<span id="iv.4.i-p13"></span>*It shall* then *be in the last of days;*
that is, when the Lord shall have executed his vengeance by demolishing
the temple, by destroying the city, and by reducing the holy place into
a solitude, this dreadful devastation shall continue, not for one year,
nor for two; in a word, it will not remain only for forty or fifty
years, but the Lord will let loose the reins of his wrath, that their
minds may long languish, and that no restoration may be evident. We now
then understand the Prophet’s design as to the last days.

<span id="iv.4.i-p14"></span>He calls the mount, *the mount of the house
of Jehovah,*  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) in a sense
different from what he did before; for then it was, as we have stated by
way of concession; and now he sets forth the reason why God did not wish
wholly to cast aside that mount; for he commanded his temple to be built
there. It is the same, then, as though he said, — “This ought not to be
ascribed to the holiness of the mountain, as if it excelled other
mountains in dignity; but because there the temple was founded, not by
the authority of men, but by a celestial oracle, as it is sufficiently
known.”

<span id="iv.4.i-p16"></span>*The mount* then *of the house of Jehovah
shall be set in order on the top of the mountains,* that is it shall
surpass in height all other mountains; *and it shall be raised,* he
says*, above the highest summits, and assemble*  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) *there shall all nations.* It is
certain, that by these words of the Prophet is to be understood no
visible eminence of situation: for that mount was not increased at the
coming of Christ; and they who lived in the time of the Prophet
entertained no gross idea of this kind. But he speaks here of the
eminence of dignity, — that God would give to mount Zion a distinction
so eminent, that all other mountains would yield to its honor. And how
was this done? The explanation follows in the next verse. Lest, then,
any one thought that there would be some visible change in mount Zion,
that it would increase in size, the Prophet immediately explains what he
meant and says, at the end of the verse, Come shall nations to God. It
is now easy to see what its elevation was to be, — that God designed
this mount to be, as it were, a royal seat. As under the monarchy of the
king of Persia, the whole of the east, we know, was subject to one tower
of the Persian; so also, when mount Zion became the seat of sovereign
power, God designed to reign there, and there he designed that the whole
world should be subject to him; and this is the reason and the Prophet
said that it would be higher than all other mountains. Hence his
meaning, in this expression, is sufficiently evident.

<span id="iv.4.i-p26"></span><span id="iv.4.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p27"></span>There follows, however, a fuller
explanation, when he says, that *many nations would come* He said only
before that nations would come: but as David, even in his age, made some
nations tributary to himself, the Prophet here expresses something more,
— that *many nations would come;* as if he had said, “Though David
subjugated some people to himself, yet the borders of his kingdom were
narrow and confined, compared with the largeness of that kingdom which
the Lord will establish at the coming of his Messiah: for not a few
nations but many shall assemble to serve him, and shall say,” etc. The
Prophet now shows that it would be a spiritual kingdom. When David
subdued the Moabites and the Amorites, and others, he imposed a certain
tribute to be paid annually but he was not able to establish among them
the pure and legitimate worship of God, nor was he able to unite them in
one faith. Then the Moabites and other nations, though they paid a
tribute to David, did not yet worship the true God, but continued ever
alienated from the Church. But our Prophet shows that the kingdom, which
God would set up at the coming of the Messiah, would be spiritual.

<span id="iv.4.i-p28"></span>For they shall say,  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) *Let us you and ascend to the mount of
Jehovah, and to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for, go*  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) *forth shall a law from Zion, and the
word of Jehovah from Jerusalem* Throughout this passage the Prophet
teaches us, that people are not to be constrained by an armed force, or
by the power of the sword, to submit to David’s posterity, but that they
are to be really and thoroughly reformed, so that they submit themselves
to God, unite with the body of the Church, and become one people with
the children of Abraham; for they will yield a voluntary service, and
embracing the teaching of the Law, they will renounce their own
superstitions. This then is the Prophet’s meaning. But the remainder we
shall defer till to-morrow.

<span id="iv.4.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.4.ii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.4.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God that as thou hast been
pleased to erect the throne of thy Son among us, we may rely on his
protection and learn to resign ourselves wholly to thee, and never turn
aside here and there, but with tulle obedience so submit ourselves to
the King who has been appointed by thee, that he may own us as his
legitimate people, and so glorify thy name, that we may not at the same
time profane it by an ungodly and wicked life, but testify by our works
that we are really thy subjects. and that thou attains full authority
over us, so that thy name may be sanctified and thy Spirit may really
guide us, until at length thy Son, who has gathered us when we were
awfully gone astray, gather us again to that kingdom, which he as
purchased for us by his own blood. Amen.

<span id="iv.4.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-eighth

<span id="iv.4.iii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the
prophecy, in which Micah promises the restoration of the Church. We have
said that this promise cannot be understood except of Christ’s kingdom,
for it refers to the last days. And it was also added, that the
superiority and eminence of mount Zion, of which he speaks, cannot be
otherwise understood than of God’s spiritual kingdom; for the
explanation follows, when he says, that many nations would come to be
taught in the ways of the Lord. We hence see that an earthly empire is
not what is here predicted, but what exists through the word and
celestial doctrine. But each particular ought to be considered by us. We
yesterday said, that in the distinct mention made of many nations, there
is to be understood a contrast; for till that time God was only known by
one people. Since God then had chosen the race of Abraham alone, there
is here pointed out a future change, when he shall gather his Church
from various nations, so as to do away with the difference between the
Gentiles and the Jews.

<span id="iv.4.iii-p3"></span>It now follows, *They shall say, Come, and
let us ascend to the mount of Jehovah* The Prophet shows in these words
that not only each one would be obedient to God, when called, but that
they would also encourage one another: and this ardor is what is justly
required in the faithful; they ought to animate and stir on one another;
for it is not enough for each of us himself to obey God, but this zeal
ought to be added, by which we may strive to produce a mutual benefit.
This concern then is what the Prophet now refers to, when he says,
“Come, that we may ascend to the mountain of the Lord.” He might have
said, that people would come, and there close his sentence; but he
wished to join the two clauses, — that they, who had before despised the
God of Israel, would come from all parts, — and also that they would
become exhorters to one another. Come then that we may ascend. But the
manner of the exhortation deserves to be noticed; for each one offers
himself as a companion in the journey. We indeed see that many are
prompt enough, when others are to be stimulated in their duty; but they
at the same time lie still; their whole fervor is consumed in sending
others, and they themselves move not, no, not a finger; so far are they
from running with alacrity in company with others. The Prophet shows
here, that the faithful will be so solicitous about the salvation of
their brethren that they will strenuously run themselves, and that they
will prescribe nothing to others but what they themselves perform. Come
then that we may ascend; they say not, “Go, ascend to the mount of
Jehovah;” but, Let us go together.” It is then the right way of
encouraging, when we really show that we require nothing from our
brethren but what we desire to do ourselves.

<span id="iv.4.iii-p4"></span>The circumstance of time must now be
noticed; for what the Prophet says respecting the nations coming into
mount Zion, as it was to be reduced to a waste, might have appeared a
fable; for what had he shortly before predicted? That Zion would be
plowed as a field, and that trees would grow there, that it would become
a wild forest. How then could it be, that many nations would flow to it
as to a most renowned place, as it was to be reduced to a dreadful
desolation? But the Prophet here extols the wonderful power of God, —
that in this wild and desert place there would at length be raised a
noble and a celebrated temple, where God would show mercy to his own
people. Hence he promises what this mount of Jehovah would be, which was
for a time to be forsaken; and that there would be, as formerly, a noble
temple in the place, where desolation had for a season existed.

<span id="iv.4.iii-p5"></span>It afterwards follows, *And he will teach
us of his ways.*  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) Here the
Prophet in a few words defines the legitimate worship of God: for it
would not be sufficient for the nations to come together into one place
to profess the one true God, unless true obedience followed, which rests
on faith, as faith does on the word. It ought then to be especially
noticed, that the Prophet sets here the word of God before us, in order
to show that true religion is founded on the obedience of faith, and
that God cannot be truly worshipped, except when he himself teaches his
people, and prescribes to them what is necessary to be done. Hence when
the will of God is revealed to us, we then can truly worship him. When
the word is again taken away, there will indeed be some form of divine
worship; but there will be no genuine religion, such as is pleasing to
God. And hence we also learn, that there is no other way of raising up
the Church of God than by the light of the word, in which God himself,
by his own voice, points out the way of salvation. Until then the truth
shines, men cannot be united together, so as to form a true Church.

<span id="iv.4.iii-p7"></span>Since it is so, it follows, that where the
truth is either corrupted or despised, there is no religion, at least
such as is approved by God. Men may indeed boast of the name with their
lips: but there is no true religion before God, except it be formed
according to the rule of his word. It hence also follows, that there is
no Church, except it be obedient to the word of God, and be guided by
it: for the prophet defines here what true religion is, and also how God
collects a Church for himself. *He will* then *teach us of his ways* And
a third particular may be added, — that God is robbed of his right and
of his honor, when mortals assume to themselves the authority to teach;
for it is to God alone that this office of teaching his people can
strictly be ascribed. (*proprie tribuitur.*) There were then priests and
prophets, yet Micah here brings them down to their proper state, and
shows that the right and the office of teaching would be in the power of
the only true God. We hence see that God claims this office for himself,
that we may not be tossed to and fro, and led astray by various
teachers, but continue in simple obedience to his word, so that he alone
may be the Supreme. In short, God is not the God and Head of the Church,
except he be the chief and the only Teacher.

<span id="iv.4.iii-p8"></span>Wheat he now says, “He will teach us of
his ways,” ought to be thus understood. He will teach us what his ways
are; as though the Prophet had said, that the perfect wisdom of men is
to understand what pleases God, and what is his will: for there is
nothing farther to be learnt.

<span id="iv.4.iii-p9"></span>It follows, *And we will walk in his
paths*. By this clause we are reminded, that the truth of God is not, as
they say, speculative, but full of energizing power. God then not only
speaks to the end that every one may acknowledge that to be true which
proceeds from him, but at the same time he demands obedience. Hence we
shall then only be the disciples of God, when we walk in his ways: for
if we only nod with our ears, as asses are wont to do, and assent to
what God says with our mouth and lips, it is extremely vain and absurd.
It is therefore then only that men really profit under the teaching of
God, when they form their life according to his doctrine, and be
prepared with their feet to walk, and to follow whithersoever be may
call them. *We will* then *walk in his paths*

<span id="iv.4.iii-p10"></span>Micah had hitherto related only what the
faithful would do; he now himself confirms the same truth, *For from
Zion shall go forth a law,*  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120)
*and the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.* Here is a reason given why
many nations would come to the temple of the Lord; and that is, because
a doctrine would be then promulgated, which had been before heard only
in one place. We indeed know that the Jews came to the temple, not only
to worship, but also to be instructed in the Law of God. The Law then
had at that time, as it were, its habitation in Zion: there was the
sanctuary of celestial wisdom. But what does our Prophet say? A law
shall go forth from Zion, that is, it shall be proclaimed far and wide:
the Lord will show, not only in one corner, what true religion is, and
how he seeks to be worshipped, but he will send forth his voice to the
extreme limits of the earth. *A law* then *shall go forth from Zion,*
according to what is said in <span id="iv.4.iii-p12.7"></span>[Ps
110](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#000)<span id="iv.4.iii-p12.7"></span>,

<span id="iv.4.iii-p13"></span>‘the scepter of thy power the Lord will
send forth from Zion.’

<span id="iv.4.iii-p14"></span>In that passage the doctrine of Christ is
metaphorically called a scepter, or is compared to a royal scepter; for
Christ does not otherwise rule among us, than by the doctrine of his
Gospel: and there David declares, that this scepter would be sent far
abroad by God the Father, that Christ might have under his rule all
those nations which had been previously aliens. Such is the meaning in
this place, *A law from Zion shall go forth* Then it follows, *The word
of Jehovah from Jerusalem* This is a repetition of the same sentiment,
which is often the case. Then by <span id="iv.4.iii-p14.1"></span>תורה,
*ture*, the Prophet means no other thing than doctrine: but, by another
term, he confirms the same thing, that is that God would be heard not
only at Jerusalem and in Judea, but that he would make his word to be
proclaimed everywhere. It now follows —

<span id="iv.4.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.iv-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003)<span id="iv.4.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iv-p2"></span>**3.** And he shall judge among many
people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their
swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruninghooks: nation shall
not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any
more.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Et judicabit inter populos multos,
et arguet (vel, corripiet) gentes robustos usque in longinquum, et
concident gladios suos in vomeres, et lanceas suas in falces: non
tollent gens contra gentem gladium, et non assuescent ultra praelio.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.4.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet here describes the fruit of
Divine truth, — that God would restore all nations to such gentleness,
that they would study to cultivate fraternal peace among themselves, and
that all would consult the good of others, having laid aside every
desire for doing harm. As then he has lately showed, that the Church of
God could not be otherwise formed than by the Word, and that the
legitimate worship of God cannot be set up and continued, except where
God is honored with the obedience of faith; so now he shows that Divine
truth produces this effect, — that they, who before lived in enmity
towards one another and burned with the lust of doing harm, being full
of cruelty and avarice, will now, having their disposition changed,
devote themselves wholly to acts of kindness. But, before the Prophet
comes to this subject, he says, —

<span id="iv.4.iv-p7"></span>*He will judge*  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) *among many people, and will reprove
strong nations.* The word judge, in Hebrew, means the same as to rule or
govern. It is certain that God is spoken of here: it is then the same as
though the Prophet had said that though the nations had not hitherto
obeyed God, they would now own him as king and submit to his government.
God has indeed ever governed the world by his hidden providence, as he
does still govern it: for how much soever the devil and the ungodly may
rage; nay, how ever much they may boil with unbridled fury, there is no
doubt but that God restrains and checks their madness by his hidden
bridle. But the Scripture speaks of God’s kingdom in two respects. God
does indeed govern the devil and all the wicked, but not by his word,
nor by the sanctifying power of his Spirit: it is so done, that they
obey God, not willingly, but against their will. The peculiar government
of God is that of his Church only, where, by his word and Spirit, He
bends the hearts of men to obedience, so that they follow him
voluntarily and willingly, being taught inwardly and outwardly, —
inwardly by the influence of the Spirit, — outwardly by the preaching of
the word. Hence it is said in <span id="iv.4.iv-p9.2"></span>[Psalm
110](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#000)<span id="iv.4.iv-p9.2"></span>,
‘Thy willing people shall then assemble.’ This is the government that is
here described by the Prophet; God then *shall judge;* not as he judges
the world, but he will, in a peculiar manner, make them obedient to
himself so that they will look for nothing else than to be wholly
devoted to him.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p10"></span>But as men must first be subdued before
they render to God such obedience, the Prophet expressly adds, *And he
will reprove (corripiet)* or convince *(arguet) many people*. And this
sentence ought to be carefully noticed; for we hence learn, that such is
our innate pride, that not one of us can become a fit disciple to God,
except we be by force subdued. Truth then would of itself freeze amidst
such corruption as we have, except the Lord proved us guilty, except he
prepared us beforehand, as it were, by violent measures. We now then
perceive the design of the Prophet in connecting reproof with the
government of God: for the verb <span id="iv.4.iv-p10.1"></span>יכח,
*ikech,* signifies sometimes to expostulate, to convince, and sometimes
to correct or reprove.  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) In
short, the wickedness and perversity of our flesh are here implied; for
even the best of us would never offer themselves to God, without being
first subdued, and that by God’s powerful correction. This, then, is the
beginning of the kingdom of Christ.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p12"></span>But when he says, that *strong nations*
would be reproved, he hereby eulogizes and sets forth the character of
the kingdom of which he speaks: and we hence learn the power of truth, —
that strong men, when thus reproved, shall offer themselves, without any
resistance, to be ruled by God. Correction is indeed necessary, but God
employs no external force, nor any armed power, when he makes the Church
subject to himself: and yet he collects strong nations. Hence then is
seen the power of truth: for where there is strength, there is
confidence and arrogance, and also rebellious opposition. Since then the
Lord, without any other helps, thus corrects the perverseness of men, we
hence see with what inconceivable power God works, when he gathers his
own Church. It is to be added, that there is not the least doubt, but
that this is to be applied to the person of Christ. Micah speaks of God,
without mentioning Christ by name; for he was not yet manifested in the
flesh: but we know that in his person has this been fulfilled, — that
God has governed the universe, and subjected to himself the people of
the whole world. We hence conclude that Christ is true God; for he is
not only a minister to the Father, as Moses, or any one of the Prophets;
but he is the supreme King of his Church.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p13"></span>Before I proceed to notice the fruit, the
expression, <span id="iv.4.iv-p13.1"></span>רחוק עד, *od rechuk,* “afar
off” must be observed. It may intimate a length of time as well as
distance of place. Jonathan applies it to a long continuance of time, —
that God would convince men to the end of the world. But the Prophet, I
doubt not, intended to include the most distant countries; as though he
had said, that God would not be the king of one people only, or of Judea
alone, but that his kingdom would be propagated to the extremities of
the earth. *He will* then *convince* people *afar off*

<span id="iv.4.iv-p14"></span>He afterward adds, with respect to the
fruit, *They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears
into pruninghooks* I have already briefly explained the meaning of the
Prophet: he in fact shows that when the nations should be taught by the
word of God, there would be such a change, that every one would study to
do good, and to perform the duties of love towards his neighbors. But by
speaking of swords and spears he briefly intimates, what men, until they
are made gentle by the word of the Lord, are ever intent on iniquitous
tyranny and oppression; nor can it be otherwise, while every one follows
his own nature; for there are none who are not wedded to their own
advantages, and the cupidity of men is insatiable. As then all are thus
intent on gain, while every one is blinded by self-love, what but
cruelty must ever break forth from this wicked principle? Hence then it
is, that men cannot cultivate peace with one another; for every one
seeks to be the first, and draws every thing to himself; no one will
willingly give way: then dissensions arise, and from dissensions,
fightings. This is what the Prophet intimates. And then he adds, that
the fruit of the doctrine of Christ would however be such, that men, who
were before like cruel wild beasts, would become gentle and meek.
*Forge* then *shall they their swords into plowshares, and their spears
into pruninghooks.*

<span id="iv.4.iv-p15"></span>*Raise,* he says, *shall not a nation a
sword against a nation, and accustom themselves they shall no more to
war* He explains here more fully what I have before said, — that the
Gospel of Christ would be to the nations, as it were, a standard of
peace: as when a banner is raised up, soldiers engage in battle, and
their fury is kindled; so Micah ascribes a directly opposite office to
the Gospel of Christ, — that it will restore those to the cultivation of
peace and concord, who before were given to acts of hostility. For when
he says, ‘Raise a sword shall not a nation against nation,’ he
intimates, as I have already stated, that wherever Christ does not
reign, men are wolves to men, for every one is disposed to devour all
others. Hence as men are naturally impelled by so blind an impulse, the
Prophet declares, that this madness cannot be corrected, that men will
not cease from wars, that they will not abstain from hostilities, until
Christ becomes their teacher: for by the word <span
id="iv.4.iv-p15.1"></span>למד, *lamed,* he implies, that it is a
practice which ever prevails among mankind, that they contend with one
another, that they are ever prepared to do injuries and wrongs, except
when they put off their natural disposition. But gentleness, whence does
it proceed? Even from the teaching of the Gospel.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p16"></span>This passage ought to be remembered; for
we here learn, that there is not growing among us the real fruit of the
Gospel, unless we exercise mutual love and benevolence, and exert
ourselves in doing good. Though the Gospel is at this day purely
preached among us, when yet we consider how little progress we make in
brotherly love, we ought justly to be ashamed of our indolence. God
proclaims daily that he is reconciled to us in his Son; Christ
testifies, that he is our peace with God, that he renders him propitious
to us, for this end, that we may live as brethren together. We indeed
wish to be deemed the children of God, and we wish to enjoy the
reconciliation obtained for us by the blood of Christ; but in the
meantime we tear one another, we sharpen our teeth, our dispositions are
cruel. If then we desire really to prove ourselves to be the disciples
of Christ, we must attend to this part of divine truth, each of us must
strive to do good to his neighbors. But this cannot be done without
being opposed by our flesh; for we have a strong propensity to
self-love, and are inclined to seek too much our own advantages. We must
therefore put off these inordinate and sinful affections, that brotherly
kindness may succeed in their place.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p17"></span>We are also reminded that it is not enough
for any one to refrain from doing harm, unless he be also occupied in
doing good to his brethren. The Prophet might indeed have said only They
shall break their swords and their spears; so that they shall hereafter
abstain from doing any hurt to others: this only is not what he says;
but, “They shall forge,” or beat,” their swords into plowshares, and
their spears into pruning hooks;” that is, when they shall abstain from
all injuries they will seek to exercise themselves in the duties of
love, consistently with what Paul says, when he exhorts those who had
stolen to steal no more, but to work with their own hands, that they
might relieve others (<span id="iv.4.iv-p17.1"></span>[Eph
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028)<span id="iv.4.iv-p17.1"></span>.)
Except then we endeavor to relieve the necessities of our brethren, and
to offer them assistance, there will not be in us but one part of true
conversion, as the case is with many, who are not indeed inhuman, who
commit no plunder, who give no occasion for complaint, but they live to
themselves, and enjoy unprofitable leisure. This indolence the Prophet
here indirectly condemns, when he speaks of the plowshares and the
pruning hooks.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p18"></span>Again, a question may be here asked, — Was
this fulfilled at the coming of Christ? It seems that the Prophet does
not describe here the state of the Church for a time, but shows what
would be the kingdom of Christ to the end. But we see, that when the
Gospel was at first preached, the whole world boiled with wars more than
ever; and now, though the Gospel in many parts is clearly preached, yet
discords and contentions do not cease; we also see that rapacity,
ambition, and insatiable avarice, greatly prevail; and hence arise
contentions and bloody wars. And at the same time it would have been
inconsistent in the Prophet to have thus spoken of the kingdom of
Christ, had not God really designed to perform what is here predicted.
My answer to this is, — that as the kingdom of Christ was only begun in
the world, when God commanded the Gospel to be everywhere proclaimed,
and as at this day its course is not as yet completed; so that which the
Prophet says here has not hitherto taken place; but inasmuch as the
number of the faithful is small, and the greater part despise and reject
the Gospel, so it happens, that plunders and hostilities continue in the
world. How so? Because the Prophet speaks here only of the disciples of
Christ. He shows the fruit of his doctrine, that wherever it strikes a
living root, it brings forth fruit: but the doctrine of the Gospel
strikes roots hardly in one out of a hundred.  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) The measure also of its progress must
be taken to the account; for so far as any one embraces the doctrine of
the Gospel, so far he becomes gentle and seeks to do good to his
neighbors. But as we as yet carry about us the relics of sin in our
flesh, and as our knowledge of the Gospel is not yet perfect, it is no
wonder, that not one of us has hitherto wholly laid aside the depraved
and sinful affections of his flesh.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p20"></span>It is also easy hence to see, how foolish
is the conceit of those, who seek to take away the use of the sword, on
account of the Gospel. The Anabaptists, we know, have been turbulent, as
though all civil order were inconsistent with the kingdom of Christ, as
though the kingdom of Christ was made up of doctrine only, and that
doctrine without any influence. We might indeed do without the sword,
were we angels in this world; but the number of the godly, as I have
already said, is small; it is therefore necessary that the rest of the
people should be restrained by a strong bridle; for the children of God
are found mixed together, either with cruel monsters or with wolves and
rapacious men. Some are indeed openly rebellious, others are hypocrites.
The use of the sword will therefore continue to the end of the world.

<span id="iv.4.iv-p21"></span>We must now understand that at the time
our Prophet delivered this discourse, Isaiah had used the very same
words, (<span id="iv.4.iv-p21.1"></span>[Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)<span id="iv.4.iv-p21.1"></span>:)
and it is probable that Micah was a disciple of Isaiah. They, however,
exercised at the same time the Prophetic office, though Isaiah was the
oldest. But Micah was not ashamed to follow Isaiah and to borrow his
words; for he was not given to self ostentation, as though he would not
adduce any thing but what was his own; but he designedly adopted the
expressions of Isaiah, and related verbally what he had said, to show
that there was a perfect agreement between him and that illustrious
minister of God, that his doctrine might obtain more credit. We hence
see how great was the simplicity of our Prophet, and that he did not
regard what malevolent and perverse men might say: “What! he only
repeats the words of another.” Such a calumny he wholly disregarded; and
he thought it enough to show that he faithfully declared what God had
commanded. Though we have not the <span id="iv.4.iv-p21.2"></span>עד
רחיק, *od rechuk,* in Isaiah, yet the meaning is the same: in all other
things they agree. It now follows—

<span id="iv.4.v"></span>

<span id="iv.4.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.v-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004)<span id="iv.4.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.v-p2"></span>**4.** But they shall sit every man under
his vine and under his fig tree; and none shall make *them* afraid: for
the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken *it*

<span id="iv.4.v-p3"></span>**4.** Et sedebunt (hoc est, quiescent, vel,
quieti habitabunt) quisque sub vite sua et sub ficn sua; et nemo erit
qui exterreat; quia os Jehovae exercituum loquutum est.

<span id="iv.4.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.v-p5"></span><span id="iv.4.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.v-p6"></span>Micah goes on here with the same subject, —
that when the minds of men shall be disposed to acts of kindness, every
one shall enjoy God’s blessing without being disturbed. There seems
indeed to be two things here included, — that acts of hostility shall
cease, — and that real happiness cannot exist among men, except Christ
rules among them by the doctrine of his Gospel. And the same thing the
prophets teach elsewhere, that is, that every one shall live without
fear; and this they do, in order to show that men ever live in a
miserable dread, except when they are safe under the protection of God.
It is the same thing as though the Prophet had said, that the life of
men is most miserable, where the doctrine of the Gospel is not had,
inasmuch as when they are disturbed by continual disquietude, every one
fears for himself, every one suffers constant terrors. There is nothing
more miserable than such a state of things, for peace is the chief good.

<span id="iv.4.v-p7"></span>We now then understand the meaning of the
Prophet to be, — that under the reign of Christ the faithful shall enjoy
true and full happiness, as they shall be exempt from trembling and
fear; hence he names the vine and the fig-tree. He might have said,
“Every one shall live securely at home;” but he says, *Every one shall
rest under his own fig-tree and under his own vine;* that is, though
exposed to thieves, he shall yet fear no violence, no injury; for those
who were thieves shall observe what is just and right; those who were
bloody shall study to do good. Hence when no one closes the door of his
house, yea, when he goes out into the fields and sleeps in the open air;
he will still be safe and secure. We now then see why the Prophet
mentions here the fig-tree and the vine, rather than the dwelling-house.

<span id="iv.4.v-p8"></span>*And there will be no one to terrify them.*
What the Prophet designed to express is here more clearly specified, —
that there would be no danger, and that there would therefore be no need
of hiding-places or of any defenses. Why? Because the very fields, he
says, will be free from every thing that may hurt, as there will be none
to cause fear. And the Prophet seems to allude to the blessing promised
in the Law, for Moses used nearly the very same words: and the Prophets,
we know, drew many things from the Law; for their design was to retain
the people in its doctrine, and to render it as familiar as possible to
them. As then Moses promised, among other things, this security,

<span id="iv.4.v-p9"></span>‘Ye shall sleep, and none shall terrify
you,’ (<span id="iv.4.v-p9.1"></span>[Le
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006)<span id="iv.4.v-p9.1"></span>;)

<span id="iv.4.v-p10"></span>so the Prophet also, in speaking here of
the kingdom of Christ, shows that this blessing would be then fully
accomplished.

<span id="iv.4.v-p11"></span>He now at last subjoins, *The mouth of
Jehovah hath* thus *spoken,* that he might confirm what seemed
incredible: for, as I have already said, since he had shortly before
predicted the devastation of mount Zion and the ruin of the temple, it
seemed very improbable that the nations would come there to worship God.
But he declares that the mouth of God had thus spoken, that the faithful
might overcome all obstacles and struggle against despair; though they
saw the temple destroyed, the mount Zion desolated, though they saw a
horrible waste and wild beasts occupying the place of men; they were yet
to continue to entertain firm hope. — How so? Because Jehovah has made a
promise and he will fulfill it: for when mention is made of God’s mouth,
his omnipotence is to be understood by which will be executed whatever
he has promised.

<span id="iv.4.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.4.vi-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.4.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since, at the
coming of Christ thy Son, thou didst really perform what thy servants,
the Prophets, had previously so much foretold, and since thou daily
invites us to the unity of faith, that with united efforts we may truly
serve thee, — O grant, that we may not continue torn asunder, every one
pursuing his own perverse inclinations, at a time when Christ is
gathering us to thee; nor let us only profess with the mouth and in
words, that we are under thy government, but prove that we thus feel in
real sincerity and may we then add to the true and lawful worship of thy
name brotherly love towards one another, that with united efforts we may
promote each other’s good, and that our adoption may thus be proved and
be more and more confirmed, that we may ever be able with full
confidence to call on thee as our Father through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.4.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.4.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Eighty-ninth

<span id="iv.4.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.4.viii-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.viii-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005)<span id="iv.4.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.viii-p2"></span>**5.** For all people will walk every one
in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the LORD our God
for ever and ever.

<span id="iv.4.viii-p3"></span>**5.** Quia omnes populi ambulabunt,
quisque in nomine dei sui; nos autem ambulabimus in nomine Jehovae Dei
nostri in seculum et usque.

<span id="iv.4.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.4.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.viii-p6"></span>Micah, after having spoken of the
restoration of the Church, now confirms the same truth, and shows that
the faithful would have reason enough to cleave constantly to their God,
and to despise all the superstitions of the world, and that though they
may be tossed here and there by contrary opinions, they will yet
continue in true religion. This verse then is connected with the kingdom
of Christ; for until we are gathered, and Christ shines among us and
rules us by his word, there can be in us no constancy, no firmness. But
when under the auspices of Christ, we join together in one body the
Church, such then becomes the constancy of our faith, that nothing can
turn us from the right course, though new storms were at any time to
arise, by which the whole world might be shaken, and though it were to
happen that the universe should be agitated or pass away. We now
understand what the Prophet means.

<span id="iv.4.viii-p7"></span>He therefore says, *All nations shall
walk every one in the name of his god.* This sentence must be thus
explained, — “Though nations be divided into various sects, and each be
addicted to their own superstitions, yet we shall continue firm in the
pure worship of God and in unity of faith.” But this question occurs,
how could the Prophet say that there would be such discords in the
world, when he had shortly before spoken of the Church being gathered
and united together? for he had said, Come shall all nations, and each
will say, Come, let us ascend into the mount of Jehovah. There seems to
be here some sort of inconsistency, — that all nations would come to
mount Zion, and yet that every people would have their own gods. But the
solution is not difficult: the Prophet in this verse strengthens the
faithful, until Christ should be revealed to the world: nor is there any
doubt but the Prophet intended to sustain the confidence of the godly,
who might have otherwise been overwhelmed a hundred times with despair.
When the children of Israel were driven into exile, when their
inheritance was taken away from them, when the temple had been
demolished, when, in a word, no visible religion existed, they might, as
I have said, have desponded, had not this promise come to their minds, —
that God would restore mount Zion, and gather a Church from the whole
world. But there was also need of some confirmation, and this is what
the Prophet now subjoins. Hence he says, “Since the Lord gives you hope
of so glorious a restoration, you ought to feel confidence. and, in
reliance on his promise, to continue in his true worship, how much
soever the Gentiles may serve their own idols, and boast that they have
the true God. However, then, every one of the nations may take pride in
their superstitions, you ought not to fluctuate, nor turn here and
there, like reeds, which are tossed to and fro, as the wind changes; but
ye shall continue firm and steady in your course; for ye know that God
is true, who has once for all adopted you, and has promised that your
salvation will be the object of his care, even when the world shall
think you to be ruined and lost.”

<span id="iv.4.viii-p8"></span>We hence see that what the Prophet had in
view was to raise up into confidence the minds of the godly in the midst
not only of troubles, but of utter confusion. *All nations* then *shall
walk,* that is, when the temple and the city shall be demolished, and
the people be led into distant exile, the ungodly will, at the same
time, triumph, every one will extol his own gods: though our God should
not then appear, there will yet be no reason why we should be
discouraged; but we ought to recomb on his word. *We shall then walk in
the name of our God, and that for ever and ever;* that is, though it
should happen that the world should a hundred times be turned and turned
over again, there shall yet be no change in our minds: for as the truth
of God is eternal, so also our faith ought to be constant and never to
vary. Now the difficulty is removed, and we see how these two things
agree, — that all nations shall come and with one consent worship God,
and yet that to each of them there would be their own gods: for the
diversity of time must be here regarded, when all nations would walk
every one in the name of his god.  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124)

<span id="iv.4.viii-p14"></span>By saying, <span
id="iv.4.viii-p14.1"></span>איש בשם אלהיו, *aish beshem Aleiu,* he
touches, in an indirect way, on that variety which exists among men.
Though all of them pertinaciously follow and defend their own
superstitions yet each one fabricates a goal for himself. Thus it
happens, that nothing is certain, for they follow only their own
inventions. But this the Prophet meant only to touch by the way. His
main object was that which I have stated, — that though the Church of
God would be small, and should find a great multitude opposed to it, it
ought not yet to succumb. We know how violent a thing is public consent;
for when the majority conspire together, the small number, who entertain
a different opinion, are, as it were instantly swallowed up. It is not
then without reason that the Prophet exhorts the faithful here to an
invincible firmness of mind, that they might triumph over all the
nations. However small, then, might be the faithful in number, the
Prophet wished them to look down, as it were from a higher place, not
only on a large multitudes but on all mankind. Though then *all nations
walk, etc.*: nor is the word <span id="iv.4.viii-p14.2"></span>כל,
*cal*, all, superfluous, — though *all nations shall walk,* *etc.* There
was then but one nation, the offspring of Abraham, among whom true
religion existed; and it was a dreadful devastation, when God suffered
the royal city and the temple to be pulled down, and the whole body of
the people to be torn asunder, to be driven away here and there, so that
no kingdom and no kind of civil community remained. Hence the Prophet
intimates here, that though the faithful should find that in number and
dignity they were far surpassed by their enemies, they yet should not
despair. “Though then all the nations walked, every one in the name of
their god, — though every people set up their superstitions against you,
and all conspired against you together, yet stand ye firm and proceed in
your course, and this not for a short time, but for ever and ever.”
 <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) Now this passage shows that
faith depends not on the suffrages of men, and that we ought not to
regard what any one may think, or what may be the consent of all; for
the truth of God alone ought to be deemed sufficient by us. How much
soever, then, the whole world may oppose God, our faith ought not to be
changeable, but remain firm on this strong foundation, — that God, who
cannot deceive, has spoken. This is one thing. Then, in the second
place, it must be added, that this firmness ought to be perpetual.
Though then Satan may excite against us new troubles, since we have
hitherto stood firm as to our faith in God’s word, let us proceed in the
same course to the end. And the Prophet designedly added this verse;
because he saw that the people would be subject to various and
long-continued temptations. It was a long captivity: hence languor might
have, as it were, wasted away all the confidence which the people then
had. And further, after they returned from exile, we know how often and
how grievously their faith was tried, when all their neighbors
inimically assailed them, and when they were afterwards oppressed by
cruel tyranny. This was the reason why the Prophet said that the
children of God are to *walk perpetually and to the end in his name*

<span id="iv.4.viii-p16"></span>Though he gives the name of gods to the
idols of the nations he yet shows that there is a great and striking
difference; for the nations worship their own gods, which they had
invented: or how did they derive their majesty and their power, except
from the false imagination of men? But the Prophet says, *We will walk
in the name of Jehovah our God.* He hence shows that the power and
authority of God is not founded on any vain device of men, for he of
himself exists, and will exist, though he were denied by the whole
world. And this also confirms what I have already stated, — that the
faithful ought thus to embrace the word of God, as they know that they
have not to do with men, the credit of whom is doubtful and inconstant,
but with him who is the true God, who cannot lie, and whose truth is
immutable. Let us proceed —

<span id="iv.4.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.4.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.ix-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006)<span id="iv.4.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.ix-p2"></span>**6.** In that day, saith the Lord, will I
assemble her that halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and
her that I have afflicted;

<span id="iv.4.ix-p3"></span>**6.** In die illa, inquit Jehova, colligam
claudam, et ejectam congregabo, et quam malis afflixi;

<span id="iv.4.ix-p4"></span>**7.** And I will make her that halted a
remnant, and her that was cast far off a strong nation: and the Lord
shall reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth, even for ever.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p5"></span>**7.** Et ponam claudam in reliquias, et
ultra ejectam in gentem robustam; regnabit Jehova super eos in monte
Sion ex nunc usque in seculum.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.ix-p7"></span><span id="iv.4.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.ix-p8"></span>The Prophet pursues the same subject. But
we must ever remember what I have previously reminded you of, — that the
trials would be so grievous and violent that there would be need of
strong and uncommon remedies; for the faithful might have been a hundred
times sunk, as it were, in the deepest gulfs, except they had been
supported by various means. This then is the reason why the Prophet
confirms so fully the truth which we have noticed respecting the
restoration of the Church.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p9"></span>*In that day,* he says, *I will gather the
halting* This metaphor is not only found here; for David sage that his
own affliction was like that of halting. The word <span
id="iv.4.ix-p9.1"></span>צלעה, *tsaloe,* means the side: hence they
metaphorically call those halters who walk only on one side: it is the
same as though he had said, that they were maimed or weak.  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) He then adds, *I will assemble the
ejected, whom I have afflicted.* In the next verse he repeats the same,
I will make the halting, he says, a remnant; that is, I will make her
who is now halting to remain alive, and her who is cast afar off, *a
strong nation*. Some explain <span id="iv.4.ix-p10.1"></span>אנאלאה,
 <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) *enelae,* in a more refined
manner, and say that it means, She who is gone before; as though the
Prophet said, God will sustain the halting, and to those who are lively
he will add strength. But this exposition is too strained. We see that
the context will not admit it; for the Prophet brings forward the Church
here as afflicted by the hand of God, and nigh utter ruin: and then, on
the other hand, he intimates, that it was to be restored by God’s power,
and that it would thereby gather new strength, and flourish as before:
he therefore calls the Church as one cast far away, as in the previous
verse; and the other verse clearly shows, that the Prophet’s design was
no other but to point out the twofold state of the Church.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p12"></span>Now, in the first place, we must observe,
that the Prophet meets the trial then present, which must have otherwise
depressed the hearts of the godly. He saw that they were in a manner
broken down; and then their dispersion was as it were a symbol of final
ruin. If then the faithful had their minds continually fixed on that
spectacle, they might have a hundred times despaired. The Prophet
therefore comes here seasonably to their help, and reminds them, that
though they were now halting, there was yet in God new vigor; that
though they were scattered, it was yet in God’s power to gather those
who had been driven afar off. The meaning briefly is, that though the
Church differed nothing for a time from a dead man, or at least from one
that is maimed, no despair ought to be entertained; for the Lord
sometimes raises up his people, as though he raised the dead from the
grave: and this fact ought to be carefully noticed, for as soon as the
Church of God does not shine forth, we think that it is wholly extinct
and destroyed. But the Church is so preserved in the world, that it
sometimes rises again from death: in short, the preservation of the
Church, almost every day, is accompanied with many miracles.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p13"></span>But we ought to bear in mind, that the
life of the Church is not without a resurrection, nay, it is not without
many resurrections, if the expression be allowed. This we learn from the
words of the Prophet, when he says, ‘I will then gather the halting, and
assemble the driven away;’ and then he adds, ‘and her whom I have with
evils afflicted.’ And this has been expressly said, that the faithful
may know, that God can bring out of the grave those whom he has
delivered to death. For if the Jews had been destroyed at the pleasure
of their enemies, they could not have hoped for so certain a remedy from
God: but when they acknowledged that nothing happened to them except
through the just judgment of God, they could entertain hope of
restoration. How so? Because it is what is peculiar to God to bring
forth the dead, as I have already said, from the grave; as it is also
his work to kill. We then see that what the Prophet promised, respecting
the restoration of the Church, is confirmed by this verse: I am he, says
God, who has afflicted; cannot I again restore you to life? For as your
death is in my hand, so also is your salvation. If the Assyrians or the
Chaldeans had gained the victory over you against my will, there would
be some difficulty in my purpose of gathering you; but as nothing has
happened but by my command, and as I have proved that your salvation and
your destruction is in my power, there is no reason for you to think
that it is difficult for me to gather you, who have through my judgment
been dispersed.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p14"></span><span id="iv.4.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.ix-p15"></span>He then adds, *I will make the halting a
remnant* By remnant he understands the surviving Church. Hence the
metaphor, halting, is extended even to destruction; as though he said,
“Though the Jews for a time may differ nothing from dead men, I will yet
cause them to rise again, that they may become again a new people.” It
was difficult to believe this at the time of exile: no wonder, then,
that the Prophet here promises that a posterity would be born from a
people that were dead. For though Babylon was to them like the grave,
yet God was able to do such a thing as to bring them forth as new men,
as it really happened.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p16"></span>He afterwards subjoins *And the driven
afar off, a strong nation* When the Jews were scattered here and there,
how was it possible that God should from this miserable devastation form
for himself a new people, and also a strong people? But the Prophet has
put the contrary clauses in opposition to one another, that the Jews,
amazed at their own evils, and astonished, might not cast away every
consolation. As then he had dispersed them, he would again gather them,
and would not only do this, but also make them a strong nation.

<span id="iv.4.ix-p17"></span>He then adds, *Reign shall Jehovah over
them on mount Zion, henceforth and for ever* The Prophet no doubt
promises here the new restoration of that kingdom which God himself had
erected; for the salvation of the people was grounded on this — that the
posterity of David should reign, as we shall hereafter see. And it is a
common and usual thing with the prophets to set forth the kingdom of
David, whenever they speak of the salvation of the Church. It was
necessary then that the kingdom of David should be again established, in
order that the Church might flourish and be secure. But Micah does not
here name the posterity of David, but mentions Jehovah himself, not to
exclude the kingdom of David, but to show that God would become openly
the founder of that kingdom, yea, that he himself possessed the whole
power. For though God governed the ancient people by the hand of David,
by the hand of Josiah and of Hezekiah, there was yet, as it were, a
shade intervening, so that God reigned not then visibly. The Prophet
then mentions here some difference between that shadowy kingdom and the
latter new kingdom, which, at the coming of the Messiah, God would
openly set up. *Jehovah himself shall then reign over them;* as though
he said, “Hitherto indeed, when the posterity of David held the
government, as God himself created both David and his sons, and as they
were anointed by his authority and command, it could not have been
thought but that the kingdom was his, though he governed his people by
the ministry and agency of men: but now God himself will ascend the
throne in a conspicuous manner, so that no one may doubt but that he is
the king of his people.” And this was really and actually fulfilled in
the person of Christ. Though Christ was indeed the true seed of David,
he was yet at the same time Jehovah, even God manifested in the flesh.
We hence see, that the Prophet here in lofty terms extols the glory of
Christ’s kingdom; as though he had said that it would not be a shadowy
kingdom as it was under the Law. *Jehovah then shall reign over you.*

<span id="iv.4.ix-p18"></span>He then subjoins, *on mount Zion*. We know
that the seat of the kingdom of Christ has not been continued on mount
Zion; but this verse must be connected with the beginning of this
chapter. The Prophet has previously said, From Zion shall go forth a
law, and the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem. If then the interpretation
of this place be asked, that is, how Jehovah showed himself the king of
his people, and erected his throne on mount Zion, the answer is, that
from thence the law went forth from that place, as from a fountain
flowed the doctrine of salvation, to replenish the whole world. As then
the Gospel, which God caused to be promulgated through the whole world,
had its beginning on mount Zion, so the Prophet says that God would
reign there. But we must at the same time observe, that through the
defection and perfidy of the people it has happened that mount Zion is
now only an insignificant corner of the earth, and not the most eminent
in the world, as also the city Jerusalem, according to the prediction of
Zechariah. Mount Zion then is now different from what it was formerly;
for wherever the doctrine of the Gospel is preached, there is God really
worshipped, there sacrifices are offered; in a word, there the spiritual
temple exists. But yet the commencement of the Gospel must be taken to
the account, if we would understand the real meaning of the Prophet,
that is, that Christ, or God in the person of Christ, began to reign on
mount Zion, when the doctrine of the Gospel from thence went forth to
the extremities of the world. It now follows —

<span id="iv.4.x"></span>

<span id="iv.4.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.x-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008)<span id="iv.4.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.x-p2"></span>**8.** And thou, O tower of the flock, the
strong hold of the daughter of Zion, unto thee shall it come, even the
first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.4.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et tu turris gregis, arx filiae Sion,
ad te veniet; perveniet principatus primus, regnum filiae Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.4.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.x-p5"></span><span id="iv.4.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.x-p6"></span>Micah still continues the same subject, —
that the miserable calamities of the people, or even their ruin, will
not prevent God to restore again his Church. *Thou tower of the flock,*
he says, *the fortress of the daughter of Zion,* doubt not but that God
will again restore to thee thy ancient kingdom and dignity from which
thou seemest now to have entirely fallen. But interpreters take the
tower of the flock in various senses. Some think that the devastation of
the city Jerusalem is pointed out, because it became like a cottage, as
it is said in Isaiah; and <span id="iv.4.x-p6.1"></span>עפל, *ophil,*
they render “obscure,” for its root is to cover. But another explanation
is simpler, — that the holy city is called the tower of the flock,
because God had chosen it for himself, to gather his people thence; for
we know that they had there their holy assemblies. *Thou,* then, *the
tower of the flock,* and then, *the fortress of the daughter of Zion, to
thee shall come the former kingdom*  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) If, however, the former sense be more
approved, I will not contend; that is, that Jerusalem is here called the
tower of the flock on account of its devastation, as it was reduced as
it were into a cottage. As to the main import of the passage, there is
no ambiguity; for the Prophet here strengthens the minds of the godly:
they were not to regard the length of time, nor to allow their thoughts,
to be occupied with their present calamity, but to feel assured, that
what God had promised was in his power, that he could, as it were, raise
the dead, and thus restore the kingdom of David, which had been
destroyed.

<span id="iv.4.x-p8"></span>Do then, he says, firmly hope. — Why?
because *come to thee, come to thee shall the former kingdom*  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) Here the breaking off of the sentence
is to be noticed, when the Prophet speaks of the ancient kingdom and
dignity. It is not indeed to be doubted, but that the people of God had
become objects of mockery, and that hypocrites and heathens thought that
what David had testified respecting the perpetuity of his kingdom was a
mere delusion.

<span id="iv.4.x-p12"></span>‘Behold thy kingdom,’ he said, ‘shall
continue as long as the sun and the moon,’  
(<span id="iv.4.x-p12.2"></span>[Psalm
72](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#000)<span id="iv.4.x-p12.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.4.x-p13"></span>but soon after the death of Solomon, a
small portion only was reserved for his posterity, and at length the
kingdom itself and its dignity disappeared. This is the reason that the
Prophet now says, that the former kingdom would come. *Come,* he says,
*to thee, daughter of Zion, come shall the former kingdom* There is
indeed no doubt, but that by the former kingdom he understands its most
flourishing condition, recorded in Scripture, under David and Solomon.

<span id="iv.4.x-p14"></span>*The kingdom,* he says, *to the daughter of
Jerusalem shall come* He expressly mentions the daughter of Jerusalem,
because the kingdom of Israel had obscured the glory of the true
kingdom. Hence the Prophet testifies here that God was not unmindful of
his promise, and that he would restore to Jerusalem the dignity which it
had lost, and unite the whole people into one body, that they might be
no more divided, but that one king would rule over the whole race of
Abraham. But this was not fulfilled, we are certain, at the coming of
Christ, in a manner visible to men: we must therefore bear in mind what
Micah has previously taught, — that this kingdom is spiritual; for he
did not ascribe to Christ a golden scepter, but a doctrine, “Come, and
let us ascend unto the mount of Jehovah, and he will teach us of his
ways; and then he added,” From Zion shall go forth a law, and the word
of Jehovah from Jerusalem. This, then, ought ever to be remembered, —
that God has not rendered Jerusalem glorious in the sight of men, as it
was formerly, nor has he enriched it with influence and wealth and
earthly power; but he has yet restored the sovereign authority; for he
has not only subjected to himself the ten tribes which had formerly
revolted, but also the whole world. Let us go on —

<span id="iv.4.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xi-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.xi-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009)<span id="iv.4.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Now why dost thou cry out aloud? *is
there* no king in thee? is thy counsellor perished? for pangs have taken
thee as a woman in travail.

<span id="iv.4.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Nunc quare vociferaris
vociferatione? Rex nullus in te? Au conciliarius tuus periit? Quia te
occupavit dolor quasi parturientem.

<span id="iv.4.xi-p4"></span>**10.** Be in pain, and labour to bring
forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail: for now shalt thou
go forth out of the city, and thou shalt dwell in the field, and thou
shalt go *even* to Babylon; there shalt thou be delivered; there the
Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.

<span id="iv.4.xi-p5"></span>**10.** Dole et ignemisce, filia Sion,
quasi parturiens; quia  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) exibis e
civitate, et habitabis in ergo; et venies Babylonem usque; illic
liberaberis, illic dedimet te Jehova e manu hostium tuorum.

<span id="iv.4.xi-p7"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.xi-p8"></span><span id="iv.4.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xi-p9"></span>The Prophet blends here things in their
nature wholly contrary, — that the Jews were for a time to be cut off, —
and that afterwards they were to recover their former state. Why, he
says, *dost thou cry out with crying?* We must notice the Prophet’s
design. He did not intend to overturn what he had before stated; but as
the minds of the godly might have fainted amidst so many changes, the
Prophet here gives them support, that they might continue firm in their
faith; and hence he says, *Why dost thou cry aloud with loud crying?*
That is, “I see that grievous troubles will arise capable of shaking
even the stoutest hearts: time will be changeable; it will often be,
that the faithful will be disturbed and degraded; but though various
tumults may arise, and tempests throw all things into confusion, yet God
will redeem his people.” We now then see what the Prophet means by
saying, Why dost thou now cry? Why dost thou make an uproar? for the
verb here properly means, not only to cry out, but also to sound the
trumpet; as though he said, Why do the Jews so much torment themselves?
There is he says, no doubt, a good reason.

<span id="iv.4.xi-p10"></span>And he adds, *Is there no king among
thee?* This was doubtless the reason why the Jews so much harassed
themselves; it was, because God had deprived them of their kingdom and
of counsel: and we know what Jeremiah has said, ‘Christ,’ that is, the
anointed of the Lord, ‘by whose life we breathe, is slain,’ (<span
id="iv.4.xi-p10.1"></span>[La
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020)<span id="iv.4.xi-p10.1"></span>.)
Since, then, the whole Church derived as it were its life from the
safety of its king, the faithful could not be otherwise than filled with
amazement when the kingdom was upset and abolished; for the hope of
salvation was taken away *Is there,* then, *not a king among thee? and
have thy counselors perished?* Some think that the unfaithfulness of the
people is here indirectly reproved, because they thought themselves to
be destitute of the help of God and of his Christ, as though he said, —
“Have ye forgotten what God has promised to you, that he would be your
king for ever, and would send the Messiah to rule over you? nay, has he
not promised that the kingdom of David would be perpetual? Whence then,
is this fear and trembling, as though God no longer reigned in the midst
of you, and the throne of David were hopelessly overturned?” These
interpreters, in confirmation of this opinion, say, that Christ is here
distinguished by the same title as in <span
id="iv.4.xi-p10.2"></span>[Isa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007)<span id="iv.4.xi-p10.2"></span>;
where he is called <span id="iv.4.xi-p10.3"></span>יועף, *ivots*, a
counselor. But as in this verse, it is the Prophet’s design to terrify,
and to reprove rather than to alleviate the grievousness of evils by
consolation; it is more probable, that their own destitution is set
before the people; as though Micah said, “What cause have you for
trembling? Is it because your king and all his counselors have been
taken away?” But what immediately follows proves that this sorrow arose
from a just cause; it was because they were stripped of all those things
which had been till that time the evidences of God’s favor.

<span id="iv.4.xi-p11"></span><span id="iv.4.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xi-p12"></span>Why then *has pain laid hold on thee as on
one in travail? Be in pain,* he says, *and groan;*  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) that is, I will not prevent thee to
grieve and to mourn; as though he said, “Certainly even the strongest
cannot look on calamities so dreadful, without suffering the heaviest
sorrow; but though God may for a time subject his children to the
greatest tortures, and expose them to the most grievous evils, he will
yet restore them at length from their exile.” *Thou shalt depart*, he
says, *from the city, and dwell in the field: thou shalt come even to
Babylon; but there thou shalt be delivered; there shall Jehovah redeem
thee from the hand of thy enemies* The import of the whole is, that
though God would have a care for his people, as he had promised, there
was yet no cause for the faithful to flatter themselves, as though they
were to be exempt from troubles; but the Prophet, on the contrary,
exhorts them to prepare themselves to undergo calamities, as they were
not only to be ejected from their country, and to wander in strange
lands like vagrants, but were to be led away into Babylon as to their
grave.

<span id="iv.4.xi-p14"></span>But to strengthen the minds of the
faithful to bear the cross, he gives them a hope of deliverance, and
says, that God would *there deliver* them, and *there redeem* them from
the hand of their enemies. He repeats the adverb, <span
id="iv.4.xi-p14.1"></span>שם, *shem*, there, twice, and not without
cause: for the faithful might have excluded every hope of deliverance,
as though the gate of God’s power had been closed. And this is the
reason why the Prophet repeats twice*, there, there;* even from the
grave he will deliver and redeem thee: “Extend then your hope, not only
to a small measure of favor, as though God could deliver you only from a
state of some small danger, but even to death itself. Though then ye
lay, as it were, in your graves, yet doubt not but that God will stretch
forth his hand to you, for he will be your deliverer. God then in whose
power is victory, can overcome many and innumerable deaths.”

<span id="iv.4.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xii-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="iv.4.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since under the
guidance of thy Son we have been united together in the body of thy
Church, which has been so often scattered and torn asunder, — O grant,
that we may continue in the unity of faith, and perseveringly fight
against all the temptations of this world, and never deviate from the
right course, whatever new troubles may daily arise: and though we are
exposed to many deaths, let us not yet be seized with fear, such as may
extinguish in our hearts every hope; but may we, on the contrary, learn
to raise up our eyes and minds, and all our thoughts, to thy great
power, by which thou quickenest the dead, and raises from nothing things
which are not, so that though we may be daily exposed to ruin, our souls
may ever aspire to eternal salvation, until thou at length really
slowest thyself to be the fountain of life, when we shall enjoy that
endless felicity, which has beon obtained for us by the blood of thy
only-begotten Son our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.4.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Ninetieth

<span id="iv.4.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p1"></span><span id="iv.4.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Micah
4:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p2"></span>**11.** Now also many nations are gathered
against thee, that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon
Zion.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** Et nunc congregatae sunt contra se
gentes multae (vel, robustae,) dicentes Damnata erit; et aspiciet in
Sion oculus noster.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p4"></span>**12.** But they know not the thoughts of
the Lord, neither understand they his counsel: for he shall gather them
as the sheaves into the floor.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p5"></span>**12.** Ipsi vero non noverunt
cognitationes Jehovae, et non intellexerunt consilium ejus; quia
congregabis eos quasi manipulum in aeream.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p6"></span>**13.** Arise and thresh, O daughter of
Zion: for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass:
and thou shalt beat in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their
gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the whole
earth.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p7"></span>**13.** Surge, et tritura filia Sion; quia
cornu tuum ponam ferrum, et ungulas tuas ponam chalybem; et conteres
populos robustos; et dicabis Jehovae opes ipsorum, et substantiam eorum
Dominatori universae terrae.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p9"></span><span id="iv.4.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p10"></span>The Prophet’s object here is to give some
alleviation to the faithful lest they should succumb under their
calamities; for, as we have stated, there were most grievous evils
approaching, sufficient to overwhelm the minds of the godly. The Prophet
then raises up here, with the moat suitable comfort, those who would
have otherwise fainted under their calamities; and the sum of the whole
is this, — that the faithful were not to be confounded on finding the
ungodly proudly triumphing, as they are wont to do, when they seem to
have gained their wishes. Since, then, the wicked show a petulant spirit
beyond all bounds, the Prophet exhorts the faithful to sustain
themselves by God’s promises, and not to care for such insolence. He
then subjoins a promise, — that God would assemble all the forces of
their enemies, as when one gathers many ears of corn into a bundle, that
he may thrash them on the floor. I will come now to the words of the
Prophet.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p11"></span>*Assemble,* he says, *against thee do
nations,* or strong nations: for, by saying, <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p11.1"></span>גוים רבים, *guim rebim*, he intimates one of
two things, either that they were strong, or that they were large in
number: as to the subject there is no great difference. The Prophet had
this in view, — that though the Church of God may be pressed by a great
multitude of enemies, it yet ought not to be broken down in mind: for
the ungodly, while they cruelly domineer, do not understand the design
of God. *Assemble,* then, *against thee do many nations* He sets the
thing before them, to heal them of terror: for when we are beyond the
reach of harm, we, for the most part, too heedlessly despise all
dangers; and then, when we come to a real struggle, we tremble, or even
fall and become wholly weak. This is the reason why the Prophet sets
before the Jews their prospects, and shows that the time was near when
they were to endure a siege, as enemies would, on all sides, surround
them. Assemble then do nations, and strong or many nations: he shows
here that the Jews had no reason to despond, though their enemies would
far exceed them in number, and in forces, and in courage, for it was
enough for them to be under the protection of God.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p12"></span>*Who say, condemned now shall be Zion*
 <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) The verb <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p17.1"></span>חנף, *chenaph,* means to act wickedly and
perversely. It may then be literally rendered, ‘profane (scelerata)
shall be Zion; and on it shall our eye look:’ but this word is often
taken metaphorically for condemnation. The meaning then is, ‘Zion is now
condemned:’ and the Prophet, no doubt, intended to intimate here, that
the enemies would so triumph, as though Zion were not under the
guardianship of God; as when any one, who has rendered himself hateful
by his vices, is left and forsaken by his patrons. So, then, the Prophet
here arms the faithful against the arrogance of their enemies, that they
might not despair, when they found that they were condemned by the
consent of all men, and that this was the opinion of all, — that they
were forsaken by God.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p18"></span><span id="iv.4.xiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p19"></span>Consolation follows, *But they know not
the thoughts of Jehovah, nor understand his counsel*: for verbs in the
past tense have the meaning of the present. Here the Prophet recalls the
attention of the godly to a subject the most suitable to them: for when
the wicked rise up so cruelly against us, we are apt to think that all
things are allowed to them, and then their reproaches and slanders
immediately take possession of our minds and thoughts, so that we in a
manner measure God’s judgment by their words. Hence when the ungodly
deride our faith, and boast that we are forsaken by God, we succumb,
being as it were filled with amazement: and nothing is easier than to
shake off from us faith and the memory of God’s promises, whenever the
ungodly are thus insolent. The Prophet then does not without cause apply
a remedy which ought to be carefully observed by us. *Who say, condemned
is Zion;* but they are like the blind when judging of colors, *for they
understand not the counsel of Jehovah and his thoughts they know not.*
We now then see what the Prophet had in view, which was to show, — that
the faithful would be unwise and foolish, if they formed an opinion of
God’s judgment according to the boasting of the ungodly: for Satan
carries them away in a furious manner; and when the Lord gives them
liberty to do evil, they think that they shall be conquerors to the end.
As then the ungodly are thus inebriated with foolish confidence, and
despise not only men, but God himself, the Prophet here holds up and
supports the minds of the godly that they might ascend higher, and thus
understand that the design of God was not the same as what the wicked
thought, who neither belonged to nor approached God.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133)

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p23"></span>It is especially needful to know this
truth. Some at the first sight may think it frigid, “O! than, what does
the Prophet mean? he says that what these declare is not the design of
Jehovah; and this we know.” But were all to examine the subject, they
would then confess with one mouth, that nothing could have been more
seasonable than this consolation. Now we are wounded by reproaches, and
this very often happens to ingenuous men; and then, while the ungodly
vomit forth their slanders, we think that God rests indifferently in
heaven; and one of their words, like a cloud, obscures the judgment of
God. As soon as any one of the wicked derides us, and laughs at our
simplicity, threatens ferociously, and spreads forth his terrors, his
words, as I have said, are like a cloud intervening between us and God.
This is the reason why the Prophet says here, that the thoughts of
Jehovah are different, and that his counsel is different: in short, the
Prophet’s object is to show, that whenever the ungodly thus proudly
despise us, and also reproachfully threaten and terrify us, we ought to
raise our thoughts to heaven. — Why so? Because the design of God is
another. Their boastings then will vanish, for they arise from nothing,
and they shall come to nothing, but the purpose of God shall stand.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p24"></span>But let us now see why the Prophet spoke
here of the design and thoughts of God: for if only these two words are
brought before us, there is certainly but little solid comfort, and
nothing that has much force or power. There is then another principle to
be understood, — that the thoughts of God are known to us, who are
taught in his school. The counsel of God then is not hidden, for it is
revealed to us in his Word. Consolation therefore depends on a higher
and a more recondite doctrine; that is, that the faithful, in their
miseries, ought to contemplate the counsel of God as in a mirror. And
what is this? that when he afflicts us, he holds a remedy in his hand,
and that when he throws us into the grave, he can restore us to life and
safety. When, therefore, we understand this design of God, — that he
chastens his Church with temporal evils, and that the issue will ever be
most salutary, — when this is known by us, there is then no reason why
the slanders of the ungodly should deject our minds; and when they vomit
forth all their reproaches, we ought to adhere firmly to this counsel of
God. But that the ungodly are thus proud is no matter of wonder; for if
they raise their horns against God, why should they not despise us also,
who are so few in number, and of hardly any influence, at least not
equal to what they possess? The Church is indeed contemptible in the
eyes of the world; and it is no wonder if our enemies thus deride us,
and load us with ridicule and contempt, when they dare to act so
frowardly towards God. But it is enough for us to know, that they do not
understand the counsel of God. We now then see the Prophet’s meaning,
and an explanation follows, —

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p25"></span>*For thou shalt assemble them,* he says,
*as a sheaf*  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) *to the floor* The
Prophet adds this clause as an explanation, that we may know what the
counsel of God is, which he has mentioned, and that is, that God will
collect the enemies as a sheaf. What is a sheaf? It is a small quantity
of corn, it may be three hundred or a thousand ears of corn: they are
ears of corn, and carried in a man’s hand. And then, what is to be done
with the sheaf? It is to be thrashed on the floor. It was indeed
difficult to believe, that enemies, when thus collected together on
every side, would be like a sheaf. If an army assembled against us, not
only ten or twenty thousand, but a much larger number, who would think,
according to the judgment of the flesh, that they would be like a sheaf?
They shall be as so many deaths and graves: even the thought of God
ought to be to us of more account than the formidable power of men.
Whenever, therefore, our enemies exceed us in strength and number, let
us learn to arise to that secret counsel of God, of which our Prophet
now speaks; and then it will be easy for us to regard a vast multitude
to be no more than a handful. And he says, that our enemies are to be
gathered to a floor, that they may be thrashed there. They assemble
themselves for another purpose; for they think that we shall be
presently in their power, that they may swallow us up; but when they
thus collect themselves and their forces, the Lord will frustrate their
purpose and cause them to be thrashed by us. It follows, —

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p27"></span><span id="iv.4.xiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p28"></span>*Arise and thresh, daughter of Zion; for
I have made thy horn*  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) *iron,
and thy hoofs brass.* The Prophet here confirms what he had previously
said: and he exhorts the daughter of Zion to arise; for it was necessary
for her to have been cast down, so as to lie prostrate on the ground.
God did not indeed restore at once his Church, but afflicted her for a
time, so that she differed nothing from a dead man. As then a dead body
lies on the ground without any feeling, so also did the Church of God
lie prostrate. This is the reason why the Prophet now says, *Arise,
daughter of Zion;* as though God, by his voice, roused the dead. We
hence see, that the word <span id="iv.4.xiv-p29.2"></span>קומי, *kumi,*
is emphatical; for the Prophet reminds us, that there is no reason for
the faithful wholly to despair, when they find themselves thus cast
down, for their restoration is in the hand and power of God, as it is
the peculiar office of God to raise the dead. And this same truth ought
to be applied for our us, whenever we are so cast down, that no
strength, no vigor, remains in us. How then can we rise again? By the
power of God, who by his voice alone can restore us to life, which
seemed to be wholly extinct.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p30"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *Thresh, for I
have made thy horn iron, and thy hoofs brass.* A mode of thrashing, we
know, was in use among the Jews the same with that in Italy and at this
day in French Provence. We here thrash the corn with flails; but there
by treading. The Prophet speaks here of this custom, and compares the
Church of God to oxen; as though he said “The Jews shall be like oxen
with iron horns and brazen hoofs that they may lay prostrate under them
the whole strength of the nations. However much then the nations may now
excel, I will subject them under the feet of my people, as if sheaves
were thrashed by them.”

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p31"></span>He then adds,  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) *And thou shalt separate or consecrate
their wealth to Jehovah, and their substance*  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) *to the Lord of the whole earth* Here
the Prophet specifies the end for which God had purposed to subject the
heathen nations to his chosen people, — that he might be glorified. This
is the meaning. But they have refined too much in allegories, who have
thought that this prophecy ought to be confined to the time of Christ:
for the Prophet no doubt meant to extend consolation to the whole
kingdom of Christ, from the beginning to the end. Others, not more
correctly, say, that this is to be referred to the Babylonian captivity
because then Daniel and some others thrashed the people, when heathen
kings were induced through their teaching to restore the temple, and
also to offer some worship to the God of Israel. But on this point they
are both mistaken, because they take the word thrashing in a different
sense from the Prophet; for it commonly means that heathen nations are
to be subjected to the Church of God: and this takes place, whenever God
stretches forth his hand to the faithful, and suffers not the ungodly to
exercise their cruelty as they wish; yea, when he makes them humbly to
supplicate the faithful. This often happens in the world, as it is
written of Christ, ‘thy enemies shall lick the earth,’ (<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p34.1"></span>[Ps
72:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009)<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p34.1"></span>.) But this prophecy shall not be fulfilled
until the last coming of Christ. We indeed begin to tread on our enemies
whenever God by his power destroys them, or at least causes them to
tremble and to be cast down, as we find that they dread whenever any
change takes place; and then they blandly profess that they desire to
serve God. So at this day it has happened both in France and in Italy.
How many hypocrites, for the sake of an earthly advantage, have
submitted themselves to God? and how many such England produced when the
Gospel flourished there? All the courtiers, and others who were
unwilling to incur the displeasure of the king, professed themselves to
be the very best lovers of religion. (*optimos pietatis cultores,* — the
best observers of piety) But yet this is ever the case,

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p35"></span>‘Aliens have been false to thee,’ (<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p35.1"></span>[Ps
18:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044)<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p35.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p36"></span>We hence see what the prophet means when
he speaks of thrashing: he intimates, that the Lord would often cause
that the enemies of the Church should be bruised, though no one crushed
them: but, as I have said, we must look forward to the last day, if we
wish to see the complete fulfillment of this prophecy.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p37"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thou shalt
consecrate their wealth to Jehovah, and their substance to the Lord of
the whole earth* The Prophet shows here, that the dominion is not to be
hoped for by the children of God, that they may abound in worldly
pleasures, and appropriate every thing to themselves and also abuse
their power, as ungodly men are wont to do; but that all is to be
applied to the worship and the glory of God. For what purpose, then does
God design his Church to become eminent? That he himself may alone shine
forth, and that the faithful may rightly enjoy their honor, and not
become thereby proud. There is, therefore nothing more alien to the
power of the Church than pride, or cruelty, or avarice. This, then that
is said ought to be carefully observed, *their wealth thou shalt
consecrate to Jehovah* He had spoken before of power, “Thou shalt bind
strong people, thou shalt thrash them, and thou shalt tread them under
thy feet;” but lest the faithful should turn all this to a purpose the
Lord had not designed, a most suitable correction is immediately added,
and that is, that this power shall not be exercised according to the
will of men, but according to the will of God: Thou shalt then
consecrate, etc.; and he uses the word <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p37.1"></span>חרם, *cherem*, which means to make a thing an
anathema or an offering;  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) as
though he said “God will raise his Church that it may rule over its
enemies; but let the faithful at the same time take heed, that they rule
not tyrannically; for God designs ever to reign alone: therefore the
whole excellency, the whole dignity, the whole power of the Church ought
to be applied for this end, — that all things may become subject to God,
and every thing among the nations may be altogether sacred to him so
that the worship of God may flourish among the conquerors, as well as
among the conquered.” We now perceive the Prophet’s object in speaking
of consecrating the wealth of the nations. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc28013.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iv.4.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p11"></span> *In extremitate dierum,* <span
id="iv.4.i-p11.1"></span>באחרית הימים, in the posteriority or postremity
of the days; <span id="iv.4.i-p11.2"></span>επ εσχατων των ημερων, in
the last days.—*Sept.* “In the latter days,” or, “in the end of
days.”—*Newcome.* “In the last of the days.”—*Henderson.* See <span
id="iv.4.i-p11.3"></span>[Jer. 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#020),
[Jer. 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024)<span
id="iv.4.i-p11.3"></span>; <span id="iv.4.i-p11.4"></span>[Eze
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#008)<span id="iv.4.i-p11.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.4.i-p11.5"></span>[Da
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)<span id="iv.4.i-p11.5"></span>;
<span id="iv.4.i-p11.6"></span>[Ho
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)<span id="iv.4.i-p11.6"></span>
*Kimchi,* as quoted by *Lowth,* says, “Whenever the latter days are
mentioned in Scripture, the days of the Messiah are always meant.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc28013.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iv.4.i-p11.7"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p12"></span> <span
id="iv.4.i-p12.1"></span>*Dispositus,* <span id="iv.4.i-p12.2"></span>
נכזן— <span id="iv.4.i-p12.3"></span>*constitus,* constituted — <span
id="iv.4.i-p12.4"></span>*praeparatus,* prepared— <span
id="iv.4.i-p12.5"></span>*firmatus,* made firm — are the words by which
the term is commonly expressed. It comes from <span
id="iv.4.i-p12.6"></span>כון, which *Leigh* justly says, means “aptly
and timely to frame, and likewise to make firm and sure;” and he adds,
“The word noteth *the ordering, perfecting,* and *fast establishing* of
anything.” How suitably then it is here used: it is a mountain (which
means evidently the Church) that is fitly framed, ordered, and firmly
established. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc28013.htm#fr_115) <span
id="iv.4.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p15"></span> *Marckius* adduces the opinions of the
ancients as to the signification of this “mount.” Some, such as
*Tertullian, Jerome,* and *Augustine,* interpret it of Christ; while
others, namely, *Origen,* the two *Cyrils,* and *Chrysostom,* regard it
as signifying the Church; and with the latter most modern commentators
agree. Here the consent of moderns exceeds that of the ancients; and it
is no doubt sounder and wiser. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc28013.htm#fr_116) <span
id="iv.4.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p17"></span> *Convenient,* <span
id="iv.4.i-p17.1"></span>ונהרו, literally, “and flow;” <span
id="iv.4.i-p17.2"></span>σπευσουσι — hasten, *Sept.* It is flowing like
that of a river, or of a strong current, and implies copiousness and
spontaneity. “There shall be,” says Henry, “a constant stream of
believers flowing in from all parts into the Church, as the people of
the Jews flowed into the temple, while it was standing, to worship
there.”

<span id="iv.4.i-p18"></span>*Kimchi* says, that this word means to “run
to what is pleasing or delightful,” —”<span
id="iv.4.i-p18.1"></span>*currere ad beneplacitum, hoc est, ad id quod
cupias* An old author, quoted by *Leigh,* says, that it implies
abundance and celerity — <span id="iv.4.i-p18.2"></span>*affluentiam cum
celeritate* It is rendered “flow together” in <span
id="iv.4.i-p18.3"></span>[Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044)<span id="iv.4.i-p18.3"></span>.

<span id="iv.4.i-p19"></span>Instead of “peoples,” <span
id="iv.4.i-p19.1"></span>עמים, Isaiah has <span
id="iv.4.i-p19.2"></span>כל חגוים, “all the nations.” One MS. Has the
same here, and three have <span id="iv.4.i-p19.3"></span>כל before <span
id="iv.4.i-p19.4"></span>עמים, and this seems to be the correct reading.
<span id="iv.4.i-p19.5"></span>עם, in the plural number, is synonymous
with <span id="iv.4.i-p19.6"></span>גוים, meaning nations. The rest of
this verse is exactly the same in the two Prophets, except that <span
id="iv.4.i-p19.7"></span>נכון, “prepared,” is differently placed, and
<span id="iv.4.i-p19.8"></span>הוא, “it,” is added by Micah after <span
id="iv.4.i-p19.9"></span>נשא, “exalted.”

<span id="iv.4.i-p20"></span>In the second verse, which is the third in
Isaiah, there is a complete verbal identity, except that <span
id="iv.4.i-p20.1"></span>גוים and <span id="iv.4.i-p20.2"></span>עמים
are reversed, and that <span id="iv.4.i-p20.3"></span>ו before <span
id="iv.4.i-p20.4"></span>אל is wanting in Isaiah; but it is supplied in
several MSS.

<span id="iv.4.i-p21"></span>In the third, the fourth in Isaiah, there
are verbal varieties in the two first lines, the four remaining are
exactly the same with the exception of a paragogic <span
id="iv.4.i-p21.1"></span>ן, *nun,* added to a verb by Micah, and the
verb <span id="iv.4.i-p21.2"></span>ישאו is singular in Isaiah. In the
two lines referred to, there is also an addition of <span
id="iv.4.i-p21.3"></span>עד רחוק, “afar of,” in Micah.

<span id="iv.4.i-p22"></span>**Isaiah**.  
<span id="iv.4.i-p22.2"></span>ושפט בין הגוים 4.  
<span id="iv.4.i-p22.4"></span> והוכיחלעמים רבים  
And he shall judge among the nation,  
And shall convince many peoples.

<span id="iv.4.i-p23"></span>**Micah.  
**<span id="iv.4.i-p23.2"></span>  
whwkyx lgwyM eumyM ed rxwq wspj byN emyM rbyM  
And he shall judge among many peoples,  
And shall convince strong nations afar off.

<span id="iv.4.i-p24"></span>With this verse the passage ends in Isaiah;
Micah adds another: and this, with the two other circumstances — that
the passage is fuller and more connected with the context here than in
Isaiah, may seem to favor the opinion that Isaiah, and not Micah, was
the copyist; but the words, with which the passage is introduced in
Isaiah, forbid such a supposition.

<span id="iv.4.i-p25"></span>“*Bishop Lowth*, on <span
id="iv.4.i-p25.1"></span>[Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span
id="iv.4.i-p25.1"></span>, thinks that Micah took this passage from
Isaiah. It is true that he has improved it after the manner of
imitators. Or, the Spirit may have inspired both with this prediction:
or both may have copied some common original, the words of a Prophet
well known at the time. — *Newcome.*

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc28013.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iv.4.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p29"></span> *Marckius* says, “<span
id="iv.4.i-p29.1"></span>*corde, ore, et opere* — with the heart, mouth,
and in deed.”

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc28013.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iv.4.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4.i-p30"></span> <span id="iv.4.i-p30.1"></span>כי, *ki,*
for, or because: what follows contains the reason for the preceding
promise. How could it be, that the mount of the house of Jehovah should
be firmly fixed on the top of mountains, etc.? The answer is here given,
“for go forth shall a law from Zion,” etc. And this was literally
fulfilled at the commencement of the Gospel; it was first preached at
Jerusalem: in consequence of this, the mount of Jehovah’s house, or the
Church, was formed; and what is here predicted was in part fulfilled,
and will no doubt be hereafter more completely fulfilled.

<span id="iv.4.i-p31"></span>It is said, “on top of the mountains,” not
of a mountain. The Church was not to be confined to one place, but was
to be preeminent throughout the earth. It was to be coextensive with the
word that was to go forth from Zion. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc28013.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iv.4.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iii-p6"></span> Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* render the
<span id="iv.4.iii-p6.1"></span>ו, *vau,* here, *that,* “that he may
teach us,” etc.: but it is better to retrain the most common meaning as
a simple copulative, as it is done in our version, and by *Calvin,* and
by *Lowth* in Isaiah. The passage thus runs better, and more
emphatically expresses the language of faith. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc28013.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iv.4.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iii-p11"></span> So *Newcome* renders it; *Lowth* and
*Henderson* read the same with our version, “the law.” The absence of
the definite article is certainly no objection, as it is but seldom used
in Hebrew. But “a law” is better except we render the copulative before
“word,” even; and then we shall destroy the distinct character of the
line. It appears that, according to the usual style of the Prophets,
what the first line states indefinitely, is in the second specified, as
being the “word of Jehovah.”

<span id="iv.4.iii-p12"></span>The word <span
id="iv.4.iii-p12.1"></span>תורה, law, in Hebrew, is more comprehensive
than the word law, in our language. It is derived from the Hiphil of
<span id="iv.4.iii-p12.2"></span>ירה, which means to direct, to appoint,
to instruct, to teach. Hence the noun, <span
id="iv.4.iii-p12.3"></span>תורה, may be rendered, directory,
institution, law, teaching, or doctrine. “It doth,” says *Leigh*, “not
only signify strictly what is to be done, but it denoteth largely any
heavenly doctrine, whether it be promise or precept.” It means often the
whole of God’s revealed word, as in <span id="iv.4.iii-p12.4"></span>[Ps
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="iv.4.iii-p12.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.4.iii-p12.5"></span>[Ps
119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174)<span
id="iv.4.iii-p12.5"></span>, etc. See <span
id="iv.4.iii-p12.6"></span>[Jos
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008)<span id="iv.4.iii-p12.6"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc28013.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iv.4.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iv-p8"></span> There is a difference of opinion as to the
nominative case to the verb “judge;” whether it be Jehovah in the
preceding line, or the word of Jehovah. The most natural construction is
the last supposition. *Jerome* and *Cyril,* as quoted by *Marckius,*
refer it to the word of Jehovah, taking the word for Christ: but this
cannot be admitted, as the law and the word seem to mean the same thing,
and must be considered as the word of the Gospel; and *Justin Martyr*
and *Irenaeus,* when referring to this passage regard it as such. And
this is the view which *Marckius* seems to prefer. The rendering then
would be, —

<span id="iv.4.iv-p9"></span>And it shall judge among many people,  
And convince strong nations afar off.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc28013.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iv.4.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iv-p11"></span> The two verbs here used are <span
id="iv.4.iv-p11.1"></span>שפט, to judge, and <span
id="iv.4.iv-p11.2"></span>הוכיח, in Hiphil, to reprove. The first is to
decide what is right and wrong, and also to defend the right and to
punish the wrong; hence it means to arbitrate, and also to vindicate as
well as to punish. The first sense is most suitable to this place. — The
other verb does not occur in Kal, but in Hiphil, it means to make
manifest, or show, by facts or by words, or by action; and hence it
signifies to demonstrate, to convince, to reprove, to chastise. The
Septuagint often renders it by <span id="iv.4.iv-p11.3"></span>ελεγχειν,
which, Parkhurst says, means, in its primary sense, to demonstrate by
convincing reasons or arguments. *Lowth’s* version in Isaiah is, “And
shall work conviction,” etc. *Newcome* renders it “convince.” The
rendering of *Henderson,* “give decision,” is not to be approved. See
<span id="iv.4.iv-p11.4"></span>[Joh
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)<span id="iv.4.iv-p11.4"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc28013.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iv.4.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.iv-p19"></span> “All these predictions must be confined
to the nations converted by the word of Jehovah, and brought into Zion,
that is, such as truly repent and believe, and must not be extended to
all nations indiscriminately, or to all who embrace the Christian name,
who are often as far as possible from the kingdom of Christ, inasmuch as
they neither learn nor follow his doctrine. — *Marckius.*

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc28013.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iv.4.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.viii-p9"></span> *Marckius* views this passage
differently. He considers that the converted Gentiles are meant here, —
that when turned from their idols and their superstitions, they shall
profess the true God, as revealed in the Gospel, and that each nation
will regard him as its own God: however various in outward
circumstances, they shall yet acknowledge the God revealed in his Word
as their own. This view most certainly harmonizes better with the
context than that of *Calvin,* which is commonly adopted. There is
another, which is the same nearly in meaning, but founded on a different
rendering of the words. The Jewish commentator *Abarbanel,* as quoted by
*Marckius,* gives this version: —

<span id="iv.4.viii-p10"></span>“<span id="iv.4.viii-p10.1"></span>Nam
omnes populi, qui ambulabant quisque in nomine dei sui, et now
ambulabimus in nomine Jehovae Dei nostri.”

<span id="iv.4.viii-p11"></span>The words will no doubt admit of this
construction; for it is often the case in Hebrew, that <span
id="iv.4.viii-p11.1"></span>אשר, who, is understood before a verb in the
future tense, especially when it has the meaning of the present, as
here, for the preceding “<span id="iv.4.viii-p11.2"></span>ambulabant,”
might be rendered “<span id="iv.4.viii-p11.3"></span>ambulant,” without
any inconstancy in the meaning. I would therefore render the verse thus,
—

<span id="iv.4.viii-p12"></span>*For all the nations,  
*Who *walk each in the name of its god,  
And we ourselves,  
Shall walk in the name of Jehovah our God,  
For ever and ever.*

<span id="iv.4.viii-p13"></span>The nations were then walking in the
name of their multiplied gods; but at the time alluded to, both Gentiles
and Jews would walk together in the name of Jehovah. There is thus an
entire correspondence between all the parts of this remarkable passage,
which extends from the first verse to the seventh inclusive; a part of
which, extending only to the end of the third verse, is to be found in
Isaiah. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc28013.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iv.4.viii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.4.viii-p15"></span> <span id="iv.4.viii-p15.1"></span>לעולם
ועד, “for ages and perpetually.” <span id="iv.4.viii-p15.2"></span>עולם
means most commonly an indefinite, rather than an infinite time. The
verb signifies to be hidden or concealed; and so the noun means an
undefined and unknown period. “For ages,” would perhaps be its best
version; whether these ages be limited or unlimited must depend on the
context. Here <span id="iv.4.viii-p15.3"></span>עד is added to show that
these ages would be endless, or to the end of time: for <span
id="iv.4.viii-p15.4"></span>עד is “still,” unceasing futurity, that
which is perpetual, still the same. The Levitical dispensation was <span
id="iv.4.viii-p15.5"></span>לעולם “for ages,” but the new state of
things promised here is to be, not only for ages, but also perpetually,
that is to the end of time, while the world lasts. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc28013.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iv.4.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4.ix-p10"></span> It means, doubtless, no more here; some
refer it to halting between two opinions, between idols and God: but
such an idea is foreign to the drift of this passage. It is the
depressed, weak, or afflicted and miserable state of the Church that is
here set forth. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc28013.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.4.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4.ix-p11"></span> It is a Niphal participle from <span
id="iv.4.ix-p11.1"></span>הלא, and corresponds in meaning with <span
id="iv.4.ix-p11.2"></span>הנדחה, “the ejected,” in the last verse; only
it is a stronger term, as it means one cast to a distance, while the
latter signifies one cast or driven away. The first, as rendered by
*Junius* and *Tremelius,* is <span id="iv.4.ix-p11.3"></span>*procul
disjecta,* and the other is <span id="iv.4.ix-p11.4"></span>*depulsa* —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc28013.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iv.4.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4.x-p7"></span> “I think the temple is meant, or Jerusalem;
the place where the *flock,* the whole *congregation* of the people
assembled to worship God. *Newcome* retains the Hebrew word <span
id="iv.4.x-p7.1"></span>עדר, *eder*, a tower in or near Bethlehem, <span
id="iv.4.x-p7.2"></span>[Ge 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#021)<span
id="iv.4.x-p7.2"></span>, or as some think, a tower near the sheep gate
in Jerusalem. I believe Jerusalem, or the temple, or both, are meant;
for these were considered the *stronghold of the daughter of Zion,* the
fortress of the Jewish people.”—*Adam Clarke.* What especially confirms
this view is, that the two clauses are in apposition, the latter is
explanatory of the former. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc28013.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iv.4.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.x-p9"></span> *Calvin* observes the order of the
original, which is not done in our version. The whole verse may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="iv.4.x-p10"></span>And thou tower of the flock,  
The fortress of the daughter of Zion!  
To thee it shall return;  
Yea, come shall the former dominion,  
The kingdom to the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="iv.4.x-p11"></span>The verb <span
id="iv.4.x-p11.1"></span>אתה, which I render “return,” means mostly, to
come, to come near, to approach, to happen. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc28013.htm#fr_130) <span
id="iv.4.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xi-p6"></span> *Tyne,* <span
id="iv.4.xi-p6.1"></span>עתה, is left out; nor is it restored in the
comment. It should be, “For now thou shalt go forth from the city.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc28013.htm#fr_131) <span
id="iv.4.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xi-p13"></span> <span
id="iv.4.xi-p13.1"></span>*Ingemisce,* groan, mourn, or sigh and sob.
<span id="iv.4.xi-p13.2"></span>גחי, burst forth, or break out; that is,
into tears or mourning. “Bring forth,” as it is rendered by *Newcome*
and *Henderson,* seems not to be the import of the word here. It may be
rendered, as *Parkhurst* proposes, “labor and bring forth.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc28013.htm#fr_132) <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p13"></span> <span id="iv.4.xiv-p13.1"></span>*Jam
damnata erit. Newcome* renders the distich thus, —

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p14"></span>*Who say, Let her be defiled,  
And let our eye see* its desire *on Zion.*

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p15"></span>Profaned, or defiled, it is no doubt the
meaning of the verb. But it is better to retain the future tense here,
though it may often, in the third person, be rendered as an imperative.
To look on, is a Hebrew idiom, and means often to triumph or exalt over
another, or to gain the upper hand. See <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p15.1"></span>[Ps
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p15.1"></span>; <span id="iv.4.xiv-p15.2"></span>[Ps
118:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007)<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p15.2"></span>. Several copies have the word for “eyes” in
the singular number, as the verb is so: but anomalies of this kind often
occur, as it is the case in Greek with respect to plural nouns in the
neuter gender, and in Welsh, and when the verb precedes its nominative,
almost in all instances. I offer the following version, —

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p16"></span>Who say, “Defiled shall she be,  
And look on Zion shall our eyes.”

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p17"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc28013.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p20"></span> The beginning of these two lines is very
emphatic: I would give this rendering, —

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p21"></span>*But they* — *they know not the purposes
of Jehovah,  
And they understand not his counsel.*

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p22"></span>It has been rendered, “But, as for them;”
but this is flat, and too prosaic. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc28013.htm#fr_134) <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p26"></span> <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p26.1"></span>*Manipulum,* a handful, a bundle of fruit;
<span id="iv.4.xiv-p26.2"></span>מיר, a sheaf,—a poetical singular for
the plural — sheaves. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc28013.htm#fr_135) <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p29"></span> *Horn,* in Scripture, means often
elevation, dignity, power, strength. It means evidently in the last
here. Zion was made strong to thrash the nations, and supplied with
strong hoofs to tread on them. The Paraphrase of Rabbi Jonathan is to
the purpose, <span id="iv.4.xiv-p29.1"></span>*Fortes sicut ferrum, et
robusti sicut aes* — “Strong as iron, and robust as brass.” And that
this is the meaning is proved by what follows, *Thou shalt beat in
pieces,* or beat small, or thrash out, *strong nations.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc28013.htm#fr_136) <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p32"></span> It is not often that Calvin passes over
a sentence without noticing it, but he does so here; and it is this,
*and thou shalt tear in pieces strong nations.* The verb is <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p32.1"></span>הדקות, thou shalt beat small, or thrash out;
see <span id="iv.4.xiv-p32.2"></span>[Isa
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#028)<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p32.2"></span>; perhaps the latter sense is most suitable
to the passage. The meaning is, that a complete subjugation will take
place. To thrash and to thrash out, is to conquer and to bring
thoroughly under subjection. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc28013.htm#fr_137) <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p33"></span> The Hebrew word for this is <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p33.1"></span>חיל, and for “wealth” <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p33.2"></span>בצע. The latter means gain, spoil, or what is
often unjustly got, or what is scraped together and constitutes the
wealth of the covetous; <span id="iv.4.xiv-p33.3"></span>חיל is properly
substance, including possessions of all kinds, land, cattle, etc. <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p33.4"></span>בצע serves to include money, silver and gold;
and <span id="iv.4.xiv-p33.5"></span>חיל, everything else which makes up
wealth.

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p34"></span>The verb, “consecrate,” is in Hebrew in
the first person, as it is in our version. There is no different
reading; but the Septuagint and the earlier versions put it in the
second person, to correspond with the previous verb, “Thou shalt beat in
pieces.” There will be no difference in the sense, if we render it
according to the Hiphil form, in which it is found, — “I will cause thee
to consecrate.” *Jerome, Theodoret, Marckius, Dathius, Newcome,* and
*Henderson,* adopt the second person. — This construction renders the
passage no doubt more uniform. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc28013.htm#fr_138) <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4.xiv-p38"></span> The word is very emphatic; it means to
devote a thing to a purpose forever, so as to be unchangeably settled.
<span id="iv.4.xiv-p38.1"></span>חרם, says *Parkhurst,* “is anything
*separated* absolutely from its common condition and *devoted* to
Jehovah, so as to be incapable of redemption. See <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p38.2"></span>[Lev.
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#021),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#029)<span id="iv.4.xiv-p38.2"></span>.
As a verb in Hiph. *To separate* or *devote* thus to Jehovah. <span
id="iv.4.xiv-p38.3"></span>[Lev.
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#029)<span id="iv.4.xiv-p38.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.4.xiv-p38.4"></span>[Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.4.xiv-p38.4"></span>.” It is therefore a sacrilege to take merely
to our own use what ought to be, or what we have, thus consecrated to
the Lord. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Micah](cc28014)
