[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc28004)  [Next](cc28006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 28: Jonah, Micah, Nahum*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.2"></span>

<span id="iii.2-p1"></span>Chapter 2.

<span id="iii.2.i"></span>

<span id="iii.2.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.2.i-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)<span id="iii.2.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his
God out of the fish’s belly,

<span id="iii.2.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et oravit Jonas ad Jehovam Deum suum
e ventre piscis;

<span id="iii.2.i-p4"></span>**2.** And said, I cried by reason of mine
affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell
cried I, *and* thou heardest my voice.

<span id="iii.2.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et dixit clamavi in angustia mea ad
Jehovam, et exaudit me (vel, respondit mihi;) e ventre sepulchri
vociferatus sum, audivisti vocem meam.  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="iii.2.i-p7"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.i-p8"></span><span id="iii.2.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.i-p9"></span>When Jonah says that he *prayed from the
bowels of the fish,* he shows first with what courage of mind he was
endued. He had then put on a new heart; for when he was at liberty he
thought that he could in a manner escape from God, he became a fugitive
from the Lord: but now while inclosed within narrow bounds, he begins to
pray, and of his own accord sets himself in God’s presence.

<span id="iii.2.i-p10"></span>This is a change worthy of being noticed:
and hence we may learn how much it profits us to be drawn back often as
it were by cords, or to be held tied up with fetters because when we are
free we go astray here and there beyond all limits. Jonah, when he was
at liberty, became, as we have seen, wanton; but now finding himself
restrained by the mighty hand of God, he receives a new mind, and prays
from the bowels of the fish  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) . But
how was it that he directed his petitions then to God, by whose hand he
saw that he was so heavily pressed? For God most rigidly handled him;
Jonah was in a manner doomed to eternal ruin; the bowels of the fish, as
we shall hereafter see, were indeed to him as it were hell or the grave.
But in this state of despair Jonah even gathered courage, and was able
to retake himself directly to God. It was a wonderful and almost
incredible example of faith. Let us then learn to weigh well what is
here said; for when the Lord heavily afflicts us, it is then a
legitimate and seasonable time for prayer. But we know that the greater
part despond, and do not usually offer their prayers freely to God,
except their minds be in a calm state; and yet God then especially
invites us to himself when we are reduced to extremities. Let this,
then, which Jonah declares of himself, come to our minds, — that he
cried to God from hell itself: and, at the same time, he assures us that
his prayer proceeded from true faith; for he does not simply say that he
prayed to *Jehovah,* but he adds that he was *his God*; and he speaks
with a serious and deeply-reflective mind. Though Jonah then was not
only like one dead, but also on the confines of perdition, he yet
believed that God would be merciful if he fled to him. We hence see that
Jonah prayed not at random, as hypocrites are wont to take God’s name in
their mouths when they are in distress, but he prayed in earnest; for he
was persuaded that God would be propitious to him.

<span id="iii.2.i-p12"></span>But we must remember that his prayer was
not composed in the words which are here related; but Jonah, while in
the bowels of the fish, dwelt on these thoughts in his mind. Hence he
relates in this song how he thought and felt; and we shall see that he
was then in a state of distraction, as our minds must necessarily be
tossed here and there by temptations. For the servants of God do not
gain the victory without great struggle. We must fight, and indeed
strenuously, that we may conquer. Jonah then in this song shows that he
was agitated with great trouble and hard contests: yet this conviction
was firmly fixed in his heart, — that God was to be sought, and would
not be sought in vain, as he is ever ready to bring help to his people
whenever they cry to him.

<span id="iii.2.i-p13"></span><span id="iii.2.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.i-p14"></span>Then he says, *I cried, when I had
trouble, to Jehovah, and he answered me.* Jonah no doubt relates now,
after having come forth from the bowels of the fish, what had happened
to him, and he gives thanks to the Lord.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) This verse then contains two parts, —
that Jonah in his trouble fled to God, — and the latter part contains
thanksgiving for having been miraculously delivered beyond what flesh
could have thought. *I cried,* he says, *in my distress, to Jehovah; I
cried out from the bowels of hell, thou hast heard my voice.* Jonah, as
we shall hereafter see, directed his prayers to God not without great
struggle; he contended with many difficulties; but however great the
impediments in his way, he still persevered and ceased not from praying.
He now tells us that he had not prayed in vain; and, that he might
amplify the grace of God, he says, *from the bowels of the grave* He
mentioned *distress* (*angustiam* — straitness) in the first clause; but
here he more clearly expresses how remarkable and extraordinary had been
the kindness of God, that he came forth safe from the bowels of the
fish, which were like the bowels of the grave. <span
id="iii.2.i-p24.3"></span>שאול, *shaul*, derived from corruption, is
called the grave by the Hebrews, and the Latin translator has almost
everywhere rendered it hell, (*infernum;*) and <span
id="iii.2.i-p24.4"></span>שאול, *shaul,* is also sometimes taken for
hell, that is, the state of the reprobate, because they know that they
are condemned by God: it is, however, taken more frequently for the
grave; and I am disposed to retain this sense, — that the fish was like
the grave. But he means that he was so shut up in the grave, that there
was no escape open to him.

<span id="iii.2.i-p25"></span>What are the bowels of the grave? Even the
inside or the recess of the grave itself. When Jonah was in this state,
he says, that he was heard by the Lord. It may be proper to repeat again
what I have already slightly touched, — that Jonah was not so oppressed,
though under the heaviest trial, but that his petitions came forth to
God. He prayed as it were from hell, and not simply prayed, for he, at
the same time, sets forth his vehemence and ardor by saying, that he
cried and cried aloud. Distress, no doubt, extorted from Jonah these
urgent entreaties. However this might have been, he did not howl, as the
unbelieving are wont to do, who feel their own evils and bitterly
complain; and yet they pour forth vain howlings. Jonah here shows
himself to be different from them by saying, that he cried and cried
aloud to God. It now follows —

<span id="iii.2.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.2.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.2.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003)<span id="iii.2.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For thou hadst cast me into the
deep, in the midst of the seas; and the floods compassed me about: all
thy billows and thy waves passed over me.

<span id="iii.2.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Atqui projeceras me in profundum,
in cor marium, et fluvius circumdedit me; omnes conflictus tui (sed hac
voce intelligit undas quae inter se confligunt; scimus enim esse varias
collisiones, ideo vertunt aliqui, contritiones tui, nam <span
id="iii.2.ii-p3.1"></span>שחר significat proprie confligere et frangere;
perinde est igitur ac si diceret, omnes fracturae tuae et collisiones
super me transierunt, et explicat quid velit, quum dicit) fluctus tui
super me transierunt.

<span id="iii.2.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.2.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.ii-p6"></span>In this verse are set forth his
difficulties: for Jonah, for the sake of amplifying, refers to his
condition. It was a great thing that he cried to God from the bowels of
the fish; but it was far more difficult for him to raise up his mind in
prayer, when he knew or thought God to be angry with him: for had he
been thrown into extreme evils, he might yet call upon God; but as it
came to his mind that all the evil he suffered was inflicted by God,
because he tried to shun his call, how was it possible for him to
penetrate into heaven when such an obstacle stood in his way? We hence
see the design of these words, *But thou hadst cast me into the gulf,
into the heart of the sea; the flood surrounded me, all thy billows and
waves passed over me.*

<span id="iii.2.ii-p7"></span>In short, Jonah shows here what dreadful
temptations presented themselves to him while he was endeavoring to
offer up prayers. It came first to his mind that God was his most
inveterate enemy. For Jonah did not then think of the sailors and the
rest who had cast him into the sea; but his mind was fixed on God: this
is the reason why he says, Thou, *Lord, hadst cast me into the deep,
into the heart of the sea;* and then, Thy *billows,* Thy *waves*  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) He does not here regard the nature of the
sea; but he bestows, as I have already said, all his thoughts on God,
and acknowledges that he had to do with him; as though he said, “Thou
Lord, in pursuing me, drivest me away; but to thee do I come: thou
showest by dreadful proofs that thou art offended with me, but yet I
seek thee; so far is it that these terrors drive me to a distance from
thee, that now, being subdued as it were by thy goads, I come willingly
to thee; for nowhere else is there for me any hope of deliverance.” We
now then see how much avails the contrast, when Jonah sets the terrible
punishment which he endured in opposition to his prayer. Let us now
proceed —

<span id="iii.2.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.2.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.2.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004)<span id="iii.2.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.iii-p2"></span>**4.** Then I said, I am cast out of thy
sight; yet I will look again toward thy holy temple.

<span id="iii.2.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Tunc ego dixi, (nam copula resolvi
debet in adverbium temporis,) Expulsus sum a conspectu oculorum tuorum;
verum adjiciam aspicere ad templum sanctitatis tuae.

<span id="iii.2.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.iii-p5"></span><span id="iii.2.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.iii-p6"></span>In the first clause of this verse Jonah
confirms again what I have said, — that when he sought to pray, not only
the door was closed against him, but there were mountains, as it were,
intervening, so that he could not breathe a prayer to God: for he did
not so much think of the state in which he was; nay, but he chiefly
considered his own case, how he had provoked the wrath of God. Hence he
says, *I have said, I am cast away from the sight of thine eyes*. Some
give this frigid exposition, that he had been only expelled from his own
country, that he might not behold the temple. But I have no doubt but
that Jonah tells us here that he suffered extreme agonies, as though
every hope of pardon had been cut off from him: “What! shall I yet hope
that God will be propitious? It is not to be hoped.” This then is the
casting away of which he speaks: for it is said that God casts us away,
when he allows us no access to him. Hence Jonah thought that he was
wholly alienated from God. Were any to object and say, that then his
faith must have been extinct; the obvious answer is, — that in the
struggle of faith there are internal conflicts; one thought is
suggested, and then another of an opposite character meets it; there
would indeed be no trial of our faith, except there were such internal
conflicts; for when, with appeased minds, we can feel assured that God
is propitious to us, what is the trial of faith? But when the flesh
tells us that God is opposed to us, and that there is no more hope of
pardon, faith at length sets up its shield, and repels this onset of
temptation, and entertains hope of pardon: whenever God for a time
appears implacable, then faith indeed is tried. Such then was the
condition of Jonah; for, according to the judgment of the flesh, he
thought that he was utterly cast away by God, so that he came to him in
vain. Jonah, then, having not yet put off flesh and blood, could not
immediately lay hold on the grace of God, but difficulties met him in
his course.

<span id="iii.2.iii-p7"></span>The latter clause is differently
explained by interpreters. Some take it negatively, “I shall no more
look towards the temple of thy holiness:” but the words admit not of
this explanation. <span id="iii.2.iii-p7.1"></span>אך, *ak,* means in
Hebrew, truly, nevertheless; and it means also, certainly; and sometimes
it is taken dubitatively, perhaps. The greater part of expounders render
the clause thus, “But I shall see the temple of thy holiness;” as though
Jonah here reproved his own distrust, which he had just expressed, as
the case is with the faithful, who immediately check themselves, when
they are tempted to entertain any doubt: “What! dost thou then cast away
hope, when yet God will be reconciled to thee if thou wilt come to him?”
Hence interpreters think that it is a sort of correction, as though
Jonah here changed his mind, and retracted what he had previously taken
up, as a false principle derived from the judgment of the flesh. He had
said then that he had been cast away from the presence of the Lord; but
now, according to these expositors, he repels that temptation, But I
shall see thy holy temple; though I seem now to be rejected by thee,
thou wilt at last receive me into favor. We may, however, explain this
clause, consistently with the former, in this way, At least, or, *but, I
would again see,* etc., as an expression of a wish. The future then may
be taken for the optative mood, as we know that the Hebrews are wont
thus to use the future tense, either when they pray or express a wish.
This meaning then best agrees with the passage, that Jonah as yet
doubtingly prays, At least, or, but, I would again, O Lord, see the
temple of thy holiness. But since the former explanation which I have
mentioned is probable, I do not contend for this. However this may be,
we find that Jonah did not wholly despair, though the judgment of the
flesh would drive him to despair; for he immediately turned his address
to God. For they who murmur against God, on the contrary, speak in the
third person, turning themselves, as it were, away from him: but Jonah
here sets God before his eyes, *I have been cast away,* he says*, from
the sight of thine eyes* He does not remonstrate here with God, but
shows that he was seeking God still, though he thought that he was cast
far away.

<span id="iii.2.iii-p8"></span>Then he adds, *I would at least see again
the temple of thy holiness*. And by speaking of the temple, he no doubt
set the temple before him as an encouragement to his faith. As then he
had been cast away, he gathers everything that might avail to raise up
and confirm his hope. He had indeed been circumcised, he had been a
worshipper of God from his childhood, he had been educated in the Law,
he had exercised himself in offering sacrifices: under the name of
temple he now includes briefly all these things. We hence see that he
thus encouraged himself to entertain good hope in his extreme necessity.
And this is a useful admonition; for when every access to God seems
closed up against us, nothing is more useful than to recall to mind,
that he has adopted us from our very infancy, that he has also testified
his favor by many tokens, especially that he has called us by his Gospel
into a fellowship with his only-begotten Son, who is life and salvation;
and then, that he has confirmed his favor both by Baptism and the
Supper. When, therefore, these things come to our minds, we may be able
by faith to break through all impediments. Let us go on —

<span id="iii.2.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.2.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.2.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
2:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005)<span id="iii.2.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.iv-p2"></span>**5.** The waters compassed me about,
*even* to the soul: the depth closed me round about, the weeds were
wrapped about my head.

<span id="iii.2.iv-p3"></span>**5.** Obsederunt me aquae usque ad
animam, abyssus undique circumdedit me, juncus alligatus fuit capite
meo:

<span id="iii.2.iv-p4"></span>**6.** I went down to the bottoms of the
mountains; the earth with her bars *was* about me for ever: yet hast
thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God.

<span id="iii.2.iv-p5"></span>**6.** Ad radices (proprie, excisuras; nam
<span id="iii.2.iv-p5.1"></span>קצב significat excidere; alii vertunt,
ad fines extremos; ad radices igitur) montium descendi; terra cum
vectibus suis circum me in seculum: et ascendere fecisti vitam meam e
sepulchro (est aliud nomen quam <span id="iii.2.iv-p5.2"></span>שאול,
nempe, <span id="iii.2.iv-p5.3"></span>שהת; alii vertunt, a corruptione,
vel, interitu,) Jehova, Deus mi.

<span id="iii.2.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.iv-p7"></span><span id="iii.2.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.iv-p8"></span>Here in many words Jonah relates how many
things had happened to him, which were calculated to overwhelm his mind
with terror and to drive him far from God, and to take away every desire
for prayer. But we must ever bear in mind what we have already stated, —
that he had to do with God: and this ought to be well considered by us.
The case was the same with David, when he says in <span
id="iii.2.iv-p8.1"></span>[Ps
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009)<span id="iii.2.iv-p8.1"></span>,
‘Thou hast yet done it;’ for, after having complained of his enemies, he
turned his mind to God: “What then do I? what do I gain by these
complaints? for men alone do not vex me; thou, God, he says, hast done
this.” So it was with Jonah; he ever set before him the wrath of God,
for he knew that such a calamity had not happened to him but on account
of his sins.

<span id="iii.2.iv-p9"></span>He therefore says that *he was by waters
beset,* and then, that he was *surrounded by the deep;* but at length he
adds, that God *made his life to ascend,* etc. All these circumstances
tend to show that Jonah could not have raised up his mind to God except
through an extraordinary miracle, as his life was in so many ways
oppressed. When he says that *he was beset with waters even to the
soul,* I understand it to have been to the peril of his life; for other
explanations seem frigid and strained. And the Hebrews says that to be
pressed to the soul, is to be in danger of one’s life; as the Latins,
meaning the same thing, say that the heart, or the inside, or the
bowels, are wounded. So also in this place the same thing is meant, ‘The
waters beset me even to the soul,’ and then, ‘the abyss surrounds me.’
Some render <span id="iii.2.iv-p9.1"></span>סוף, *suph*, sedge; others
sea-weed; others bulrush: but the sense amounts to the same thing. No
doubt <span id="iii.2.iv-p9.2"></span>סוף, *suph,* is a species of
sedge; and some think that the Red Sea was thus called, because it is
full of sedges or bulrushes. They think also that bulrushes are thus
called, because they soon putrefy. But what Jonah means is certain and
that is, that weed enveloped his head, or that weed grew around his
head: but to refer this to the head of the fish, as some do, is
improper: Jonah speaks metaphorically when he says that he was entangled
in the sedge, inasmuch as there is no hope when any one is rolled in the
sedge at the bottom of the sea. How, indeed, can he escape from drowning
who is thus held, as it were, tied up? It is then to be understood
metaphorically; for Jonah meant that he was so sunk that he could not
swim, except through the ineffable power of God.

<span id="iii.2.iv-p10"></span><span id="iii.2.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.iv-p11"></span>According to the same sense he says, *I
descended to the roots of the mountains.* But he speaks of promontories,
which were nigh the sea; as though he had said, that he was not cast
into the midst of the sea, but that he had so sunk as to be fixed in the
deep under the roots of mountains. All these things have the same
designs which was to show that no deliverance could be hoped for, except
God stretched forth his hand from heaven, and indeed in a manner new and
incredible.

<span id="iii.2.iv-p12"></span>He says that *the earth with its bars was
around him.* He means by this kind of speaking, that he was so shut up,
as if the whole earth had been like a door. We know what sort of bars
are those of the earth, when we ascribe bars to it: for when any door is
fastened with bolts, we know how small a portion it is. But when we
suppose the earth itself to be like a door, what kind of things must the
bolts be? It is the same thing then as though Jonah had said, that he
was so hindered from the vital light, as if the earth had been set
against him to prevent his coming forth to behold the sun: the earth,
then, *was set against me, and that for ever*

<span id="iii.2.iv-p13"></span>He afterwards comes to thanksgiving, *And
thou Jehovah, my God, hast made my life to ascend from the grave.*
Jonah, after having given a long description, for the purpose of showing
that he was not once put to death, but that he had been overwhelmed with
many and various deaths, now adds his gratitude to the Lord for having
delivered him, *Thou,* he says, *hast made my life to ascend from the
grave, O Jehovah.* He again confirms what I have once said, — that he
did not pour forth empty prayers, but that he prayed with an earnest
feeling, and in faith: for he would not have called him his God, except
he was persuaded of his paternal love, so as to be able to expect from
him a certain salvation. *Thou,* then, *Jehovah, my God,* he says; he
does not say, Thou hast delivered me, but, Thou hast brought forth my
life from the grave. Then Jonah, brought to life again, testifies here
that he was not only delivered by God’s aid from the greatest danger,
but that he had, by a certain kind of resurrection, been raised from the
dead. This is the meaning of this mode of speaking, when he says that
his life had been brought forth from the grave, or from corruption
itself. It follows —

<span id="iii.2.v"></span>

<span id="iii.2.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.2.v-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007)<span id="iii.2.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.v-p2"></span>**7.** When my soul fainted within me I
remembered the LORD: and my prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy
temple.

<span id="iii.2.v-p3"></span>**7.** Quum deficeret in me anima mea (vel,
dum se convolveret supra me anima mea,) Jehovae recordatus sum, et
ingressa est oratio mea ad templum sanctitatis tuae.

<span id="iii.2.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.2.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.v-p6"></span>Here Jonah comprehends in one verse what he
had previously said, — that he had been distressed with the heaviest
troubles, but that he had not yet been so cast down in his mind, as that
he had no prospect of God’s favor to encourage him to pray. He indeed
first confesses that he had suffered some kind of fainting, and that he
had been harassed by anxious and perplexing thoughts, so as not to be
able by his own efforts to disengage himself.

<span id="iii.2.v-p7"></span>As to the word <span
id="iii.2.v-p7.1"></span>עטף, *otheph*, it means in Hebrew to hide, to
cover; but in Niphal and Hithpael (in which conjugation it is found
here) it signifies to fail: but its former meaning might still be
suitably retained here; then it would be, ‘My soul hid or rolled up
itself,’ as it is in <span id="iii.2.v-p7.2"></span>[Ps
102:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001)<span id="iii.2.v-p7.2"></span>,
‘The prayer of the afflicted, when he rolled up himself in his
distress.’ They who render it, he multiplied prayers, have no reason to
support them. I therefore doubt not but that Jonah here means, either
that he had been overcome by a swoon, or that he had been so perplexed
as not to be able without a violent struggle to raise up his mind to
God. However it may have been, he intended by this word to express the
anxiety of his mind. While then we are tossed about by divers thoughts,
and remain, as it were, bound up in a hopeless condition, then our soul
may be said to roll or to fold up itself within us. When therefore the
soul rolls up itself, all the thoughts of man in perplexity recoil on
himself. We may indeed seek to disburden ourselves while we toss about
various purposes, but whatever we strive to turn away from us, soon
comes back on our own head; thus our soul recoils upon us. We now
perceive what Jonah meant by this clause, *When my soul infolded
itself,* or failed within me, *I remembered, he says, Jehovah.* We hence
learn that Jonah became not a conqueror without the greatest
difficulties, not until his soul, as we have said, had fainted: this is
one thing. Then we learn, also, that he was not so oppressed with
distresses but that he at length sought God by prayer. Jonah therefore
retained this truth, that God was to be sought, however severely and
sharply he treated him for a time; for the remembering, of which he
speaks, proceeded from faith. The ungodly also remember Jehovah, but
they dread him, for they look on him as a judge; and whenever a mention
is made of God, they expect nothing but destruction: but Jonah applied
the remembrance of God to another purpose, even as a solace to ease his
cares and his anxieties.

<span id="iii.2.v-p8"></span>For it immediately follows, *that his
prayer had penetrated unto God,* or entered before him.  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) We then see that Jonah so remembered his
God, that by faith he knew that he would be propitious to him; and hence
was his disposition to pray. But by saying that his prayer entered into
his temple, he no doubt alludes to a custom under the law; for the Jews
were wont to turn themselves towards the temple whenever they prayed:
nor was this a superstitious ceremony; for we know that they were
instructed in the doctrine which invited them to the sanctuary and the
ark of the covenant. Since then this was the custom under the law, Jonah
says that his prayer entered into the temple of God; for that was a
visible symbol, through which the Jews might understand that God was
near to them; not that they by a false imagination bound God to external
signs, but because they knew that these helps Had not in vain been given
to them. So then Jonah not only remembered his God, but called also to
mind the signs and symbols in which he had exercised his faith, as we
have just said through the whole course of his life; for they who view
him as referring to heaven, depart wholly from what the Prophet meant.
We indeed know that the temple sometimes means heaven; but this sense
suits not this place. Then Jonah meant that though he was far away from
the temple, God was yet near to him; for he had not ceased to pray to
that God who had revealed himself by the law which he gave, and who had
expressed his will to be worshipped at Jerusalem, and also had been
pleased to appoint the ark as the symbol of his presence, that the Jews
might, with an assured faith, call upon him, and that they might not
doubt but that he dwelt in the midst of them, inasmuch as he had there
his visible habitation.

<span id="iii.2.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.2.vi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.2.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
once given us such an evidence of thy infinite power in thy servant
Jonah, whose mind, when he was almost sunk down into hell, thou hadst
yet raised up to thyself, and hadst so supported with firm constancy,
that he ceased not to pray and to call on thee, — O grant, that in the
trials by which we must be daily exercised, we may raise upwards our
minds to thee, and never cease to think that thou art near us; and that
when the signs of thy wrath appear, and when our sins thrust themselves
before our eyes, to drive us to despair, may we still constantly
struggle, and never surrender the hope of thy mercy, until having
finished all our contests, we may at length freely and fully give thanks
to thee, and praise thy infinite goodness, such as we daily experience
that being conducted through continual trials, we may at last come into
that blessed rest which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ one
Lord. Amen.

<span id="iii.2.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.2.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Seventy-seventh

<span id="iii.2.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.2.viii-p1"></span><span id="iii.2.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008)<span
id="iii.2.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.viii-p2"></span>**8.** They that observe lying vanities
forsake their own mercy.

<span id="iii.2.viii-p3"></span>**8.** Qui observant vanitates mendaces,
misericordiam suam (vel, clementiam) derelinquent (hoc est,
derelinquunt.)

<span id="iii.2.viii-p4"></span>**9.** But I will sacrifice unto thee
with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay *that* that I have vowed.
Salvation *is* of the Lord

<span id="iii.2.viii-p5"></span>**9.** Ego autem in voce laudis
sacrificabo tibi, quae vovi reddam: salus est Jehovae.

<span id="iii.2.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.viii-p7"></span><span id="iii.2.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.viii-p8"></span>Here Jonah says first, that men
miserably go astray, when they turn aside to vain superstitions, for
they rob themselves of the chief good: for he calls whatever help or aid
that is necessary for salvation, the mercy of men. The sense then is
that as soon as men depart from God, they depart from life and
salvation, and that nothing is retained by them, for they willfully cast
aside whatever good that can be hoped and desired. Some elicit a
contrary meaning, that the superstitious, when they return to a sound
mind, relinquish their own reproach; for <span
id="iii.2.viii-p8.1"></span>חסד, *chesad,* sometimes means reproach.
They then think that the way of true penitence is here described, — that
when God restores men from their straying to the right way, he gives
them at the same time a sound mind, so that they rid themselves from all
their vices. This is indeed true, but it is too strained a meaning.
Others confine this to the sailors who vowed sacrifices to God; as
though Jonah had said, that they would soon relapse to their own
follies, and bid adieu to God, who in his mercy had delivered them from
shipwreck; so they explain their mercy to be God; but this is also too
forced an explanation.

<span id="iii.2.viii-p9"></span>I doubt not, therefore, but that Jonah
here sets his own religion in opposition to his false intentions of men;
for it immediately follows, *But I with the voice of praise will
sacrifice to thee.* Jonah, then, having before confessed that he would
be thankful to God, now pours contempt on all those inventions which men
foolishly contrive for themselves, and through which they withdraw
themselves from the only true God, and from the sincere worship of him.
For he calls all those devices, by which men deceive themselves*, the
vanities of falsehood;*  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) for it is
certain that they are mere fallacies which men invent for themselves
without the authority of God’s Word; for truth is one and simple, which
God has revealed to us in his world. Whosoever then turns aside the
least, either on this or on that side, seeks, as it were designedly,
some imposture or another, by which he ruins himself. *They* then *who
follow such vanities, says Jonah, forsake their own mercy,*  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) that is they reject all happiness: for no
aid and no help can be expected from any other quarter than from the
only true God.

<span id="iii.2.viii-p16"></span>But this passage deserves a careful
notice; for we hence learn what value to attach to all superstitions, to
all those opinions of men, when they attempt to set up religion
according to their own will: for Jonah calls them lying or fallacious
vanities. There is then but one true religion, the religion which God
has taught us in his word. We must also notice, that men in vain weary
themselves when they follow their own inventions; for the more
strenuously they run, the farther they recede from the right way, as
Augustine has well observed. But Jonah here adopts a higher principle, —
that God alone possesses in himself all fullness of blessings: whosoever
then truly and sincerely seeks God, will find in him whatever can be
wished for salvation. But God is not to be sought but by obedience and
faith: whosoever then dare to give themselves loose reins, so as to
follow this or that without the warrant of God’s word, recede from God,
and, at the same time, deprive themselves of all good things. The
superstitious do indeed think that they gain much when they toil in
their own inventions; but we see what the Holy Spirit declares by the
mouth of Jonah. The Lord says the same by Jeremiah

<span id="iii.2.viii-p17"></span>“They have forsaken me, the fountain of
living water, and cisterns have they digged for themselves,” (<span
id="iii.2.viii-p17.1"></span>[Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span
id="iii.2.viii-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.2.viii-p18"></span>There the Lord complains of his chosen
people, who had gone astray after wicked superstitions. Hence, when men
wander beyond the word of God, they in a manner renounce God, or say
adieu to him; and thus they deprive themselves of all good things; for
without God there is no salvation and no help to be found.

<span id="iii.2.viii-p19"></span><span id="iii.2.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.viii-p20"></span>Jonah therefore rightly adds, *But I,
with the voice of praise, will sacrifice to thee;* as though he said
While men as it were banish themselves from God, by giving themselves up
to errors, I will sacrifice to thee and to thee alone, O Lord. And this
ought to be observed by us; for as our minds are prone to falsehood and
vanity, any new superstition will easily lay hold so us, except we be
restrained by this bond, except we be fully persuaded, — that true
salvation dwells in God alone, and every aid and help that can be
expected by us: but when this conviction is really and thoroughly fixed
in our hearts, then true religion cannot be easily lost by us: though
Satan should on every side spread his allurements, we shall yet continue
in the true and right worship of God. And the more carefully it behaves
us to consider this passage, because Jonah no doubt meant here to
strengthen himself in the right path of religion; for he knew that like
all mortals he was prone to what was false; he therefore encouraged
himself to persevere: and this he does, when he declares that whatever
superstition men devise, is a deprivation of the chief good, even of
life and salvation. It will hence follow, that we shall abominate every
error when we are fully persuaded that we forsake the true God whenever
we obey not his word, and that we at the same time cast away salvation,
and every thing good that can be desired. Then Jonah says, *I will
sacrifice to thee with the voice of praise.*

<span id="iii.2.viii-p21"></span>It must be noticed here farther, that
the worship of God especially consists in praises, as it is said in
<span id="iii.2.viii-p21.1"></span>[Ps
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span
id="iii.2.viii-p21.1"></span>: for there God shows that he regards as
nothing all sacrifices, except they answer this end — to set forth the
praise of his name. It was indeed his will that sacrifices should be
offered to him under the law; but it was for the end just stated: for
God cares not for calves and oxen, for goats and lambs; but his will was
that he should be acknowledged as the Giver of all blessings. Hence he
says there, ‘Sacrifice to me the sacrifice of praise.’ So also Jonah now
says, I will offer to thee the sacrifice of praise, and he might have
said with still more simplicity, “Lord, I ascribe to thee my preserved
life.” But if this was the case under the shadows of the law, how much
more ought we to attend to this, that is, — to strive to worship God,
not in a gross manner, but spiritually, and to testify that our life
proceeds from him, that it is in his hand, that we owe all things to
him, and, in a word, that he is the Source and Author of salvation, and
not only of salvation, but also of wisdom, of righteousness, of power?

<span id="iii.2.viii-p22"></span>And he afterwards mentions his vows, *I
will pay,* he says, *my vows.* We have stated elsewhere in what light we
are to consider vows. The holy Fathers did not vow to God, as the
Papists of this day are wont to do, who seek to pacify God by their
frivolous practices; one abstains for a certain time from meat, another
puts on sackcloth, another undertakes a pilgrimage, and another obtrudes
on God some new ceremony. There was nothing of this kind in the vows of
the holy Fathers; but a vow was the mere act of thanksgiving, or a
testimony of gratitude: and so Jonah joins his vows here with the
sacrifice of praise. We hence learn that they were not two different
things; but he repeats the same thing twice. Jonah, then, had declared
his vow to God for no other purpose but to testify his gratitude.

<span id="iii.2.viii-p23"></span>And hence he adds, *To Jehovah is,* or
belongs, *salvation;* that is, to save is the prerogative of God alone;
Jehovah is here in the dative case, for prefixed to it is <span
id="iii.2.viii-p23.1"></span>ל, *lamed*. It is then to Jehovah that
salvation belongs; the work of saving appertains to no other but to the
Supreme God. Since it is so, we see how absurd and insane men are, when
they transfer praises to another, as every one does who invents an idol
for himself. As, then, there is but the one true God who saves, it
behaves us to ascribe to him alone all our praises, that we may not
deprive him of his right. This is the import of the whole. It follows —

<span id="iii.2.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.2.ix-p1"></span><span id="iii.2.ix-p1.1"></span>[Jonah
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010)<span id="iii.2.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.ix-p2"></span>**10.** And the Lord spake unto the fish,
and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry *land*

<span id="iii.2.ix-p3"></span>**10.** Et dixit Jehovah pisci (hoc est,
praecepit;) et evomuit Jonam super aridam.

<span id="iii.2.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.2.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.2.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.ix-p6"></span>The deliverance of Jonah is here in few
words described; but how attentively ought we to consider the event? It
was an incredible miracle, that Jonah should have continued alive and
safe in the bowels of the fish for three days. For how was it that he
was not a thousand times smothered or drowned by waters? We know that
fish continually draw in water: Jonah could not certainly respire while
in the fish; and the life of man without breathing can hardly continue
for a minute. Jonah, then, must have been preserved beyond the power of
nature. Then how could it have been that the fish should cast forth
Jonah on the shore, except God by his unsearchable power had drawn the
fish there? Again, who could have supernaturally opened its bowels and
its mouth? His coming forth, then, was in every way miraculous, yea, it
was attended with many miracles.

<span id="iii.2.ix-p7"></span>But Jonah, that he might the more extol
the infinite power of God, adopted the word said. Hence we learn that
nothing is hard to God, for he could by a nod only effect so great a
thing as surpasses all our conceptions. If Jonah had said that he was
delivered by God’s kindness and favor, it would have been much less
emphatical, than when he adopts a word which expresses a command, *And
Jehovah spake,* or *said*, *to the fish.*

<span id="iii.2.ix-p8"></span>But as this deliverance of Jonah is an
image of the resurrection, this is an extraordinary passage, and worthy
of being especially noticed; for the Holy Spirit carries our minds to
that power by which the world was formed and is still wonderfully
preserved. That we may then, without hesitation and doubt, be convinced
of the restoration which God promises to us, let us remember that the
world was by him created out of nothing by his word and bidding, and is
still thus sustained. But if this general truth is not sufficient, let
this history of Jonah come to our minds, — that God commanded a fish to
cast forth Jonah: for how was it that Jonah escaped safe and was
delivered? Even because it so pleased God, because the Lord commanded;
and this word at this day retains the same efficacy. By that power then,
by which he works all things, we also shall one day be raised up from
the dead. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc28005.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.2.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.i-p6"></span> It is remarkable that several sentences in
this prayer, as it has been observed by *Marchius* and *Henderson,* are
exactly the same, not only in sense, but also, in most instances, in
words, with passages in the Psalms. The first clause of this verse is
found in <span id="iii.2.i-p6.1"></span>[Ps
120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001)<span id="iii.2.i-p6.1"></span>,
only the words are differently arranged. The last clause of the third
verse, both in words and order, is the same with a distich in <span
id="iii.2.i-p6.2"></span>[Ps 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007)<span
id="iii.2.i-p6.2"></span>. The beginning of the fourth verse agrees
nearly with <span id="iii.2.i-p6.3"></span>[Ps
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)<span id="iii.2.i-p6.3"></span>;
and so does the fifth verse with a line in <span
id="iii.2.i-p6.4"></span>[Ps 69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)<span
id="iii.2.i-p6.4"></span>, one word being different. The first clause of
the seventh verse is found in the very same words in <span
id="iii.2.i-p6.5"></span>[Ps
142:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#003)<span id="iii.2.i-p6.5"></span>;
and the first line in the eighth verse is <span
id="iii.2.i-p6.6"></span>[Ps 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006)<span
id="iii.2.i-p6.6"></span>, with the exception of one letter; and the
last words of the ninth verse are to be met within <span
id="iii.2.i-p6.7"></span>[Ps 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008)<span
id="iii.2.i-p6.7"></span>, only the order is reversed. “On the
supposition,” says *Henderson*, “that Jonah was familiar with the
Psalms, it was very natural for him to incorporate sentences taken from
them with his own language.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc28005.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.2.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.i-p11"></span> “No place amiss for prayer, *I will that
men pray everywhere;* where ever God casts us we may find a way open
heavenwards, if it be now our own fault. Jonah was now in the bottom of
the sea, yet out of the depths he cries to God.” — *M. Henry.* “It may
be asked, How could Jonah either pray or breathe in the stomach of a
fish? Very easily, if God so willed it. And let the reader keep this
constantly in view: the whole is a *miracle*, from Jonah’s being
swallowed by the fish, till he was cast ashore by the same animal. It
was God that had *prepared* the great fish; it was the Lord that *spake*
to the fish, and *caused* it to vomit Jonah on the dry land. All is
miracle.” — *Adam Clarke.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc28005.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.2.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.i-p15"></span> He relates here, as it appears from the
preceding, “and he said,” the prayer he offered when in the fish’s
bowels, and not a prayer offered after his deliverance. Some have
entertained the latter opinion, because some of the verbs here are in
the past tense: but this circumstance only shows that he continued to
pray from the time when he was swallowed by the fish to the time when he
was delivered. It was a continued act. It is the same as though he said,
“I have called, and do call on Jehovah.” *Marckius,* and also *Dathius,*
render the verbs in the present tense, “I call,” etc. The following is a
translation according to the view of this prayer, —

<span id="iii.2.i-p16"></span>*3. I call in my distress on Jehovah, and
he will answer me;  
From the belly of the grave I cry,* — *thou hearest my voice.*

<span id="iii.2.i-p17"></span>*4. When thou didst send me to the deep,
into the midst of the waters,  
And the flood surrounded me,* —*  
Thy billows and waves over me passed;*

<span id="iii.2.i-p18"></span>*5. Then I said, I am banished from the
sight of thine eyes;* —*  
Yet I will again look towards the temple of thy holiness.*

<span id="iii.2.i-p19"></span>6. Encompass me do the waters to the
soul,  
The deep surrounds me,  
The sedge is wrapped around my head:

<span id="iii.2.i-p20"></span>*7. To the cuttings off of the mountains
have I descended;  
The earth! Its bars* are *continually around me:  
But thou wilt bring from destruction my life,  
O Jehovah, my God.*

<span id="iii.2.i-p21"></span>*8. When overwhelmed within me was my
soul,  
Jehovah did I remember;  
And come to thee shall my prayer* —*  
To the temple of thy holiness.*

<span id="iii.2.i-p22"></span>9. They who regard idols of vanity,  
Their own mercy forsake:

<span id="iii.2.i-p23"></span>*10. But I, with the voice of praise, will
sacrifice to thee,  
What I have vowed will I fulfill:  
Salvation* belongs *to Jehovah.*

<span id="iii.2.i-p24"></span>“The cuttings off,” in verse 7, says
*Parkhurst,* were those parts which were *cut off* from the mountains at
the deluge. The Septuagint has <span id="iii.2.i-p24.1"></span>σχισμας —
rents-clefts. Roots, bottoms, foundations, have been adopted by some,
but not consistently with the meaning of the original word, — “The bars
or bolts” of the earth convey the idea of impediments in his way to
return to the earth. They were “around” him, or literally “upon” him,
<span id="iii.2.i-p24.2"></span>בעדי, that is, they were, as it were,
closed upon him. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc28005.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.2.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.ii-p8"></span> “He calls them God’s billows and his
waves, not because he made and rules them, but because he had now
commissioned them against Jonah, and ordered them to afflict and
terrify, but not to destroy him. These words are plainly quoted by Jonah
from <span id="iii.2.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007)<span id="iii.2.ii-p8.1"></span>.
What David spoke figuratively and metaphorically, Jonah applies to
himself as literally fulfilled.” — *M. Henry.*

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc28005.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.2.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.v-p9"></span> “Here prayer is *personified,* and is
represented as a *messenger* going from the *distressed* and entering
into the temple of God, and standing before him. This is a very fine and
delicate image.” — *Adam Clarke.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc28005.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.2.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.2.viii-p10"></span> <span
id="iii.2.viii-p10.1"></span>הבלי-שוא, “Idols of vanity or falsehood,”
*i.e.,* false, or deceitful, or vain idols. <span
id="iii.2.viii-p10.2"></span>הבל means vapor, smoke, breath, vanity,
inanity: but in the plural number it is applied for the most part to
idols. See <span id="iii.2.viii-p10.3"></span>[De
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span
id="iii.2.viii-p10.3"></span>; <span id="iii.2.viii-p10.4"></span>[1
Kings 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#013),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#026)<span id="iii.2.viii-p10.4"></span>
<span id="iii.2.viii-p10.5"></span>שוא is a lie, which is vain —
useless, and false — deceptive. *Marckius* renders the words, “<span
id="iii.2.viii-p10.6"></span>Vanitates inanitatis — vanities of
inanity’” *Junius* and *Tremelius,* “<span
id="iii.2.viii-p10.7"></span>Vanitates mendaces — mendacious vanities;”
*Septuagint,* “<span id="iii.2.viii-p10.8"></span>ματαια και Ψευδη —
vain and false things.” “He thus calls idols,” says an author in Poole’s
Syn., “and all those things in which any one, excluding God, trusts;
which are nothing, and can do nothing, and which deceive their
worshippers.” This is true, that is, that all other things, as well as
idols, are, apart from God, vain, and worthless, and deceptive; but the
reference here no doubt is to idols. They are not only empty, but
deceptive. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc28005.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.2.viii-p10.9"></span>

<span id="iii.2.viii-p11"></span> <span
id="iii.2.viii-p11.1"></span>חסדם יעזבו, “Their mercy or goodness they
forsake,” that is, the mercy exhibited and offered to them by God; or,
if we render it goodness, it means their chief good, which is God. The
Psalmist calls God his goodness in <span
id="iii.2.viii-p11.2"></span>[Ps
144:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#002)<span
id="iii.2.viii-p11.2"></span>, <span id="iii.2.viii-p11.3"></span>חסדי,
“my goodness,” the giver of all his goodness, or his chief good.
*Dathius* gives very correctly the meaning of the two lines in these
words —

<span id="iii.2.viii-p12"></span>*“*<span
id="iii.2.viii-p12.1"></span>*Qui vana idola colunt,  
Felicitatis suae auctorem deserunt* —*  
They who worship vain idols,  
Desert the author of their own happiness.”*

<span id="iii.2.viii-p13"></span>More literally —

<span id="iii.2.viii-p14"></span>“They who attend on the idols of
vanity,  
Their own goodness forsake.”

<span id="iii.2.viii-p15"></span>There is a contrast between vain idols
and their own goodness, that is, the goodness received by them from God.
*Grotius* gives this paraphrase, “They who worship idols are vain; for
they forsake their own mercy, that is, God, who is able to help them in
their distress.” *Henry* suggests another view, “They who follow their
own inventions, as Jonah had done, when he fled from the presence of the
lord to go to Tarshish, forsake their own mercy, that mercy which they
may find in God.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Jonah](cc28006)
