[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal21)  [Next](goal23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII.

#### THE LIKENESS OF GOD.

#### *THREE STEPS*.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the preceding chapter we viewed man as
dependent upon the earth and being "of the earth, earthy," and also in
some of his relations to the Divine Likeness. We shall now consider some
of the methods by which man is raised from the animal, earthy state into
the spiritual; for nothing in the universe is effected without method
involving a purpose—let it be the purpose of the Divine Mind or a
purpose active in the human mind. Nothing is accomplished without
conforming to natural law.

In the present chapter we call attention to "Three Steps" or distinct
methods, by which man ascends to a higher plane of existence—that of
"The Likeness of God." Man has nothing to do with these methods, that
is, he has no direct control over them—a great truth which the prophet
saw when, in his devotion to God, he exclaimed: "Thou hast wrought all
our works in us."

The three steps are: (*1*) *Inspiring or indrawing from the creative
forces*. (*2*) *The incorporating of* 

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

*the paschal lamb—the Divine Word*. (*3*) *Man's rebirth or the birth of
the spirit-child*.

FIRST STEP

The *First Method* is in pursuance of the law of natural inspiration,
active in all creation. In accordance with this law the creature when it
has so developed as to feel the need of a higher state of unfoldment,
begins to inspire from the all-fountain, the source of its life. Need
produces desire and the *sincere desire* of the heart is *prayer*; so
that when man has reached a point in his evolutionary unfoldment where
he can go no further, there springs up within him a yearning, longing
desire for something undefined, unknown. The soul prays and as he prays
the answer comes, and there flows into the man an added higher quality.

It must be remembered that all inspiration, all inflowing life, even in
the growth of the plant, is governed by the law manifest in mind as
*desire*, causing the intelligence to feel the need of that which is
desired. Without this feeling of need there can be no indrawing and
incorporating into the organism of the higher element, there can be no
inspiration from God. The first method, therefore, is the natural
indrawing from the creative forces.

SECOND STEP

The *Second Method* is the incorporating of the emanation or inherent
substance of the word spoken by the Lord Christ. God created the world
by a

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

*word*, therefore wherever the Spirit forms a word it gives to that word
life and power to cause action.

No doubt each one who reads this, has met at least one person whose
thoughts were high, pure and grand, and while talking to the person you
undoubtedly received something that was elevating, something that was
added to you that you did not possess before—something, at least, of
which you were not before conscious. There are qualities emanating from
the thoughts of individuals that have an influence upon the atmosphere
which surrounds them. This explains the mystery embodied in the words of
the Lord Christ before quoted, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have not life in yourselves." . . . "It is
the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing: the *words*
that I have spoken unto you, are spirit and are life." Mark you, they
are spirit, which is one thing, and they are life, which is another
thing. The words are *spirit* because of their potentiality; they are
*life* because they enter into the organism to which they are sent and
begin the work of creating like spirit and thought.

Again Christ asks: "How can one enter into the house of the strong man,
and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he
will spoil his house." The strong man is the animal or natural man
without the spirit of God. He is armed with all the requisites for
self-preservation

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

and for maintaining that which he esteems his goods; but when the
*spirit* and *life* that were in the words spoken by the Christ enter
into the strong man, they begin gradually to bind him by getting control
of the passions and wrong desires, gradually winding the cord of
spiritual desire around the old man, binding the passions, appetites and
evil desires, supplanting them by the desires of the Spirit, until
finally the spiritual man becomes strong enough to take control of the
animal man, then we say of him he is converted. He has made his decision
and perhaps declaration that he will thenceforth live for God and for
righteousness.

This method is symbolized by the eating of the Passover Lamb. If you
read the twelfth chapter of Exodus, you will observe that the children
of Israel were told to take a lamb for an house and that they were to
eat all of it, "his head with his legs and with the inwards thereof,"
and they were to let nothing remain until the morning and that which was
not eaten was to be burned with fire. They were to eat it with their
shoes on their feet and their staves in their hands, in readiness and in
haste to go out from the old conditions—Egypt.

Mark you, there is some reason for the emphasis made in regard to their
eating *all* of the lamb. At the institution of the "Lord's Supper"
Jesus the Christ used words that have not been understood

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

by the translators of the New Testament. When he handed the cup to his
disciples he said to them, "Drink you out of it all this for it is the
blood of me," and likewise when he gave them the bread he said, "Eat ye
all of it;" that is, he impressed the thought that was symbolized by the
Passover, that the bread and wine were his flesh and blood and that they
were to eat "all of it." Now, hold this thought in mind and let us look
further.

Before his crucifixion, Christ commanded his disciples to remain in
Jerusalem, in prayer and supplication, until the day of Pentecost, and
we read that on that day the Holy Spirit descended upon the disciples,
appearing to them as "cloven tongues of fire;" that "there were dwelling
at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven," and
that every man heard the disciples speak in his own language. This shows
that the Holy Spirit had descended upon and into them, and that they
were speaking from the Spirit and not from the intellect.

Whence came this Spirit and what did this mean? We read that after the
resurrection of Jesus he ascended into heaven. His physical body was not
permitted to see corruption, but it was taken away. Where did it go?

The answer is found in the symbolic story of the Passover Lamb that was
all eaten by the children of Israel; in other words, the lamb entered
into the body of Israel. This was symbolic of the fact that

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

after the physical body of Christ was taken into heaven, by the fires of
spirit it was transmuted to Spirit (God is a consuming fire), and sent
into his faithful followers on the day of Pentecost and
they—symbolically—ate all of the body of Christ. As the kernel of wheat
is planted in the ground, so all of the transmuted body of Christ was
planted in his disciples (Israel ate *all* of the Passover Lamb), and
since that time it has been growing, expanding and developing. Some of
our churches have recognized the fact that the children of those who
have been begotten from above are as much the children of God as are
their parents, in other words, that the rightful heritage of the church
is in the blood, the offspring, which is in itself a truth.

Thus Christ planted in his people the qualities that he had generated
and materialized into his fleshly form; and when they were first
planted, they were, so to speak, focalized in the few, enabling them to
raise the dead, to heal the sick, and to do the things that Christ had
done. As time went on, however, men lost faith in God, and in the power
of his Spirit, and as they lost faith the Spirit was gradually repelled
from them. But the fulness of time is now at hand, the fruitage of the
Lord's planting is ripe. The mass of the people in the churches is
repelling the Spirit that was in Christ. The Holy Spirit is again being
concentrated in the few who will constitute the first ripe fruit of the
earth, the 144, 000.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

The two methods given, the first two, are insufficient in themselves to
bring into manifestation the sons of God, made in his Likeness. They are
merely preparatory to the third and final method of creating man in the
"Likeness of God."

THIRD STEP

The *Third Method*, that of being born from above is yet to take form in
the mind of man—its greatness, its grandeur, its absolute reality have
never entered into the mind of man. Jesus said, "that which is born of
the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit;" and
he added, "Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye must be born anew \[from
above\]." He here impresses the fact that flesh cannot generate spirit,
and that spirit cannot generate flesh, but that every kind produces its
own kind, that like itself.

Many times throughout the Scriptures men are called sons of God, and
John says, "Now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what
we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like
him; for we shall see him as he is." (I. John iii. 2.) John here says
that we shall be like the Christ, who was born from above: he was
conceived and born from the Spirit. Therefore, we can be like him only
when we have been born from above, as he was born from above. Christ
emphatically said that that which is born of the flesh is the fleshly
man.

We know how the fleshly man is brought into

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

existence, but how we are to be born of the Spirit is a mystery that
until recently has been hidden from humanity; and even now it can only
be put into words which perhaps many will doubt and but few will
believe. Notwithstanding, we have faith that those who are of God will
hear God's words, that they who have the spirit of truth within, will
believe the truth when expressed.

This truth of *being born from above* may be briefly stated as follows:

We know as men and women what generation means. How came generation to
have existence?—Was it not a part of the creative word? and he that
spoke the word could put nothing therein that was not in himself.
Therefore there must be in God, the Creator, something answering to
generation on earth; as the old philosopher so well said, "as below, so
above," and everything that has an existence in the experiences of human
life, has something answering to it in the Cause whence man originated.

We have seen in former chapters that the Elohim consist of mature souls
that have come into the form of the heavenly temple, an organized Body
of perfected souls which most assuredly consists of both men and women;
for, as the apostle says, "neither is the man without the woman, nor the
woman without the man, in the Lord." "God is Love," which is a
constructive force, and we are told that "Elohim is a consuming
fire"—fire is

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

action, activity. Without activity there is death, and the creative, or
constructive function is the activity of the life (love) forces.

We find that when the creative or sex function dies, death soon comes to
the body, for through the sex all life on the planet originated and is
perpetuated; and that principle in the heavens answering to the sex—from
which sex in the form it is known on the earth has been derived—has been
the fountain and source from which all creation has sprung. Therefore,
we are forced to conclude that there is even in the heavens, and in the
heaven of heavens, a love-passion that is pure spirit, active between
the positive and negative forces, between the two spiritual entities
from which men and women have derived their existence. If this is true,
then, in the activities of that love, a spirit-child is formed; and
being pure spirit, it is yet without experience, it must learn wisdom,
gain knowledge and develop power—in short, it must grow as any child
until it has reached not only the image of its father and mother, but
has attained to their likeness.

It is impossible for us to explain further the order of the heavens,
from which is derived the rebirth, unless we give that which has been
given to us: We knew a man who was living the regenerate life,
controlling the creative forces in himself, turning these forces toward
the brain for spiritual and intellectual use. One evening at a social
gathering he made the acquaintance of a

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

lady whom he had never seen before and who was living the regenerate
life, for, through inherent tendencies she had an abhorrence of the sex
relations and had conserved all the life generated in the body, and was
in her real organism a *regenerate woman*.

During the evening the subject of *phrenology* was discussed, and, this
man having had some experience in reading character from the form of the
head, he was asked to place his hands on this lady's head and give a
delineation of character. On doing so, he found that her head was as a
flame of fire. Soon after he realized that there had entered into him a
new life-force, which rushed through his body like a cyclone. When he
retired at night this life concentrated in the brain, and by the power
of this life he could see the interior of his own brain, and he saw
there a flame of white light. The muscles of the brain were in travail
as a woman in childbirth, and he saw taking shape in the brain, by the
working of the muscles, a diminutive human form, being shaped from the
head down to the feet, and when the feet were formed, the little
spirit-form took flight, and his whole being rested. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) In his own language, he was impregnated
by the life emanations from this woman's head and he brought forth a
child, a spirit-form, through the action of his brain.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

This is at least an illustration of the order of the regeneration or
love-life in the heavens. In the heavens spirit and mind are all there
are. Mind is the thought-former; *spirit* or life is the *cause* of the
thought-forming and is the substance out of which the thought is formed.
Thus in the heavens spirit-children are begotten of *love* and *mind*,
life and use. In the heavens function is servant and not master;
therefore the function for animal production does not exist in the
spiritual production, for, keep in mind, that God by a word, a thought
formed in the mind and sent out by the will, created all things.

It may be quite a shock to the idealism of some of our readers to think
that even in heaven spiritual children are born, but they are conceived
in mind and born from the life of the Spirit through the brain. Should
there not be a use for that divine love that is perfect? and is there
not a use, a purpose, a cause for the creation of man and for his being
given an existence on the earth? Creation sprang from the unity and
activity of Divine Love and Wisdom. There is no activity without use,
and no use without accomplishment. All nature, wherever the mind turns,
is in action, and the higher the realm the more intense is the action.
Love is the action of life, or life in motion, and "God is love," and
God's love links him with all his creation. There can be no evolution
without involution—that which is involved is that which

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

evolves, develops and grows. Therefore, it is in the Divine Purpose to
"bring many sons unto God," and these sons are begotten of the Holy
Spirit in those who have gained the attainment to be justly called <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim.

<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim by the prophet said, "For
thy Maker is thy husband; <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> of hosts
is his name: and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; the God of the
whole earth shall he be called." (Isaiah liv. 5.) Read also Jeremiah
iii. 14, and Ezekiel xxiii.

In these references the declaration is unequivocal that God's chosen
people are regarded as his wife. You will notice in the experience given
that it was the man's brain that was impregnated by the woman, and that
the man brought forth the spirit- child. God declared himself to be the
husband of his physical Israel—not of woman but of man and woman.

We are told in another place that "God is love." The expression of the
feminine as we know her on earth, is love, and the expression of the
masculine as we know him on earth, is mind, but the indication from
revelation is that this order is reversed in the heavens.

There seem to be shadows of the condition in the heavens flitting over
the inner consciousness of the world of humanity at the present time,
causing those called "advanced thinkers" to talk about woman being
superior to man—that she must lead

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

man into the higher life. These are merely inverted shadows that flit
over the consciousness of those who are without knowledge; they assume
that the physical organism of the woman, with the mind arising
therefrom, is to be master and leader, but the divine order is expressed
in the quotation: "Thy Maker is thy husband; <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> of hosts is his name."

God recognizes the individual as neither man nor woman, but the
statement is emphatic that the man and the woman are one, whose
consciousness becomes to the Spirit an individualized consciousness. And
the development and refinement of the body enable the body, in turn, to
know the mind of the Spirit and to be conscious of all that of which the
Spirit is conscious.

We have said that the action of life—the unity of *love* and
*wisdom*—results in the production of organic forms, and that by the
intensity of divine love and the order of supreme wisdom or mind,
children are born of the Spirit.

But in order that they may have experience, development, growth and
unfoldment, it is necessary that they have an earthly experience. Earth
is intended as a schoolroom of the Spirit, and those who attain a divine
degree of purity and holiness become the wife, the temple of this
spirit, or Godchild.

This spirit-child begotten of the Holy Spirit, born in the heavens,
descends into the organism of man

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

or woman and grows, gaining knowledge, both spiritual and intellectual;
and in its growth it passes on from plane to plane of consciousness
carrying with it all that constitutes the consciousness of the man or
the woman in whom it dwells; whose consciousness becomes to the
indwelling spirit-child an added consciousness.

Mere surface thought may suggest to the reader that "being born from
above" leaves the individual man and woman out of the scheme of
salvation and saves something that they are not; but we have carefully
striven to impress upon the mind that we, as the plant, die daily, and
live in the memories. The advent of this God-child does not destroy the
memories, but rather creates an added consciousness in the individual,
and makes that consciousness immortal.

Now, let us draw a conclusion from the foregoing: In God's love and
wisdom creation proceeds, and in the process of creating sons of God,
the spirit-child is conceived and born from the life of those in the
heavens; and when man has so developed that the spirit-life that was in
the Christ has possession and control of the will, impelling him to live
the regenerate life, when the strong animal man is bound and the life of
the man is consecrated and passive to the life of God—then the man is
made a receptacle and fit temple for the indwelling of the Holy Spirit,
this spiritual child that enters in and grows and increases from the
experiences of an earth-life,

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The consciousness
and life of the individual become one with the consciousness and life of
the spirit-child and of its Father, and thus man becomes the son of
God—becomes <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim.

It is apparent, therefore, that the earthly life of man is a necessity
to God as well as an opportunity to man, because it is a schoolroom for
the sons of God, begotten in the heavens and matured upon the earth. For
knowledge is gained from experience, and the experiences of the
spiritual son of God must be gently conducted from the low state of
human existence up to a consciousness of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim, and a oneness with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[228:\*](goal22.htm#fr_13) Was not this the
creative Word, or Word of God?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The Likeness of God: Man Becoming Yahveh
Elohim](goal23)
