[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal09)  [Next](goal11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

#### OTHER WORLDS THAN OURS.

<span class="smallcaps">A</span> subject of so vast proportions as the
title of this chapter indicates, naturally suggests exhaustive study of
the investigations of scientists, ancient and modern; but for the sake
of brevity, and because the conclusions of ancient philosophy are not
accepted in our time, we omit its consideration and confine ourselves to
an examination of a small portion of modern investigation.

The unity of opinion, however, on the part of our modern scientists and
the fact that their investigations are accessible to every one, make it
unnecessary to quote from them, more than just enough to show that the
truths we are about to present are in trend with the scientific mind of
the day.

It seems that the only objection science has to offer to the theory that
the planets are inhabited is that the conditions existing upon them make
life, as we know it, impossible. They object that upon certain of the
planets, and especially upon the sun, there is an absence of the
conditions that make life possible upon our own earth. But what do we

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

mean by the terms *life*, *living matter*, and so on? In their
investigations, physicists have reached the point where matter is
reduced to a mere center of force, and where heat is only the rate of
speed of motion in matter. In the light of these facts, can the line
between living and non-living matter be drawn? It has never been drawn,
and we are prepared to say that it never will be.

Professor Bose in his book entitled "Response in the Living and
Non-Living," claims to have scientifically demonstrated that there is no
essential difference between animal, vegetable, or mineral life. He
shows also that metals, like the animal organism, can be put to sleep,
poisoned, revived, and finally killed.

Thus we are forced to the conclusion that what we call matter is a
living organism.

It should be remembered that iron is purified by fire, as in fact are
all the metals. It does not kill the life of iron or steel to put it
into the furnace and melt it, on the contrary, it seems to bring it into
a condition where the life-qualities are more perfectly manifested. And
our earth, science tells us, has come from a state of incandescence.
Intense heat has prepared it to bring forth living organisms. Yes,
more—the heat is absolutely essential to the perpetuation of these
organisms.

It is true that our own life requires what we call a moderate amount of
heat, but it is well known that there are microbes that subjected to a
very

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

intense heat still live. If life in its diminutive forms exists under
such conditions, may not the same possibility for life exist in more
highly organized forms? May there not be organisms of intelligence,
great and mighty minds, whose natural element is a heat transcending our
imagination?

The Biblical account states that the three Hebrew children were thrown
into a furnace heated seven times hotter than it was wont, that
Nebuchadnezzar looking in saw a fourth form like unto a son of man, and
that the three Hebrews came out unharmed. The Bible also declares that
God is a "consuming fire;" and while such quotations may have no
scientific bearing, they at least show that Revelation seeks to impress
upon our minds not only that the cause of all life and being is fire,
but that fire in itself is more like God than anything else that we
know.

This is in harmony with the scientific conclusion that every substance
originated in fire—the incandescent gas from which worlds were made—and
may not the Christ have announced a law when he said, "I came out from
God, and I return to God"? If the planets came out from fire, may they
not return to fire? If God, the Source of all mind, of all life, of all
action—in short, of all there is—is a consuming fire and if the highest
angels that the earth's inhabitants have ever seen appear as flaming
fire, is it not reasonable to believe that those blazing suns that
illuminate the heavens are the

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

abodes of high and holy beings whose very substance is a flame of fire.

When we say their very substance is a "flame of fire," do not allow your
mind to think of fire from the standpoint of a child. Science has
demonstrated that fire is nothing more or less than what is called
matter in great activity, the atoms of which are in violent vibration,
and there are evidences in human life that the higher the organism the
more rapid are the vibrations of the life-currents in the organism. So
that if we allow our reason full scope in connection with what has
already been accepted as Divine Revelation and as the truths of science,
we may believe, with good reason, that all the heavenly bodies are
inhabited.

While inquiring into the facts relative to the universe, the reader
should remember that the search is not merely for the wonderful, but for
the purpose of confirming and enlarging our conception of God. The
answer to the question:

ARE THE PLANETS AND SUNS INHABITED?

that naturally arises in the mind, necessarily reveals the wonders and
greatness of the mind, the consciousness, the intelligence that we call
Spirit, God, the Cause of all things.

Astronomers, in their investigation of the solar system, perceive that
the larger planets lying beyond our own are less dense and, to a certain
degree, self-luminous, and they inquire, "Is it Possible for life to
exist upon these worlds?" Such

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

a question can be answered only by logical deduction.

The best intellects will say, "If we have to consider these things at
all, we must search for the most logical hypotheses, and there wait
until evidences multiply to assure us of their correctness or
incorrectness."

In the absence of inspiration, if men cannot trust their reason, there
is nothing that they can trust; therefore, very little is accepted as
fact in regard to the systems of the universe. In order to reach
conclusions by means of the reason, we must first examine facts upon our
own planet and from these facts draw inferences as to what exists upon
other worlds.

Turning our attention to our own world and traversing the extreme north
among icebergs and perpetual snows, we find there the Eskimos and many
forms of animal life; going to the hottest part of our globe we find
that inhabited; in fact we find no place too hot, no place too cold, no
place too barren—in short, no conditions existing on our globe which
make life impossible.

Furthermore, the geologist has been able to turn a few pages of Nature's
past history, and he has discovered the remains of weird and strange
creatures—indeed it is impossible to picture the great diversity of
vegetable and animal life which has been found to exist on this
globe—life which it would be unable to support under the present

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

terrestial conditions. He has been able to turn pages that extend over
millions of years; but he has found no period that does not give
evidence of life.

Finally, it has been proved that the earth itself is a body of life, its
very substance is life. Sometime we shall know that there is no such
thing as dead matter, that all is mind, spirit, or soul-substance.

We believe that the majority of those who have studied our system and
the universe in general, agree with the astronomer Proctor in "Other
Worlds Than Ours" when he says, concerning the habitability of planets
and systems of worlds:

“I have already spoken of the conclusions to be drawn from the existence
of the same materials in the substance of the sun that exist around us
on this earth. I have shown that we are compelled to regard this general
resemblance of structure as sufficient to prove that the other planets
resemble the earth, since we have no reason to believe that our earth
bears an exceptionally close resemblance to the sun as respects the
elements of which she is composed.

“Since, then, we have reason to believe that all the planets which
circle around the sun are constituted of the same materials which exist
in his substance, though these materials are not necessarily nor
probably combined in the same proportions throughout the solar system,
we have every reason which analogy can give us for believing that the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

planets circling around Betelgeux or Aldebaran are constituted of the
same materials which exist in the substance of their central luminary.

“Thus we are led to a number of interesting conclusions even respecting
orbs which no telescope that man can construct is likely to reveal to
his scrutiny. The existence of such elements as sodium or calcium in
those other worlds suggests the probable existence of the familiar
compounds of these metals—soda, salt, lime, and so on. Again, the
existence of iron and other metals of the same class carries our minds
to the various useful purposes which these metals are made to subserve
on the earth. We are at once invited to recognize that the orbs circling
around those distant suns are not meant merely to be the abode of life,
but that intelligent creatures, capable of applying these metals to
useful purposes, must exist in those worlds. We need not conclude,
indeed, that at the present moment every one of those worlds is peopled
with intelligent beings, because we have good reason for believing that
throughout an enormous proportion of the time during which our earth has
existed as a world no intelligent use has been made of the supplies of
metal existing in her substance. But that at some time or other those
worlds have been or will be the abode of intelligent creatures seems to
be a conclusion very fairly deducible from what we now know of their
probable structure.   \*   \*   \*

“Thus the fact, that the stars send forth heat to the worlds which
circle around them, suggests at once the thought that on those worlds
there must

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

exist vegetable and animal forms of life; that natural phenomena, such
as we are familiar with as due to the solar heat, must be produced in
those worlds by the heat of their central sun; and that works such as
those which man undertakes on earthworks in which intelligent creatures
use Nature's powers to master Nature to their purposes—must go on in the
worlds which circle around Aldebaran and Betelgeux, around Vega,
Capella, and the blazing Sirius.”

Professor Proctor's reasoning here is good so far as it goes, and we
believe meets with general approval. His reasoning, that the fact that
these instrumentalities of use exist is in itself an evidence that there
are intelligences to use them, is good, because all who have given
thought to Nature's methods see that use determines all qualities,
whether good or evil, and that nothing exists in this world that has not
a use; and if there is an intelligent Creator it certainly would impeach
his intelligence—it even impeaches the intelligence of a man—to be
constantly producing useless things; only an idiot would sit and work
continuously when no object or use could be accomplished.

When an intelligent man is employed in work he seeks to serve a use. Is
God less intelligent than man? Has he created millions, untold millions
of worlds and systems of worlds, that have no use? Can we imagine that
these untold millions of worlds exist only to beautify our little grain
of

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

sand? Such thoughts are unworthy of intelligent beings.

No doubt the present theory—that the sun is an incandescent mass,
because the solar rays on striking the earth generate heat—is destined
soon to be superceded by one more worthy of the intelligence of our day.
Professor Proctor says:

"We know that the sun is the sole source whence light and heat are
plentifully supplied to the worlds that circle around him. The question
immediately suggests itself: Whence does the sun derive those amazing
stores from whence he is continually supplying his dependent worlds? We
know that, were the sun a mass of burning matter, he would be consumed
in a few thousand years. We know that were he simply a heated body,
radiating heat and light continually into space, he would in like manner
have exhausted all his energies in a few thousand years—a mere day in
the history of his system. Whence, then, comes the enormous supply of
force which he has afforded for millions on millions of years, and which
also our reason tells us he will continue to afford while the worlds
which circle around him have need of it—in other words, for countless
ages yet to come?"

The recent discovery of radium has already suggested to many
astronomers, that our sun and all the suns of the universe, may be
luminous from another cause than fire—as fire is generally known—that
there is a light that has the appearance of fire, like the burning bush
that burned, but was

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

not consumed, which Moses saw when he was commissioned to deliver Israel
from bondage.

That which is called fire has been a mystery through all time, and is as
much a mystery to-day as it was in the days of the fire worshipers, yea,
more of a mystery to-day, for the child-race lived so near to nature
that the thought formed in its brain was by virtue of the Universal
Mind, and came nearer the truth, in many respects, than the mind that
has shut itself against everything that cannot be demonstrated in the
physical.

When our philosophers have fully accepted the fact that the so-called
blazing suns are not blazing with consuming fire, but with an
illuminating property which perhaps will always be beyond the power of
the deepest research to fathom, then their theories will be reversed.
Revelation says that "God is a consuming fire," so that until they are
able to comprehend something of God, they can never fully comprehend the
cause of light.

We repeat, when philosophers are able to grasp this thought they will
find that in reasoning from analogy concerning nature's methods they
will need make no leaps. Evolution is generally accepted as the
universal law. It is certainly the law of all things that we know on
earth. Gradual development seems to characterize everything that exists.
It is said that, "Every generation becomes weaker and wiser." As mind
develops in the man the physical strength and avoirdupois lessen.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Everything points to the truth of the statement in Revelation that all
growth—evolutionary processes—is carrying "the whole creation" onward
and upward toward the likeness of its Cause, and if the first Cause of
all things is Spirit, and the tendency of all things is toward Spirit,
then it follows that the avoirdupois, the density of substance, must
decrease, as, not man only, but worlds go on in their process of
refinement and spiritualization.

There is a marked difference between the organisms of the lower races
and the organisms of the higher; and we know too that there is a marked
difference in the light that shines from the face of one of a highly
intellectual organism—especially when the mind is clear and active and
everything in the body is at its best—and in the light from the face of
a lower type. A natural light shines forth from a highly spiritualized
face, a light that is not imaginary but real, a light that anybody that
is in the habit of observing can see even from a distance.

Some years ago I called on a friend who, on my arrival, was not at home,
but soon after he came in and stepped from the hall into the back
parlor. I was sitting in the front parlor by the window and, as he
looked in while taking off his overcoat, I said to his wife: "What is
the matter with Mr. B?" She inquired why I asked, and I replied; "His
face is so dark." She then informed me that he had been out on business
in which there

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

was much trouble and anxiety. All this had cast over his face a shadow,
a darkness so marked that it could be seen the length of the room.
Probably all who are observant have noticed that a condition of anxiety
or disappointment throws a shadow over the face, making the countenance
actually shadowy and dark.

If, then, in ordinary life, a state of mind illuminates or darkens the
countenance—and many readers will bear witness to this statement—is not
this fact at least a suggestion that the more highly developed the soul,
the greater the luminosity that emanates from the body?

We are told many times in sacred history that celestial visitants were
shining as the light, in some cases so bright that they could not be
looked upon. Development means the increasing and the intensifying of
the life energy, which beyond a certain point reaches luminosity. The
fact that development and spiritualization are always accompanied by
illumination has been accepted by all spiritually developed men, and by
those who know something of mature souls that have passed into the
spirit-world; and from the evidence that we have been able to gather we
have come to the conclusion that as worlds age and develop, they, as
well as their inhabitants, become more spiritualized and luminous.

We reason that there can be nothing born, nothing come into
manifestation without a parent, let it

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

be plant, animal, or man. In continuing the analogy we are forced to the
conclusion that there is a parental source for every world, and if
worlds have a parentage, then we necessarily reject the "Nebular
Hypothesis" so far as it relates to the formation of worlds independent
of the sun around which they revolve. If worlds form from nebulæ in
space without any parental agency, then we conclude that life may be
born on our planet without the agency of parentage; in fact we are left
open to accept almost any theory. It is not so unreasonable to suppose
that a mother could bring forth a child without a father as to believe
that a world can be formed without a father or a mother.

On the other hand, it is evident that worlds are ruled by the same law
that governs individuals, that our sun has brought fourth and thrown
into space a system of worlds, and that some of these worlds have begun
to have a family of their own. It is not known if the younger
planets—that is, Venus and Mercury—have moons. But Earth has one child,
the moon; Mars has two; Jupiter, seven; and Saturn, ten. So we conclude
that as worlds are born from their parent-suns they are less in size,
denser, and more opaque, and need the more direct rays of their
parent-sun for growth and maturity. But as ages roll on, these worlds
grow and become more self-existent, more refined and luminous, and
organize for themselves a family of worlds, shedding their light upon
their children's life.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

Thus is carried forward the work of birth and development in all systems
of suns and worlds, and if it is a law that the progress of every world
is from density and opacity to refinement and luminosity, then the
astronomical observations that many of the suns floating in space are
less dense than our sun, and that the outermost planets of our solar
system are less dense than the inner planets, are undoubtedly correct
and substantiate our conclusion.

We believe it is generally accepted that light is due to a certain speed
of electric vibrations. We have been led to say that light is life in
motion, and light on one plane of existence is darkness to another.

For instance, we have animals and birds on our planet at the present
time that evidently never saw the sun. The light of the sun to them is
darkness. A good illustration of this is the owl. The owl may be sitting
upon a fence or the limb of a tree and if the sun is shining brightly
you may approach him and he is apparently blind, but as the shadows
begin to deepen he begins to see a little, and when total darkness
reigns he sees plainly. This is not only true of the owl but of many
insects, birds and animals.

This is at least a suggestion of the following general law; namely, that
when a world is born from its central sun it receives its light and heat
from that center and that it cannot even see light

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

emanating from a higher center, nor feel the heat from a higher center,
for the vibrations of that higher center cannot touch it. We believe
that if there are inhabitants on our moon that the earth would be to
them a sun and that they would have no consciousness of our sun.

The same would be true of all the satellites of Mars, Jupiter, and the
other planets. We see the sun and feel its light and are dependent upon
its emanating life for our existence, because it is our parent, and we
believe that when the inhabitants of the earth have developed to a
higher plane of existence they will begin to see shining worlds in space
that now are entirely invisible to us; suns and systems so glorious and
bright, so refined and ethereal that their emanations do not touch
anything that belongs to us and therefore we know nothing of their
existence. So that there may be suns immensely greater and brighter than
our sun even nearer to us than our sun and yet we know nothing about
them.

Again we quote from Professor Proctor's book entitled "Other Worlds Than
Ours:"

“Or if we estimate Jupiter rather by the forces inherent in his system,
if we contemplate the enormous rapidity with which his vast bulk whirls
round upon his axis, or trace the stately motion with which he sweeps
onward on his orbit, or measure the influences by which he sways his
noble family of satellites, we are equally impressed with

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the feeling that here we have the prince of all the planets, the orb
which, of all others in the solar scheme, suggests to us conceptions of
the noblest forms of life. The very symmetry and perfection of the
system which circles around Jupiter have led many to believe that he
must be inhabited by races superior in intelligence to any which people
our earth. The motions of these bodies afford indeed to our astronomers
a noble subject of study.”

If the course of all worlds, as well as the course of their inhabitants,
is from the grosser to the finer, then the inevitable conclusion is,
that the sun, our parent world, must be a planet in a state of
development so far beyond, so much more spiritualized than our world,
that its light is spiritual fire, and if our central luminary has been
born from another world, we may expect that the parent of our sun is as
much beyond our sun in luminosity, refinement and spirituality, as our
sun is more luminous than our earth. Following the same analogy leads us
to say that the parent of our sun must have a parent from which it was
born and that it is also transcendently more refined and spiritualized
than its child. If worlds are born from their parents and become
luminous suns, their density decreasing, or, in other words, if they
become more refined, then, by an ever increasing ratio we may trace on,
on, infinitely on, from child to parent in world-life, until worlds
become so refined and attenuated that they are, so far as we are able to
discern, immaterial.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

It also follows from the mutual relation of a planet and its people
that, as those luminous worlds unfold and develop, so their inhabitants
unfold and develop, becoming together more refined and luminous; and as
this refinement and spiritualization is the law of growth, there
necessarily is a point where these immense worlds, with their
inhabitants, become invisible—even spirit-substance to our
comprehension.

And if worlds have existed from all eternity, then it necessarily
follows that all space thruout the immensity of the universe is filled
and inter-filled with worlds and systems of worlds, each governed by its
own law, and each becoming higher, and still higher, more spiritual, and
yet more spiritual, fine and etherial, so that our solar system may be
floating through a body of immense worlds, so refined, so spiritualized,
that we have no consciousness of their presence, nor they of ours.

Thus the manifestations of God, Spirit, are without limit, as to extent
and planes of existence. Here our finite thought ends, but we see that
there is no place where there is not an expression of God, a body formed
by that Spirit that is omnipresent, who is the formless mind and will of
all universes: formless, yet forming all things; expressionless, yet
organizing forms to become the expression of his own great mind; and
thus we find ourselves thinking of God, Spirit, Formless-Substance,
continually

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

forming and expressing himself through the forms that he has made.

ADDENDUM.

We quote from the *Literary Digest* (N. Y. Nov. 10, 1906) the following
excerpts from the work of Prof. Kirschmann and comments, as they furnish
interesting thought on the line of the foregoing chapter.

"LIFE IN OTHER WORLDS."

"The probability, or even the possibility, of life in other worlds than
our own is denied by the veteran English scientist, Dr. Alfred Russel
Wallace, in his book on "Man's Place In The Universe." This opinion is
vigorously combated in a pamphlet reprinted from the *Transactions* of
the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada (Toronto, 1906), by Dr. A.
Kirschmann, professor of philosophy in the University of Toronto. Space
forbids allusion to all of Dr. Kirschmann's arguments, but he makes, in
particular, an ingenious use of the hypothesis of the relativity of
things, which is worthy of notice. To the relativity of magnitudes, for
instance, he will admit absolutely no limit, and he therefore maintains
the possibility of living beings so huge that every molecule of their
bodies is as great as our solar system, or so small that countless hosts
of them may dwell together on one of our molecules. 'Perhaps,' he says,
'the whole galactic system is nothing but one cell of an immense
organism.' To one who holds this view of matter

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

and life, argument designed to show that there are no human beings on
Venus or Mars, are evidently inadequate. Says Professor Kirschmann:

“We must not forget that the greatness of the universe known to us is
only relative. The law of relativity of all magnitudes is not a
speculation, but a fact which is given with every experience, and which
can be verified at any moment. But we have become accustomed to close
our eyes to it. There is absolutely nothing great or small in the world;
and the mathematical conception, so much indulged in, of the
approximation to zero is one of the worst fictions which human
intelligence ever invented. There can be no part of substance or of
empty space though ever so small, which, regarded from another
standpoint, is not a large part of matter or of space. Consequently, a
single molecule of chalk with its atoms of calcium and oxygen and
carbon—these again consisting of millions of ions, and these again of
sub-ions, and so on *ad infinitum*—may be a whole solar system again
with a central body, and planets and satellites, containing life in many
forms, but for our measure too small to be ever perceived. And, on the
other hand, the whole universe as far as we can fathom it may be only a
small aggregation of particles or cells of a greater and higher organism
absolutely unfathomable by us.”

“Somewhat similar to this infinity of magnitudes is the infinity of
physical conditions which the writer invokes as another argument in
favor of the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

possibility of life in other worlds. The laws of nature, it is true, may
be constant thruout all space and all time—though Professor Kirschmann
reminds us that even this is not susceptible of proof—but the variation
of conditions may still be infinite. We have no reason to believe that
life may not be possible under all these variations, for all conditions
are relative just as magnitude is. For every change in temperature, in
the intensity of gravity, and in the chemical composition of
atmospheres, and for every possible combination of these three, there
may be a specially adapted organism somewhere. Says the writer:

‘Physically there is no such thing as cold. The transformation of the
uniform series of possible physical temperatures from zero to infinite,
different only in intensity, into a manifoldness of two antagonistic
qualities, heat and cold, with even a changeable zero-point between, is
purely physical. If this zero-point can vary for us in the different
seasons—or on account of after-effects and contrast—we should assume
that it can vary considerably more under other conditions of gravity and
pressure. It is said that life could not exist on Jupiter because its
surface is still red-hot. But if the zero-point of the sense of
temperature of the Jovians is shifted for a few hundred degrees they
will have as pleasant a walk on that red surface as we do on the green
grass.’

‘After all, the ordinary notions of physical temperature as used in
cosmology are rather vague and

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

misleading If temperature consists in time and space relations of the
kinetic or dynamic elements of matter, or in changes of those
[relations](errata.htm#0), then it is clear that *the elements
themselves* no matter whether they are atoms, centers of force, ions, or
electrons, *can not have any temperature at all*.’

“Even Wallace's contention that life is dependent on the presence of
carbon, nitrogen, and water is not admitted by Professor Kirschmann.
Under present conditions other elements enter into organic combination,
and he sees no reason why the relative importance of these should not be
vastly greater in other places and at other times. He would admit,
perhaps, the possibility of a man made out of iron, bisulfid of carbon,
and chlorin. He says:

‘To say that life is dependent on the prevalence of the four organogens
on the surface of a planet is again incorrect. They are only the
organogens under the conditions of heat, gravity and pressure as they
prevail on our earth. Under other conditions of heat and pressure, other
substances, iron, gold, silicon, may play the role of organogens and
form compounds with similar characteristics as those very complex and
changeable chemical (organic) combinations which respond with partial or
complete decomposition to slight stimulation. The neglect of this
circumstance is the greatest mistake all those have made who have
hitherto written on the subject.’

“To cap the climax, our knowledge of our own

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

relationship to the external world is only relative. Professor
Kirschmann says of this:

‘There is one more point which should make us modest with regard to our
statements about what is possible in other worlds. We are accustomed to
think that we are a part of this world—an item in space and time. But
this is a matter of belief, not of knowledge or science. On closer
examination we find that what we can say *with certainty* is that the
whole world as we *know* it is *a part of us*—of our consciousness. Not
that we are in space and time—but space and time are in us. They are the
glasses through which alone we can see. We can look *through* them, but
not *at* them. If we attempt to take them off to look at them, we are
totally blind. What they are objectively we do not know. They are the
tools with which consciousness works. . . . . Time and space are for us
the instruments with which we grasp the world. We have a lease of these
instruments, and usually a lease for less than ninety-nine years.
Whether with different mental instruments other worlds may be opened to
us, whether the evil in this world is real or is only a distortion
produced by the inadequacy of the tools or the imperfection of us who
handle them, we cannot know in this life. We may discover when the lease
runs out.’”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Immensity of the Universe](goal11)
