[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal22)  [Next](goal24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

### CHAPTER XIX.

#### THE LIKENESS OF GOD.

#### *MAN BECOMING YAHVEH ELOHIM*.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> Established Theology there have been
two great points of conflict, between "Predestination" or
"Foreordination," on the one hand, and what is known as "Free-Agency" or
"Free-Will," on the other hand. But to quote from Robertson's Sermon's:

"All high truth is the union of two contradictories. Thus
*predestination* and *free-will* are opposites; and the truth does not
lie between these two, but in a higher reconciling of truth which leaves
both true."

As we have suggested, man, like the animal world, cannot think or desire
anything that is not in himself. He has perfect freedom of will so far
as circumstances and capacity permit; but he can never get the will to
be or to do that which is contrary to his nature. He must possess the
quality before he can express it. The nature of the life-forces must be
such as to produce desire and consequent action.

We read that it is God that worketh in us, "both

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

to *will* and to do of his good pleasure." It is true that man is free
to do what he wills, but God is our potter and we are the clay in his
hands; and the methods by which man is lifted to a higher degree of
existence are the methods by which God is creating within man his own
divine nature and quality.

Predestination is established in God's purpose, announced in the
beginning when he said, "Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness." This is his purpose and this purpose <span
class="smallcaps">will</span> be accomplished. All nature works together
to force its accomplishment (Romans viii. 22, 23), but man is given a
"free-will" to act within the limits of his knowledge and his capacity,
and the qualities within him producing desires.

To explain how man becomes <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim,
it is necessary to look again at the "Three Steps" for attaining "The
Likeness of God."

The "First Step," *inspiring or indrawing from the creative forces*, is
common to all flesh—the method in pursuance of the law, that as man
unfolds, new conditions demand higher qualities, which naturally flow
in, producing nobler desires, loftier aspirations, and purer thoughts.

The "Second Step," *the incorporating of the paschal lamb or the Divine
Word*, leads to the next higher plane where the evolutionary forces have
refined and qualitated the human organism to a degree which renders it
capable of receiving an

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

influx from that spirit-life that was generated and prepared for the
world by the Lord Christ. Up to this time man has nothing directly to do
with these steps, it is all of God. But when, as we have seen, this
second quality is obtained, there begins in the man a struggle
[between](errata.htm#15) the forces of the carnal or animal man, and the
forces of the spiritual or divine man, and there are manifested in the
man two natures, the one struggling against the other. This is the
condition that has been active in the world since the time of the
Christ.

At this point man's responsibility begins. While desire comes from
development, yet that desire draws in, gathering to itself the spiritual
qualities that were prepared through the Lord Jesus, which cause the
individual to aspire to a higher and a holier life.

But there still remain active in the individual the appetites and
passions of the flesh, causing a struggle between the two natures. Here
begins the work of "overcoming," for by thought and by effort, man can
coerce these appetites and passions and give special freedom and culture
to the spiritual desires and aspirations, or he is free to neglect the
developing of the spiritual qualities, even to the extent of crushing
out from his own organism the divine life that God has given him, and
thus he is lost, individually lost, in that he will leave the body
without being able to carry with him a perpetual consciousness. He will
then have to

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

return in another organism, and finish that which he failed to do in his
former incarnation.

But if a person turn his thoughts toward God and give his entire life
and all his efforts to know and to do the will of God, suppressing the
appetites, passions and evil desires of the flesh, then will the spirit
of life from God grow and mature in him. Before this maturity can take
place, however, we are brought face to face with the "Allegory of Eden,"
"the fall of man," and his redemption through Christ.

The "fall," we are informed, was carnal generation, or the spiritual man
descending into and becoming party to the generation of the flesh.
Christ taught of two ways, the way of *generation* and the way of
*regeneration*. Generation was the old order of life, wherein were found
labor, sorrow, experience (experimentation) and final death; then
reincarnation, a repetition of the experience whereby knowledge and
development were obtained—and again, death. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14)

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

This has been the law and the order of life from the beginning of our
history down to the present time, but we have reason to believe, that
there is a people now in the world who have so far matured and through
the evolutionary processes of nature have gotten so near the finished
work, that they are able to grasp the knowledge and to apply the methods
whereby they may become like God.

In this people is found the Christ-Spirit. They are now ready to take
the "Third Step," namely, *Man's re-birth, or the birth of the
spirit-child*. These are they who have received the word that Jesus sent
forth to be preached to the world—it "has fallen into good ground ready
to bring forth an hundred-fold." They have been partakers of the flesh
and blood of Christ and they are now ready for the finishing work, ready
to become one of the first begotten from above, the real sons and
daughters of God.

In all cases where the spirit has become so strong that the whole desire
and effort of the life of the

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

person is toward a life of righteousness, and the mind has become
awakened to an earnest desire to know the truth that he may live in
harmony with it, a desire so strong that it has become paramount,
over-ruling all other desires, then will take place the rebirth, then
will be sent into the person the spiritual child, the son of God, a
child begotten of divine love and divine mind, begotten by the action of
these two forces in the spiritual soul of those who have become <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim.

When this newly begotten child enters the organism, the person is many
times unconscious of the change. Sometimes, however, he is conscious
that a new life from an unknown and invisible source has entered into
him, and when it comes it thrills the whole being, passing through all
the veins as a living, loving fire. It produces in the person a feeling
that he belongs to and is linked with the heavens in a way that he has
not been before.

We have mentioned the struggle that exists between the carnal man and
the spiritual man after the second step is attained—a struggle well
known to the Christian, since the time of Christ. But at this point, the
*third step*, comes another, a deadlier struggle, a struggle between
Generation on the one side and Regeneration on the other side. As the
fierceness of any battle is measured by the strength of the opposing
forces, so here a deadly conflict ensues, for marshalled ins

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

battle array, on the one side is all Creation—the whole world of
generation, visible and invisible; while on the other side is all
*Re-Creation*—the Holy Spirit, and the great body of <span
class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim in the heavens, aiding man in his
final great struggle to become "Yahveh Elohim." This "step" or way is
the "Narrow Way" so often spoken of by the Christ and referred to in II.
Esdras vii. 6-10:

"There is another thing: A city is builded, and set upon a broad field,
and is full of all good things; the entrance thereof is narrow, and is
set in a dangerous place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the
right hand, and on the left a deep water: and only one path between them
both, even between the fire and the water, so small that there could but
one man go there at once. If this city now were given unto a man for an
inheritance, if he never shall pass the danger set before it, how shall
he receive this inheritance? And I said, It is so, Lord. Then said he
unto me, Even so also is Israel's portion."

The presence of the spirit-child in the organism at once causes the
person to repel, to hate every act of the old generation, to stop all
waste of the life fluids, and to consecrate all the life generated in
the body to the developing of mind and soul powers, to the developing of
the newly begotten child. He is now literally a son of God, and all that
belongs to the Holy Spirit and to the state symbolized by

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

the "Garden of Eden," is attractive to the heavenly guest that occupies
the temple—the body.

This brings us to the question of *individuality*, for there has entered
into the organism another soul, a spirit-child, from above, entirely
distinct from the individual, and there begins a struggle between the
two as to which shall become the real man, which shall survive and which
shall be absorbed by the other. It is not, however, wholly a question of
which shall be absorbed, because the carnal mind, or human soul, can
never absorb the spiritual child, but the spiritual child can absorb and
must absorb the human soul—not destroy it, but absorb it into or unite
it with its own consciousness. This is a process that the human
intellect is incapable of understanding only as experience has taught
the individual along these lines.

It is as if the Spirit of God should come to you and say: "The way you
are going will ultimate in death and you will be as if you had not been,
and another spirit sent from God will enter into your body and will
become the real man, one of the builders of the kingdom of God on earth.
Are you willing thus to die, that your body and all that belongs to the
physical desires, appetites, passions, loves, sympathies, may be
absorbed and transformed by a spiritual consciousness, in order that the
kingdom of God, the conditions that now exist in the heavens, may have a
standing on the earth?"

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

When you are ready to answer this question in the affirmative, then the
spiritual child that has entered the body will be given freedom of
action, then will this higher intelligence begin to take control of
every appetite, passion and desire, and will gradually refine them and
transform them into the likeness of the Spirit. In other words, it will
gradually carry the individual up out of the low state in which he is
found after years of generation, labor, sorrow and death, and bring him
back into the form ("The Image"), and cause him to express the quality
that was in the mind of his heavenly Father ("The Likeness of God"), the
Creator of all things. He will be fitted to dwell in the Eden of God,
the new heaven and the new earth.

INDIVIDUALITY

We here meet a question that will arise in the minds of nearly all who
read the foregoing: Does not this idea, in place of saving man, destroy
him and save that which man is not? It appears so from a surface view;
but when we remember the fact that man, like all growing vegetation, is
constantly changing, taking on the new and throwing off the old, then we
realize that this is not the destroying of the man, but is creating in
him a center which only is immortal, which only can perpetuate his
consciousness.

If you should retire at night and fall into a deep sleep and on
awakening find that you had forgotten

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

everything that you had ever known, what would be the difference between
your condition and that of a child just born?—There would be no
difference except in the development of the body and the mind organs,
formed by the habit of the mind running in a certain channel, but so far
as the individual man (consciousness) is concerned, your life would
begin at that point. You would have an existence only from that point as
a beginning. We think that this is clear to all who have given any
thought to the subject.

This thought brings to our mind the fact that we live in our memories
and we die in forgetting. The conditions that exist to-day will have
passed away forever to-morrow, and new ones will have come in their
place. Thus to-morrow we shall have died to much that exists to-day ("I
die daily." I. Cor. xv. 31), and we shall live again in the new
experiences, the new desires and aspirations that the occasion creates,
and when these are of the earth, earthy, they continue to be as
transient as the days, hours and minutes that succeed each other.

But when this newly begotten soul, this spiritual form, begotten of God,
enters into the individual organism, his consciousness is then of his
heavenly Father, and the absorption of all that belongs to the old man
adds to, but does not take from the person, for all useful memories
possessed by the person before the advent of the spiritual child, remain
intact; but, as we have said, these memories

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

will be carried up and refined, and this spirit-life, this spirit-child
that lives from God and is conscious in the cause world, throws a new
light upon all things. In that new light all the desires, as well as all
the happenings of the past life, are seen, understood and comprehended,
even as God sees and knows. Then wisdom and knowledge of God begin to
take form in the individual, and as they take form and succeed in
overcoming the hypnotized state of the human consciousness—which causes
man to think and to feel that the material world, the physical
externality, is all there is—facts in nature begin to be realized and
things appear as they are.

Science, as we have shown, is already meeting Revelation by showing
evidences that all material things are, after all, spiritual substance,
or at least that they are not material.

In this process the individual who has been begotten from above, is
transformed from a mere physical consciousness to a consciousness of
God, his Father, a consciousness that is of the heavens. As Jesus said,
the heavens are opened and man discovers the angels of God ascending and
descending upon the son of man. At this point he is made acquainted with
the occupants of the spiritual heavens, and there awakens in the inner
consciousness of the man, a realization of perfect oneness with the
heavenly occupants, the untold millions

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

of perfected souls that form the Eternal Brotherhood of which Christ is
a member.

It should be borne in mind here that the father and mother love that
exists in man is a derivative of the heavens, that the father and mother
of the spirit-child love it; and that their special care and even
solicitude are for the prosperity, growth and unfoldment, not only of
the spirit-child, but of the body and mind that it occupies. Think for a
moment of that wonderful love of God, and then think that that love is
all turned toward you, to care for you, to protect you and to provide
the necessary conditions for your highest possible good.

When the spirit-child has gotten sufficient control of the animal body
and mind to transfer the consciousness of the flesh to the consciousness
of spirit, then the old passions, the old likes and dislikes, will have
all passed away. Of such the angel said to John, "He shall go no more
out," for he has entered into life, his consciousness is one with the
immortals, and the things of this world are only secondary
considerations; they serve for the uses of the body in the consummating
of the object in the creation of the world.

Thus the individual becomes a co-worker with God and his angels, and, as
we have seen that the "Image of God" is consummated in the gathering of
the first ripe fruit of the earth, the 144,000 or the 288,000
individuals, all of one mind; therefore the one great desire of the
individual brought to this

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

point will be to follow out and to accomplish God's purpose, and the
same desire and all-controlling impulse will be in the heart of the
whole body. The Spirit of the highest will be the dominant, leading
spirit of every individual, and, consequently, this body will be caused
to come together from all parts of the world; the members will be moved
as by one mind, one spirit, and they will come as the prophets have
prophesied in the following:

"Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the earth
be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once?
for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children." (Isaiah
lxvi. 8.) (See also Ezekiel xxxiv. 11 to 31; <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15) Rev. chapters i. vii., xiv., xxi, and
xxii.)

By virtue of the foregoing conditions brought about by being born of the
Spirit, men are to be drawn together by one common impulse, to unite in
one organic structure, a structure which was revealed in the symbology
of the temple of God, the cubical city. Herein is found the great truth
referred to by the Apostle Paul when he said, "Now ye are the body of
Christ, and members in particular."

When this Great Body is drawn together by the one Spirit, there can be
no jealousies or schisms among the members, for each will love above all

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

things to live in harmony with the mind and will of the Father, and to
be the expression of that mind. As God is one, but will have many
manifestations through the varied organisms of men, each one will
delight most in being what he or she really is, will delight in the use
for which he or she was designed in creation. Therefore no one will
desire the position occupied by another, and the whole Body will come
into its functions of use "without the sound of a hammer," without an
effort on the part of any, except to know and to do the will of the
Father. (I. Kings vi. 7.)

Thus they will stand forth as a multitude of members constituting one
"Grand Man," one glorified individuality, as the Spirit proclaimed by
the apostle, speaking of the Christ:

"Wherefore when he cometh into the world, he saith, Sacrifice and
offering thou wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me: in burnt
offerings and sacrifices for sin thou hast had no pleasure. Then said I,
Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me,) to do thy
will, O God."

After saying that God had no pleasure in sacrifice and offerings and
burnt offerings, and sacrifices for sin, which are offered under the
law, the apostle adds, "Lo, I come, to do thy will, O God," "he taketh
away the first, that he may establish the second."

This Glorified Man made up of 144,000 members or 288,000 individuals
(male and female) will be the

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Image of God,"
and as God is the life and mind thereof ("The Lord is in his holy
temple: let all the earth keep silent before him"), therefore the
"Likeness" will also be manifested. As we have seen in a former chapter
<span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span> Elohim is the great center and God
of the Solar System, and, consequently, of all that belongs to our
earth; and according to the revelation to John, when this Body is
organized its members are made "to be unto our God a kingdom and
priests; and they reign upon the earth." By virtue of being the
embodiment and expression of <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, they
will inherit the earth.

They will then be in truth and verity the sons of God, and they come
into the image of their Father through coming into the unity of the Body
that is composed of many members, a Body which becomes the Christ, the
anointed Savior of the world, as well as the king and ruler of the
planet earth. The accomplishment of this will be the accomplishment of
the work declared in the words:

"Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[237:\*](goal23.htm#fr_14) It is evident that
Jesus and his disciples believed and accepted as a truth the law of
*reincarnation*; otherwise, why did not the Christ correct his disciples
when they asked him, concerning the man who was born blind—"Who did sin,
this man or his parents, that he was born blind?" That this is a
question concerning reincarnation is evident, for how could the man sin
before he was born, and suffer the consequence of that sin—being born
blind—unless reincarnation is the law? Jesus did not correct his
disciples in that thought, but he answered, "Neither did this man sin,
nor his parents: but that the works of God should be made manifest in
him," implying that if the man was working out the result of his sin it
would not have been in order to have opened his <span id="page_237">p.
237</span> eyes, but it was done for a specific purpose, therefore he
gave him sight.

Again Jesus said, "Before Abraham was, I am." Many Christian people ask:
Was he not Melchisedek? They little know when they ask this question
that they are believing in reincarnation—but this is true, however. And
there are many inferential evidences throughout the teachings of the
Christ that reincarnation was accepted as a law, and as it was settled
beyond question in the minds of the people with whom Christ was
dealing—for nearly the whole Oriental world believed in reincarnation—it
was unnecessary that it should form a part of his instructions.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[246:\*](goal23.htm#fr_15) It should be borne in
mind that according to Usher's chronology this prophecy was uttered
about 400 years after the death of David.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. The Image And The Likeness](goal24)
