[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](goal28)  [Next](goal30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1428625305/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Goal of Life*, by Hiram Butler, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

### CHAPTER XXIV.

#### EXIT FROM THE OLD TO THE NEW.

#### PART IV.

"<span class="smallcaps">Be</span> ye therefore perfect, even as your
Father which is in heaven is perfect."

If we are members of the church, or the children of church members, we
have been taught from our early childhood that we are "miserable
sinners," and that no matter what we do, yet we are sinners. This idea
has been so instilled into our minds that we regard this injunction of
our Lord, to be perfect even as our Father in heaven is perfect, as a
mere incentive to cause us to strive toward perfection, but at the same
time without any hope of ever attaining it on this earth. Thus we accuse
the Lord Christ of a form of deception, for commanding us to do that
which he knew to be impossible for us to do; therefore we are not
expected to obey.

John carries out the same idea of perfection as did Christ: "Little
children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness is
righteous, even as he \[Christ\] is righteous," and we would emphasize

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

the words of the beloved disciple, "*let no man deceive you*," but do
right and you are right.

Again remember that when you do the best you can through watchfulness,
prayerfulness and diligence in every direction, you have done all that
any one on earth or in heaven can do. The angels can do no more than to
do their best. If there were no provisions made by the Holy Spirit to
enable you to be perfect, then it would be better if the words of the
Christ and of the beloved disciple John had not been spoken; they are a
deception, or, at least it was folly on the part of the Christ and of
John to express them.

Bear in mind that you are begotten of God; that your real self is the
son of God, a spiritual and divine being, as truly as was Jesus of
Nazareth, and remember too that being a son of God, you are in touch
with his Spirit, and that all power in heaven and in earth is at your
command; for you were created and embodied for the exclusive purpose of
taking the kingdom from the Father and executing dominion over all the
earth.

Therefore keep ever before your mind's eye the clear distinction between
your *real self*, who is the son of God, and your *physical body*, which
is the son of man.

In the physical body are weaknesses and inclinations toward depravity,
but in your real self is the divine son of God that gives you
inclinations toward righteousness.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

Strive above all things to realize that, being a son of God, you are one
with the Father, and to realize also that the words of Jesus are
applicable to you, when he said, "All things that the Father hath are
mine;" if you are faithful and accept your high calling, you are to
receive the kingdoms of this world and the dominion over them.

When these realizations become vivid to you, then you will be conscious
that you are walking before God and being perfect. As God said to
Abraham, "I am the Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect."

It is essential that you believe and realize these things, for that
which you believe you grow to be like, it matters not what it is. If you
believe that you are a miserable sinner, you will grow to be a miserable
sinner; but if you believe that you are a son of God and will to be
righteous even as he is righteous, then all the new life that is
generated in the body and conserved by you for the use of the brain and
soul-powers, will be of that perfect quality.

It is well known that if a child is constantly told that he is ugly,
wicked and bad in every way, he will grow to be wicked and bad.

That holy child that has been begotten in you, wants to realize its
holiness, its righteousness, its oneness with the Father, its perfection
in his sight, and all these qualities must be realized and cultivated

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

in your mind. But remember, you must keep *active* the distinction
between the *physical* structure, and the appetites and passions arising
therefrom, and the *real self*, the spiritual man. Remember the object
of your incarnation in flesh is, that you take control of this body, and
no longer allow it to be controlled by the appetites, passions and
desires of the flesh, but to regenerate it into the likeness of your
real self and the likeness of the everlasting Father. Here you have an
individual work, great and important, which must be done by you. When
the Christ said, "seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you," he implied
that the seeking of God and his righteousness, must be the first and
chief object and all other things must be subordinate to that object.

Now that you understand what the kingdom of God is, your life is
dedicated to God that it may be established, as the prophet Obadiah
said, "And saviors shall come up on Mount Zion to judge the mount of
Esau; and the kingdom shall be <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh's</span>."

Yes, you are called to be a savior to the world. The office of that
newly begotten son that you are, is that of a savior, as was the office
of the Christ of Nazareth. If you hold firmly to the realization that
you are a prince (a son) of the Most High God, and do not let the
thought that you are a poor, weak, carnal man, enter your mind

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

for an instant, then will the strength of the Spirit produce in you a
consciousness that you have access to the power of the will of the
Infinite, and all power in earth and in heaven will be at your command.
Faithfully following this line, will bring you where the Christ was when
he said, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth." Up to this
point you go alone—alone with God. Your eye is kept *single* and
centered upon the Father. Spiritually you see and know no one but God;
but you know that God has a great family of children like unto yourself,
whom he is leading, the same as he is leading you.

But in your realizing that you are the son of God, and not a poor, weak,
mortal man, you meet a grave danger, where thousands have fallen; that
is, the ego, the self; the dark forces from the invisible side, will at
once step in and cause you to feel that you are more than other men, and
will cause you to begin to live in the *ego*, and there is no one thing
that will destroy the working of the Spirit so quickly as this *egoism*.
It is because of this that God said by the prophet, "Cursed be the man
that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm." And in this connection
the Apostle Paul said:

"For we dare not make ourselves of the number, or compare ourselves with
some that commend themselves; but they measuring themselves by

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise."
(II. Cor. x. 12.)

In order to maintain your realization that you are a son of God and yet
remain humble and conscious of your dependence on the Father, it is
necessary that you always look upward, and if any comparison is to be
made, let it be made between yourself and God and his angels. This will
ever keep you humble, meek and faithful in your effort to become more
and more like them. But if you begin to compare yourself with your
fellow men, you at once turn your eye away from God. Your eye is no
longer single and you see yourself superior to so many of your fellow
men that you swell up with egoism, and the door is wide open for dark
spirits to enter and to possess you, and your last state will be worse
than the first.

But by faithfulness to God and by constantly living up to the highest
and the best that you know, and by seeking always the light of the
Spirit to guide you in everything that you do, you become joined to and
one with the Father, as God said by the prophet Hosea, "And it shall be
at that day, saith <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, that thou
shalt call me my husband; and shalt call me no more my master." (Hosea
ii. 16.) Now you will know what God meant when he said, by the prophet
Isaiah:

"And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction, yet shall not

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

thy teachers be hidden any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers:
and thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way,
walk ye in it; when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the
left." (Is. xxx. 20, 21.)

You will be introduced by the Lord Christ to the Father, as he said,
"Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess
also before my Father who is in heaven." Here will be vivid, the
realization that you are introduced to the Father and to his angels,
introduced into membership with that Eternal Brotherhood and are
consciously a member thereof, and that you are no longer a member of
this world, though a resident therein.

Now you are ready to follow the Spirit wherever it leads. As God is one,
when the time will have arrived for the gathering of the first ripe
fruit of the earth—for the birth of the man-child spoken of in the
twelfth chapter of Revelation, which is to rule all nations as with a
rod of iron—then will you be called out from the world and gathered into
the place .appointed by the Father, together with the 144,000, who, like
yourself, have been following the Lord wholly. Having obtained absolute
control over the body, over generation and death, when you are really
introduced consciously as a member to the Eternal Brotherhood, God will
say, "It is not good that man should be alone; I will make an helpmeet
for him," and as the apostle

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

said, "Neither is the man without the woman, neither the woman without
the man in the Lord," and, according to the Lord Christ, "They twain
shall be one flesh." Thus are brought together 288,000 individuals, but
144,000 souls, as the two become one, which Body constitutes the first
ripe fruit, the holy city which came out of heaven from God, the new
Jerusalem wherein dwelleth peace.

This Body will constitute the "Image of God," and the righteousness of
your soul's desires and acts will constitute your likeness to God. Thus
there will be established on earth that holy Body that has become indeed
the temple of God, in which <span class="smallcaps">Yahveh</span>, the
Formless Former of all things, will have established his throne and
through which he will take the kingdom and the dominion under the whole
heaven. Then the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdom of our
God and of his anointed, the 144, 000. Thus will be accomplished the
purpose of God in the creation of the world:

"Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and
over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Part V](goal30)
