[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](jss12)  [Next](jss14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029XG0XM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Journey in Southern Siberia*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### CHAPTER IX

### THE ORIGIN OF SHAMANS

FROM Baronyé Tabin Tabung Tengeri, the first spirit to emerge from the
Highest Existence in the Universe, Delquen Sagán Burkan, World White
god, often called Esege Malan, came the fifty-five Tengeris. One day the
spirit of one of the fifty-five, it is unknown which, entered into a
hailstone, fell to the earth, and was swallowed by a girl thirteen years
of age, whose name was Mélûk Shin. Soon after swallowing the stone Mélûk
Shin became a mother. The son she bore—Qolongoto Ubugun, or, as he was
also called, Mindiú Qúbun Iryil Noyon Tunkói—lived three hundred years.
He established the Buriat religion, gave the Buriats all their prayers,
and told them of their gods. (My translator, a Christian, states that
Mindiú is the same for the Buriats that Christ is for Christians).

Mindiú chose and consecrated the first one hundred and seventy-six
Shamans, ninety-nine males and seventy-seven females. In a sense he was
himself the first Shaman. He commanded to pray to Delquen Sagan, to
Tabin Tabung, to the fifty-five Tengeri, and the forty-four Tengeri,—to
heavenly spirits only. But in later times Shamans have forgotten or do
not follow his command, and pray sometimes to the spirits of dead
Shamans, male and female, and to the Bumal (descended) Burkans.

Mindiú's portrait is always made of skunk skin.

There are two kinds of Shamans,—those made directly by Burkans, and
those who have inherited from either the male or female branch of their
family their right to be Shamans.

A man whose father or mother, grandfather or grandmother, has been a
Shaman has the inherited right; he must, however, have this right
confirmed by the Burkans. A child or young

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

person is supposed to be acceptable to the Burkans when the spirit of a
dead relative, a Shaman, comes while he is sleeping and takes his spirit
to the residences of the Earthly and Heavenly Burkans, who conduct him
through their mansions, show him their possessions, power, and wealth,
and instruct him in all things.

To one selected directly by the Burkans the spirit of a Shaman, who has
died within four or five years, comes at night while he is sleeping and
conducts his spirit to the Burkans. In the morning the spirit returns to
the body. This Shaman guide may select two or three, or perhaps four,
children or young people and educate their spirits while their bodies
sleep.

It happens sometimes that a person who seems foolish in this world
becomes wise in the mansions of the Burkans, and one who seems wise to
us may be found by the Burkans to be foolish and incapable.

When this education, which may require several years, is finished, the
spirit of the Shaman, in the form of a flame, strikes the student a
heavy blow on the forehead. He falls to the ground, and is raised to his
feet by those who chance to be near him. If this happens away from his
home, he is taken home, and an offering of tarasun is made by sprinkling
tarasun to the young man's Shaman ancestors, and to those Burkans who
gave rights of Shamanship to those ancestors. Or if he has been chosen
directly, they offer a libation of tarasun to the Burkan who has chosen
him. A person who has inherited the right to be a Shaman is educated
exactly the same as one who is chosen directly.

Even after his education is finished it is a long time before a young
Shaman can offer sacrifice; often there are years of trial. The Burkans
may leave him at any time as unfit or incapable, and then he is no
better than an ordinary man. His first libations and offerings are made
to Bumal Burkans (those who have their homes in sacred groves) and to
the spirits of Shamans. He officiates by request of the people.

The spirit of his ancestor strikes him again on the forehead. He falls,
the people raise him and cut birch sticks for him an inch or so thick.
He takes these sticks and sways them behind his back, then in front.
Then he holds them in one hand, sways

 

<span id="img_10600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TEA FROM CHINA,
COMING FROM KIAKHTA TO THE RAILROAD IN IRKUTSK.](tn/10600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10600.jpg)  
TEA FROM CHINA, COMING FROM KIAKHTA TO THE RAILROAD IN IRKUTSK.  
</span>

*Page* [20](jss06.htm#page_20)

<span id="img_10601"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![BURIAT WATCH
DOG.](tn/10601.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10601.jpg)  
BURIAT WATCH DOG.  
</span>

*Page* [27](jss06.htm#page_27)

 

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

them, pats his forehead with his palm, and begins to speak of the life
and work of his ancestor. It is not the young Shaman who speaks, but the
flame or spirit which struck his forehead, and which speaks through him.

Another flame strikes him. He falls, throws away the sticks, is raised,
and the second flame speaks just as the first did. This may continue
till all his Shaman ancestors have spoken. While speaking for a dead
Shaman the live Shaman often approaches some person present and says
such and such a Burkan wishes of you an offering and libation. If it is
not given, you will suffer from sickness or misfortune.

When the young Shaman is ready to become a Shaman in full a day is
appointed by the people. They invite an experienced Shaman to conduct
the ceremony, and he makes libations and offerings to a number of
Burkans, asking for their assistance.

Fifty-four birch trees are cut from a sacred grove, by the permission of
the Burkan of that grove. Three of these trees are large, the others are
small. The small ones are planted in a row called "dry"; a large tree is
placed on the right side of the row and is called sergé, "pillar ";
beyond this is the second large tree, called turga. The third large tree
is placed in the middle of the yurta, the top coming out at the
smoke-hole; to this top are fastened silk strings representing the
colors of the rainbow; the strings are carried to the tree called the
pillar and tied to its highest branch.

From the young Shaman's village nine men are selected to assist in the
ceremony. They represent the nine Heavenly assistants of Xoxode Mergen
(one of the Burkans). Then the old Shaman and the young one enter the
yurta and stand at the right-hand side of the door; each holds in his
right hand as many one-branched twigs as he has friendly Burkans. The
old man sets fire to his twigs and summons by name the Burkans which the
twigs represent; when he has finished his invocation, the young one
begins. As soon as they have summoned the Burkans they leave the yurta
and go to the great birch tree, "the turga."

The people of the village and of surrounding villages have brought milk,
tarasun, sheep, and horses, all things necessary for a great sacrifice.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

There can never be less than nine animals offered on such an occasion,
if there are more than nine there must be eighteen or twenty-seven (it
is not necessary, however, to have nine of a kind, there can be eight
sheep and one horse, or any combination which will make up the nine).

Again the two Shamans summon the Burkans. Milk and tarasun are sprinkled
as a libation on each of the nine animals, and they are then sacrificed.
The old Shaman calls on the Burkans. Three of his assistants stand at
his side, the first man sprinkles milk en the ground, the second tea,
and the third tarasun. This, immensely multiplied, goes to the Burkans
supposed to be present, or, if not present, in their dwellings where
they can partake of all that is offered them.

During this ceremony the young Shaman removes his outer garments,
leaving only his shirt, and approaches the row of small birches; when he
reaches the birches he takes off his shirt, and is entirely naked. Then
the nine young men, representing the Heavenly assistants of Xoxode
Mergen, bring up in front of him a white goat and stab the goat in the
breast in such a way that the blood spirts over the naked body of the
new Shaman. This ceremony is called ugälga, purification. When it is
over, the goat, still alive, is thrown far off to where women are
waiting; they seize it, give it the finishing blow, then cook and eat
the meat.

Before the sacrifice begins, if any of the animals are impure the Shaman
knows it, and has them purified by being led through the smoke of
burning juniper.

The flesh of the animals sacrificed is boiled, parts of it offered to
the gods, and the rest eaten. When this ceremony is ended the young man
is declared to be a full-fledged Shaman. If there are a number of
Shamans present they begin now to tell about their family of Shamans,
and there is much talk and uproar. The feasting lasts for three days and
nights. Some of the Shamans go to the tops of the trees and make
offerings to the gods from there.

In old times there were such mighty Shamans that they could walk on the
silk strings connecting the top of the tree which comes up through the
smoke-hole of the yurta with

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

the great birch tree outside; this was called "walking on the rainbow."

The Buriats have many traditions regarding the power of their Shamans.

Once two Shamans went to heaven on the real rainbow; when coming back in
the same way the Heavenly Burkans saw them and were very angry. "How did
those black beetles of the earth dare to come up here on the rainbow,
and think of going back on it?" asked they, and immediately they cut the
rainbow. The Shamans were falling to the earth when the stronger of the
two, a very powerful Shaman, seeing that they would surely be killed,
turned himself into a yellow, spotted eagle, seized his companion in his
claws, and brought him down to the earth gently and safely.

Once a Lama came from beyond the Baikal to visit a family at Usturdi. A
Shaman by the name of Badai, who did not like to have a Lama among his
people, turned himself into a gray wolf and went to the house in the
night-time. The Lama, who saw the wolf and was terribly frightened,
called out: "There is a wizard here in the form of a wolf! He has come
to kill me! Build a fire quickly!"

The master of the house did not see the wolf; it was invisible to every
one save the Lama, who was so terrified that his eyes burned, and he was
as pale as a dead man. All night the beast stood in front of the Lama,
apparently ready to spring at him; not till daylight did it disappear.

The Lama left Usturdi that very day.

They tell of Shamans who cut open their stomachs, take out their livers,
roast and eat them, then close their stomachs and are as well as ever.
Others take a sharp shaman stick called "haribo," thrust it in over one
of their eyes to the depth of several inches, and ask some one to pull
it out. To do so requires all the strength of a strong man, still the
stick leaves no visible wound.

There are Shamans who cut a man's head off. He walks around without it,
they put it on again, and he is the same as ever. Some Shamans can stab
the central pillar of a yurta and a stream of tarasun will flow out, for
the Shaman has power to

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

summon tarasun from a distance, and command it to be in the pillar.

Another can call the birds of heaven, and they will come and sit on his
shoulders. Then he will put the back of his hands to his head and spread
out his fingers, and immediately his hands and fingers will be covered
with worms for the birds to eat.

Almost any Shaman can dance on fire. A large fire is built on the
ground, the Shaman strips naked and dances on the live coals until they
die out; not even the soles of his feet are burned. Once a half-drunk
Buriat, seeing a Shaman dancing in this manner, said, "I am as good a
man as you are, I can dance on fire!" Pulling off his shoes he danced on
the live coals for one moment and was so badly burned that he could not
step for three months.

The seven Heavenly Blacksmiths have given a Shaman living in Usturdi the
power to handle red-hot iron. He can heat a bar of iron until it is red,
take it in one hand, draw the other hand over it and make sparks fly. He
can lick it with his tongue and it does not burn him. This same Shaman
if locked in a room whispers a few words, spits, and the door flies
open.

There are Shamans who can ride on horseback through the two walls of a
yurta, and leave no opening.

In Irkutsk, a long time ago, the Russians, who did not believe in
Shamans, said, "We will see what power those people have."

They built a great fire and put a Shaman into it. The Burkans turned the
fire into water and the Shaman danced in what seemed fire to others, but
was water for him. The Russians shot at the Shamans; they caught the
bullets in their hands, held them out and said, "Here are your balls."
Every effort against them was useless.

A Shaman has nothing to do with marriages; with deaths he has nothing to
do after it is certain that the spirit has left the body and cannot be
persuaded to return. His field of action is soothsaying with the
shoulder-blade of a sheep; sacrificing, preparing Ongons, tying a ribbon
on the cradle of each infant when a few days old, and conducting. the
great feast made when the child is one year old.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

#### A SHAMAN STORY

In Olzoni, where this story was told, there lived three hundred years
ago an old Shaman who could raise the dead. One day when he was in his
seventy-fifth year he went on a visit to a neighboring village. The
people there were so glad to see him that they killed a number of sheep,
roasted them, and all feasted for three days.

On his way home he came to a large gate opening into a field, and there
he met three hundred horned cattle. He thought that a butcher was
driving them, but soon discovered that they were driven by a woman who
was riding on a red ox. The woman was holding an infant in her arms.
After the red ox had passed him he met a man whose head was as big as a
cock of hay, he was riding on a gray stallion of enormous size.

"From where do you come, flesh merchant?" asked the Shaman.

"I am not a flesh merchant," replied the man, "I am Minga Nudite Milá
(Thousand Eyes), and I have just destroyed all the cattle in the country
around here."

The Shaman hurried home and found that his cattle were gone, not a cow,
sheep, or horse was left. He was very angry, and going to his five
brothers, who were all Shamans, he said: "Let us take counsel. Shall we
not go in pursuit of Minga Nudite Milá?"

"Of what use?" asked they. "He would not yield to us, for he is subject
to no one."

When he saw that his brothers were unwilling to help him, and he must do
all with his own magic, the old Shaman went home, made tarasun and drank
it; then he went to the corner of the room, got his axe and put it under
the pillow on his bed, tied his horse to a post in the yurta and lay
down, saying to his wife,

"Do not let my horse out, and do not waken me." Soon he and his horse
were sound asleep. But they were not asleep, it was only their bodies
which were so quiet. In reality the Shaman was riding swiftly toward the
Angara.

Before reaching Irkutsk there is a mountain, Torkoi Tonkoi. From the top
of this mountain the Shaman saw that Minga

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

Milá had made a bridge across the river and was beginning to drive his
cattle over it. Half of the bridge was silver and half of it was gold.

The Shaman turned himself into a bee, made his axe equally small, and,
taking it with him, flew under the bridge and hewed the pillars so that
the bridge broke in two. All the cattle fell into the Angara, as well as
the woman on the red ox. Minga Milá fell, but he saved himself—at least
he did not sink, though he and his gray stallion remained in the water.

The old Shaman threw his gold ring of a Shaman toward heaven, and a
dreadful wind sprang up which lasted for three days. Minga Milá sat on
the water and was driven back and forth by the wind. After the three
days of wind came three days of strong rain. By the end of those six
days the hoofs of Minga Milá's horse fell off. When the storm was over
Minga Milá came out of the river; his horse followed him, and they began
to dry themselves. The horse's hoofs came from the river and went on to
his feet.

Enraged by the loss of the cattle and the woman on the red ox, but
frightened by the terrible storm, Minga Milá swore a great oath that
henceforth he would not go to the Olzoni country. "Should I go there may
my one thousand eyes jump out of my head, and my body be cut in three
pieces. I will neither kill people hereafter nor destroy cattle,"
declared he. Hearing this oath the Shaman was greatly pleased, and at
once started for home.

On the road he went to his five brothers and told them how he had
punished Thousand Eyes. "I have freed myself and you of this monster,"
said he; "we can now live in peace." When he reached his yurta he rose
from the bed, where his wife thought he was sleeping, untied his horse
and drove it out to pasture. And all was as if it had not been. But the
cattle of Olzoni were never stolen again.

The Shaman began to drink tarasun and visit his friends. In the spring,
about a year after his return from the Angara, he was on his way to see
friends in Olzonski-Rod when he came upon three men who were burying a
dead child. "What are you doing?" asked the Shaman.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

"Go thy way, grandfather," answered the men. "Stand not there, for the
child is dead. No one is free from death."

They let down the body and began to cover it with earth.

"Take away that earth," commanded the Shaman; "give me the child and do
you kill a goat and bury it in this grave." He carried the child to its
home, had six stones heated red hot, took off his leggings, danced with
bare feet on the red hot stones, and "shamaned" till morning, stepping
over the dead child from time to time, until the first cock crowed. That
made the blood move in the child's body, and he opened his eyes, but
could not talk.

The next night the Shaman had the boy's father and mother tied to a post
in the yurta, and again he danced and shamaned until the first cock
crowed. All this time the child lay without moving. At sunrise the
Shaman blew on the child's head and feet. He sprang up and asked, "What
are you doing, father?"

Then the Shaman unbound the father and mother. "Your child is alive and
well," said he; "now I will go home."

"No," said the father, "I must reward you; I am rich. I will give you
half my money and half my cattle for what you have done."

"I do not need your money or your cattle," replied the Shaman. But the
father was too happy over the recovery of his child to let the Shaman go
without a reward. "Well," said the Shaman, "all I need is one cock of
hay, an arkan rope (skin rope, hide), and nine copecks in money."

The father gave him the money, the rope, and the hay, and loaned him an
ox to draw the hay home. The Shaman fed the hay to his cattle, hung up
the rope, and kept the nine copecks in memory of the father's gratitude.

The raising of the boy from the dead was the last great act of the
Shaman's life, for he died soon after.

#### BURIAT GHOST STORY

There was once a Shaman named Gaqui Guldief. One day he was returning
from Irkutsk to his home, when night overtook him on the Kanjirevsk
steppes. Soon after dusk he saw dead men dancing, "for he was
second-sighted." He heard them say,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "Be careful, Gaqui
Guldief is coming!" They had known him when they were living, and knew
that he understood the dead and could see them.

Among the dancers was one who danced better than any of the others, and
his friends were urging him to dance his very best. He was about to do
so, when Gaqui shot at him, hit him, and he fell to the ground a skull.
Then a terrible disturbance arose among the dancers, and turning to one
of their number, a tall strong man, they said, "You must punish him for
this!" Guldief hurried away, for he heard what they said. When he got
home he led into the house the savage dog he usually kept chained in the
yard. He was not disturbed that night, but early the next night the
tall, strong dead man came into the room followed by a great crowd of
people of all ages.

There were food and drink on the table. The strong man began to eat;
then the crowd ate and drank, and passed food to the living man. When
they had finished eating, one of the number, looking at Gaqui, who was
watching them, carefully, said, "Let us play tricks on him, and punish
him." "No," cried others; "he is a good man at heart. We have eaten of
his food; we will not harm him."

They remained a long time, then silently disappeared. When the watcher
was alone in the room he saw that the food and drink which he had placed
on the table was all there; there was not one bite of food or one drop
of drink less, though all the dead had eaten.

#### SECOND SIGHT

Once a man having second sight was passing through a large field about
dusk, when he saw three men, whom he knew to be dead, coming toward him.
One of them was carrying a small box.

"What are you carrying?" asked the live man.

"We are carrying the soul of an infant," answered the dead.

The man knew that the son of a rich Buriat was very sick, and he made up
his mind that the child had died, and the dead were carrying its soul
away. "The dead are sometimes very shrewd

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and sometimes very stupid," said he to himself. "I will try and get that
soul away from them."

"How queerly you walk!" called out one of the dead men. "Your feet make
a dust, and you shake the earth when you step."

"I have been dead only a little while," answered the live man, "and have
not yet learned to walk like the dead." Then he asked cunningly, "Are
you afraid of anything?"

"We are afraid of the shipovnik bush (a shrub which has long thorns).
What are you afraid of?" "I am afraid of fat meat," replied the man. He
walked on with the dead until they came to a large clump of shipovnik
bushes; then he seized the box in which they were carrying the child's
soul and sprang into the bushes. They dared not approach, but ran off to
get fat meat; they were back in a flash and began to pelt him with it.
He ate the meat, and kept firm hold of the box.

After a time the dead went away, and the live man took the soul back to
the house where the body of the dead child was. The soul went into the
body; the child came to life and began to sneeze.

#### SACRED GROVES OF SHAMANS

When a Shaman dies his spirit, in the form of fire, goes to a Shaman who
has been his friend during life, and strikes him such a strong blow on
the forehead that he falls to the ground (the spirit or flame is
invisible to bystanders). They raise the Shaman, and when he has
recovered somewhat he says: "The spirit of my friend has come to me for
assistance. It wishes to settle in a grove, and tells me where the grove
is."

No one doubts that this is the request of the spirit of the dead Shaman.
Friends go to the place mentioned, and, selecting one of the largest and
best trees, cut a small box-like aperture in it. The body of the dead
Shaman is burned, the ashes placed in the aperture in the tree, and a
slab fastened across it. Ever afterward the grove is sacred. Later on,
if the spirit of a Shaman of the same family asks that the ashes of his
dead body be deposited in this grove, the request is granted. Hence
often in such a grove there are several trees which contain ashes of the
dead.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

There are many of these sacred groves in the Buriat country. When a
Buriat is passing a grove where the ashes of a Shaman or of several
Shamans are deposited, he sprinkles vodka or tarasun to their spirits.
If he has no vodka or tarasun he sprinkles tobacco, thinking they may
like to smoke. He mentions such and such Shamans of the grove, and sends
the tobacco to them specially. It is supposed to reach the spirits
multiplied immensely in quantity and improved in quality.

No tree can be cut down, grass mown, or sod turned in a sacred grove. A
man would come to great grief if he were to injure a tree, even by
breaking off a branch or twig. The punishment would be inflicted by the
spirits of the dead Shamans.

No woman can enter a sacred Shaman grove.

#### THE SACRED GROVES OF THE BURKANS OR BURIAT GODS

There are Burkans who are called Bumal Burkans. They are so called
because instead of residing always in lofty places their homes are in
certain groves. No tree can be felled, twig broken, or grass cut in such
a grove. In passing the grove offerings are made of tarasun or tobacco.

Not far from the village of Usturdi, where I spent several weeks, there
is a sacred grove of a Bumal [Burkan](errata.htm#2). Some years ago
three or four Buriats who had lost faith in their ancient religion
decided to measure the land and cut the grass around the grove. Shamans
warned them that not only the grove, but the land to the extent of some
acres around it, belonged to the Burkan. Paying no heed to the warning,
the men began to cut the grass.

The Burkan was very angry, and to punish them for trying to take his
grass and curtail his domain, he sent an epidemic upon the village.
People began to die off rapidly. The land around the grove was
immediately abandoned, and sacrifices were made to the god, who after a
time was appeased, and the epidemic died out.

One or two of the Bumal Burkans allow women to pass through their
groves, but others are very strict in this regard;

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

women not only are forbidden to enter their groves, but are punished if
they step on the land.

Sometimes there is a mountain or high hill between villages, and on the
summit of the hill, not very far from the road, is a sacred grove
belonging to a Bumal Burkan. If a man dies in one of the villages no
person is allowed to pass the grove for three days. At the end of that
time the first man to pass must purify himself before leaving home. This
is done by gathering dry juniper, placing it in a pile on the ground,
setting fire to it, and, when it smokes well, walking through it
repeatedly, inhaling the smoke. The horse the person is to ride must be
purified in the same way.

#### SACRED TREES AND GROVES

It has happened at times during past centuries that a Shaman seeing a
beautiful tree or a fine clump of trees has thought that a Burkan or the
spirit of a dead Shaman if passing by there would surely like to stop
and have a smoke; hence he has declared that tree or clump of trees to
be sacred, and no man would be so foolhardy as to meddle with trees
which they know have been given to the Burkans and spirits.

Buriats dislike to cut down a beautiful tree which has grown up on a
clean place. They are inclined to believe that the tree belongs to a
Burkan; for there are cases where a man engaged in felling such a tree
has been taken suddenly ill, and the Shamans have discovered that the
illness was caused by the Burkan to whom the tree belonged. Sometimes
the name of the Burkan is unknown; then, although an offering is made,
the man may die.

A beautiful pine tree growing near Usturdi was cut down by one of the
Buriats, who almost immediately fell ill. A Shaman was sent for, and by
reading the cracks in the charred shoulder bone of a sheep he found that
the tree belonged to a Burkan—was a sacred tree. But he did not know
which Burkan; consequently, though several offerings were made, the man
died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Gods of the Buriats](jss14)
