[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm01)  [Next](rrm03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# Preface to the Second Edition

THE Authors of this important Book--such must obviously be the fact of
any work speaking with authority in regard of that extraordinary
Brotherhood the 'Rosicrucians'--feel assured that it will only be
necessary to penetrate but to the extent of two or three pages therein,
to secure vivid curiosity and attention. The Producers--particularly in
the instance of this much enlarged Second Edition--are particularly
desirous that no one shall identify them with, or consider them as
maintaining personally, the strangely abstruse, and, in some instances,
the startlingly singular ideas of these Princes among the Mystics. We
are--and desire etc) be viewed as--the Historians only of this renowned
Body; of whom it may most truly be asserted that no one can boast of
having ever--really and in fact--seen or known in any age any supposed
(or suspected) 'Member' in the flesh. It is sufficient honour to offer
as the medium only, or the Intermediaries to the reading-world--of this
Illustrious Membership; whose renown has filled, and whose mystical
doctrines (assumed or supposed) have puzzled the ages:--in the intenser
degree, still, in the present time; as the inquisitive reception of the
Authors' First Edition of *The Rosicrucians* abundantly proved.

Dr. Ginsburg says of the *Cabala*, or *Kabbalah* (regarding the
mysteries of which the Rosicrucians claimed to be the only true
exponents), that it is a

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

system of religious philosophy, or more properly of theosophy, which has
not only exercised, for hundreds of years, an extraordinary influence on
the mental development of so shrewd a people as the Jews, but has
captivated the minds of some of the greatest thinkers of Christendom in
the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 'It--and all that refers to
it'--therefore claims the greatest attention of both the philosopher and
the theologian. 'The thinkers of the past days, after restlessly
searching for a scientific system which should disclose to them the
"deepest depths" of the Divine Nature, and approve to the understanding
the *real tie* which binds all things together, found the craving of
their mind SATISFIED by this Theosophy.'

We say enough in reference to the august possessors of this knowledge
when we remind the reader that among those who knew how to wield (and to
adapt) the stupendous acquisition to which they were supposed to have at
last penetrated, were Raymond Lully, the celebrated scholastic,
metaphysician, and chemist (died 1315); John Reuchlin, the renowned
scholar and reviver of oriental literature in Europe (born 14J5, died
1522); John Picus di Mirandola, the famous philosopher and classical
scholar (1463-1494); Cornelius Henry Agrippa, the distinguished
philosopher, divine, and physician (1486-1535); John Baptist von
Helmont, a remarkable chemist and physician (1577-1644); Dr. Henry More
(1614-1687), and lastly and chiefly (in regard of whom this whole Book
is but the translation and exposition of his highly-prized and very
scarce works), our own countryman <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0),
Robert Flood or Fludd (Robertus de Fluctibus)

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

the famous physician and philosopher (1574-1637).

HARGRAVE-JENNINGS.

LONDON, *April* 6*th*, 1879.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[viii:1](rrm02.htm#fr_0) In regard to the value
and rarity of Robert Fludd's books it may be mentioned that Isaac
D’Israeli says that 'forty' and <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>
'seventy' 'pounds' were given for a 'single volume' abroad in his
time--such was the curiosity concerning them. At the present time the
value of these books has greatly increased. Fludd's volumes, and any of
the early editions of Jacob Bœhmen's books, are worth much money. Indeed
they are so scarce as to be caught up everywhere when
offered--especially when encountered by foreigners and Americans.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the First Edition](rrm03)
