[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm18)  [Next](rrm20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH

#### CAN EVIDENCE BE DEPENDED UPON? EXAMINATION OF HUME’S REASONING

'OUR evidence for the truth of the Christian religion is less than the
evidence for the truth of our senses; because, even in the first authors
of our religion, it was no greater. It is evident it must diminish in
passing from them to their disciples; nor can any one rest such
confidence in their testimony as in the immediate object of his senses.'

This is wrong, The testimony of some men is more valid than is the
evidence of the senses of some others. All depends upon the power of the
mind judging.

'It is a general maxim, that no objects have any discoverable connexion
together. All the inferences which we can draw from one to another are
founded merely on our experience of their constant and regular
conjunction; It is evident that we ought not to make an exception to
this maxim in favour of human testimony, whose connexion with any event
seems in itself as little necessary as any other.'

It may be put to any person who carefully considers Hume’s previous
position as to the fixedness of the proofs of the senses, whether this
last citation does not upset what he previously affirms.

'The memory is tenacious to a certain degree. Men commonly have an
inclination to truth and a principle of probity. They are sensible to
shame

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

when detected in a falsehood. These are qualities in human nature.'

This is a mistake; for they are *not* qualities in human nature. They
are the qualities of grown men, because they are reflective of the state
of the man when he is living in community--not as man.

'Contrariety of evidence, in certain cases, may be derived from several
different causes: from the opposition of contrary testimony--from the
character or number of the witnesses--from the manner of their
delivering their testimony--or from the union of all these
circumstances. We entertain a suspicion concerning any matter of fact
when the witnesses contradict each other--when they are but few, or of a
doubtful character--when they have an interest in what they affirm--when
they deliver their testimony with hesitation, or, on the contrary, with
too violent asseverations. There are many other particulars of the same
kind, which may diminish or destroy the force of any argument derived
from human testimony.'

Now, we contest these conclusions; and we will endeavour to meet them
with a direct overthrowing answer. The recognition of likelihood--not to
say of truth--is intuitive, and does not depend on testimony. In fact,
sometimes our belief goes in another direction than the testimony,
though it be even to matters of fact.

Hume resumes with his cool, logical statements: 'The reason why we place
any credit in witnesses and historians is not derived from any connexion
which we perceive *a priori* between testimony and reality, but *because
we are accustomed to find a conformity between them*.'

Just so! we would add to this 'because we are accustomed to find a
conformity between them.'

We are now arrived at the grand dictum of cool-headed,

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

self-possessed Hume, who thought that by dint of his logical clearness,
and by his definitions, he had exposed the impossibility of that
unaccountable thing which men call a miracle, and upon the possibility
or the non-possibility of which religion will, be ultimately found to
wholly depend, because religion is, entirely opposed to laws of 'must
be' and 'must not be'.

'A miracle is a violation of the *laws of nature*' he declares.

Not so, we will rejoin. It is only a violation of the laws of *our*
nature. A very different thing. We have no right to set *our* nature up
as the measure of *all* nature. This is merely the mind’s assumption;
and it is important to expose its real emptiness, because all Hume’s
philosophy turns upon this, which he imagines to be a rigid axiom, to
which all argument must recur.

'A firm and unalterable experience has established the laws of nature.
The proof against a miracle, from the very nature of the fact, is as
entire as any argument from experience can possibly be imagined.' So
says Hume.

But experience has nothing to do with a miracle, because it is a sense
not comprised in the senses, but an unexperienced sensation or
perception, exposing the senses as dreams, and overriding their supposed
certainty and totality by a *new dream*, or apparent certainty,
contradicting the preceding. If this were not possible, then the senses,
or the instantaneous judgment which comes out of their sum--or the thing
'conviction' as we call it--would be the measure of everything past,
present, and to come--which we know it is not.

Hume, or any. philosopher, is wrong in dogmatizing at all; because he
only speaks from his own experience;

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

and individual experience will in no wise assist towards the discovery
of real truth. In philosophy, no one has a right to lay down any basis,
and to assume it as true. The philosopher must always argue negatively,
not affirmatively. The moment he adopts the latter course, he is lost.
Hume presupposes all his *Treatise on Miracles* in this single
assumption that nature itself has laws, and not laws *only to our
faculties*. The mighty difference between these two great facts will be
at once felt by a thinker; but we will not permit Hume to assume
anything where he has no right, and so to turn the flank of his
adversary by artfully putting forward unawares and carrying an
assumption. Nature is only nature in man’s mina, but not true otherwise,
any more than that the universe exists out of the mind--or out of the
man, who has in thinking to make it. Take away, therefore, the man in
whom the idea of it is, and the universe disappears. We will question
Hume, the disbelieving philosopher, as to his right to open his lips,
because it is very doubtful if language, which is the power of
expression, any more than that which we call consistent thought, is
inseparably consistent to man, who is all inconsistence in his
beginning, middle, and end--in his coming here and in his going hence
from here, out of this strange world; to which he does not seem really
to belong, and in which world he seems to have been somehow obtruded, as
something not of it--strange as this seems.

As to the philosophy of Hume, granting the ground, you have, of course,
all the basis for, the constructions raised upon that ground. But
suppose we, who argue in opposition to Hume, dispute his ground?

Hume, in his *Treatise on Miracles*, only begs the question; and there
is therefore no wonder that, having first secured his position by
consent or negligence

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

of the opponent, he may deal from it the shot of what artillery he
pleases; and his opponent, having. once allowed the first ground--or the
capacity to argue--has unwittingly let in all the ruinous results which
follow; these philosophically are indisputable. We would urge that Hume
has no capacity to argue in this way, inasmuch as he has taken the
'human 'mind' as the capacity of arguing. Either .reason or miracle must
be first removed, because you can admit either; for they are opposites,
and cannot camp in the same mind one is idea, the other is no idea--in
this world; and as we are in this world, we can only judge as in this
world. In another world, Hume the philosopher may himself be an
impossibility, and therefore be a miracle, through his own philosophy,
and the application of it.

Hume is the man of ideas, and is therefore very correct, as a
philosopher, if philosophy were possible; but we deny that it is
possible in regard to any speculation out of this world. Ideas--that is,
philosophical ideas--may be described as the steps of the ladder by
which we philosophically descend *from* God. Emotions are also the steps
by which alone we can ascend *to* Him. Human reason is a possibility,
from the line drawn by which either ascent or descent may be made. The
things Necessity, or Fate, and Free Will, passing into the mind of man
(*both* may be identical in their nature, though opposite in their
operation), *dictate* from the invisible, but *persuade* from the
visible.

Hume asserts that 'a uniform experience amounts to a proof'. It does not
do so, any more than 'ninety-nine' are a 'hundred'.

He also says that 'there is not to be found in all history any miracle
attested by a sufficient number of men to be believed.' Now, we will
rejoin to this,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

that a public miracle is a public impossibility; for the moment it has
become public, it has ceased to be a miracle. 'In the case of any
particular assumed miracle', he further says, 'there are not a
sufficient number of men of such unquestioned good sense, education, and
learning as to secure us against all delusion in themselves--of such
undoubted integrity as to place them beyond all suspicion of any design
to *deceive others*.' Now, to this our answer is, that our own senses
deceive us; and why, then, should not the asseverations of others?

Hume adduces a number of circumstances which, he insists, 'are requisite
to give us a full assurance in the testimony of men'; but nothing can
give us this assurance in other men’s testimony that he supposes. We
judge of circumstances ourselves, upon our own ideas of the testimony of
men--not upon the testimony itself; for we sometimes believe that which
the witnesses, with the fullest reliance upon themselves, deny. We judge
upon our own silent convictions--that is, upon all abstract points. It
is for this reason that assurances even by angels, in Scripture, have
not been believed by the persons to whom the message was directly sent.
Of course, if the miracle was displayed through the ordinary channels of
human comprehension, it was no miracle; for comprehension never has
miracle in it.

'The maxim by which we commonly conduct ourselves in our reasonings is,
that the objects of which we have no experience resemble those of which
we have' says Hume.

Now, this remark is most true; but we cannot help this persuasion. We
conclude inevitably that things unknown should resemble things known,
because, whatever may be outside of our nature, we have no means of
knowing it, or of discovering anything else

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

that is other than ourselves. We can know nothing, except through our
own machinery of sense. As God made outside and inside, God alone works,
though we think that *we*--that is, Nature--work. God (who is Himself
miracle) can effect impossibilities, and make two one by annihilating
the distinction between them.

Hume says that 'where there is an opposition of arguments, we ought to
give the preference to such as are founded on the *greatest number of
past observations*.'

So we ought, if the world were real; but, as it is not, we ought not.
Things unreal cannot make things real.

Hume declares that 'if the spirit of religion join itself to the love of
wonder, there is an end of common sense. Human testimony, in these
circumstances, loses all pretensions to authority. A religionist may be
an enthusiast, and imagine he sees what has no reality. He may know his
narrative to be false, and yet persevere in it with the best intentions
in the world, for the sake of promoting so holy a cause. Even where this
delusion has not taken place, vanity, excited by so strong a temptation,
operates on him more powerfully than on the rest, of mankind in any
other circumstances, and self-interest with equal force. His auditors
may not have, and commonly have not, sufficient judgment to canvass his
evidence. What judgment they have, they renounce by principle in these
sublime and mysterious subjects. If they were ever so willing to employ
it, passion and a heated imagination disturb the regularity of its
operations. Their credulity increases his impudence, and his impudence
overpowers their credulity.'

Now, the reverse of all this is more nearly the fact. Ordinary minds
have more incredulity than credulity. It is quite a mistake to imagine
that credulity is the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

quality of an ignorant mind; it is rather *incredulity* that is.

'Eloquence, when at its highest pitch', says Hume, 'leaves little room
for reason or reflection.'

Now, on the contrary, true eloquence is the embodiment or *synthesis* of
reason and reflection.

'Eloquence', resumes Hume, 'addresses itself entirely to the fancy or
the affections, captivates the willing hearers, and subdues their
understanding. Happily, this pitch it seldom attains; but what a Tully
or a Demosthenes could scarcely effect over a Roman or Athenian
audience, every capuchin, every itinerant or stationary teacher, can
perform over the generality of mankind, and in a higher degree, by
touching such gross and vulgar passions.'

All the above is simply superficial assumption.

Hume then of 'forged miracles and prophecies'; but there is no proof of
any *forged* miracle or prophecy. He says that 'there is a strong
propensity in mankind to the extraordinary and the marvellous. There is
no kind of report which rises so easily and spreads so quickly,
especially in country places and provincial towns, as those concerning
marriages, insomuch that two young persons of equal condition never see
each other, twice, but the whole neighbourhood immediately join them
together.'

This is all nonsense. There is always a reason for these suppositions.

Hume then goes on to adduce this same love of inspiring curiosity and
delight in wonders as the cause of the belief in miracles.

'Do not', he asks, 'the same passions, and others still stronger,
incline the generality of mankind to believe and report, with the
greatest vehemence and assurance, all religious miracles?'

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

Now, this is only very poor.; and, besides, it is all assumption of
truths where they are not.

Hume speaks of supernatural and miraculous relations as having been
received from 'ignorant and barbarous ancestors'. But what is ignorance
and barbarism?--and what is civilization? He says that they have been
'transmitted with that inviolable sanction and authority which always
attend received opinions'. But supernatural and miraculous relations
have never been received opinions. They have always been contested, and
have made their way *against* the common sense of mankind, because the
common sense of mankind is common sense, and nothing more; and, in
reality, common sense goes but a very little way, even in the common
transactions of life; for *feeling* guides us in most matters.

'All belief in the extraordinary', Hume declares, 'proceeds from the
usual propensity of mankind towards the marvellous, which only receives
a check at intervals from sense and learning'. But what are sense and
learning both but mere *conceits*?

'"It is strange", a judicious reader is apt to say', remarks Hume, 'upon
the perusal of these wonderful histories, "that such prodigious events
never happen in our days".' But such events *do* occur, we would rejoin;
though they are never believed, and are always treated as fable, when
occurring in their own time.

'It is experience only', says Hume, 'which gives authority to human
testimony'. Now, it is not experience only which induces belief, but
recognition. It is not ideas, but light. We do not go to the thing in
ideas, but the thing comes into us, as it were: for instance, a man
never finds that he is awake by experience, but by influx of the thing
'waking'--whatever the act of waking is, or means.

'When two kinds of experience are contrary, we

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

have nothing to do but to *subtract the one from the other*, and embrace
an opinion either on one side or the other, with that assurance which
arises from the remainder.'

This which follows may be a conclusion in regard to the above. If
beliefs were sums, we should, and could, subtract the difference between
two amounts of evidence, and accept the product; but we cannot help our
beliefs, because they are intuitions, and not statements.

Hume towards the close of his strictly hard and logical *Treatise on
Miracles*, brings forward an argument, which to all appearance is very
rigid and conclusive, out of this his realistic philosophy--if that were
true:

'Suppose that all the historians who treat of England should agree that
on the 1st of January 1600 Queen Elizabeth died, that both before and
after her death she was seen by her physicians and the whole court, as
is usual with persons of her rank, that her successor was acknowledged
and proclaimed by the parliament, and that, after being interred a
month, she again appeared, resumed the throne, and governed England for
three years. I must confess that I should be surprised at the
concurrence of so many odd circumstances, but should not have the least
inclination to believe so miraculous an event. *I should not doubt of
her pretended death, and of those other public circumstances that
followed it*.'

Now, in their own sequence, as they occur to us as real facts in the
world, so unreal even are true, positive circumstances, that we only
believe them by the same means that we believe dreams--that is, by
intuition. There is no fact, so to say. Startling as it may appear, I
appeal to the consciousness of those who have witnessed death whether
the death itself

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

did not seem unreal, and whether it did not remain without belief as' a
fact until the negative--that, is 'The dead man is not here'--affirmed
it, not through present persuasions, but through unreal incidents,
post-dating reappearance.

As to the belief in miracles, Hume asserts that the Christian religion
cannot be believed by any reasonable person without a miracle. 'Mere
reason', he assures us, 'is insufficient to convince us of its veracity;
and whoever is moved by faith to assent to it, is conscious of a
continued miracle in his own person, which subverts all the principles
of his understanding.'

The theosophic foundation of the Bhuddistic *Maya*, or Universal
Illusion, has been finely alluded to by Sir William Jones, who was
deeply imbued with the Oriental mysticism and transcendental religious
views.

'The inextricable difficulties', says he, 'attending the *vulgar notion
of material substances*, concerning which we know this only, that we
know nothing, induced many of the wisest among the ancients, and some of
the most enlightened among the moderns, to believe that the whole
creation was rather an *energy* than a work, by which the Infinite
Being, who is present at all times and in all places, exhibits to the
minds of His creatures a set of perceptions, like a wonderful picture or
piece of music, always varied, yet always uniform; so that all bodies
and their qualities exist, indeed, to every wise and useful purpose, but
exist only as far as they are *perceived*--a theory no less pious than
sublime, and as different from any principle of atheism as the brightest
sunshine differs from the blackest midnight.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Footsteps of the Rosicrucians Amidst Architectural
Objects](rrm20)
