[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm29)  [Next](rrm31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

### CHAPTER THE TWENTY-FIFTH

#### THE GREAT PYRAMID

IN a very elaborate and interesting book, published in the year 1867,
the title of which, at length, is the following: *Life and Work at the
Great Pyramid*, by C. Piazzi Smyth, Professor of Practical Astronomy in
the University of Edinburgh, and Astronomer Royal for Scotland.
Edinburgh, 1867: the conclusions (though a mistake) which we now supply
from the author are offered as definitions, after infinite care, of this
important name or word, 'PYRAMID'. 'Pyramid' is derived in this book
from two Greek terms. πυρός, 'wheat'; μετρον, 'measure'; or from Coptic
roots, signifying *pyr*, 'division'; *met*, 'ten'. However, we offer to
deduce this term 'Pyramid' from quite another source. The present writer
originally sought to do. this in the year 1860, in a dissertation on the
origin and purpose of the 'Pyramids of Egypt'. It is well known that the
letters *P* and *F* are radically the same letter (as is evidenced by
their peculiar pronunciation in certain countries), and that they are
interchangeable. In Professor Smyth's book, Πυρός is wrongly translated
'wheat'. It signifies 'product', or 'growth', or 'elimination'; in other
words, and in the symbolical sense, it means 'sun-begotten', or
'fire-begotten'. The Coptic derivation (re-read by a new light) is the
true one. Thus we obtain another reason upon which we rely as the real
interpretation of the name of the pyramid, or obelisk, or great original
altar or upright, raised in the

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

divinity working secondarily in nature. Πυρ is fire (or Division
produced by fire); Μετρον is Ten (or measures or spaces numbered as
ten). The whole word means, and the entire object bearing this name
means, the original Ten Measures or Parts of the Fiery Ecliptic or Solar
Wheel, or the Ten Original Signs of the Zodiac. Therefore the Pyramids
are commemorative altars raised to the divinity Fire.

The *Ophites* are said to have maintained that the serpent of Genesis
was the Λογος, and the 'Saviour'. The *Logos* was Divine Wisdom, and was
the Bhudda, or Buddha, of India. The Brazen Serpent was called Λογος, or
the 'Word', by the Chaldee Paraphrast (Basnage, lib. iv. ch. xxv). It is
very certain that, in ancient times, the serpent was an object of
adoration in almost all nations. The serpent-worshippers seem to have
placed at the head, or nearly at the head, of all things (Maia), and
most intimately connected with the serpent, a certain principle which
they called 'Sophia'. This is clearly a translation of the word 'Bhudda'
into Greek. It also reminds us that the old Bhuddas are always under the
care of the Cobra-Capella. This is evidenced in all the Memnonian or
Egyptian heads; and in the asp (or fleur-de-lis), more or less veiled or
altered, displayed as the chief symbol upon the universal Sphynxes. The
serpent, in one view, was the emblem of the evil principle, or
destroyer. But, as we have seen before, the 'destroyer' was the
'creator'. Hence he had the name, among his numerous appellations, of
ΟΦΙΣ; in Hebrew, ‏אוב‎, *Ob*; and as he was the 'logus', or 'linga', he
was also ΟΨ, and in Hebrew ‏מרא‎∙‏מ‎. Query, hence, Συφαρ, a seraph or
serpent?--see Jones's *Lexicon* (*in voce*), and Σοφος, wise. The Συφ
and Σοφ are both the same root. The famous 'Brazen Serpent', called
Nehustan, set up by Moses in the Wilderness, is termed in the Targum

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

a 'Saviour'. It was probably a 'serpentine crucifix', as it is called a
cross by Justin Martyr. All the foregoing is allegorical, and hides deep
Gnostic myths, which explain serpent-worship, united with the adoration
paid to a perpendicular.

The three most celebrated emblems carried in the Greek mysteries were
the Phallus, Ι; the Egg, Ο and the Serpent, Φ; or otherwise the Phallus,
the Ioni or Umbilicus, and the Serpent. The first, in each case. is the
emblem of the sun, or of fire, as the male, or active, generative power.
The second denotes the passive nature, or feminine principle, or the
element of water. The third symbol indicates the destroyer, the
reformer, or the renewer (the uniter of the two), add thus the preserver
or perpetuator--eternally renewing itself. The universality of the
serpentine worship (or phallic adoration) is attested by emblematic
sculpture and architecture all over the world. This does not admit of
denial. Its character and purpose are, however, wholly misunderstood.
Not only is the worship of the serpent found everywhere, but it
everywhere occupies an important station; and the farther back we go,
the more universally it is found, and the more important it appears to
have been considered. The Destroyer or Serpent of Genesis is correctly
the Renovator or Preserver. In Genesis there is a 'Tree of Knowledge'
and a 'Tree of Life'. Here we have the origin of the *Ophites*,
*Ophiones*, or Oriental emblematical serpent-worshippers, to account for
whom, and for whose apparently absurd object of adoration, our
antiquaries have been so much perplexed. They worshipped the
Saviour-Regenerator under the strangest (but the sublimest) aspect in
the world; but not the devil, or malific principle, in our perverse,
mistaken ideas, and with the vulgar, downward, literal meanings which we
apply. The mythic and mimetic art of the

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gnostics is
nowhere more admirably or more successfully displayed than in their
hieroglyphs and pictured *formulæ*. Even in the blazonry and in the
collars and badges of chivalry (which seems so remote from them), we
find these Ophite hints. The heathen temples and the modern ritualistic
churches alike abound in unconscious Gnostic emblems. State ceremony
harbours them; they mix with the insignia of all the orders of
knighthood; and they show in all the heraldic and masonic marks,
figures, and patterns, both of ancient and of modern times. The religion
of the Rosicrucians is also concealed, and unconsciously carried
forward, perpetuated, and ignorantly fostered, by the very persons and
classes who form, contrive, and wear decorations with special mysterious
marks, all the world over. Every person, in unconsciously repeating
certain figures, which form an unknown language, heired from the ancient
times; carries into futurity, and into all parts of the world, the same
carefully guarded traditions, for the knowing to recognize, to whose
origin the sun, in his first revolution, may be figuratively said to be
the only witness. Thus the great inexpressible 'Talisman' is said to be
borne to the 'initiate' through the ages.

Proposals were published some years ago for a book entitled, 'The Enigma
of Alchemy and of Œdipus resolved; designed to elucidate the fables,
symbols, and other mythological disguises, in which the Hermetic Art has
been enveloped and signalized in various ages, in ecclesiastical
ceremonies, masonic *formulæ*, astronomical signs, and
constellations--even in the emblazonments of chivalry, heraldic badges,
and other emblems; which, without explanation, have been handed down,
and which are shown to have originated in the same universal mystic
school, through each particular tracing their allusion to the means and

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

mechanism.' This intended work was left in MS. by its anonymous author,
now deceased, but was never published. The unknown author of it produced
also in the year 1850, in one vol. 8vo, a book displaying extraordinary
knowledge of the science of alchemy; which bore the name *A Suggestive
Enquiry into the Hermetic Mystery; with a Dissertation on the more
celebrated of the Alchemical Philosophers*. This book was published in
London; but it is now extinct, having been bought up--for suppression,
as we believe--by the author's friends after his decease, who probably
did not wish him to be supposed to be mixed up in such out-of-the-way
inquiries.

The Vedas describe the Persian religion (Fire-Worship) as having come
from Upper Egypt. 'The mysteries celebrated within the recesses of the
"hypogea"' (caverns or labyrinths) 'were precisely of that character
which is called Freemasonic, or Cabiric. The signification of this
latter epithet is, as to written letters, a desideratum. Selden has
missed it; so have Origen and Sophocles. Strabo, too, and
[Montfauçon](errata.htm#5), have been equally astray. Hyde was the only
one who had any idea of its composition when he declared that "It was a
*Persian word*, somewhat altered from *Gabri* of *Guebri*, and
signifying FIRE-WORSHIPPERS".' See O’Brien’s *Round Towers of Ireland*,
1834, p. 354). Pococke, in his India in Greece, is very sagacious and
true in his arguments; but he tells only half the story of the myths in
his supposed successful divestment of them of all unexplainable
character, and of exterior supernatural origin. He supposes that all the
mystery must necessarily disappear when he has traced, and carefully
pointed out, the identity and transference of these myths from India
into Egypt and into Greece, and their gradual spread westward. But he is
wholly mistaken; and most other modern explainers are equally

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

mistaken. Pococke contemplates all from the ethnic and realistic point
of view. He is very learned in an accumulation of particulars, but his
learning is 'of the earth, earthy'; by which we mean that, like the
majority of modern practical philosophers, he argues from below to
above, and not, in the higher way, from above to below, or (contrary to
the inductive, or Aristotelian, or Baconian method) from generals to
particulars, or from the light of inspiration into the *sagacities* of
darkness, as we may call unassisted world’s knowledge--always vain.

The Feast of Lanterns, or Dragon-Feast, occurs in China at their New
Year, which assimilates with that of the Jews, and occurs in October at
the high tides. They salute the festival with drums and music, and with
explosions of crackers. During the Feast, nothing is permitted to be
thrown into water (for fear of profaning it). Here we have the rites of
Aphrodite or Venus, or the Watery Deity, observed even in China, which
worship, in Protean forms, being also the worship of the Dragon or
Snake, prevails, in its innumerable contradictory and effective
disguises, over the whole world. How like are the noises and explosions
of crackers, etc., to the tumult of the festivals of Dionusus or
Dionysius, to the riot or rout of the Corybantes amongst the Greeks, to
the outcry and wild music of the priests of the Salii, and, in modern
times, to the noises said to be made at initiation by the Freemasons,
whose myths are claimed to be those (or imitative of those) of the whole
world, whose Mysteries are said to come from that First Time,
deep-buried in the blind, unconscious succession of the centuries! In
the Royal-Arch order of the Masons, as some have said, at an initiation,
the 'companions' fire pistols, clash swords, overturn chairs, and roll
cannon-balls about. The long-descended forms trace from the oldest
tradition;

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

the origin, indeed, of most things is only doubt or conjecture, hinted
in symbols.

The Egyptian Deities may always be recognized by the following
distinctive marks:

Phthas, Ptah, by the close-fitting Robe, Four Steps, Baboon,
Cynocephalus.

Ammon, Amn, by a Ram's Head, Double Plume, Vase, Canopus.

The Sun-God (Phre or Ra) has a Hawk's Head, Disc, Serpent, Uræus.

Thoth, or Thoyt, is Ibis-headed (means a scribe or priest).

Sochos, or Suches, has a Hawk. Hermes Trismegistus (Tat) displays a
Winged Disc.

The Egyptians, however, *never* committed their greater knowledge to
marks or figures, or to writing of any kind.

Figure 313: the Gnostics have a peculiar talisman of Fate (Homer's
Αισα). This is one of the rarest types to be met with in ancient art. In
Stosch's vast collection, Winckelmann was unable to find a single
indubitable example. It is of brown agate, with transverse shades, and
is an Etruscan intaglio or Gnostic gem. *The Gnostics*, p. 238, makes a
reference to this figure.

Later in our book (figs. 191, 300, 301) we give a figure of the
'Chnuphis Serpent' raising himself aloft. Over, and corresponding to the
rays of his crown, are the *seven vowels*, the elements of his name. The
usual triple 'S.S.S.' and bard, and the name 'ΧΝΟΥΒΙC', are the reverse
of, this Gnostic gem. It is a beautiful intaglio on a pale plasma of the
finest quality, extremely convex, as it has been found on examination.

In the Ophic planetary group (*Origen in Celsum*, vi. 25) Michael is
figured as a lion, Suriel as a bull, Raphael as a serpent, Gabriel as an
eagle, Thautabaoth

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

as a bear, Eratsaoth as a dog, Ouriel as an ass. Emanations are supposed
to pass through the seven planetary regions, signified by these Chaldæan
names, on their way to this world. It was through these seven planetary
spiritual regions, or spheres, filled with their various orders of
angels, that the Gnostics mythed the Saviour Jesus Christ to have passed
secretly; disguising Himself and His Mission in order to win securely to
His object. In evading recognition, in His acceptable disguises, through
these already-created 'Princedoms of Angels', He veiled His purpose of
His Voluntary Sacrifice for the Human Race till He was safe, in His
investment in 'Humanity' for the accepted 'Propitiation'--through the
'Virgin' for production only; not for 'office'.

There was deep mystery in the Gnostic method of teaching that, although
the 'Sacrifice' (the source of sacrifice in all faiths) was complete and
real and perfect, the Saviour did not--nor could--suffer *bodily* or be
nailed *really*, and *die* upon the Cross, but that He suffered in
appearance only, and vicariously--the Scripture being misread. The
Gnostics maintained that Simon the Cyrenean--who, the Evangelist states,
bore His Cross--did really bear it as the culprit, and suffered upon it.
As human and divine are totally different, this could not impair the
efficacy of the 'Crucifixion', for the substitution of persons was
miraculous and remote (of course) from human sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. History of the Tower or Steeple](rrm31)
