[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm39)  [Next](rrm41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

### CHAPTER THE TENTH

#### ROSICRUCIAN 'CELESTIAL' AND 'TERRESTRIAL' (MEANS OF INTERCOMMUNICATION)

'CONSCIENTIOUS readers will thank the man who states accurately that
which they agree with, but will be almost equally grateful to the man
who states clearly what they most dissent from. What they want is either
truth or error; not a *muddle between them*.'

The reason of the real superlative importance of the ideas entertained
by people respecting the Rosicrucians, is that they were REALLY magical
men, appearing like real men; carrying, in very deed, through the world
*eternally forbidden secrets*--safe, however, in the fact that they were
sure never to be believed. De Quincey, who has written the most lucid
and intelligible (until this present work) speculation concerning these
profoundest of mystics; and which account, though (most naturally)
*humanly* lucid and intelligible--*groping* as it were at the claims of
these men--is yet as far from the truth and as different to the real
beliefs of the Rosicrucians as darkness is from light; De Quincey says;
in exemplification of the grandeur of their mystery: 'To be hidden
amidst crowds is sublime. To come down hidden amongst crowds from
distant generations is *doubly sublime*.' This appears in *The London
Magazine* of 1821; reprinted, corrected, enlarged, and greatly improved
in the last edition of his collected works in volumes, published by
Groombridge, Paternoster

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Row. De Quincey,
Works, Vol. 6: Secret Societies, p. 235.

It is very little reflected upon, but it is no less a truth, which
(because profound) is therefore contradictory--that if you take away Man
from out the universe, that no universe remains. There cannot be any
proof of there being anything outside of us when you take away Man, TO
WHOM ALONE THE WORLD IS. For to any other intelligence than Man’s, the
world real CANNOT BE. And hence arises a curious question. It is,
whether space as occurring AS AN IDEA in sleep (which implies time)
would be real space? The truth of time, and of space, depend alone upon
this question. Consider the depth of void ('something') into which
thought has the power to extend. Consider the preposterous (in our
senses) wall of separation (utterly IMPOSSIBLE to our POSSIBLE) which
divides living human life (or 'living possibility') from the life (and
the 'possibility') of the world *even next-off* this world. Not to speak
of possibly multitudinous other worlds (or other possibilities), which
stretch--for all we know to the contrary--we know not whither. And these
'possibilities' or metaphysical intelligible worlds--of what kind, of
what nature, or of what (whether pleasant or unpleasant) character we
can conceive not. We understand not *what* they are; or *how* they are;
or *why* they are. Indeed--penetrating down to this truth--we know not
why WE ourselves exist, or what we ARE. For we, that is, the human race,
are not intelligible. Creation is not intelligible. That single word
SOMEHOW alone covers the whole of our knowledge. The entire ground
next-off this ground of senses (or of nature) is wholly conjecture.
Nature itself--*away from us*, and *not us*--may be 'UNNATURAL', for all
we know to the contrary. For Man himself is only a 'PHENOMENON', and HE
alone MAKES nature, which

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

exists not without Him. All the foregoing is the groundwork of the
arguments of the deep Buddhists in regard to the *real* nature of
things.

The result of all these sound and only possible philosophical
conclusions is, that there is nothing left for man but *entire
submission*--entire subjection to the UNKNOWN POWER--the humbleness of
the UNKNOWING CHILD. And herein we see the force of that *dictum* of the
Saviour: 'Unless ye become as one of THESE' (little children), 'ye shall
in nowise see the 'Kingdom of God.' Certainly, we are unable to know
absolutely (that is, philosophically) that WE OURSELVES EXIST.
(Berkeley, in showing that our senses are only *medium*, but not
*means*, implied that we did not exist.) By a side-glance, as it were,
we can suspect whether 'Life' itself be only a 'grand DREAM' which may
be, or be not; be anything, or be nothing. There is no such thing as
pain or pleasure, radically; without a medium which makes it pain or
pleasure. And both are only 'disturbance', *made pain or pleasure from
without*. Our pain may be pleasure in another differently-constituted
nervous method (or medium of) existence. Our pleasures may be pains (or
PENALTIES) elsewhere. This possibility, which is the foundation of
supernaturalism--or of the doctrine of the 'intelligent population of
the elements'--proves that pain, and pleasure, and the countless shades
between them, necessitate the idea of *body*, or of *capacity*, of some
kind or other: because capacity is 'state', and state is 'material'. So
says Paracelsus; so says Van Helmont; so says Jacob Boehm. Nothing can
be anything,' unless it is fixed in something material.

Hume, in demonstrating that in reality there is 'no connexion between
cause and effect', proved that there is some *delusion* between cause
and effect; and therefore that life *may be* a dream. Benedictus

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spinoza, in his
merciless logic, although he was a man so interpenetrated with the idea
of Deity, as to be called 'The God-intoxicated man', proved that GOD
MUST BE 'MATTER'; in evaporating, or exhausting, or '*calculating Him
the closest* OUT of His own works'. So much for the AUDACITY of
mind--mind which is 'knowledge', knowledge which is the 'devil'; the
devil which is the 'DENIER'. Our highest knowledge--the most refined
'sum-up' of the thinnest-sifted (until disappearing, *evanishing*)
metaphysics, is peremptorily passed back upon us when we essay beyond
the frontier of 'second causes'. All is guess over that brink. All is
cloud where this pathway--turn Which way we will--ends. Man’s human arms
are insufficient to lift as 'weights' aught than second causes--'CAUSED
CAUSES'. He falls asleep, helpless, when the Great Veil is dropped over
him to insulate his understanding. All is possible in 'SLEEP', because
'DREAMS' are in sleep. God is in sleep. And God, who is in sleep,
although He is a reality AWAY from us, is a delusion, when sought to be
demonstrated TO us. And sleep, which is men’s thoughts, or rather *the
dreams are* that are in his (man’s sleep), is the stumbling-block over
which the whole comprehensible theory of man parts into nothing and
falls into absurdity; as in which dream he is himself ALONE, perhaps,
made. These general ideas of the profound constitute the 'BYTHOS' of the
GNOSTICS, and the 'MAYA', or annihilation, of the BUDDHISTS--however
defectively interpreted heretofore, where these sublime subjects have
not been wholly misunderstood or thought absurd--

*Firstly*.--In the affairs of God Almighty and the world there is some
mighty reason--*ab extrâ*--which contradicts itself; inasmuch as it
contradicts reason--*having no reason*. But *because* it contradicts
reason,

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

it proves itself to HAVE a REASON--divine and ABOVE REASON--which is
human; that is, INTELLIGIBLE ONLY. It follows from this, logically,
(even)--that in being 'UNINTELLIGIBLE' it is master of the
'INTELLIGIBLE'. Therefore 'MIRACLE' is superior to 'REALITY'. Because
miracle is true (being impossibility and wonder), and reality is untrue,
being possible, and *therefore limited* (in the face of the
*illimitable*). Reality (reason) is satisfied, and complete, and
'full'--so to speak. While the 'impossible', and therefore the
'supernatural', must be true, because it *encloses* nature: which is
only intelligible up to its certain point of nature. (But not beyond.)
Nature *itself being yet to be accounted for*--inasmuch as NATURE is NOT
REASONABLE. What is truth? There is no truth--inasmuch as nature itself,
which must necessarily be the basis of everything, is not *true truth*,
but only apparent truth.

*Secondly*.--So long as Nature must have a 'farther'--or a
'whereto'--beyond the present apparent 'whole' (and forward to which, in
the necessity of things it must pass)--it may be reasonable--that is,
all of TRUTH APPARENT. (The Cabalists (Rosicrucians, the Brothers of the
'CRUCIFIED ROSE') say that 'Man' is unintelligible, that 'Nature' is
unintelligible, that the Old Testament, with its Genesis, its
Pentateuch; that the New Testament, with Christianity and the 'Scheme of
Redemption', that all is unintelligible without their *secret*--to the
world wholly forbidden '*interpretation*'). But it cannot be TRUE TRUTH;
or abstract, positive truth. Man is made. Man is not a maker. In other
words, man gets nothing that is outside of him. He only obtains that
which is already in him. He is in his world. He is of his world. But he
is not of another world. His helplessness--unsupported--is perfectly
ridiculous. He only lives--forgetting himself. He '*falls asleep*',
blindly '*into* 

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

*his morrow*'. If he had independent power he would not do this. He
would *know* his 'morrow'. (This is the contention of the Buddhists.)

Now, in regard of real truth, it has been settled for very many ages
that there is no possibility of there ever being such. '*Cogito; ergo
sum*.' I am; because I am. Existent only to the periphery of
consciousness--no more.

*Thirdly*.--For there is something in the ring outside which
(converging) makes the centre--or, in other words, that creates
consciousness. That which insulates is greater than that which it
insulates. 'Power' is only escaped 'Rest'. The 'Living' out of the
'Dead'.

*Fourthly*.--Thus IMPOSSIBILITY, alone, makes POSSIBILITY POSSIBLE.

*Fifthly*.--The 'made' cannot know its 'maker'; otherwise it would be
'its maker itself'. For the MAKER knows that which It (HE) makes, up to
the farthest possible limit of its making or prolongation. Every man’s
morrow (*not yet arrived at him*) is already PAST to the SUPERIOR
INTELLIGENCE that is altogether independent of 'morrows'--that is,
ordinary morrows. 'The ANGELS have their manacles on the wrists of the
MEN-MOVERS.' Men think they act their own intentions; but in reality
they act *other agents’* intentions. In this 'delusion' perhaps lies the
reconcilement of that unresolvable puzzle by MAN--at least, in his
waking, or real, state--'Free-Will' and 'Necessity'. Free-will is
'necessity' UPWARDS, while necessity is 'free-will' DOWNWARDS; or mutual
reversal of the *ends of the same lever*--GOD’S INTENT-TONS. This is as
far as MAN is concerned; for Fate is Fate as regards the universal frame
of things; the human reason being capable of grasping *no possibility*
otherwise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Pre-Adamites. Profound Cabalistic or Rosicrucian
Speculations](rrm41)
