[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm46)  [Next](rrm48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

### CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH

#### MYSTERIES OF THE ANCIENTS

#### THE ARK OF NOAH

NOTE *to Plate* '*Mysterium*': The explanation of this engraving will be
found at a previous page. The ancient volume from which it is taken is
very rare, and bears the following title:

*Antiquitatum ludaicarum* LIBRI IX:

*In qüis, præter Ivdæe, Hierosolymorum, et Templi Salomonis accuratam
delineationem, præcipui Sacri ac profani gentis Titus describuntur*
(auctore Benedicto Aria Montano Hispalensi). Adiectis formis æneis.
Lvgdani Batavorum. Ex officina Planteniana apud Franciscum
Raphelengium--1595.

The Ark of Noah--the medium of escape from the Deluge, and the mythic
means of the perpetuation of the Human Family (afterwards Race). The
Post-Diluvian 'Signs of the Zodiac' are here correctly designated as in
number 'Twelve'. Let the judicious Reader remark that twelve times
thirty are Three-Hundred-and-Sixty, which is *not* the number of the
degrees of this symbolical plan. There are twelve divisions in this ark.
The centre space is that through which the 'Dove', or 'Raven', escaped
out into the 'open' in search of its new home, or into the restored
world when the waters 'went down' or 'disappeared'. Each of the twelve
spaces in the accompanying plan contains twenty-five degrees, which make
an aggregate of three hundred degrees. The mythical figure contained

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

in the Ark is presumably that of Noah. It is also evidently the
symbolical figure of the 'Saviour', and typically only that of Noah; for
the hands are 'crossed', and the feet and hands bear the marks of the
'Incision'--the 'Nails of the Crucifixion (or Passion)'. Twenty-five,
the number of the degrees in each space or sign of this 'Noachic Ark',
Arca, or Chest (Gigantic), are the number of the Knights of the Garter;
with the reserved 'twenty-sixth', or Kingly or Sovereign Seat. In this
respect the ark may be regarded as the grand mythic 'Idea' of the 'Round
Table'; as that was the production of the central mythic 'Idea' of the
'Sangreal', or 'Sangreil'--*Refer to the Engravings, and to the
Rosicrucian comment throughout both parts*. See pages generally, and the
whole of the Chapters referring to the 'origin' of the Order of the
'Garter'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII: Cabalistic Illustrations. The San-Grëale, Greal,
or Holy Grëale](rrm48)
