[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm49)  [Next](rrm51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

### CHAPTER THE TWENTIETH

#### REMARKS UPON TWO CURIOUS BOOKS

THE following old book is a very extraordinary one; as the design and
tendency of it will puzzle most persons who are acquainted with the
nature of the antagonistic relations which were supposed to exist
between the Church of Rome and the Rosicrucians. The book is exceedingly
scarce and valuable:

*Rosa Jesuitica, oder Jesuitische Rottgesellen, das ist, Eine Frag ob
die Zween Orden, der ganandten Ritter von der Neerscharen Jesu, und der
Rosen-Creuzer ein einiger Ordensen*: per J. P. D. a S. Jesuitarum
Protectorum. Prague, 1620. (4to.) This is a truly curious tract upon the
'relations of the Jesuits and the Rosicrucians'.

A very curious book upon the subject of the peculiar and fanciful
*attributed* notions of the Rosicrucians, and which drew a large amount
of surprised and 'left-handed' attention when it first appeared, was
that which bore the title (in its improved edition--published without a
date): *Comte de Gabalis, ou Entretiens sur Les Sciences Secrètes.
Renouvellé et augmenté d’une Lettre sur ce sujet*. This book was brought
out at Cologne. The printer’s name was Pierre Marteau. Bound up with the
copy in the possession of the present Authors of the Rosicrucians is
another volume bearing the following title: *La Suite du Comte de
Gabalis; ou Nouveaux Entretiens sur les Sciences Secrètes, touchant La
Nouvelle Philosophie*. This latter work was published at Amsterdam, with
no year

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

mentioned of its publication, by Pierre Mortier. Upon the title-page of
the first-named of these books appears the 'rescript' 'Quod tanto
impendio absconditur, etiam solum-modò demonstrare, destruere
est.--'Tertullian.

These works were considered--although written from the questioning and
cautiously satirical point--as unwelcome and even obnoxious; even among
those who freely commented on religion. Nevertheless they provoked (and
still provoke) extraordinary curiosity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI: Remarks Relating to the Great Mystic, Robert 'de
Fluctibus'](rrm51)
