[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4931) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 161">{p. 161}</span>

## MEDITATION

#### ON

# BUDDHA AMITAYUS\[1\].

 

PART I.

   § 1. Thus it was heard by me: At one time the Buddha dwelt in
Râ*g*ag*ri*ha, on the mountain G*ri*dhrakû*t*a, with a large assembly of
Bhikshus and with thirty-two thousands of Bodhisattvas; with
Ma*ñg*u*s*rî, Prince of the Law\[2\], at the head of the assembly.

   § 2. At that time, in the great city of Râ*g*ag*ri*ha there was a
prince, the heir-apparent, named A*g*âta*s*atru. He listened to the
wicked counsel of Devadatta and other friends and forcibly arrested
Bimbisâra his father, the king, and shut him up by himself in a room
with seven walls, proclaiming to all the courtiers that no one should
approach (the king). The chief consort of the king, Vaidehî by

\[1. Nanjio's Catalogue of Tripi*t*aka, No. 198; translated into Chinese
A. D. 424, by Kâlaya*s*as, a *S*rama*n*a from India.

2\. Sanskrit Kumârabhûta, 'prince' or 'princely,' but Chinese has
'prince of the law;' according to the commentator, *K*'-*k*ö, he was
called so because he was (skilled in) converting men by (teaching) the
Law. *K*'-*k*ö seems to have understood that Ma*ñg*u*s*rî was not a
royal prince, but the name Kumârabhûta was given him as an honorific
title. Max Müller, 'the prince' (p. 350, vol. ii, Selected Essays);
Kern, 'the prince royal,' but he gives an alternative 'still a youth'
(p. 4, Saddharmapu*nd*arika).\]

<span id="p. 162">{p. 162}</span>

name, was true and faithful to her lord, the king. She supported him in
this wise: having purified herself by bathing and washing, she anointed
her body with honey and ghee mixed with corn-flour, and she concealed
the juice of grapes in the various garlands she wore (in order to give
him food without being noticed by the warder). As she stole in and made
an offering to him, he was able to eat the flour and to drink the juice
(of grapes). Then he called for water and rinsed his mouth. That done,
the king stretched forth his folded hands towards the Mount
G*ri*dhrakû*t*a and worshipped duly and respectfully the World-Honoured
One, who at that time abode there. And he uttered the following prayer:
'Mahâyâna is my friend and relative; let him, I pray, feel compassion
towards me; and come and communicate to me the eight prohibitive
precepts\[1\] (of Buddha).' On this, Mahâyâna at once appeared before
the king, coming with a speed equal to the flight of a falcon or an
eagle, and communicated to him the eight precepts.

   Day after day did he come. The World-Honoured One sent also his
worthy disciple Pûr*n*a to preach the Law to the king. Thus a period of
three weeks passed by. The king showed by his countenance that he was
happy and contented when he had an opportunity of hearing the Law as
well as of enjoying the honey and flour.

   § 3. At that time, A*g*âta*s*atru asked the warder

<span class="small">\[1. According to the commentator, Shân-tâo,
'killing, stealing, adultery, lying, drinking, applying ointment, &c.,
music, and using ornamented chairs, &c.'\]</span>

<span id="p. 163">{p. 163}</span>

of the gate whether his father was yet alive. On this, the warder
answered him: 'O Exalted king, the chief consort (of thy father) brought
(food) and presented it to him by anointing her body with honey and
flour and filling her garlands with the juice (of grapes), and the
*S*rama*n*as, Mahâyâna and Pûr*n*a, approached the king through the sky
in order to preach the Law to him. It is, O king, impossible to prevent
them coming.' When the prince heard this answer his indignation arose
against his mother: 'My mother,' he cried, 'is, indeed, a rebel, for she
was found in company with that rebel. Wicked people are those
*S*rama*n*as, and it is their art of spells causing illusion and
delusion that delayed the death of that wicked king for so many days.'
Instantly he brandished his sharp sword, intending to slay his mother.
At that moment, there intervened a minister named *K*andraprabha, who
was possessed of great wisdom and intelligence, and *G*îva (a famous
physician). They saluted the prince and remonstrated with him, saying:
'We, ministers, O Great king, heard that since the beginning of the
kalpas there had been several wicked kings, even to the number of
eighteen thousand, who killed their own fathers, coveting the throne of
(their respective) kingdoms, as mentioned in the Sûtra of the discourse
of the Veda\[1\]. Yet never have we heard of a man killing his mother,
though he be void of virtue. Now, if thou, O king, shouldst dare to
commit such a deadly sin, thou wouldst bring a stain upon the blood of
the Kshatriyas (the kingly race). We cannot even

<span class="small">\[1. This is non-Buddhistic, according to
Shân-tâo.\]</span>

<span id="p. 164">{p. 164}</span>

bear to hear of it. Thou art indeed a *K*a*nd*âla (the lowest race); we
shall not stay here with thee.' After this speech, the two great
ministers retired stepping backward, each with his hand placed on his
sword. A*g*âta*s*atru was then frightened, and greatly afraid of them,
and asked *G*îva, saying: 'Wilt thou not be friendly to me?' In reply
*G*îva said to him: 'Do not then, O Great king, by any means think of
injuring thy mother.' On hearing this, the prince repented and sought
for mercy, and at once laid down his sword and did his mother no hurt.
He finally ordered the officers of the inner chambers to put the queen
in a hidden palace and not to allow her to come out again.

   § 4. When Vaidehî was thus shut up in retirement she became afflicted
by sorrow and distress. She began to do homage to Buddha from afar,
looking towards the Mount G*ri*dhrakû*t*a. She uttered the following
words: 'O Tathâgata! World-Honoured One! In former times thou. hast
constantly sent Ânanda to me for enquiry and consolation. I am now in
sorrow. and grief. Thou, O World-Honoured One, art majestic and exalted;
in no way shall I be able to see thee. Wilt thou, I pray thee, command
Mahâyâna and thy honoured disciple, Ânanda, to come and have an
interview with me?' After this speech, she grieved and wept, shedding
tears like a shower of rain. Before she raised her head from doing
homage to the distant Buddha, the World-Honoured One knew what Vaidehî
was wishing in her mind, though he was on the Mount G*ri*dhrakû*t*a.
Therefore, he instantly ordered Mahâyâna and Ânanda to go to her through
the sky. Buddha

<span id="p. 165">{p. 165}</span>

himself disappeared from that mountain and appeared in the royal palace.

   When the queen raised her head as she finished homage to Buddha, she
saw before her the World-Honoured Buddha *S*âkyamuni, whose body was
purple gold in colour, sitting on a lotus-flower which consists of a
hundred jewels, with Mahâyâna attending on his left, and with Ânanda on
his right. *S*akra (Indra), Brahman, and other gods that protect the
world were seen in the midst of the sky, everywhere showering heavenly
flowers with which they made offerings to Buddha in their worship.
Vaidehî, at the sight of Buddha the World-Honoured One, took off her
garlands and prostrated herself on the ground, crying, sobbing, and
speaking to Buddha: 'O World-Honoured One! what former sin of mine has
produced such a wicked son? And again, O Exalted One, from what cause
and circumstances hast thou such an affinity (by blood and religion)
with Devadatta (Buddha's wicked cousin and once his disciple)?'

   § 5. 'My only prayer,' she continued, 'is this: O World-Honoured One,
mayst thou preach to me in detail of all the places where there is no
sorrow or trouble, and where I ought to go to be born anew. I am not
satisfied with this world of depravities\[1\], with *G*ambudvîpa
(India)\[2\], which is full of hells, full of hungry spirits (pretas),
and of the brute creation. In this world of depravities, there is many
an assemblage of the wicked. May I not

\[1. For five depravities vide Smaller Sukhâvatî, § 18;
Saddharmapu*nd*arîka by Kern, p. 58, § 140 note.

2\. But Japanese Buddhists take this in a wider sense.\]

<span id="p. 166">{p. 166}</span>

hear, I pray, the voice of the wicked in the future; and may I not see
any wicked person.

   'Now I throw my five limbs down to the ground before thee, and seek
for thy mercy by confessing my sins. I pray for this only that the
Sun-like Buddha may instruct me how to meditate on a world wherein all
actions are pure.' At that moment, the World-Honoured One flashed forth
a golden ray from between his eyebrows. It extended to all the
innumerable worlds of the ten quarters. On its return the ray rested on
the top of Buddha's head and transformed itself into a golden pillar
just like the Mount Sumeru, wherein the pure and admirable countries of
the Buddhas in the ten quarters appeared all at once illuminated.

   One was a country consisting of seven jewels, another was a country
all full of lotus-flowers; one was like the palace of Mahe*s*vara Deva
(god *S*iva), another was like a mirror of crystal, with the countries
in the ten quarters reflected therein: There were innumerable countries
like these, resplendent, gorgeous, and delightful to look upon. All were
meant for Vaidehî to see (and choose from).

   Thereupon Vaidehî again spoke to Buddha: 'O World-Honoured One,
although all other Buddha countries are pure and radiant with light, I
should, nevertheless, wish myself to be born in the realm of Buddha
Amitâyus (or Amitâbha), in the world of Highest Happiness (Sukhâvatî),
Now I simply pray thee, O World-Honoured One, to teach me how to
concentrate my thought so as to obtain aright vision (of that country).'

   § 6. Thereupon the World-Honoured One gently smiled upon her, and
rays of five colours issued

<span id="p. 167">{p. 167}</span>

forth out of his mouth, each ray shining as far as the head of king
Bimbisâra.

   At that moment, the mental vision of that exalted king was perfectly
clear though he was shut up in lonely retirement, and he could see the
World-Honoured One from afar. As he paid homage with his head and face,
he naturally increased and advanced (in wisdom), whereby he attained to
the fruition of an Anâgâmin (the third of the four grades to Nirvâ*n*a
).

   § 7. Then the World-Honoured One said: 'Now dost thou not know, O
Vaidehî, that Buddha Amitâyus is not very far from here? Thou shouldst
apply thy mind entirely to close meditation upon those who have already
perfected the pure actions necessary for that Buddha country.

   'I now proceed to fully expound them for thee in many parables, and
thereby afford all ordinary persons of the future who wish to cultivate
these pure actions an opportunity of being born in the Land of Highest
Happiness (Sukhâvatî) in the western quarter. Those who wish to be born
in that country of Buddha have to cultivate a threefold goodness.
Firstly, they should act filially towards their parents and support
them; serve and respect their teachers and elders; be of compassionate
mind, abstain from doing any injury, and cultivate the ten virtuous
actions\[1\]. Secondly, they should take and observe the vow of seeking
refuge with the Three Jewels, fulfil all moral precepts, and not lower
their dignity or neglect any ceremonial observance. Thirdly, they should
give their whole mind

<span class="small">\[1. I.e. observe the ten prohibitive precepts of
Buddha.\]</span>

<span id="p. 168">{p. 168}</span>

to the attainment of the Bodhi (perfect wisdom), deeply believe in (the
principle of) cause and effect, study and recite (the Sûtras of) the
Mahâyâna doctrine, and persuade and encourage others who pursue the same
course as themselves.

   'These three groups as enumerated are called the pure actions
(leading to the Buddha country).' 'O Vaidehî!' Buddha continued, 'dost
thou not understand now? These three classes of actions are the
efficient cause of the pure actions taught by all the Buddhas of the
past, present, and future.'

   § 8. Buddha then addressed Ânanda as well as Vaidehî: 'Listen
carefully, listen carefully! Ponder carefully on what you hear! I,
Tathâgata, now declare the pure actions needful (for that Buddha
country) for the sake of all beings hereafter, that are subject to the
misery (inflicted) by the enemy, i.e. passion. Well done, O Vaidehî!
Appropriate questions are those which thou hast asked\[1\]! O Ânanda, do
thou remember these words of me, of Buddha, and repeat them openly to
many assemblies. I, Tathâgata, now teach Vaidehî and also all beings
hereafter in order that they may meditate on the World of Highest
Happiness (Sukhâvatî) in the western quarter.

   'It is by the power of Buddha only that one can see that pure land
(of Buddha) as clear as one sees the image of one's face reflected in
the transparent mirror held up before one.

   'When one sees the state of happiness of that country in its highest
excellence, one greatly rejoices

<span class="small">\[1. Vide supra, § 4; but those two questions,
though appropriate, have not after all been answered by Buddha in this
Sûtra.\]</span>

<span id="p. 169">{p. 169}</span>

in one's heart and immediately attains a spirit of resignation prepared
to endure whatever consequences may yet arise\[1\].' Buddha, turning
again to Vaidehî, said: 'Thou art but an ordinary person; the quality of
thy mind is feeble and inferior.

   'Thou hast not as yet obtained the divine eye and canst not perceive
what is at a distance. All the Buddhas, Tathâgatas have various means at
their disposal and can therefore afford thee an opportunity of seeing
(that Buddha country).' Then Vaidehî rejoined: 'O World-Honoured One,
people such as I, can now see that land by the power of Buddha, but how
shall all those beings who are to come after Buddha's Nirvâ*n*a, and
who, as being depraved and devoid of good qualities, will be harassed by
the five worldly sufferings\[2\]--how shall they see the World of
Highest Happiness of the Buddha Amitâyus?'

 

PART II.

   § 9. Buddha then replied: 'Thou and all other beings besides ought to
make it their only aim, with concentrated thought, to get a perception
of the western quarter. You will ask how that perception is to be
formed. I will explain it now. All beings, if not blind from birth, are
uniformly possessed of sight, and they all see the setting sun. Thou
shouldst sit down properly, looking in the western direction, and
prepare thy thought for a close meditation

\[1. Anutpatikadharmakshânti, cf: Larger Sukhâvatî, § 19, p. 39, and §
32, p. 5. Kern, 'the acquiescence in the eternal law,'
Saddharmapu*nd*ârika XI, p. 254.

2\. 1. Birth, 2. Old age, 3. Sickness, 4. Death, 5. Parting.\]

<span id="p. 170">{p. 170}</span>

on the sun; cause thy mind to be firmly fixed (on it) so as to have an
unwavering perception by the exclusive application (of thy thought), and
gaze upon it (more particularly) when it is about to set and looks like
a suspended drum.

   'After thou hast thus seen the sun, let (that image) remain clear and
fixed, whether thine eyes be shut or open;--such is the perception of
the sun, which is the First Meditation.

   § 10. 'Next thou shouldst form the perception of water; gaze on the
water clear and pure, and let (this image) also remain clear and fixed
(afterwards); never allow thy thought to be scattered and lost.

   'When thou hast thus seen the water thou shouldst form the perception
of ice. As thou seest the ice shining and transparent, thou shouldst
imagine the appearance of lapis lazuli.

   'After that has been done, thou wilt see the ground consisting of
lapis lazuli, transparent and shining both within and without. Beneath
this ground of lapis lazuli there will be seen a golden banner with the
seven jewels, diamonds and the rest, supporting the ground\[1\]. It
extends to the eight points of the compass, and thus the eight corners
(of the ground) are perfectly filled up. Every side of the eight
quarters consists of a hundred jewels, every jewel has a thousand rays,
and every ray has eighty-four thousand colours which, when reflected in
the ground of lapis lazuli, look like a thousand millions of suns, and
it is difficult to see them all one by one. Over the surface of that
ground of lapis lazuli there are

<span class="small">\[1. 'A banner supporting or lifting up the ground'
is rather strange, but there is no other way of translating it.\]</span>

<span id="p. 171">{p. 171}</span>

stretched golden ropes intertwined crosswise; divisions are made by
means of (strings of) seven jewels with every part clear and distinct.

   'Each jewel has rays of five hundred colours which look like flowers
or like the moon and stars. Lodged high up in the open sky these rays
form a tower of rays, whose storeys and galleries are ten millions in
number and built of a hundred jewels. Both sides of the tower have each
a hundred millions of flowery banners furnished and decked with
numberless musical instruments. Eight kinds of cool breezes proceed from
the brilliant rays. When those musical instruments are played, they emit
the sounds "suffering," "non-existence," "impermanence," and
"non-self;"--such is the perception of the water, which is the Second
Meditation.

   § 11. 'When this perception has been formed, thou shouldst meditate
on its (constituents) one by one and make (the images) as clear as
possible, so that they may never be scattered and lost, whether thine
eyes be shut or open. Except only during the time of thy sleep, thou
shouldst always keep this in thy mind. One who has reached this (stage
of) perception is said to have dimly seen the Land of Highest Happiness
(Sukhâvatî).

   'One who has obtained the Samâdhi (the state of supernatural calm) is
able to see the land (of that Buddha country) clearly and distinctly:
(this state) is too much to be explained fully;--such is the perception
of the land, and it is the Third Meditation.

   'Thou shouldst remember, O Ânanda, the Buddha words of mine, and
repeat this law for attaining to the perception of the land ( of the
Buddha country)

<span id="p. 172">{p. 172}</span>

for the sake of the great mass of the people hereafter who may wish to
be delivered from their sufferings. If anyone meditates on the land (of
that Buddha country), his sins (which bind him to) births And deaths
during eighty millions of kalpas shall be expiated; after the
abandonment of his (preSent) body, he will assuredly be born in the pure
land in the following life. The practice of this kind of meditation is
called the "right meditation." If it be of another kind it is called
"heretical meditation."'

   § 12. Buddha then spoke to Ânanda and Vaidehî: 'When the perception
of the land (of that Buddha country) has been gained, you should next
meditate on the jewel-trees (of that country). In meditating on the
jewel-trees, you should take each by itself and form a perception of the
seven rows of trees; every tree is eight hundred yo*g*anas high, and all
the jewel-trees have flowers and leaves consisting of seven jewels all
perfect. All flowers and leaves have colours like the colours of various
jewels:--from the colour of lapis lazuli there issues a golden ray; from
the colour of crystal, a saffron ray; from the colour of agate, a
diamond ray; from the colour of diamond, a ray of blue pearls. Corals,
amber, and all other gems are used as ornaments for illumination; nets
of excellent pearls are spread over the trees, each tree is covered by
seven sets of nets, and between one set and another there are five
hundred millions of palaces built of excellent flowers, resembling the
palace of the Lord Brahman; all heavenly children live there quite
naturally; every child has a garland consisting of five hundred millions
of precious gems like those that are fastened

<span id="p. 173">{p. 173}</span>

on *S*akra's (Indra's) head\[1\], the rays of which shine over a hundred
yo*g*anas, just as if a hundred millions of suns and moons were united
together; it is difficult to explain them in detail. That (garland) is
the most excellent among all, as it is the commixture of all sorts of
jewels. Rows of these jewel-trees touch one another; the leaves of the
trees also join one another.

   'Among the dense foliage there blossom various beautiful flowers,
upon which are miraculously found fruits of seven jewels. The leaves of
the trees are all exactly equal in length and in breadth, measuring
twenty-five yo*g*anas each way; every leaf has a thousand colours and a
hundred different pictures on it, just like a heavenly garland. There
are many excellent flowers which have the colour of *G*âmbûnada gold and
an appearance of fire-wheels in motion, turning between the leaves in a
graceful fashion. All the fruits are produced just (as easily) as if
they flowed out from the pitcher of the God *S*akra. There is a
magnificent ray which transforms itself into numberless jewelled
canopies with banners and flags. Within these jewelled canopies the
works of all the Buddhas of the Great Chiliocosm appear illuminated; the
Buddha countries of the ten quarters also are manifested therein. When
you have seen these trees you should also meditate on them one by one in
order. In meditating on the trees, trunks, branches, leaves, flowers,
and fruits, let them all be distinct and clear;--such is the perception
of the trees (of that Buddha country), and it is the Fourth Meditation.

<span class="small">\[1. The text has Sakrâbhilagnama*n*iratna, vide
infra, §§ 16, 19.\]</span>

<span id="p. 174">{p. 174}</span>

   § 13. 'Next, you should perceive the water (of that country). The
perception of the water is as follows:--

   'In the Land of Highest Happiness there are waters in eight lakes;
the water in every lake consists of seven jewels which are soft and
yielding. Deriving its source from the king of jewels that fulfils every
wish\[1\], the water is divided into fourteen streams; every stream has
the colour of seven jewels; its channel is built of gold, the bed of
which consists of the sand of variegated diamonds.

   'In the midst of each lake there are sixty millions of lotus-flowers,
made of seven jewels; all the flowers are perfectly round and exactly
equal (in circumference), being twelve yo*g*anas. The water of jewels
flows amidst the flowers and rises and falls by the stalks (of the
lotus); the sound of the streaming water is melodious and pleasing, and
propounds all the perfect virtues (Parâmitâs), "suffering,"
"non-existence," "impermanence," and "non-self;" it proclaims also the
praise of the signs of perfection\[2\], and minor marks of
excellence\[2\] of all Buddhas. From the king of jewels that fulfils
every wish, stream forth the golden-coloured rays excessively beautiful,
the radiance of which transforms itself into birds possessing the
colours of a hundred jewels, which sing out harmonious notes, sweet and
delicious, ever praising the remembrance of Buddha, the remembrance of
the Law, and the remembrance of the Church;--such is the perception

\[1. Sanskrit *K*intâma*n*i, i.e. 'wishing-pearl.'

2\. For thirty-two signs and eighty minor marks vide Dharmasangraha by
Kasawara, p. 53 seq. (vol. i, part v, Anecdota Oxoniensia, Aryan Series,
1885).\]

<span id="p. 175">{p. 175}</span>

of the water of eight good qualities, and it is the Fifth Meditation.

   § 14. 'Each division of that (Buddha) country, which consists of
several jewels, has also jewelled storeys and galleries to the number of
five hundred millions; within each storey and gallery there are
innumerable Devas engaged in playing heavenly music. There are some
musical instruments that are hung up in the open sky, like the jewelled
banners of heaven; they emit musical sounds without being struck, which,
while resounding variously, all propound the remembrance of Buddha, of
the Law and of the Church, Bhikshus, &c. When this perception is duly
accomplished, one is said to have dimly seen the jewel-trees,
jewel-ground, and jewel-lakes of that World of Highest Happiness
(Sukhâvatî);--such is the perception formed by meditating on the general
(features of that Land), and it is the Sixth Meditation.

   'If one has experienced this, one has expiated the greatest sinful
deeds which would (otherwise lead one) to transmigration for numberless
millions of kalpas; after his death he will assuredly be born in that
land.

   § 15\[1\]. 'Listen carefully! listen carefully! Think over what you
have heard! I, Buddha, am about to explain in detail the law of
delivering one's self from trouble and torment. Commit this to your
memory in order to explain it in detail before a great assembly.' While
Buddha was uttering these words, Buddha Amitâyus stood in the midst of
the sky

<span class="small">\[1. § 15. Hereafter, for brevity's sake, I take the
liberty of omitting several passages which seem to be unnecessary
repetitions.\]</span>

<span id="p. 176">{p. 176}</span>

with Bodhisattvas Mahâsthâma and Avalokite*s*vara, attending on his
right and left respectively. There was such a bright and dazzling
radiance that no one could see clearly; the brilliance was a hundred
thousand times greater than that of gold (*G*âmbûnada). Thereupon
Vaidehî saw Buddha Amitâyus and approached the World-Honoured One, and
worshipped him, touching his feet; and spoke to him as follows: 'O
Exalted One! I am now able, by the power of Buddha, to see Buddha
Amitâyus together with the two Bodhisattvas. But how shall all the
beings of the future meditate on Buddha Amitâyus and the two
Bodhisattvas?'

   § 16. Buddha answered: 'Those who wish to meditate on that Buddha
ought first to direct their thought as follows: form the perception of a
lotus-flower on a ground of seven jewels, each leaf of that lotus
exhibits the colours of a hundred jewels, and has eighty-four thousand
veins, just like heavenly pictures; each vein possesses eighty-four
thousand rays, of which each can be clearly seen. Every small leaf and
flower is two hundred and fifty yo*g*anas in length and the same
measurement in breadth. Each lotus-flower possesses eighty-four thousand
leaves, each leaf has the kingly pearls to the number of a hundred
millions, as ornaments for illumination; each pearl shoots out a
thousand rays like bright canopies. The surface of the ground is
entirely covered by a mixture of seven jewels. There is a tower built of
the gems which are like those that are fastened on *S*akra's head. It is
inlaid and decked with eighty thousand diamonds, Ki*ms*uka jewels,
Brahma-ma*n*i and excellent pearl nets.

<span id="p. 177">{p. 177}</span>

   'On that tower there are miraculously found four posts with jewelled
banners; each banner looks like a hundred thousand millions of Sumeru
mountains.

   'The jewelled veil over these banners is like that of the celestial
palace of Yama, illuminated with five hundred millions of excellent
jewels, each jewel has eighty-four thousand rays, each ray has various
golden colours to the number of eighty-four thousand, each golden colour
covers the whole jewelled soil, it changes and is transformed at various
places, every now and then exhibiting various appearances; now it
becomes a diamond tower, now a pearl net, again clouds of mixed flowers,
freely changing its manifestation in the ten directions it exhibits the
state of Buddha;--such is the perception of the flowery throne, and it
is the Seventh Meditation.'

   Buddha, turning to Ânanda, said: 'These excellent flowers were
created originally by the power of the prayer of Bhikshu,
Dharmâkara\[1\]. All who wish to exercise the remembrance of that Buddha
ought first to form the perception of that flowery throne. When engaged
in it one ought not to perceive vaguely, but fix the mind upon each
detail separately. Leaf, jewel, ray, tower, and banner should be clear
and distinct, just as one sees the image of one's own face in a mirror.
When one has achieved this perception, the sins which would produce
births and deaths during fifty thousand kalpas are expiated, and he is
one who will most assuredly be born in the World of Highest Happiness.

   § 17. 'When you have perceived this, you should

<span class="small">\[1. Vide Larger Sukhâvalî, p. 7, § 3.\]</span>

<span id="p. 178">{p. 178}</span>

next perceive Buddha himself. Do you ask how? Every Buddha Tathâgata is
one whose (spiritual) body is the principle of nature (Darmadhâtu-kâya),
so that he may enter into the mind of any beings. Consequently, when you
have perceived Buddha, it is indeed that mind of yours that possesses
those thirty-two signs of perfection and eighty minor marks of
excellence (which you see in Buddha). In fine, it is your mind that
becomes Buddha, nay, it is your mind that is indeed Buddha. The ocean of
true and universal knowledge of all the Buddhas derives its source from
one's own mind and thought. Therefore you should apply your thought with
an undivided attention to a careful meditation on that Buddha Tathâgata,
Arhat, the Holy and Fully Enlightened One. In forming the perception of
that Buddha, you should first perceive the image of that Buddha; whether
your eyes be open or shut, look at an image like *G*âmbûnada gold in
colour, sitting on that flower (throne mentioned before).

   'When you have seen the seated figure your mental vision will become
clear, and you will be able to see clearly and distinctly the adornment
of that Buddha country, the jewelled ground, &c. In seeing these things,
let them be clear and fixed just as you see the palms of your hands.
When you have passed through this experience, you should further form (a
perception of) another great lotus-flower which is on the left side of
Buddha, and is exactly equal in every way to the above-mentioned
lotus-flower of Buddha. Still further, you should form (a perception of)
another lotus-flower which is on the right side of Buddha. Perceive that
an image of Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara is sitting on the left-hand

<span id="p. 179">{p. 179}</span>

flowery throne, shooting forth golden rays exactly like those of Buddha.
Perceive then that an image of Bodhisattva Mahâsthâma is sitting on the
right-hand flowery throne.

   'When these perceptions are gained the images of Buddha and the
Bodhisattvas will all send forth brilliant rays, clearly lighting up all
the jewel-trees with golden colour. Under every tree there are also
three lotus-flowers. On every lotus-flower there is an image, either of
Buddha or of a Bodhisattva; thus (the images of the Bodhisattvas and of
Buddha) are found everywhere in that country. When this perception has
been gained, the devotee should hear the excellent Law preached by means
of a stream of water, a brilliant ray of light, several jewel-trees,
ducks, geese, and swans. Whether he be wrapped in meditation or whether
he has ceased from it, he should ever hear the excellent Law. What the
devotee hears must be kept in memory and not be lost, when he ceases
from that meditation; and it should agree with the Sûtras, for if it
does not agree with the Sûtras, it is called an illusory perception,
whereas if it does agree, it is called the rough perception of the World
of Highest Happiness;--such is the perception of the images, and it is
the Eighth Meditation.

   'He who has practised this meditation is freed from the sins (which
otherwise involve him in) births and deaths for innumerable millions of
kalpas, and during this present life he obtains the Samâdhi due to the
remembrance of Buddha.

   § 18. 'Further, when this perception is gained, you should next
proceed to meditate on the bodily marks and the light of Buddha
Amitâyus.

<span id="p. 180">{p. 180}</span>

   'Thou shouldst know, O Ânanda, that the body of Buddha Amitâyus is a
hundred thousand million times as bright as the colour of the
*G*âmbûnada gold of the heavenly abode of Yama; the height of that
Buddha is six hundred thousand niyutas of ko*t*îs of yo*g*anas
innumerable as are the sands of the river Gangâ.

   'The white twist of hair between the eyebrows all turning to the
right, is just like the five Sumeru mountains.

   'The eyes of Buddha are like the water of the four great oceans; the
blue and the white are quite distinct.

   'All the roots of hair of his body issue forth brilliant rays which
are also like the Sumeru mountains.

   'The halo of that Buddha is like a hundred millions of the Great
Chiliocosms; in that halo there are Buddhas miraculously created, to the
number of a million of niyutas of ko*t*îs innumerable as the sands of
the Gangâ; each of these Buddhas has for attendants a great assembly of
numberless Bodhisattvas who are also miraculously created.

   'Buddha Amitâyus has eighty-four thousand signs of perfection, each
sign is possessed of eighty-four minor marks of excellence, each mark
has eighty-four thousand rays, each ray extends so far as to shine over
the worlds of the ten quarters, whereby Buddha embraces and protects all
the beings who think upon him and does not exclude (anyone of them). His
rays, signs, &c., are difficult to be explained in detail. But in simple
meditation let the mind's eye dwell upon them.

<span id="p. 181">{p. 181}</span>

   'If you pass through this experience, you will at the same time see
all the Buddhas of the ten quarters. Since you see all the Buddhas it is
called the Samâdhi of the remembrance of the Buddhas.

   'Those who have practised this meditation are said to have
contemplated the bodies of all the Buddhas. Since they have meditated on
Buddha's body, they will also see Buddha's mind. It is great compassion
that is called Buddha's mind. It is by his absolute compassion that he
receives all beings.

   'Those who have practised this meditation will, when they die, be
born in the presence of the Buddhas in another life, and obtain a spirit
of resignation wherewith to face all the consequences which shall
hereafter arise.

   'Therefore those who have wisdom should direct their thought to the
careful meditation upon that Buddha Amitâyus. Let those who meditate on
Buddha Amitâyus begin with one single sign or mark--let them first
meditate on the white twist of hair between the eyebrows as clearly as
possible; when they have done this, the eighty-four thousand signs and
marks will naturally appear before their eyes. Those who see Amitâyus
will also see all the innumerable Buddhas of the ten quarters. Since
they have seen all the innumerable Buddhas, they will receive the
prophecy of their future destiny (to become Buddha), in the presence of
all the Buddhas;--such is the perception gained by a complete meditation
on all forms and bodies (of Buddha), and it is the Ninth Meditation.

   § 19. 'When you have seen Buddha Amitâyus distinctly, you should then
further meditate upon Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara, whose height is
eight

<span id="p. 182">{p. 182}</span>

hundred thousands of niyutas of yo*g*anas; the colour of his body is
purple gold, his head has a turban (ush*n*îsha*s*iraskatâ), at the back
of which there is a halo; (the circumference of) his face is a hundred
thousand yo*g*anas. In that halo, there are five hundred Buddhas
miraculously transformed just like those of *S*âkyamuni Buddha, each
transformed Buddha is attended by five hundred transformed Bodhisattvas
who are also attended by numberless gods.

   'Within the circle of light emanating from his whole body, appear
illuminated the various forms and marks of all beings that live in the
five paths\[1\] of existence.

   'On the top of his head is a heavenly crown of gems like those that
are fastened (on Indra's head), in which crown there is a transformed
Buddha standing, twenty-five yo*g*anas high.

   'The face of Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara is like *G*âmbûnada gold in
colour.

   'The soft hair between the eyebrows has all the colours of the seven
jewels, from which eighty-four kinds of rays flow out, each ray has
innumerable transformed Buddhas, each of whom is attended by numberless
transformed Bodhisattvas; freely changing their manifestations they fill
up the worlds of the ten quarters; (the appearance) can be compared with
the colour of the red lotus-flower.

   '(He wears) a garland consisting of eight thousand rays, in which is
seen fully reflected a state of perfect beauty. The palm of his hand has
a mixed colour of five hundred lotus-flowers. His hands have ten

<span class="small">\[1. Men, gods, hell, the departed spirits, the
brute creation.\]</span>

<span id="p. 183">{p. 183}</span>

(tips of) fingers, each tip has eighty-four thousand pictures, which are
like signet-marks, each picture has eighty-four thousand colours, each
colour has eighty-four thousand rays which are soft and mild and shine
over all things that exist. With these jewel hands he draws and embraces
all beings. When he lifts up his feet, the soles of his feet are seen to
be marked with a wheel of a thousand spokes (one of the thirty-two
signs) which miraculously transform themselves into five hundred million
pillars of rays. When he puts his feet down to the ground, the flowers
of diamonds and jewe1s are scattered about, and all things are simply
covered by them. All the other signs of his body and the minor marks of
excellence are perfect, and not at all different from those of Buddha,
except the signs of having the turban on his head and the top of his
head invisible, which two signs of him are inferior to those of the
World-Honoured One;--such is the perception of the real form and body of
Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara, and it is the Tenth Meditation.'

   Buddha, especially addressing Ânanda, said: 'whosoever wishes to
meditate on Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara must do so in the way I have
explained. Those who practise this meditation will not suffer any
calamity; they will utterly remove the obstacle that is raised by Karma,
and will expiate the sins which would involve them in births and deaths
for numberless kalpas. Even the hearing of the name of this Bodhisattva
will enable one to obtain immeasurable happiness. How much more, then,
will the diligent contemplation of him!

   'Whosoever will meditate on Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara

<span id="p. 184">{p. 184}</span>

should first meditate on the turban of his head, and then on his
heavenly crown.

   'All the other signs should also be meditated on according to their
order, and they should be clear and distinct just as one sees the palms
of one's hands.

   'Next you should meditate on Bodhisattva Mahâsthâma, whose bodily
signs, height, and size are equal to those of Avalokite*s*vara; the
circumference (lit. surface) of his halo is one hundred and twenty-five
yo*g*anas, and it shines as far as two hundred and fifty yo*g*anas. The
rays of his whole body shine over the countries of the ten quarters,
they are purple gold in colour, and can be seen by all beings that are
in favourable circumstances.

   'If one but sees the ray that issues from a single root of the hair
of this Bodhisattva, he will at the same time see the pure and excellent
rays of all the innumerable Buddhas of the ten quarters.

   'For this reason this Bodhisattva is named the Unlimited Light; it is
with this light of wisdom that he shines over all beings and causes them
to be removed from the three paths of existence (Hells, Pretas, and the
brute creation), and to obtain the highest power. For the same reason
this Bodhisattva is called the Bodhisattva of Great Strength
(Mahâsthâma). His heavenly crown has five hundred jewel-flowers; each
jewel-flower has five hundred jewel-towers; in each tower are seen
manifested all the pure and excellent features of the far-stretching
Buddha countries in the ten quarters. The turban on his head is like a
padma- (lotus) flower; on the top of the turban there is a
jewel-pitcher, which is filled with various brilliant rays

<span id="p. 185">{p. 185}</span>

fully manifesting the state of Buddha. All his other bodily signs are
quite equal to those of Avalokite*s*vara. When this Bodhisattva walks
about, all the regions of the ten quarters tremble and quake. Wherever
the earth quakes there appear five hundred millions of jewel-flowers;
each jewel-flower with its splendid dazzling beauty looks like the World
of Highest Happiness (Sukhâvatî).

   'When this Bodhisattva sits down, all the countries of seven jewels
at once tremble and quake: all the incarnate (lit. divided) Amitâyus's,
innumerable as the dust of the earth, and all the incarnate Bodhisattvas
(Aval. and Mahâs.) who dwell in the middlemost Buddha countries
(situated) between the Buddha country of the lower region (presided
over) by a Buddha called the "Golden Light," and the country of the
upper region (presided over) by a Buddha called the "King of
Light,"--all these assemble in the World of Highest Happiness
(Sukhâvatî), like gathering clouds, sit on their thrones of
lotus-flowers, which fill the whole sky, and preach the excellent Law in
order to deliver all the beings that are plunged in suffering;--such is
the perception of the form and body of Bodhisattva Mahâsthâma, and it is
the Eleventh Meditation.

   'Those who practise this meditation are freed from the sins (which
would otherwise involve them) in births and deaths for innumerable
asankhya kalpas.

   'Those who have practised this meditation do not live in an embryo
state but obtain free access to the excellent and admirable countries of
Buddhas. Those who have experienced this are said to have

<span id="p. 186">{p. 186}</span>

perfectly meditated upon the two Bodhisattvas Avalokite*s*vara and
Mahâsthâma.

   § 20. 'After thou hast had this perception, thou shouldst imagine
thyself to be born in the World of Highest Happiness in the western
quarter, and to be seated, cross-legged, on a lotus-flower there. Then
imagine that the flower has shut thee in and has afterwards unfolded;
when the flower has thus unfolded, five hundred coloured rays will shine
over thy body, thine eyes will be opened so as to see the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas who fill the whole sky; thou wilt hear the sounds of waters
and trees, the notes of birds, and the voices of many Buddhas preaching
the excellent Law, in accordance with the twelve divisions\[1\] of the
scriptures. When thou hast ceased from that meditation, thou must
remember the experience ever after.

   'If thou hast passed through this experience thou art said to have
seen the World of Highest Happiness in the realm of the Buddha
Amitâyus;--this is the perception obtained by a complete meditation on
that Buddha country, and is called the Twelfth Meditation.

   'The innumerable incarnate bodies of Amitâyus, together with those of
Aval. and Mahâs., constantly come and appear before such devotees (as
above mentioned).'

   § 21. Buddha then spoke to Ânanda and Vaidehî: 'Those who wish, by
means of their serene thoughts, to be born in the western land, should
first meditate on an image of the Buddha, who is sixteen cubits

<span class="small">\[1. Vide Max Müller, Dhammapada, Introduction, p.
xxxiii, and Kasawara, Dharmasangraha, LXII, p. 48.\]</span>

<span id="p. 187">{p. 187}</span>

high\[1\], seated on (a lotus-flower in) the water of the lake. As it
was stated before the (real) body and its measurement are unlimited,
incomprehensible to the ordinary mind.

   'But by the efficacy of the ancient prayer of that Tathâgata, those
who think of and remember him shall certainly be able to accomplish
their aim.

   'Even the mere perceiving of the image of that Buddha brings to one
immeasurable blessings. How much more, then, will the meditating upon
all the complete bodily signs of that Buddha! Buddha Amitâyus has
supernatural power; since everything is at his disposal, he freely
transforms himself in the regions of the ten quarters. At one time he
shows himself as possessing a magnificent body, which fills the whole
sky, at another he makes his body appear small, the height being only
sixteen or eighteen cubits. The body he manifests is always pure gold
incolour; his halo--(bright with) transformed Buddhas--and his jewel
lotus-flowers are as mentioned above. The bodies of the two Bodhisattvas
are the same always.

   'All beings can recognise either of the two Bodhisattvas by simply
glancing at the marks of their heads. These two Bodhisattvas assist
Amitâyus in his work of universal salvation;--such is the meditation
that forms a joint perception of the Buddha and Bodhisattvas, and it is
the Thirteenth Meditation.'

<span class="small">\[1. This is said to have been the height of
*S*âkyamuni; the cubit is Chinese, but as it varied from time to time,
it is difficult to determine his real height. Spence Hardy, in his
Manual of Buddhism, p. 364, says, 'Buddha is sometimes said to be twelve
cubits in height, and sometimes eighteen cubits.'\]</span>

<span id="p. 188">{p. 188}</span>

 

PART III.

   § 22. Buddha then spoke to Ânanda and Vaidehî: 'The beings who will
be born in the highest form of the highest grade (i.e. to Buddhahood)
are those, whoever they may be, who wish to be born in that country and
cherish the threefold thought whereby they are at once destined to be
born there. What is the threefold thought, you may ask. First, the True
Thought; second, the Deep Believing Thought; third, the Desire to be
born in that Pure Land by bringing one's own stock of merit to maturity.
Those who have this threefold thought in perfection shall most assuredly
be born into that country.

   'There are also three classes of beings who are able to be born in
that country. What, you may ask, are the three classes of beings? First,
those who are possessed of a compassionate mind, who do no injury to any
beings, and accomplish all virtuous actions according to Buddha's
precepts; second, those who study and recite the Sûtras of the Mahâyâna
doctrine, for instance, the Vaipulya Sûtras\[1\]; third, those who
practise the sixfold remembrance\[2\]. These three classes of beings who
wish to be born in that country by bringing (their respective stocks of
merit) to maturity, will become destined to be born there if they have
accomplished any of those meritorious deeds for one day or even for
seven days.

\[1. Nanjio's Catalogue of Tripi*t*aka, Nos. 23, 24-28, and many others.

2\. Sixfold remembrance, i.e. of the Three Jewels, the precepts, the
charity of Buddha, and Bodhisattvas and the world of Devas.\]

<span id="p. 189">{p. 189}</span>

   'When one who has practised (these merits) is about to be born in
that country, Buddha Amitâyus, together with the two Bodhisattvas Aval.
and Mahâs., also numberless created Buddhas, and a hundred thousand
Bhikshus and *S*âvakas, with their whole retinue, and innumerable gods,
together with the palaces of seven jewels, will appear before him out of
regard for his diligence and courage; Aval., together with Mahâs., will
offer a diamond seat to him; thereupon Amitâyus himself will send forth
magnificent rays of light to shine over the dying person's body. He and
many Bodhisattvas will offer their hands and welcome him, when Aval.,
Mahâs., and all the other Bodhisattvas will praise the glory of the man
who practised the meritorious deeds, and convey an exhortation to his
mind. When the new-comer, having seen these, rejoicing and leaping for
joy, looks at himself, he will find his own body seated on that diamond
throne; and as he follows behind Buddha he will be born into that
country, in a moment. When he has been born there, he will see Buddha's
form and body with every sign of perfection complete, and also the
perfect forms and signs of all the Bodhisattvas; he will also see
brilliant rays and jewel-forests and hear them propounding the excellent
Law, and instantly be conscious of a spirit of resignation to whatever
consequences may hereafter arise. Before long he will serve every one of
the Buddhas who live in the regions of the ten quarters. In the presence
of each of those Buddhas he will obtain successively a prophecy of his
future destiny. On his return to his own land (Sukhâvatî, in which he
has just been born)

<span id="p. 190">{p. 190}</span>

he will obtain countless hundreds of thousands of Dhârani formulas
(mystic form of prayer);--such are those who are to be born in the
highest form of the highest grade (to Buddhahood).

   § 23. 'Next, the beings who will be born in the middle form of the
highest grade are those who do not necessarily learn, remember, study,
or recite those Vaipulya Sûtras, but fully understand the meaning of the
truth (contained in them), and having a firm grasp of the highest truth
do not speak evil of the Mahâyâna doctrine, but deeply believe in (the
principle of) cause and effect; who by bringing these good qualities to
maturity seek to be born in that Country of Highest Happiness. When one
who has acquired these qualities is about to die, Amitâyus, surrounded
by the two Bodhisattvas Aval. and Mahâs., and an innumerable retinue of
dependents, will bring a seat of purple gold and approach him with words
of praise, saying: "O my son in the Law! thou hast practised the
Mahâyâna doctrine; thou hast understood and believed the highest truth;
therefore I now come to meet and welcome thee." He and the thousand
created Buddhas offer hands all at once.

   'When that man looks at his own body, he will find himself seated on
that purple gold seat; he will, then, stretching forth his folded hands,
praise and eulogise all the Buddhas. As quick as thought he will be born
in the lake of seven jewels, of that country. That purple gold seat on
which he sits is like a magnificent jewel-flower, and will open after a
night; the new-comer's body becomes purple gold in colour, and he will
also find under his feet a lotus-flower consisting of seven jewels.
Buddha and the

<span id="p. 191">{p. 191}</span>

Bodhisattvas at the same time will send forth brilliant rays to shine
over the body of that person whose eyes will instantaneously be opened
and become clear. According to his former usage (in the human world) he
will hear all the voices that are there, preaching primary truths of the
deepest significance.

   'Then he will descend from that golden seat and worship Buddha with
folded hands, praising and eulogising the World-Honoured One. After
seven days, he will immediately attain to the state of the highest
perfect knowledge (anuttarasa*m*yaksa*m*bodhi) from which he will never
fall away (avaivartya); next he will fly to all the ten regions and
successively serve all the Buddhas therein; he will practise many a
Samâdhi in the presence of those Buddhas. After the lapse of a lesser
kalpa he will attain a spirit of resignation to whatever consequences
may hereafter arise, and he will also obtain a prophecy of his future
destiny in the presence of Buddhas.

   § 24. 'Next are those who are to be born in the lowest form of the
highest grade: this class of beings also believes in (the principle of)
cause and effect, and without slandering the Mahâyâna doctrine, simply
cherishes the thought of obtaining the highest Bodhi and by bringing
this good quality to maturity seeks to be born in that Country of
Highest Happiness. When a devotee of this class dies, Amitâyus, with
Aval., Mahâs., and all the dependents, will offer him a golden
lotus-flower; he will also miraculously create five hundred Buddhas in
order to send and meet him. These five hundred created Buddhas will, all
at once, offer hands and praise him, saying: "O my son in the Law! thou
art pure now; as thou hast cherished the thought of obtaining the
highest Bodhi, we come to

<span id="p. 192">{p. 192}</span>

meet thee." When he has seen them, he will find himself seated on that
golden lotus-flower. Soon the flower will close upon him; following
behind the World-Honoured One he will go to be born in the lake of seven
jewels. After one day and one night the lotus-flower will unfold itself.
Within seven days he may see Buddha's body, though his mind is not as
yet clear enough to perceive all the signs and marks of the Buddha,
which he will be able to see clearly after three weeks; then he will
hear many sounds and voices preaching the excellent Law, and he himself,
travelling through all the ten quarters, will worship all the Buddhas,
from whom he will learn the deepest significance of the Law. After three
lesser kalpas he will gain entrance to the knowledge of a hundred
(divisions of) nature (*s*atadharmavidyâdvâra) and become settled in the
(first) joyful stage\[1\] (of Bodhisattva). The perception of these
three classes of beings is called the meditation upon the superior class
of beings, and is the Fourteenth Meditation.

   § 25. 'The beings who will be born in the highest form of the middle
grade are those who observe the five prohibitive precepts, the eight
prohibitive precepts and the fasting, and practise all the moral
precepts; who do not commit the five deadly sins\[2\], and who bring no
blame or trouble upon any being; and who by bringing these good
qualities to maturity seek to be born in the World of Highest Happiness
in the western quarter. On the eve of such a person's departure from
this life, Amitâyus, surrounded by

\[1. There are ten stages which a Bodhisattva goes through.

2\. Childer's Pâli Dictionary, s.v. abhi*th*ânam.\]

<span id="p. 193">{p. 193}</span>

Bhikshus and dependents, will appear before him, flashing forth rays of
golden colour, and will preach the Law of suffering, non-existence,
impermanence, and non-self. He will also praise the virtue of
homelessness that can liberate one from all sufferings. At the sight of
Buddha, that believer will excessively rejoice in his heart; he will
soon find himself seated on a lotus-flower. Kneeling down on the ground
and stretching forth his folded hands he will pay homage to Buddha.
Before he raises his head he will reach that Country of Highest
Happiness and be born there. Soon the lotus-flower will unfold, when he
will hear sounds and voices praising and glorifying the Four Noble
Truths (of suffering). He will immediately attain to the fruition of
Arhatship, gain the threefold knowledge and the six supernatural
faculties, and complete the eightfold emancipation.

   § 26. 'The beings who will be born in the middle form of the middle
grade are those who either observe the eight prohibitive precepts, and
the fasting for one day and one night, or observe the prohibitive
precept for *S*rama*n*era (a novice) for the same period, or observe the
perfect moral precepts, not lowering their dignity nor neglecting any
ceremonial observance for one day and one night, and by bringing their
respective merits to maturity seek to be born in the Country of Highest
Happiness. On the eve of departure from this life, such a believer who
is possessed of this moral virtue, which he has made fragrant by
cultivation during his life, will see Amitâyus, followed by all his
retinue; flashing forth rays of golden colour, this Buddha will come
before him and offer a lotus-flower of seven jewels.

<span id="p. 194">{p. 194}</span>

   'He will hear a voice in the sky, praising him and saying: "O son of
a noble family, thou art indeed an excellent man. Out of regard for thy
obedience to the teachings of all the Buddhas of the three worlds I,
now, come and meet thee." Then the newcomer will see himself seated on
that lotus-flower. Soon the lotus-flower will fold around him, and being
in this he will be born in the jewel-lake of the World of Highest
Happiness in the western quarter.

   'After seven days that flower will unfold again, when the believer
will open his eyes, and praise the World-Honoured One, stretching forth
his folded hands. Having heard the Law, he will rejoice and obtain the
fruition of a Srota-âpanna\[1\] (the first grade to Nirvâ*n*a).

   'In the lapse of half a kalpa he will become an Arhat.

   § 27. 'Next are the beings who will be born in the lowest form of the
middle grade (to Buddhahood) If there be sons or daughters of a noble
family who are filial to their parents and support them, besides
exercising benevolence and compassion in the world, at their departure
from this life, such persons will meet a good and learned teacher who
will fully describe to them the state of happiness in that Buddha
country of Amitâyus, and will also explain the forty-eight prayers of
the Bhikshu Dharmâkara\[2\]. As soon as any such person has heard these
details, his life will come to an end. In a brief moment\[3\] he

\[1. Vide Va*g*ra*kkh*edikâ, § 9.

2\. Vide Larger Sukhâvatî, §§ 7, 8.

3\. Lit. 'In the time in which a strong man can bend his arm or stretch
his bended arm.'\]

<span id="p. 195">{p. 195}</span>

will be born in the World of Highest Happiness in the western quarter.

   'After seven days he will meet Aval. and Mahâs., from whom he will
learn the Law and rejoice. After the lapse of a lesser kalpa he will
attain to the fruition of an Arhat. The perception of these three sorts
of beings is called the meditation of the middle class of beings, and is
the Fifteenth Meditation.

   § 28. 'Next are the beings who will be born in the highest form of
the lowest grade. If there be anyone who commits many evil deeds,
provided that he does not speak evil of the Mahâvaipulya Sûtras, he,
though himself a very stupid man, and neither ashamed nor sorry for all
the evil actions that he has done, yet, while dying, may meet a good and
learned teacher who will recite and laud the headings and titles of the
twelve divisions of the Mahâyâna scriptures. Having thus heard the names
of all the Sûtras, he will be freed from the greatest sins which would
involve him in births and deaths during a thousand kalpas.

   'A wise man also will teach him to stretch forth his folded hands and
to say, "Adoration to Buddha Amitâyus" (Namo\*mitâbhâya Buddhâya, or,
Namo\*mitâyushe Buddhâya). Having uttered the name of the Buddha, he
will be freed from the sins which would otherwise involve him in births
and deaths for fifty millions of kalpas. Thereupon the Buddha will send
a created Buddha, and the created Bodhisattvas Aval. and Mahâs., to
approach that person with words of praise, saying: "O son of a noble
family, as thou hast uttered the name of that Buddha, all thy sins have
been destroyed and expiated, and therefore we now come to meet thee."
After this

<span id="p. 196">{p. 196}</span>

speech the devotee will observe the rays of that created Buddha flooding
his chamber with light, and while rejoicing at the sight he will depart
this life. Seated on a lotus-flower he will follow that created Buddha
and go to be born in the jewel-lake.

   'After the lapse of seven weeks, the lotus-flower will unfold, when
the great compassionate Bodhisattvas Aval. and Mahâs. will stand before
him, flashing forth magnificent rays, and will preach to him the deepest
meaning of the twelve divisions of the scriptures. Having heard this, he
will understand and believe it, and cherish the thought of attaining the
highest Bodhi. In a period of ten lesser ka1pas he will gain entrance to
the knowledge of the hundred (divisions of) nature, and be able to enter
upon the first (joyful) stage (of Bodhisattva). Those who have had an
opportunity of hearing the name of Buddha, the name of the Law, and the
name of the Church--the names of the Three Jewelscan also be born (in
that country).'

   § 29. Buddha continued: 'Next are the beings who will be born in the
middle form of the lowest grade. If there be anyone who transgresses the
five and the eight prohibitive precepts, and also all the perfect moral
precepts; he, being himself so stupid as to steal things that belong to
the whole community\[1\], or things that belong to a particular Bhikshu,
and not be ashamed nor sorry for his impure preaching of the Law (in
case of preacher), but magnify and glorify himself with many wicked
deeds:--such a

<span class="small">\[1. The text has 'sanghika things,' which is
probably sanghika lâbha, i.e. 'gains of the whole community' opposed to
gains of a single monk, Childers' Pâli Dictionary, s.v. sanghiko, p.
449.\]</span>

<span id="p. 197">{p. 197}</span>

sinful person deserves to fall into hell in consequence of those sins.
At the time of his death, when the fires of hell approach him from all
sides, he will meet a good and learned teacher who will, out of great
compassion, preach the power and virtue of the ten faculties of Amitâyus
and fully explain the supernatural powers and brilliant rays of that
Buddha; and will further praise moral virtue, meditation, wisdom,
emancipation, and the thorough knowledge that follows emancipation.
After having heard this, he will be freed from his sins, which would
involve him in births and deaths during eighty millions of kalpas;
thereupon those violent fires of hell will transform themselves into a
pure and cool wind blowing about heavenly flowers. On each of these
flowers will stand a created Buddha or Bodhisattva to mtet and receive
that person. In a moment he will be born in a lotus-flower growing in
the lake of seven jewels. After six kalpas the lotus-flower will open,
when Avalokite*s*vara and Mahâsthâma will soothe and encourage him with
their Brahma-voices, and preach to him the Mahâyâna Sûtras of the
deepest significance.

   'Having heard this Law, he will instantaneously direct his thought
toward the attainment of the highest Bodhi.

   § 30. 'Lastly, the beings who will be born in the lowest form of the
lowest grade. If there be anyone who commits evil deeds, and even
completes the ten wicked actions, the five deadly sins\[1\] and the
like; that

<span class="small">\[1. The five deadly sins, according to
Mahâvyutpatti, § 118, are Mât*ri*ghâta, Pit*ri*ghâta, Arhatghâta,
Sanghabheda, Tathâgatasyântike dush*t*a*k*ittarudhirotpâdana, which are
unpardonable in the Larger Sukhâvatî; vide Nanjio's note and
Pra*n*idhâna 19 (§ 8), the Ânantarya sins. Cf. the six crimes enumerated
in Childers' Pâli Dictionary, p. 7 b, Abhi*th*ânam; vide supra, p. 192,
§ 25.\]</span>

<span id="p. 198">{p. 198}</span>

man, being himself stupid and guilty of many crimes, deserves to fall
into a miserable path of existence and suffer endless pains during many
kalpas. On the eve of death he will meet a good and learned teacher who
will, soothing and encouraging him in various ways, preach to him the
excellent Law and teach him the remembrance of Buddha, but, being
harassed by pains, he will have no time to think of Buddha. Some good
friend will then say to him: "Even if thou canst not exercise the
remembrance of Buddha, thou mayst, at least, utter the name, 'Buddha
Amitâyus\[1\].'" Let him do so serenely with his voice uninterrupted;
let him be (continually) thinking of Buddha until he has completed ten
times the thought, repeating (the formula), "Adoration to Buddha
Amitâyus" (Namo\*mitâyushe Buddhâya). On the strength of (his merit of)
uttering Buddha's name he will, during every repetition, expiate the
sins which involve him in births and deaths during eighty millions of
kalpas. He will, while dying, see a golden lotus-flower like the disk of
the sun appearing before his eyes; in a moment he will be born in the
World of Highest Happiness. After twelve greater kalpas the lotus-flower
will unfold; thereupon the Bodhisattvas Aval. and Mahâs., raising their
voices in great compassion, will preach to him in detail the real state
of all the elements of nature and the law of the expiation of sins.

<span class="small">\[1. The Corean text and the two other editions of
the T'ang and Sung dynasties have 'Namo\*mitâyushe Buddhâya' instead of
'Buddha Amitâyus,' which is the reading of the Japanese text and the
edition of the Ming dynasty.\]</span>

<span id="p. 199">{p. 199}</span>

   'On hearing them he will rejoice and will immediately direct his
thought toward the attainment of the Bodhi;--such are the beings who are
to be born in the lowest form of the lowest grade (to Buddhahood). The
perception of the above three is called the meditation of the inferior
class of beings, and is the Sixteenth Meditation.'

 

PART IV.

   § 31. When Buddha had finished this speech, Vaidehî, together with
her five hundred female attendants, could see, as guided by the Buddha's
words, the scene of the far-stretching World of the Highest Happiness,
and could also see the body of Buddha and the bodies of the two
Bodhisattvas. With her mind filled with joy she praised them, saying:
'Never have I seen such a wonder!' Instantaneously she became wholly and
fully enlightened, and attained a spirit of resignation, prepared to
endure whatever consequences might yet arise\[1\]. Her five hundred
female attendants too cherished the thought of obtaining the highest
perfect knowledge, and sought to be born in that Buddha country.

   § 32. The World-Honoured One predicted that they would all be born in
that Buddha country, and be able to obtain the Samâdhi (the supernatural
calm) of the presence of many Buddhas. All the innumerable Devas (gods)
also directed their thought toward the attainment of the highest Bodhi.
Thereupon Ânanda rose from his seat, approached

<span class="small">\[1. Vide supra, §§ 8, 22, 23.\]</span>

<span id="p. 200">{p. 200}</span>

Buddha, and spoke thus: 'O World-Honoured One, what should we call this
Sûtra? And how should we receive and remember it (in the future)?'

   Buddha said in his reply to Ânanda: 'O Ânanda, this Sûtra should be
called the meditation on the Land of Sukhâvatî, on Buddha Amitâyus,
Bodhisattva Avalokite*s*vara, Bodhisattva Mahâsthâma, or otherwise be
called "(the Sûtra on) the entire removal of the obstacle of Karma\[1\],
(the means of) being born in the realm of the Buddhas." Thou shouldst
take and hold it, not forgetting nor losing it. Those who practise the
Samâdhi (the supernatural calm) in accordance with this Sûtra will be
able to see, in the present life, Buddha Amitâyus and the two great
Bodhisattvas.

   'In case of a son or a daughter of a noble family, the mere hearing
of the names of the Buddha and the two Bodhisattvas will expiate the
sins which would involve them in births and deaths during innumerable
kalpas. How much more will the remembrance (of Buddha and the
Bodhisattvas)!

   'Know that he who remembers that Buddha is the white lotus
(pu*nd*arîka) among men, it is he whom the Bodhisattvas Avalokite*s*vara
and Mahâsthâma consider an excellent friend. He will, sitting in the
Bodhi-ma*nd*ala\[2\], be born in the abode of Buddhas.'

\[1. Sanskrit karmâvara*n*a-vi*s*uddhi.

2\. Bodhi-ma*nd*ala=Bodhi-ma*nd*a, i.e. the Circle of Bodhi; 'the round
terrace of enlightenment,' see Kern, Saddharmapu*nd*arîka, p. 155 note.
This circle is the ground on which stood the A*s*vattha tree near which
*S*âkyamuni defeated the assaults of Mâra, and finally obtained Bodhi or
enlightenment. The tree is called Bodhidruma, the ground round its stem
the bodhima*nd*ala. In the Saddharmapu*nd*arîka VII, 7, it is called
Bodhima*nd*avara, which Dr. Kern translates by the terrace of
enlightenment, vára meaning circuit. A different idea is expressed by
bodhima*nd*apa in the Buddha-*k*arita XIV, 90, which would mean a hall
or pavilion, unless we ought to read here also bodhima*nd*ala.\]

<span id="p. 201">{p. 201}</span>

   Buddha further spoke to Ânanda: 'Thou shouldst carefully remember
these words. To remember these words is to remember the name of Buddha
Amitâyus.'

   When Buddha concluded these words, the worthy disciples Mahâyâna, and
Ânanda, Vaidehî, and the others were all enraptured with excessive Joy.

   § 33. Thereupon the World-Honoured One came back, walking through the
open sky; to the Mount G*ri*dhrakû*t*a. Ânanda soon after spoke before a
great assembly of all the occurrences as stated above. On hearing this,
all the innumerable Devas (gods), Nâgas (snakes), and Yakshas
(demi-gods) were inspired with great joy; and having worshipped the
Buddha they went their way.

   Here ends the Sûtra of the Meditation on Buddha Amitâyus, spoken by
Buddha (*S*âkyamuni).
