[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4927)  [Next](sbe4930)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="p. 111">{p. 111}</span>

### THE

# VA*G*RA*KKH*EDIKÂ

#### OR

## DIAMOND-CUTTER.

 

   ADORATION to the blessed Ârya-pra*gñ*â-pâramitâ (perfection of
wisdom).

I.

   Thus it was heard by me: At one time Bhagavat (the blessed Buddha)
dwelt in *S*râvastî, in the grove of *G*eta\[1\], in the garden of
Anâthapi*nd*ada\[2\], together with a large company of Bhikshus
(mendicants), viz. with 1250 Bhikshus\[3\], with many noble-minded
Bodhisattvas\[4\].

\[1. *G*eta, son of king Prasena*g*it, to whom the park belonged before
it was sold to Anâthapi*nd*ada.

2\. Another name of Sudatta, meaning, literally, he who gives food to
the poor.

3\. The number of 1250 is explained by a Chinese priest Lun-hin, in his
commentary on the Amitâyur-dhyâna-sûtra. According to the
Dharmagupta-vinaya, which he quotes, the number consisted of 500
disciples of Uruvilva-kâ*s*yapa, 300 of Gayâ-kâ*s*yapa, 200 of
Nadî-kâ*s*yapa, 150 of *S*âriputra, and 100 of Maudgalyâyana. The
Chinese translators often mistook the Sanskrit expression 'half-thirteen
hundred,' i.e. 1250. See Bunyiu Nanjio, Catalogue of Tripitaka, p. 6.

4\. Higher beings on the road to Bodhi or perfect knowledge. They are
destined hereafter to become Buddhas themselves.\]

<span id="p. 112">{p. 112}</span>

   Then Bhagavat having in the forenoon put on his undergarment\[1\],
and having taken his bowl and cloak, entered the great city of
*S*râvastî to collect alms. Then Bhagavat, after he had gone to the
great city of *S*râvastî to collect alms, performed the act of
eating\[2\], and having returned from his round in the afternoon\[3\],
he put away his bowl and cloak, washed his feet, and sat down on the
seat intended\[4\] for him, crossing his legs\[5\], holding his body
upright, and turning his reflection upon himself. Then many Bhikshus
approached to where Bhagavat was, saluted his feet with their heads,
turned three times round hira to the right, and sat down on one side.
(1)

II\.

   At that time again the venerable Subhûti came to that assembly and
sat down. Then rising from his seat and putting his robe over one
shoulder, kneeling on the earth with his right knee, he stretched out
his folded hands towards Bhagavat and said to him: 'It is wonderful, O
Bhagavat, it is exceedingly wonderful, O Sugata, how much the
noble-minded Bodhisattvas have been favoured with the highest favour by
the Tathâgata, the holy and

\[1. In Pâli pubba*m*hasmaya*m* nivâsetva, the technical expression for
putting on the robes early in the morning; see Childers, s.v. nivâseti.

2\. In Pâli katabhattaki*kk*o, see Childers, s.v.

3\. In Pâli pa*kkh*âbhatta*m* pi*nd*apâtapa*t*ikkânta, see Childers,
s.v. pi*nd*apâta. Vi*g*. observes that pa*kkh*abhatta*m*
pi*nd*apâtapa*t*ikkânto is a {Greek *ú!oteron próteron*}, as it means,
having returned from his rounds, and then made his meal on the food
obtained on his rounds.

4\. Pâli pa*ññ*ata.

5\. Burnouf, Lotus, p. 334.\]

<span id="p. 113">{p. 113}</span>

fully enlightened! It is wonderful how much the noble-minded
Bodhisattvas have been instructed\[1\] with the highest instruction by
the Tathâgata, the holy and fully enlightened! How then, O Bhagavat,
should the son or the daughter of a good family, after having entered on
the path of the Bodhisattvas, behave, how should he advance, and how
should he restrain his thoughts?'

   After the venerable Subhûti had thus spoken, Bhagavat said to him:
'Well said, well said, Subhûti! So it is, Subhûti, so it is, as you say.
The noble-minded Bodhisattvas have been favoured with the highest favour
by the Tathâgata, the noble-minded Bodhisattvas have been instructed
with the highest instruction by the Tathâgata. Therefore, O Subhûti,
listen and take it to heart, well and rightly. I shall tell you, how any
one who has entered on the path of Bodhisanvas should behave, how he
should advance, and how he should restrain his thoughts.' Then the
venerable Subhûti answered the Bhagavat and said: 'So be it, O
Bhagavat.' (2)

III\.

   Then the Bhagavat thus spoke to him: 'Any one, O Subhûti, who has
entered here on the path of the Bodhisattvas must thus frame his
thought: As many beings as there are in this world of beings,
comprehended under the term of beings (either born of eggs, or from the
womb, or from moisture, or miraculously), with form or without form,
with name or without name, or neither with nor without name, as far as

<span class="small">\[1. I have followed the Chinese translator, who
translates parîndita by instructed, entrusted, not by
protected.\]</span>

<span id="p. 114">{p. 114}</span>

any known world of beings is known, all these must be delivered by me in
the perfect world of Nirvâ*n*a. And yet, after I have thus delivered
immeasurable beings, not one single being has been delivered. And why?
If, O Subhûti, a Bodhisattva had any idea of (belief in) a being, he
could not be called a Bodhisattva (one who is fit to become a Buddha).
And why? Because, O Subhûti, no one is to be called a Bodhisattva, for
whom there should exist the idea of a being, the idea of a living being,
or the idea of a person.' (3)

IV\.

   'And again, O Subhûti, a gift should not be given by a Bodhisattva,
while he believes\[1\] in objects; a gift should not be given by him,
while he believes in anything; a gift should not be given by him, while
he believes in form; a gift should not be given by him, while he
believes in the special qualities of sound, smell, taste, and touch. For
thus, O Subhûti, should a gift be given by a noble-minded Bodhisattva,
that he should not believe even in the idea of cause. And why? Because
that Bodhisattva, O Subhûti, who gives a gift, without believing in
anything, the measure of his stock of merit is not easy to
learn.'--'What do you think, O Subhûti, is it easy to learn the measure
of space in the eastern quarter?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O
Bhagavat.'--Bhagavat said: 'In like manner, is it easy to learn the
measure of space in the southern, western, northern quarters, below and
above (nadir and zenith), in quarters and subquarters, in the ten
quarters all round?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed,

<span class="small">\[1. To believe here means to depend on or ta accept
as real.\]</span>

<span id="p. 115">{p. 115}</span>

O Bhagavat.' Bhagavat said: 'In the same manner, O Subhûti, the measure
of the stock of merit of a Bodhisattva, who gives a gift without
believing in anything, is not easy to learn. And thus indeed, O Subhûti,
should one who has entered on the path of Bodhisattvas give a gift, that
he should not believe even in the idea of cause.' (4)

V.

   'Now, what do you think, O Subhûti, should a Tathâgata be seen
(known) by the possession of signs\[1\]?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O
Bhagavat, a Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the possession of
signs. And why? Because what has been preached by the Tathâgata as the
possession of signs, that is indeed the possession of no-signs.'

   After this, Bhagavat spoke thus to the venerable Subhûti: 'Wherever
there is, O Subhûti, the possession of signs, there is falsehood;
wherever there is no possession of signs, there is no falsehood. Hence
the Tathâgata is to be seen (known) from no-signs as signs\[2\].' (5)

VI\.

   After this, the venerable Subhûti spoke thus to the Bhagavat:
'Forsooth, O Bhagavat, will there be any beings in the future, in the
last time, in the last moment, in the last 500 years\[3\], during the
time

\[1. Qualities by which he could be known.

2\. It would be easier to read laksha*n*âlaksha*n*atvata*h*, from the
signs having the character of no-signs. M. de Harlez translates rightly,
'c'est par le non-marque de marquer que la Tathâgata doit être vu et
reconnu.'

3\. I have changed Pa*ñk*â*s*atî into Pa*ñk*a*s*atî, because what is
intended here is evidently the last of the periods of 500 years each,
which, according to the Mahâyâna-Buddhists, elapsed after the death of
Buddha. The following extract from the Mahâsannipâta-sûtra (Ta-tsi-king,
No. 61 in Tripi*t*aka), given to me by Mr. B. Nanjio, fully explains the
subject. 'It is stated in the fifty-first section of the
Mahâsannipâta-sûtra, that Buddha said: "After my Nirvâ*n*a, in the first
500 years, all the Bhikshus and others will be strong in deliberation in
my correct Law. (Those who first obtain the 'holy fruit,' i.e. the
Srota-âpannas, are called those who have obtained deliberation.) In the
next or second 500 years, they will be strong in meditation. In the next
or third 500 years, they will be strong in 'much learning,' i.e.
bahu*s*ruta, religious knowledge. In the next or fourth 500 years, they
will be strong in founding monasteries, &c. In the last or fifth 500
years, they will be strong in fighting and reproving. The pure (lit.
white) Law will then become invisible."'

The question therefore amounts to this, whether in that corrupt age the
law of Buddha will be understood? and the answer is, that there will be
always some excellent Boddhisatvas who, even in the age of corruption,
can understand the preaching of the Law.\]

<span id="p. 116">{p. 116}</span>

of the decay of the good Law, who, when these very words of the Sûtras
are being preached, will frame a true idea\[1\]?' The Bhagavat said: 'Do
not speak thus, Subhûti. Yes, there will be some beings in the future,
in the last time, in the last moment, in the last 500 years, during the
decay of the good Law, who will frame a true idea when these very words
are being preached.

   'And again, O Subhûti, there will be noble-minded Bodhisattvas, in
the future, in the last time, in the last moment, in the last 500 years,
during the decay of the good Law, there will be strong and good and wise
beings, who, when these very words of the Sûtras are being preached,
will frame a true idea. But those noble-minded Bodhisattvas, O Subhûti,
will not have served one Buddha only, and the stock

<span class="small">\[1. Will understand them properly.\]</span>

<span id="p. 117">{p. 117}</span>

of their merit will not have been accumulated under one Buddha only; on
the contrary, O Subhûti, those noble-minded Bodhisattvas will have
served many hundred thousands of Buddhas, and the stock of their merit
will have been accumulated under many hundred thousands of Buddhas; and
they, when these very words of the Sûtras are being preached, will
obtain one and the same faith\[1\]. They are known, O Subhûti, by the
Tathâgata through his Buddha-knowledge; they are seen, O Subhûti, by the
Tathâgata through his Buddha-eye; they are understood, O Subhûti, by the
Tathâgata. All these, O Subhûti, will produce and will hold fast an
immeasurable and innumerable stock of merit. And why? Because, O
Subhûti, there does not exist in those noble-minded Bodhisattvas the
idea of self, there does not exist the idea of a being, the idea of a
living being, the idea of a person. Nor does there exist, O Subhûti, for
these noble-minded Bodhisattvas the idea of quality (dharma), nor of
no-quality. Neither does there exist, O Subhûti, any idea (sa*mgñ*â) or
no-idea. And why? Because, O Subhûti, if there existed for these
noble-minded Bodhisattvas the idea of quality, then they would believe
in a self, they would believe in a being, they would believe in a living
being, they would believe in a person. And if there existed for them the
idea of no-quality, even then they would believe in a self,

<span class="small">\[1. I am doubtful about the exact meaning of
eka*k*ittaprasâda. Childers gives eka*k*itta, as an adjective, with the
meaning of 'having the same thought,' and *k*ittaprasâda, as faith in
Buddha. But eka*k*ittaprasâda may also be 'faith producted by one
thought,' 'immediate faith,' and this too is a recognised form of faith
in Buddhism. See Sukhâvatî, pp. 71, 108.\]</span>

<span id="p. 118">{p. 118}</span>

they would believe in a being, they would believe in a living being,
they would believe in a person. And why? Because, O Subhûti, neither
quality nor no-quality is to be accepted by a noble-minded Bodhisattva.
Therefore this hidden saying has been preached by the Tathâgata: "By
those who know the teaching of the Law, as like unto a raft, all
qualities indeed must be abandoned; much more no-qualities\[1\]"' (6)

VII\.

   And again Bhagavat spoke thus to the venerable Subhûti: 'What do you
think, O Subhûti, is there anything (dharma) that was known by the
Tathâgata under the name of the highest perfect knowledge, or anything
that was taught by the Tathâgata?'

   After these words, the venerable Subhûti spoke thus to Bhagavat: 'As
I, O Bhagavat, understand the meaning of the preaching of the Bhagavat,
there is nothing that was known by the Tathâgata under the name of the
highest perfect knowledge, nor is there anything that is taught by the
Tathâgata. And why? Because that thing which was known or taught by the
Tathâgata is incomprehensible and inexpressible. It is neither a thing
nor no-thing. And why? Because the holy persons\[2\] are of imperfect
power\[3\].' (7)

\[1. The same line is quoted in the Abhidharmakosha-vyâkhyâ.

2\. Âryapudgala need not be Bodhisattvas, but all who have entered on
the path leading to Nirvâ*n*a.

3\. Harlez: 'Parceque les entités supérieures sont produites telles sans
être réelles et parfaites pour cela.' If sa*m*sk*ri*ta can be used in
Buddhist literature in the sense of perfect, and prabhâvitâ as power, my
translation might pass, but even then the 'because' remains difficult.\]

<span id="p. 119">{p. 119}</span>

VIII\.

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, if a son or daughter of
a good family filled this sphere of a million millions of worlds with
the seven gems or treasures, and gave it as a gift to the holy and
enlightened Tathâgatas, would that son or daughter of a good family on
the strength of this produce a large stock of merit?' Subhûti said:
'Yes, O Bhagavat, yes, O Sugata, that son or daughter of a good family
would on the strength of this produce a large stock of merit. And why?
Because, O Bhagavat, what was preached by the Tathâgata as the stock of
merit, that was preached by the Tathâgata as no-stock of merit.
Therefore the Tathâgata preaches: "A stock of merit, a stock of merit
indeed!"' Bhagavat said: 'And if, O Subhûti, the son or daughter of a
good family should fill this sphere of a million millions of worlds with
the seven treasures and should give it as a gift to the holy and
enlightened Tathâgatas, and if another after taking from this treatise
of the Law one Gâthâ of four lines only should fully teach others and
explain it, he indeed would on the strength of this produce a larger
stock of merit immeasurable and innumerable. And why? Because, O
Subhûti, the highest perfect knowledge of the holy and enlightened
Tathâgatas is produced from it; the blessed Buddhas are produced from
it. And why? Because, O Subhûti, when the Tathâgata preached:

<span class="small">\[1. See Childers, s.v. Lokadhâtu.</span>

2\. Or should it be, bhâshate\*pu*n*yaskandha*h* pu*n*yaskandha iti,
i.e. he preaches no-stock of merit is the stock of merit? It would not
be applicable to later passages, but the style of the Sûtras varies.\]

<span id="p. 120">{p. 120}</span>

"The qualities of Buddha, the qualities of Buddha indeed!" they were
preached by him as no-qualities of Buddha. Therefore they are called the
qualities of Buddha.' (8)

IX\.

   Bhagavat said: 'Now, what do you think, O Subhûti, does a
Srota-âpanna think in this wise: The fruit of Srota-âpatti has been
obtained by me?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O Bhagavat, a Srota-âpanna
does not think in this wise: The fruit of Srota-âpatti has been obtained
by me. And why? Because, O Bhagavat, he has not obtained any particular
state (dharma). Therefore he is called a Srota-âpanna. He has not
obtained any form, nor sounds, nor smells, nor tastes, nor things that
can be touched. Therefore he is called a Srota-âpanna. If, O Bhagavat, a
Srota-âpanna were to think in this wise: The fruit of Srota-âpatti has
been obtained by me, he would believe in a self, he would believe in a
being, he would believe in a living being, he would believe in a
person.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, does a Sak*ri*dâgâmin
think in this wise: The fruit of a Sak*ri*dâgâmin has been obtained by
me?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O Bhagavat, a Sak*ri*dâgâmin

\[1. This phrase is wanting in the Sanskrit MSS., but it is found in the
Chinese translation of Dharmagupta, of the Sui dynasty (A. D. 589-618).

2\. Srota-âpanna, a man who has obtained the first grade of
sanctification, literally, who has entered the stream. The second grade
is that of the Sak*ri*dâgâmin, who returns once. The third grade is that
of the Anâgâmin, who does not return at all, but is born in the Brahman
world from whence he becomes an Arhat and may obtain Nirvâ*n*a.\]

<span id="p. 121">{p. 121}</span>

does not think in this wise: The fruit of a Sak*ri*dâgâmin has been
obtained by me. And why? Because he is not an individual being (dharma),
who has obtained the state of a Sak*ri*dâgâmin. Therefore he is called a
Sak*ri*dâgâmin.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, does an Anâgâmin think
in this wise: The fruit of an Anâgâmin has been obtained by me?' Subhûti
said: 'Not indeed, O Bhagavat, an Anâgâmin does not think in this wise:
The fruit of an Anâgâmin has been obtained by me. And why? Because he is
not an individual being, who has obtained the state of an Anâgâmin.
Therefore he is called an Anâgâmin.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, does an Arhat think in
this wise: The fruit of an Arhat has been obtained by me?' Subhûti said:
'Not indeed, O Bhagavat, an Arhat does not think in this wise: The fruit
of an Arhat has been obtained by me. And why? Because he is not an
individual being, who is called an Arhat. Therefore he is called an
Arhat. And if, O Bhagavat, an Arhat were to think in this wise: The
state of an Arhat has been obtained by me, he would believe in a self,
he would believe in a being, he would believe in a living being, he
would believe in a person.

   'And why? I have been pointed out, O Bhagavat, by the holy and fully
enlightened Tathâgata, as the foremost of those who dwell in
virtue\[1\].

<span class="small">\[1. Ara*n*âvihârin. Ra*n*a is strife, then sin,
therefore ara*n*a might be peace and virtue, only the a would be short.
Probably ara*n*avihârin was formed with reference to âra*n*ya-vihârin,
living in the forest, retired from the world, and in peace, just as
arhan, worthy, was changed into arahan, the destroyer of sin. Beal
translates, 'one who delights in the mortification of an Ara*n*yaka
(forest devotee).' De Harlez: 'chey de ceux qui ne sont plus attachés à
la jouissance.'\]</span>

<span id="p. 122">{p. 122}</span>

I, O Bhagavat, am an Arhat, freed from passion. And yet, O Bhagavat, I
do not think in this wise: I am an Arhat, I am freed from passion. If, O
Bhagavat, I should think in this wise, that the state of an Arhat has
been obtained by me, then the Tathâgata would not have truly prophesied
of me, saying: "Subhûti, the son of a good family, the foremost of those
dwelling in virtue, does not dwell anywhere, and therefore he is called
a dweller in virtue, a dweller in virtue indeed!"' (9)

X.

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, is there anything
(dharma) which the Tathâgata has adopted from the Tathâgata
Dîpankara\[1\], the holy and fully enlightened?' Subhûti said: 'Not
indeed, O Bhagavat; there is not anything which the Tathâgata has
adopted from the Tathâgata Dîpankara, the holy and fully enlightened.'

   Bhagavat said: 'If, O Subhûti, a Bodhisattva should say: "I shall
create numbers of worlds," he would say what is untrue. And why?
Because, O Subhûti, when the Tathâgata preached: Numbers of worlds,
numbers of worlds indeed! they were preached by him as no-numbers.
Therefore they are called numbers of worlds.

   'Therefore, O Subhûti, a noble-minded Bodhisattva should in this wise
frame an independent

<span class="small">\[1. A former Buddha.\]</span>

<span id="p. 123">{p. 123}</span>

mind, which is to be framed as a mind not believing in anything, not
believing in form, not believing in sound, smell, taste, and anything
that can be touched. Now, for instance, O Subhûti, a man might have a
body and a large body, so that his size should be as large as the king
of mountains, Sumeru. Do you think then, O Subhûti, that his selfhood
(he himself) would be large?' Subhûti said: 'Yes, O Bhagavat, yes, O
Sugata, his selfhood would be large. And why? Because, O Bhagavat, when
the Tathâgata preached: "Selfhood, selfhood indeed!" it was preached by
him as no-selfhood. Therefore it is called selfhood.' (10)

XI\.

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, if there were as many
Gangâ rivers as there are grains of sand in the large river Gangâ, would
the grains of sand be many?' Subhûti said: 'Those Gangâ rivers would
indeed be many, much more the grains of sand in those Gangâ rivers.'
Bhagavat said: 'I tell you, O Subhûti, I announce to you, If a woman or
man were to fill with the seven treasures as many worlds as there would
be grains of sand in those Gangâ rivers and present them as a gift to
the holy and fully enlightened Tathâgatas--What do you think, O Subhûti,
would that woman or man on the strength of this produce a large stock of
merit?' Subhûti said: 'Yes, O Bhagavat, yes, O Sugata, that woman or man
would on the strength of this produce a large stock of merit,
immeasurable and innumerable.' Bhagavat said: 'And if, O Subhûti, a
woman or man having filled so many worlds with the seven treasures
should give them as a gift to the holy and enlightened Tathâgatas,

<span id="p. 124">{p. 124}</span>

and if another son or daughter of a good family, after taking from this
treatise of the Law one Gâthâ of four lines only, should fully teach
others and explain it, he, indeed, would on the strength of this produce
a larger stock of merit, immeasurable and innumerable.' (11)

XII\.

   'Then again, O Subhûti, that part of the world in which, after taking
from this treatise of the Law one Gâthâ of four lines only, it should be
preached or explained, would be like a *K*aitya (holy shrine) for the
whole world of gods, men, and spirits; what should we say then of those
who learn the whole of this treatise of the Law to the end, who repeat
it, understand it, and fully explain it to others? They, O Subhûti, will
be endowed with the highest wonder\[1\]. And in that place, O Subhûti,
there dwells the teacher\[2\], or one after another holding the place of
the wise preceptor\[3\].' (12)

XIII\.

   After these words, the venerable Subhûti spoke thus to Bhagavat: 'O
Bhagavat, how is this treatise of the Law called, and how can I learn
it?' After this, Bhagavat spoke thus to the venerable Subhûti: 'This
treatise of the Law, O Subhûti, is called the Pra*gñ*â-pâramitâ
(Transcendent wisdom), and you should learn it by that name. And why?
Because, O Subhûti, what was preached by the Tathâgata as the
Pra*gñ*â-pâramitâ, that was preached by the

\[1. With what excites the highest wonder.

2\. *S*astâ, often the name of Budha, Pâli sattha.

3\. This may refer to a succession of teachers handing down the
tradition one to the other.\]

<span id="p. 125">{p. 125}</span>

Tathâgata as no-Pâramitâ. Therefore it is called the Pra*gñ*â-pâramitâ.

   'Then, what do you think, O Subhûti, is there anything (dharma) that
was preached by the Tathâgata?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O Bhagvat,
there is not anything that was preached by the Tathâgata.'

   Bhagavat said. 'What do you think then, O Subhûti,--the dust of the
earth which is found in this sphere of a million millions of worlds, is
that much?' Subhûti said: 'Yes, O Bhagavat, yes, O Sugata, that dust of
the earth would be much. And why? Because, O Bhagavat, what was preached
by the Tathâgata as the dust of the earth, that was preached by the
Tathâgata as no-dust. Therefore it is called the dust of the earth. And
what was preached by the Tathâgata as the sphere of worlds, that was
preached by the Tathâgata as no-sphere. Therefore it is called the
sphere of worlds.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, is a holy and fully
enlightened Tathâgata to be seen (known) by the thirty-two signs of a
hero?' Subhûti said: 'No indeed, O Bhagavat; a holy and fully
enlightened Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the thirty-two signs
of a hero. And why? Because what was preached by the Tathâgata as the
thirty-two signs of a hero, that was preached by the Tathâgata as
no-signs. Therefore they are called the thirty-two signs of a hero.'

   Bhagavat said: 'If, O Subhûti, a woman or man should day by day
sacrifice his life (selfhood\[1\]) as

<span class="small">\[1. Âtmabhâva seems to refer here to the living
body, not to the spiritual Âtman, which, according to Buddha, can be got
rid of by knowledge only. Buddha himself sacrificed his life again and
again, and a willingness to die would probably be accepted for the
deed.\]</span>

<span id="p. 126">{p. 126}</span>

many times as there are grains of sand in the river Gangâ, and if he
should thus sacrifice his life for as many kalpas as there are grains of
sand in the river Gangâ, and if another man, after taking from this
treatise of the Law one Gâthâ of four lines only, should fully teach
others and explain it, he indeed would on the strength of this produce a
larger stock of merit, immeasurable and innumerable.' (13)

XIV\.

   At that time, the venerable Subhûti was moved by the power of the
Law, shed tears, and having wiped his tears, he thus spoke to Bhagavat:
'It is wonderful, O Bhagavat, it is exceedingly wonderful, O Sugata, how
fully this teaching of the Law has been preached by the Tathâgata for
the benefit of those beings who entered on the foremost path (the path
that leads to Nirvâ*n*a), and who entered on the best path, from whence,
O Bhagavat, knowledge has been produced in me. Never indeed, O Bhagavat,
has such a teaching of the Law been heard by me before. Those
Bodhisattvas, O Bhagavat, will be endowed with the highest wonder\[1\],
who when this Sûtra is being preached hear it and will frame to
themselves a true idea. And why? Because what is a true idea is not a
true idea. Therefore the Tathâgata preaches: "A true idea, a true idea
indeed!"

   'It is no wonder to me, O Bhagavat, that I accept and believe this
treatise of the Law, which has been preached. And those beings also, O
Bhagavat,

<span class="small">\[1. Will possess miraculous powers, and will be
admired.\]</span>

<span id="p. 127">{p. 127}</span>

who will exist in the future, in the last time, in the last moment, in
the last 500 years, during the time of the decay of the good Law, who
will learn this treatise of the Law, O Bhagavat, remember it, recite it,
understand it, and fully explain it to others, they will indeed be
endowed with the highest wonder.

   'But, O Bhagavat, there will not arise in them any idea of a self,
any idea of a being, of a living being, or a person, nor does there
exist for them any idea or no-idea. And why? Because, O Bhagavat, the
idea of a self is no-idea, and the idea of a being, or a living being,
or a person is no-idea. And why? Because the blessed Buddhas are freed
from all ideas.'

   After these words, Bhagavat thus spoke to the venerable Subhûti: 'So
it is, O Subhûti, so it is. Those beings, O Subhûti, who when this Sûtra
was being recited here will not be disturbed or frightened or become
alarmed, will be endowed with the highest wonder. And why? Because, O
Subhûti, this was preached by the Tathâgata, as the Paramapâramitâ,
which is no-Pâramitâ. And, O Subhûti, what the Tathâgata preaches as the
Paramapâramitâ, that was preached also by immeasurable blessed Buddhas.
Therefore it is called the Paramapâramitâ.

   'And, O Subhûti, the Pâramitâ or the highest perfection of endurance
(kshânti) belonging to a Tathâgata, that also is no-Pâramitâ. And why?
Because, O Subhûti, at the time when the king of Kalinga\[1\] cut my
flesh from every limb, I had no idea of a self, of a being, of a living
being, or of

<span class="small">\[1. The Chinese text points to Kalirâ*g*â. On this
Kalirâ*g*â or Kalin*ri*pa see Lalita-vistara, p. 191.\]</span>

<span id="p. 128">{p. 128}</span>

a person; I had neither an idea nor no-idea. And why? Because, O
Subhûti, if I at that time had had an idea of a self, I should also have
had an idea of malevolence. If I had had an idea of a being, or of a
living being, or of a person, I should also have had an idea of
malevolence. And why? Because, O Subhûti, I remember the past 500
births, when I was the *Ri*shi Kshântivâdin (preacher of endurance). At
that time also, I had no idea of a self, of a being, of a living being,
of a person. Therefore then, O Subhûti, a noble-minded Bodhisattva,
after putting aside all ideas, should raise his mind to the highest
perfect knowledge. He should frame his mind so as not to believe
(depend) in form, sound, smell, taste, or anything that can be touched,
in something (dharma), in nothing or anything. And why? Because what is
believed is not believed (not to be depended on). Therefore the
Tathâgata preaches: "A gift should not be given by a Bodhisattva\[1\]
who believes in anything, it should not be given by one who believes in
form, sound, smell, taste, or anything that can be touched."

   'And again, O Subhûti, a Bodhisattva should in such wise give his
gift for the benefit of all beings. And why? Because, O Subhûti, the
idea of a being is no-idea. And those who are thus spoken of by the
Tathâgata as all beings are indeed no-beings. And why? Because, O
Subhûti, a Tathâgata says what is real, says what is true, says the
things as they are; a Tathâgata does not speak untruth.

   'But again, O Subhûti, whatever doctrine has been

<span class="small">\[1. See before, chap. iv.\]</span>

<span id="p. 129">{p. 129}</span>

perceived, taught, and meditated on by a Tathâgata, in it there is
neither truth nor falsehood. And as a man who has entered the darkness
would not see anything, thus a Bodhisattva is to be considered who is
immersed in objects, and who being immersed in objects gives a gift. But
as a man who has eyes would, when the night becomes light, and the sun
has risen, see many things, thus a Bodhisattva is to be considered who
is not immersed in objects, and who not being immersed in objects gives
a gift.

   'And again, O Subhûti, if any sons or daughters of good families will
learn this treatise of the Law, will remember, recite, and understand
it, and fully explain it to others, they, O Subhûti, are known by the
Tathâgata through his Buddha-knowledge, they are seen, O Subhûti, by the
Tathâgata through his Buddha-eye. All these beings, O Subhûti, will
produce and hold fast an immeasurable and innumerable stock of merit.'
(14)

XV\.

   'And if, O Subhûti, a woman or man sacrificed in the morning as many
lives as there are grains of sand in the river Gangâ and did the same at
noon and the same in the evening, and if in this way they sacrificed
their lives for a hundred thousands of niyutas of ko*t*îs of ages, and
if another, after hearing this treatise of the Law, should not oppose
it, then the latter would on the strength of this produce a larger stock
of merit, immeasurable and innumerable. What should we say then of him
who after having written it, learns it, remembers it, understands it,
and fully explains it to others?

   'And again, O Subhûti, this treatise of the Law is

<span id="p. 130">{p. 130}</span>

incomprehensible and incomparable. And this treatise of the Law has been
preached by the Tathâgata for the benefit of those beings who entered on
the foremost path (the path that leads to Nirvâ*n*a), and who entered on
the best path. And those who will learn this treatise of the Law, who
will remember it, recite it, understand it, and fully explain it to
others, they are known, O Subhûti, by the Tathâgata through his
Buddha-knowledge, they are seen, O Subhûti, by the Tathâgata through his
Buddha-eye. All these beings, O Subhûti, will be endowed with an
immeasurable stock of merit, they will be endowed with an
incomprehensible, incomparable, immeasurable and unmeasured stock of
merit. All these beings, O Subhûti, will equally remember the Bodhi (the
highest Buddha-knowledge), will recite it, and understand it. And why?
Because it is not possible, O Subhûti, that this treatise of the Law
should be heard by beings of little faith, by those who believe in self,
in beings, in living beings, and in persons. It is impossible that this
treatise of the Law should be heard by beings who have not acquired the
knowledge of Bodhisattvas, or that it should be learned, remembered,
recited, and understood by them. The thing is impossible.

   'And again, O Subhûti, that part of the world in which this Sûtra
will be propounded, will have to be honoured by the whole world of gods,
men, and evil spirits, will have to be worshipped, and will become like
a *K*aitya (a holy sepulchre).' (15)

XVI\.

   And, O Subhûti, sons or daughters of a good family who will learn
these very Sûtras, who will

<span id="p. 131">{p. 131}</span>

remember them. recite them, understand them, thoroughly take them to
heart, and fully explain them to others, they will be overcome\[1\],
they will be greatly overcome. And why? Because, O Subhûti, whatever
evil deeds these beings have done in a former birth, deeds that must
lead to suffering, those deeds these beings, owing to their being
overcome, after they have seen the Law, will destroy, and they will
obtain the knowledge of Buddha.

   'I remember, O Subhûti, in the past, before innumerable and more than
innumerable kalpas, there were eighty-four hundred thousands of niyutas
of ko*t*îs of Buddhas following after the venerable and fully
enlightened Tathâgata Dîpankara, who were pleased by me, and after being
pleased were not displeased. And if, O Subhûti, these blessed Buddhas
were pleased by me, and after being pleased were not displeased, and if
on the other hand people at the last time, at the last moment, in the
last 500 years, during the time of the decay of the good Law, will learn
these very Sûtras, remember them, recite them, understand them, and
fully explain them to others, then, O Subhûti, in comparison with their
stock of merit that former stock of merit will not come to one hundredth
part, nay, not to one thousandth part, not to a hundred thousandth part,
not to a ten millionth part, not to a hundred millionth part, not to a
hundred thousand ten millionth part, not to a hundred thousands of
niyutas ten millionth part. It will not bear number, nor fraction, nor
counting, nor comparison, nor approach, nor analogy.

   'And if, O Subhûti, I were to tell you the stock of

<span class="small">\[1. Paribhûta is explained by despised, but the
sense, or even the non-sense, is difficult to understand.\]</span>

<span id="p. 132">{p. 132}</span>

merit of those sons or daughters of good families, and how large a stock
of merit those sons or daughters of good families will produce, and hold
fast at that time, people would become distracted and their thoughts
would become bewildered. And again, O Subhûti, as this treatise of the
Law preached by the Tathâgata is incomprehensible and incomparable, its
rewards also must be expected (to be) incomprehensible.' (16)

XVII\.

   At that time the venerable Subhûti thus spoke to the Bhagavat: 'How
should a person, after having entered on the path of the Bodhisattvas,
behave, how should he advance, and how should he restrain his thoughts?'
Bhagavat said: 'He who has entered on the path of the Bodhisativas
should thus frame his thought: All beings must be delivered by me in the
perfect world of Nirvâ*n*a; and yet after I have thus delivered these
beings, no being has been delivered. And why? Because, O Subhûti, if a
Bodhisattva had any idea of beings, he could not be called a
Bodhisattva, and so on\[1\] from the idea of a living being to the idea
of a person; if he had any such idea, he could not be called a
Bodhisattva. And why? Because, O Subhûti, there is no such thing
(dharma) as one who has entered on the path of the Bodhisattvas.

   'What do you think, O Subhûti, is there anything which the Tathâgata
has adopted from the Tathâgata Dîpankara with regard to the highest
perfect knowledge? 'After this, the venerable Subhûti

<span class="small">\[1. See chap. iii, p. 114.\]</span>

<span id="p. 133">{p. 133}</span>

spoke thus to the Bhagavat: 'As far as I, O Bhagavat, understand the
meaning of the preaching of the Bhagavat, there is nothing which has
been adopted by the Tathâgata from the holy and fully enlightened
Tathâgata Dîpankara with regard to the highest perfect knowledge.' After
this, Bhagavat thus spoke to the venerable Subhûti: 'So it is, Subhûti,
so it is. There is not, O Subhûti, anything which has been adopted by
the Tathâgata from the holy and fully enlightened Tathâgata Dîpankara
with regard to the highest perfect knowledge. And if, O Subhûti,
anything had been adopted by the Tathâgata, the Tathâgata Dîpankara
would not have prophesied of me, saying\[1\]: "Thou, O boy, wilt be in
the future the holy and fully enlightened Tathâgata called *S*âkyamuni."
Because then, O Subhûti, there is nothing that has been adopted by the
holy and fully enlightened Tathâgata with regard to the highest perfect
knowledge, therefore I was prophesied by the Tathâgata Dîpankara,
saying: "Thou, boy, wilt be in the future the holy and fully enlightened
Tathâgata called *S*âkyamuni."

   'And why, O Subhûti, the name of Tathâgata? It expresses true
suchness. And why Tathâgata, O Subhûti? It expresses that he had no
origin. And why Tathâgata, O Subhûti? It expresses the destruction of
all qualities. And why Tathâgata, O Subhûti? It expresses one who had no
origin whatever. And why this? Because, O Subhûti, no-origin is the
highest goal.

   'And whosoever, O Subhûti, should say that, by the holy and fully
enlightened Tathâgata, the highest

<span class="small">\[1. This prophecy is supposed to have been
addressed by Dîpankara to *S*âkyamuni, before he had become a
Buddha.\]</span>

<span id="p. 134">{p. 134}</span>

perfect knowledge has been known, he would speak an untruth, and would
slander me, O Subhûti, with some untruth that he has learned. And why?
Because there is no such thing, O Subhûti, as has been known by the
Tathâgata with regard to the highest perfect knowledge. And in that, O
Subhûti, which has been known and taught by the Tathâgata, there is
neither truth nor falsehood. Thetefore the Tathâgata preaches: "All
things are Buddha-things." And why? Because what was preached by the
Tathâgata, O Subhûti, as all things, that was preached as no-things; and
therefore all things are called Buddha-things.

   'Now, O Subhûti, a man might have a body and a large body.' The
venerable Subhûti said: That man who was spoken of by the Tathâgata as a
man with a body, with a large body, he, O Bhagavat, was spoken of by the
Tathâgata as without a body, and therefore he is called a man with a
body and with a large body.'

   Bhagavat said: 'So it is, O Subhûti; and if a Bodhisattva were to
say: "I shall deliver all beings," he ought not to be called a
Bodhisattva. And why? Is there anything, O Subhûti, that is called a
Bodhisattva?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, Bhagavat, there is nothing
which is called a Bodhisattva.' Bhagavat said: 'Those who were spoken of
as beings, beings indeed, O Subhûti, they were spoken of as no-beings by
the Tathâgata, and therefore they are called beings. Therefore the
Tathâgata says: "All beings are without self all beings are without
life, without manhood\[1\], without a personality."

<span class="small">\[1. Sans croissance, Harlez; see Childers, s.v.
poriso.\]</span>

<span id="p. 135">{p. 135}</span>

   'If, O Subhûti, a Bodhisattva were to say: "I shall create numbers of
worlds," he would say what is untrue. And why? Because, what were spoken
of as numbers of worlds, numbers of worlds indeed, O Subhûti, these were
spoken of as no-numbers by the Tathâgata, and therefore they are called
numbers of worlds.

   'A Bodhisattva, O Subhûti, who believes that all things are without
self, that all things are without self, he has faith, he is called a
noble-minded Bodhisattva by the holy and fully enlightened Tathâgata.'
(17)

XVIII\.

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, has the Tathâgata the
bodily eye?' Subhûti said: 'So it is, O Bhagavat, the Tathâgata has the
bodily eye.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, has the Tathâgata the
heavenly eye?' Subhûti said: 'So it is, O Bhagavat, the Tathâgata has
the heavenly eye.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, has the Tathâgata the
eye of knowledge?' Subhûti said: 'So it is, O Bhagavat, the Tathâgata
has the eye of knowledge.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, has the Tathâgata the
eye of the Law?' Subhûti said: 'So it is, O Bhagavat, the Tathâgata has
the eye of the Law.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, has the Tathâgata the
eye of Buddha?' Subhûti said: 'So it is, O Bhagavat, the Tathâgata has
the eye of Buddha.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, as many grains of sand
as there are in the great river Gangâ--were they preached by the
Tathâgata

<span id="p. 136">{p. 136}</span>

as grains of sand?' Subhûti said: 'So it is, O Bhagavat, so it is, O
Sugata, they were preached as grains of sand by the Tathâgata.' Bhagavat
said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, if there were as many Gangâ rivers
as there are grains of sand in the great river Gangâ; and, if there were
as many worlds as there are grains of sand in these, would these worlds
be many?' Subhûti said: 'So it is, O Bhagavat, so it is, O Sugata, these
worlds would be many.' Bhagavat said: 'As many beings as there are in
all those worlds, I know the manifold trains of thought of them all. And
why? Because what was preached as the train of thoughts, the train of
thoughts indeed, O Subhûti, that was preached by the Tathâgata as
no-train of thoughts, and therefore it is called the train of thoughts.
And why? Because, O Subhûti, a past thought is not perceived, a future
thought is not perceived, and the present thought is not perceived.'
(18)

XIX\.

   'What do you think, O Subhûti, if a son or a daughter of a good
family should fill this sphere of a million millions of worlds with the
seven treasures, and give it as a gift to holy and fully enlightened
Buddhas, would that son or daughter of a good family produce on the
strength of this a large stock of merit?' Subhûti said: 'Yes, a large
one.' Bhagavat said: 'So it is, Subhûti, so it is; that son or daughter
of a good family would produce on the strength of this a large stock of
merit, immeasurable and innumerable. And why? Because what was preached
as a stock of merit, a stock of merit indeed, O Subhûti, that was
preached as no-stock

<span id="p. 137">{p. 137}</span>

of merit by the Tathâgata, and therefore it is called a stock of merit.
If, O Subhûti, there existed a stock of merit, the Tathâgata would not
have preached: "A stock of merit, a stock of merit indeed!"'(19)

XX\.

   'What do you think then, O Subhûti, is a Tathâgata to be seen (known)
by the shape of his visible body?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O
Bhagavat, a Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the shape of his
visible body. And why? Because, what was preached, O Bhagavat, as the
shape of the visible body, the shape of the visible body indeed, that
was preached by the Tathâgata as no-shape of the visible body, and
therefore it is called the shape of the visible body.'

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, should a Tathâgata be
seen (known) by the possession of signs?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O
Bhagavat, a Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the possession of
signs. And why? Because, what was preached by the Tathâgata as the
possession of signs, that was preached as no-possession of signs by the
Tathâgata, and therefore it is called the possession of signs.' (20)

XXI\.

   Bhagavat said: 'What do you think, O Subhûti, does the Tathâgata
think in this wise: The Law has been taught by me?' Subhûti said: 'Not
indeed, O Bhagavat, does the Tathâgata think in this wise: The Law has
been taught by me.' Bhagavat said: 'If a man should say that the Law has
been taught by the Tathâgata, he would say what is not true; he

<span id="p. 138">{p. 138}</span>

would slander me with untruth which he has learned. And why? Because, O
Subhûti, it is said the teaching of the Law, the teaching of the Law
indeed. O Subhûti, there is nothing that can be perceived by the name of
the teaching of the Law.'

   After this, the venerable Subhûti spoke thus to the Bhagavat:
'Forsooth, O Bhagavat, will there be any beings in the future, in the
last time, in the last moment, in the last 500 years, during the time of
the decay of the good Law, who, when they have heard these very Laws,
will believe?' Bhagavat said: 'These, O Subhûti, are neither beings nor
no-beings. And why? Because, O Subhûti, those who were preached as
beings, beings indeed, they were preached as no-beings by the Tathâgata,
and therefore they are called beings.' (2 1)

XXII\.

   'What do you think then, O Subhûti, is there anything which has been
known by the Tathâgata in the form of the highest perfect knowledge?'
The venerable Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O Bhagavat, there is nothing, O
Bhagavat, that has been known by the Tathâgata in the form of the
highest perfect knowledge.' Bhagavat said: 'So it is, Subhûti, so it is.
Even the smallest thing is not known or perceived there, therefore it is
called the highest perfect knowledge.' (22)

XXIII\.

   'Also, Subhûti, all is the same there, there is no difference there,
and therefore it is called the highest perfect knowledge. Free from
self, free from being, free from life, free from personality, that

<span id="p. 139">{p. 139}</span>

highest perfect knowledge is always the same, and thus known with all
good things. And why? Because, what were preached as good things, good
things indeed, O Subhûti, they were preached as no-things by the
Tathâgata, and therefore they are called good things.' (23)

XXIV\.

   'And if, O Subhûti, a woman or man, putting together as many heaps of
the seven treasures as there are Sumerus, kings of mountains, in the
sphere of a million millions of worlds, should give them as a gift to
holy and fully enlightened Tathâgatas; and, if a son or a daughter of a
good family, after taking from this treatise of the Law, this
Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ, one Gâthâ of four lines only, should teach it to
others, then, O Subhûti, compared with his stock of merit, the former
stock of merit would not come to the one hundredth part,' &c.\[1\], till
'it will not bear an approach.' (24)

XXV\.

   'What do you think then, O Subhûti, does a Tathâgatas think in this
wise: Beings have been delivered by me? You should not think so, O
Subhûti. And why? Because there is no being, O Subhûti, that has been
delivered by the Tathâgata. And, if there were a being, O Subhûti, that
has been delivered by the Tathâgatas, then the Tathâgata would believe
in self, believe in a being, believe in a living being, and believe in a
person. And what is called a belief in self, O Subhûti, that is preached

<span class="small">\[1. As before, in chap. xvi.\]</span>

<span id="p. 140">{p. 140}</span>

as no-belief by the Tathâgata. And this is learned by children and
ignorant persons; and they who were preached as children and ignorant
persons, O Subhûti, were preached as no-persons by the Tathâgata, and
therefore they are called children and ignorant persons.' (25)

XXVI\.

   'What do you think then, O Subhûti, is the Tathâgata to be seen
(known) by the possession of signs?' Subhûti said: 'Not indeed, O
Bhagavat. So far as I know the meaning of the preaching of the Bhagavat,
the Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the possession of signs.'
Bhagavat said: 'Good, good, Subhûti, so it is, Subhûti; so it is, as you
say; a Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the possession of signs.
And why? Because, O Subhûti, if the Tathâgata were to be seen (known) by
the possession of signs, a wheel-turning king also would be a
Tathâgata\[1\]; therefore a Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the
possession of signs.' The venerable Subhûti spoke thus to the Bhagavat:
'As I understand the meaning of the preaching of the Bhagavat, a
Tathâgata is not to be seen (known) by the possession of signs.' Then
the Bhagavat at that moment preached these two Gâthâs:

> They who saw me by form, and they who heard me by sound,  
> They engaged in false endeavours, will not see me.  

<span class="small">\[1. This probably refers to the auspicious signs
discovered in *S*âkyamuni at his birth, which left it open whether he
should become a king or a Buddha.\]</span>

<span id="p. 141">{p. 141}</span>

> A Buddha is to be seen (known) from the Law; for the Lords (Buddhas)
> have the Law-body;  
> And the nature of the Law cannot be understood, nor can it be made to
> be understood. (26)  

XXVII\.

   'What do you think then, O Subhûti, has the highest perfect knowledge
been known by the Tathâgata through the possession of signs? You should
not think so, O Subhûti. And why? Because, O Subhûti, the highest
perfect knowledge would not be known by the Tathâgata through the
possession of signs. Nor should anybody, O Subhûti, say to you that the
destruction or annihilation of any thing is proclaimed by those who have
entered on the path of the Bodhisattvas.' (27)

XXVIII\.

   'And if, O Subhûti, a son or a daughter of a good family were to fill
worlds equal to the number of grains of sand of the river Gangâ with the
seven treasures, and give them as a gift to holy and fully enlightened
Tathâgatas; and if a Bodhisattva acquired endurance in selfless and
uncreated things, then the latter will on the strength of this produce a
larger stock of merit, immeasurable and innumerable.

   'But, O Subhûti, a stock of merit should not be appropriated by a
noble-minded Bodhisattva.' The venerable Subhûti said: 'Should a stock
of merit, O Bhagavat, not be appropriated by a Bodhisattva?' Bhagavat
said: 'It should be appropriated, O Subhûti; it should not be
appropriated; and therefore it is said: It should be appropriated.' (28)

<span id="p. 142">{p. 142}</span>

XXIX\.

   'And again, O Subhûti, if anybody were to say that the Tathâgata
goes, or comes, or stands, or sits, or lies down, he, O Subhûti, does
not understand the meaning of my preaching. And why? Because the word
Tathâgata means one who does not go to anywhere, and does not come from
anywhere; and therefore he is called the Tathâgata (truly come), holy
and fully enlightened.' (29)

XXX\.

   'And again, O Subhûti, if a son or a daughter of a good family were
to take as many worlds as there are grains of earth-dust in this sphere
of a million millions of worlds, and reduce them to such fine dust as
can be made with immeasurable strength, like what is called a mass of
the smallest atoms, do you think, O Subhûti, would that be a mass of
many atoms?' Subhûti said: 'Yes, Bhagavat, yes, Sugata, that would be a
mass of many atoms. And why? Because, O Bhagavat, if it were a mass of
many atoms, Bhagavat would not call it a mass of many atoms. And why?
Because, what was preached as a mass of many atoms by the Tathâgata,
that was preached as no-mass of atoms by the Tathâgata; and therefore it
is called a mass of many atoms. And what was preached by the Tathâgata
as the sphere of a million millions of worlds, that was preached by the
Tathâgata as no-sphere of worlds; and therefore it is called the sphere
of a million millions of worlds. And why? Because, O Bhagavat, if there
were a sphere of worlds, there would exist a belief in matter; and what
was preached as a belief in matter by the Tathâgata, that was

<span id="p. 143">{p. 143}</span>

preached as no-belief by the Tathâgata; and therefore it is called a
belief in matter.' Bhagavat said: 'And a belief in matter itself, O
Subhûti, is unmentionable and inexpressible; it is neither a thing nor
no-thing, and this is known by children and ignorant persons.' (30)

XXXI\.

   'And why? Because, O Subhûti, if a man were to say that belief in
self, belief in a being, belief in life, belief in personality had been
preached by the Tathâgata, would he be speaking truly?' Subhûti said:
'Not indeed, Bhagavat, not indeed, Sugata; he would not be speaking
truly. And why? Because, O Bhagavat, what was preached by the Tathâgata
as a belief in self, that was preached by the Tathâgata as no-belief;
therefore it is called belief in self.'

   Bhagavat said: 'Thus then, O Subhûti, are all things to be perceived,
to be looked upon, and to be believed by one who has entered on the path
of the Bodhisattvas. And in this wise are they to be perceived, to be
looked upon, and to be believed, that a man should believe neither in
the idea of a thing nor in the idea of a no-thing. And why? Because, by
saying: The idea of a thing, the idea of a thing indeed, it has been
preached by the Tathâgata as no-idea of a thing.' (31)

XXXII\.

   'And, O Subhûti, if a noble-minded Bodhisattva were to fill
immeasurable and innumerable spheres of worlds with the seven treasures,
and give them as a gift to holy and fully enlightened Tathâgatas;

<span id="p. 144">{p. 144}</span>

and if a son or a daughter of a good family, after taking from this
treatise of the Law, this Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ, one Gâthâ of four lines
only, should learn it, repeat it, understand it, and fully explain it to
others, then the latter would on the strength of this produce a larger
stock of merit, immeasurable and innumerable. And how should he explain
it? As in the sky:

> Stars, darkness, a lamp, a phantom, dew, a bubble.  
> A dream, a flash of lightning, and a cloud--thus we should look upon
> the world (all that was made).  

Thus he should explain; therefore it is said: He should explain.'

   Thus spoke the Bhagavat enraptured. The elder Subhûti, and the
friars, nuns, the faithful laymen and women, and the Bodhisattvas also,
and the whole world of gods, men, evil spirits and fairies, praised the
preaching of the Bhagavat. (32)

Thus is finished the Diamond-cutter, the blessed Pra*gñ*âpâramitâ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Larger Pra*gñ*â-pâramitâ-h*ri*daya-sûtra](sbe4930)
