[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip22)  [Next](fip24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# THE SOLITARY FAIRIES.

### LEPRACAUN. CLURICAUN. FAR DARRIG.

"The name *Lepracaun*," Mr. Douglas Hyde writes to me, "is from the
Irish *leith brog*--*i.e.*, the One-shoemaker, since he is generally
seen working at a single shoe. It is spelt in Irish *leith bhrogan*, or
*leith phrogan*, and is in some places pronounced Luchryman, as
O'Kearney writes it in that very rare book, the *Feis Tigh Chonain*."

The *Lepracaun*, *Cluricaun*, and *Far Darrig*. Are these one spirit in
different moods and shapes? Hardly two Irish writers are agreed. In many
things these three fairies, if three, resemble each other. They are
withered, old, and solitary, in every way unlike the sociable spirits of
the first sections. They dress with all unfairy homeliness, and are,
indeed, most sluttish, slouching, jeering, mischievous phantoms. They
are the great practical jokers among the good people.

The *Lepracaun* makes shoes continually, and has grown very rich. Many
treasure-crocks, buried of old in war-time, has he now for his own. In
the early part of this century, according to Croker, in a newspaper
office in Tipperary, they used to show a little shoe forgotten by a
Lepracaun.

The *Cluricaun*, (*Clobhair-ceann*, in O'Kearney) makes himself drunk in
gentlemen's cellars. Some suppose he is merely the Lepracaun on a spree.
He is almost unknown in Connaught and the north.

The *Far Darrig* (*fear dearg*), which means the Red Man, for he wears a
red cap and coat, busies himself with practical joking, especially with
gruesome joking. This he does, and nothing else.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

The *Fear-Gorta* (Man of Hunger) is an emaciated phantom that goes
through the land in famine time, begging an alms and bringing good luck
to the giver.

There are other solitary fairies, such as the House-spirit and the
*Water-sheerie*, own brother to the English Jack-o'-Lantern; the *Pooka*
and the *Banshee*--concerning these presently; the *Dallahan*, or
headless phantom--one used to stand in a Sligo street on dark nights
till lately; the Black Dog, a form, perhaps, of the *Pooka*. The ships
at the Sligo quays are haunted sometimes by this spirit, who announces
his presence by a sound like the flinging of all "the tin porringers in
the world" down into the hold. He even follows them to sea.

The Leanhaun Shee (fairy mistress), seeks the love of mortals. If they
refuse, she must be their slave; if they consent, they are hers, and can
only escape by finding another to take their place. The fairy lives on
their life, and they waste away. Death is no escape from her. She is the
Gaelic muse, for she gives inspiration to those she persecutes. The
Gaelic poets die young, for she is restless, and will not let them
remain long on earth--this malignant phantom.

Besides these are divers monsters--the *Augh-iska*, the Water-horse, the
Payshtha (*píast* = *bestia*), the Lake-dragon, and such like; but
whether these be animals, fairies, or spirits, I know not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lepracaun; Or Fairy Shoemaker by William Allingham](fip24)
