[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip25)  [Next](fip27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### FAR DARRIG IN DONEGAL.

MISS LETITIA MACLINTOCK.

Pat Diver, the tinker, was a man well-accustomed to a wandering life,
and to strange shelters; he had shared the beggar's blanket in smoky
cabins; he had crouched beside the still in many a nook and comer where
poteen was made

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

on the wild Innishowen mountains; he had even slept on the bare heather,
or on the ditch, with no roof over him but the vault of heaven; yet were
all his nights of adventure tame and commonplace when compared with one
especial night.

During the day preceding that night, he had mended all the kettles and
saucepans in Moville and Greencastle, and was on his way to Culdaff,
when night overtook him on a lonely mountain road.

He knocked at one door after another asking for a night's lodging, while
he jingled the halfpence in his pocket, but was everywhere refused.

Where was the boasted hospitality of Innishowen, which he had never
before known to fail? It was of no use to be able to pay when the people
seemed so churlish. Thus thinking, he made his way towards a light a
little farther on, and knocked at another cabin door.

An old man and woman were seated one at each side of the fire.

"Will you be pleased to give me a night's lodging, sir?" asked Pat
respectfully.

"Can you tell a story?" returned the old man.

"No, then, sir, I canna say I'm good at story-telling," replied the
puzzled tinker.

"Then you maun just gang farther, for none but them that can tell a
story will get in here."

This reply was made in so decided a tone that Pat did not attempt to
repeat his appeal, but turned away reluctantly to resume his weary
journey.

"A story, indeed," muttered he. "Auld wives fables to please the weans!"

As he took up his bundle of tinkering implements, he observed a barn
standing rather behind the dwelling-house, and, aided by the rising
moon, he made his way towards it.

It was a clean, roomy barn, with a piled-up heap of straw in one corner.
Here was a shelter not to be despised; so Pat crept under the straw and
was soon asleep.

He could not have slept very long when he was awakened

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

by the tramp of feet, and, peeping cautiously through a crevice in his
straw covering, he saw four immensely tall men enter the barn, dragging
a body which they threw roughly upon the floor.

They next lighted a fire in the middle of the barn, and fastened the
corpse by the feet with a great rope to a beam in the roof. One of them
began to turn it slowly before the fire. "Come on," said he, addressing
a gigantic fellow, the tallest of the four--"I'm tired; you be to tak'
your turn."

"Faix an' troth, I'll no' turn him," replied the big man.

"There's Pat Diver in under the straw, why wouldn't he tak' his turn?"

With hideous clamour the four men called the wretched Pat, who, seeing
there was no escape, thought it was his wisest plan to come forth as he
was hidden.

"Now, Pat," said they, "you'll turn the corpse, but if you let him burn
you'll be tied up there and roasted in his place."

Pat's hair stood on end, and the cold perspiration poured from his
forehead, but there was nothing for it but to perform his dreadful task.

Seeing him fairly embarked in it, the tall men went away.

Soon, however, the flames rose so high as to singe the rope, and the
corpse fell with a great thud upon the fire, scattering the ashes and
embers, and extracting a howl of anguish from the miserable cook, who
rushed to the door, and ran for his life.

He ran on until he was ready to drop with fatigue, when, seeing a drain
overgrown with tall, rank grass, he thought he would creep in there and
lie hidden till morning.

But he was not many minutes in the drain before he heard the heavy
tramping again, and the four men came up with their burthen, which they
laid down on the edge of the drain.

"I'm tired," said one, to the giant; "it's your turn to carry him a
piece now."

"Faix and troth, I'll no' carry him," replied he, "but

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

there's Pat Diver in the drain, why wouldn't he come out and tak' his
turn?"

"Come out, Pat, come out," roared all the men, and Pat, almost dead with
fright, crept out.

He staggered on under weight of the corpse until he reached Kiltown
Abbey, a ruin festooned with ivy, where the brown owl hooted all night
long, and the forgotten dead slept around the walls under dense, matted
tangles of brambles and ben-weed.

No one ever buried there now, but Pat's tall companions turned into the
wild graveyard, and began digging a grave.

Pat, seeing them thus engaged, thought he might once more try to escape,
and climbed up into a hawthorn tree in the fence, hoping to be hidden in
the boughs.

"I'm tired," said the man who was digging the grave; "here, take the
spade," addressing the big man, "it's your turn."

'Faix an' troth, it's no' my turn," replied he, as before. "There's Pat
Driver in the tree, why wouldn't he come down and tak' his turn?"

Pat came down to take the spade, but just then the cocks in the little
farmyards and cabins round the abbey began to crow, and the men looked
at one another.

"We must go," said they, "and well is it for you, Pat Diver, that the
cocks crowed, for if they had not, you'd just ha' been bundled into that
grave with the corpse."

Two months passed, and Pat had wandered far and wide over the county
Donegal, when he chanced to arrive at Raphoe during a fair.

Among the crowd that filled the Diamond he came suddenly on the big man.

"How are you, Pat Diver?" said he, bending down to look into the
tinker's face.

"You've the advantage of me, sir, for I havna' the pleasure of knowing
you," faltered Pat.

"Do you not know me, Pat?" Whisper--"When you go back to Innishowen,
you'll have a story to tell!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pooka](fip27)
