[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip29)  [Next](fip31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE KILDARE POOKA <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

PATRICK KENNEDY

Mr. H------ R------, when he was alive, used to live a good deal in
Dublin, and he was once a great while out of the country on account of
the "ninety-eight" business. But the servants kept on in the big house
at Rath------ all the same as if the family was at home. Well, they used
to be frightened out of their lives after going to their beds with the
banging of the kitchen-door, and the clattering of fire-irons, and the
pots and plates and dishes. One evening they sat up ever so long,
keeping one another in heart with telling stories about ghosts and
fetches, and that when--what would you have it?--the little scullery boy
that used to be sleeping over the horses, and could not get room at the
fire, crept into the hot hearth, and when he got tired listening to the
stories, sorra fear him, but he fell dead asleep.

Well and good, after they were all gone and the kitchen fire raked up,
he was woke with the noise of the kitchen door opening, and the
trampling of an ass on the kitchen floor. He peeped out, and what should
he see but a big ass, sure enough, sitting on his curabingo and yawning
before the fire. After a little he looked about him, and began
scratching his ears as if he was quite tired, and says he, "I may as
well begin first as last." The poor boy's teeth began to chatter in his
head, for says he, "Now he's goin' to ate me;" but the fellow with the
long ears and tail on him had something else to do. He stirred the fire,
and then he brought in a pail of water from the pump, and filled

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

a big pot that he put on the fire before he went out. He then put in his
hand--foot, I mean--into the hot hearth, and pulled out the little boy.
He let a roar out of him with the fright, but the pooka only looked at
him, and thrust out his lower lip to show how little he valued him, and
then he pitched him into his pew again.

Well, he then lay down before the fire till he heard the boil coming on
the water, and maybe there wasn't a plate, or a dish, or a spoon on the
dresser that he didn't fetch and put into the pot, and wash and dry the
whole bilin' of 'em as well as e'er a kitchen-maid from that to Dublin
town. He then put all of them up on their places on the shelves; and if
he didn't give a good sweepin' to the kitchen, leave it till again. Then
he comes and sits foment the boy, let down one of his ears, and cocked
up the other, and gave a grin. The poor fellow strove to roar out, but
not a dheeg 'ud come out of the throat. The last thing the pooka done
was to rake up the fire, and walk out, giving such a slap o' the door,
that the boy thought the house couldn't help tumbling down.

Well, to be sure if there wasn't a hullabullo, next morning when the
poor fellow told his story! They could talk of nothing else the whole
day. One said one thing, another said another, but a fat, lazy scullery
girl said the wittiest thing of all. "Musha!" says she, "if the pooka
does be cleaning up everything that way when we are asleep, what should
we be slaving ourselves for doing his work?" "Shu gu dheine," <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) says another; "them's the wisest words you
ever said, Kauth; it's meeself won't contradict you."

So said, so done. Not a bit of a plate or dish saw a drop of water that
evening, and not a besom was laid on the floor, and every one went to
bed soon after sundown. Next morning everything was as fine as fine in
the kitchen, and the lord mayor might eat his dinner off the flags. It
was great case to the lazy servants, you may depend, and everything went
on well till a foolhardy gag of a boy said he would stay up one night
and have a chat with the pooka.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

He was a little daunted when the door was thrown open and the ass
marched up to the fire.

"An' then, sir," says he, at last, picking up courage, "if it isn't
taking a liberty, might I ax who you are, and why you are so kind as to
do half of the day's work for the girls every night?" "No liberty at
all," says the pooka, says he: "I'll tell you, and welcome. I was a
servant in the time of Squire R.'s father, and was the laziest rogue
that ever was clothed and fed, and done nothing for it. When my time
came for the other world, this is the punishment was laid on me--to come
here and do all this labour every night, and then go out in the cold. It
isn't so bad in the fine weather; but if you only knew what it is to
stand with your head between your legs, facing the storm, from midnight
to sunrise, on a bleak winter night." "And could we do anything for your
comfort, my poor fellow?" says the boy. "Musha, I don't know," says the
pooka; "but I think a good quilted frieze coat would help to keep the
life in me them long nights." "Why then, in troth, we'd be the
ungratefullest of people if we didn't feel for you."

To make a long story short, the next night but two the boy was there
again; and if he didn't delight the poor pooka holding up a fine warm
coat before him, it's no mather! Betune the pooka and the man, his legs
was got into the four arms of it, and it was buttoned down the breast
and the belly, and he was so pleased he walked up to the glass to see
how he looked. "Well," says he, "it's a long lane that has no turning. I
am much obliged to you and your fellow-servants. You have made me happy
at last. Good-night to you."

So he was walking out, but the other cried, "Och! sure your going too
soon. What about the washing and sweeping?" "Ah, you may tell the girls
that they must now get their turn. My punishment was to last till I was
thought worthy of a reward for the way I done my duty. You'll see me no
more." And no more they did, and right sorry they were for having been
in such a hurry to reward the ungrateful pooka.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[105:1](fip30.htm#fr_12) *Legendary Fictions of
the Irish Celts*.--Macmillan.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[106:1](fip30.htm#fr_13) Meant for *seadh go
deimhin*--*i.e.*, yes, indeed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Banshee](fip31)
