[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip30)  [Next](fip32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

# THE SOLITARY FAIRIES.

### THE BANSHEE

The *banshee* (from *ban* \[*bean*\], a woman, and *shee* \[*sidhe*\], a
fairy) is an attendant fairy that follows the old families, and none but
them, and wails before a death. Many have seen her as she goes wailing
and clapping her hands. The keen \[*caoine*\], the funeral cry of the
peasantry, is said to be an imitation of her cry. When more than one
banshee is present, and they wail and sing in chorus, it is for the
death of some holy or great one. An omen that sometimes accompanies the
banshee is the *coach-a-bower* (*cóiste-bodhar*)--an immense black
coach, mounted by a coffin, and drawn by headless horses driven by a
*Dullahan*. It will go rumbling to your door, and if you open it,
according to Croker, a basin of blood will be thrown in your face. These
headless phantoms are found elsewhere than in Ireland. In 1807 two of
the sentries stationed outside St. James's Park died of fright. A
headless woman, the upper part of her body naked, used to pass at
midnight and scale the railings. After a time the sentries were
stationed no longer at the haunted spot. In Norway the heads of corpses
were cut off to make their ghosts feeble. Thus came into existence the
*Dullahans*, perhaps; unless, indeed, they are descended from that Irish
giant who swam across the Channel with his head in his teeth.--ED.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Thomas Connolly Met the Banshee, by J. Todhunter](fip32.md)
