[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip46)  [Next](fip48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BEWITCHED BUTTER (QUEEN'S COUNTY) <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)

ABOUT the commencement of the last century there lived in the vicinity
of the once famous village of Aghavoe <span
id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21.md) a wealthy farmer, named Bryan Costigan.
This man kept an extensive dairy and a great many milch cows, and every

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

year made considerable sums by the sale of milk and butter. The
luxuriance of the pasture lands in this neighbourhood has always been
proverbial; and, consequently, Bryan's cows were the finest and most
productive in the country, and his milk and butter the richest and
sweetest, and brought the highest price at every market at which he
offered these articles for sale.

Things continued to go on thus prosperously with Bryan Costigan, when,
one season, all at once, he found his cattle declining in appearance,
and his dairy almost entirely profitless. Bryan, at first, attributed
this change to the weather, or some such cause, but soon found or
fancied reasons to assign to a far different source. The cows, without
any visible disorder, daily declined, and were scarcely able to crawl
about on their pasture: many of them, instead of milk, gave nothing but
blood; and the scanty quantity of milk which some of them continued to
supply was so bitter that even the pigs would not drink it; whilst the
butter which it produced was of such a bad quality, and stunk so
horribly, that the very dogs would not eat it. Bryan applied for
remedies to all the quacks and "fairy-women" in the country--but in
vain. Many of the impostors declared that the mysterious malady in his
cattle went beyond *their* skill; whilst others, although they found no
difficulty in tracing it to superhuman agency, declared that they had no
control in the matter, as the charm under the influence of which his
property was made away with, was too powerful to be dissolved by
anything less than the special interposition of Divine Providence. The
poor farmer became almost distracted; he saw ruin staring him in the
face; yet what was he to do? Sell his cattle and purchase others! No;
that was out of the question, as they looked so miserable and emaciated,
that no one would even take them as a present, whilst it was also
impossible to sell to a butcher, as the flesh of one which he killed for
his own family was as black as a coal, and stunk like any putrid
carrion.

The unfortunate man was thus completely bewildered. He knew not what to
do; he became moody and stupid;

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

his sleep forsook him by night, and all day he wandered about the
fields, amongst his "fairy-stricken" cattle like a maniac.

Affairs continued in this plight, when one very sultry evening in the
latter days of July, Bryan Costigan's wife was sitting at her own door,
spinning at her wheel, in a very gloomy and agitated state of mind.
Happening to look down the narrow green lane which led from the high
road to her cabin, she espied a little old woman barefoot, and enveloped
in an old scarlet cloak, approaching slowly, with the aid of a crutch
which she carried in one hand, and a cane or walking-stick in the other.
The farmer's wife felt glad at seeing the odd-looking stranger; she
smiled, and yet she knew not why, as she neared the house. A vague and
indefinable feeling of pleasure crowded on her imagination; and, as the
old woman gained the threshold, she bade her "welcome" with a warmth
which plainly told that her lips gave utterance but to the genuine
feelings of her heart.

"God bless this good house and all belonging to it," said the stranger
as she entered.

"God save you kindly, and you are welcome, whoever you are," replied
Mrs. Costigan.

"Hem, I thought so," said the old woman with a significant grin. "I
thought so, or I wouldn't trouble you."

The farmer's wife ran, and placed a chair near the fire for the
stranger; but she refused, and sat on the ground near where Mrs. C. had
been spinning. Mrs. Costigan had now time to survey the old hag's person
minutely. She appeared of great age; her countenance was extremely ugly
and repulsive; her skin was rough and deeply embrowned as if from long
exposure to the effects of some tropical climate; her forehead was low,
narrow, and indented with a thousand wrinkles; her long grey hair fell
in matted elf-locks from beneath a white linen skull-cap; her eyes were
bleared, blood-shotten, and obliquely set in their sockets, and her
voice was croaking, tremulous, and, at times, partially inarticulate. As
she squatted on the floor, she looked round the house with an
inquisitive gaze; she peered pryingly

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

from corner to comer, with an earnestness of look, as if she had the
faculty, like the Argonaut of old, to see through the very depths of the
earth, whilst Mrs. C. kept watching her motions with mingled feelings of
curiosity, awe, and pleasure.

"Mrs.," said the old woman, at length breaking silence, "I am dry with
the heat of the day; can you give me a drink?"

"Alas!" replied the farmer's wife, "I have no drink to offer you except
water, else you would have no occasion to ask me for it."

"Are you not the owner of the cattle I see yonder?" said the old hag,
with a tone of voice and manner of gesticulation which plainly indicated
her foreknowledge of the fact.

Mrs. Costigan replied in the affirmative, and briefly related to her
every circumstance connected with the affair, whilst the old woman still
remained silent, but shook her grey head repeatedly; and still continued
gazing round the house with an air of importance and self-sufficiency.

When Mrs. C. had ended, the old hag remained a while as if in a deep
reverie: at length she said--

"Have you any of the milk in the house?"

"I have," replied the other.

"Show me some of it."

She filled a jug from a vessel and handed it to the old sybil, who
smelled it, then tasted it, and spat out what she had taken on the
floor.

"Where is your husband?" she asked.

"Out in the fields," was the reply.

"I must see him."

A messenger was despatched for Bryan, who shortly after made his
appearance.

"Neighbour," said the stranger, "your wife informs me that your cattle
are going against you this season."

'She informs you right," said Bryan.

"And why have you not sought a cure?"

"A cure!" re-echoed the man; "why, woman, I have sought cures until I
was heart-broken, and all in vain; they get worse every day."

"What will you give me if I cure them for you?"

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

"Anything in our power," replied Bryan and his wife, both speaking
joyfully, and with a breath.

"All I will ask from you is a silver sixpence, and that you will do
everything which I will bid you," said she.

The farmer and his wife seemed astonished at the moderation of her
demand. They offered her a large sum of money.

"No," said she, 'I don't want your money; I am no cheat, and I would not
even take sixpence, but that I can do nothing till I handle some of your
silver."

The sixpence was immediately given her, and the most implicit obedience
promised to her injunctions by both Bryan and his wife, who already
began to regard the old beldame as their tutelary angel.

The hag pulled off a black silk ribbon or fillet which encircled her
head inside her cap, and gave it to Bryan, saying--

"Go, now, and the first cow you touch with this ribbon, turn her into
the yard, but be sure don't touch the second, nor speak a word until you
return; be also careful not to let the ribbon touch the ground, for, if
you do, all is over."

Bryan took the talismanic ribbon, and soon returned, driving a red cow
before him.

The old hag went out, and, approaching the cow, commenced puffing hairs
out of her tail, at the same time singing some verses in the Irish
language in a low, wild, and unconnected strain. The cow appeared
restive and uneasy, but the old witch still continued her mysterious
chant until she had the ninth hair extracted. She then ordered the cow
to be drove back to her pasture, and again entered the house.

"Go, now," said she to the woman, "and bring me some milk from every cow
in your possession."

She went, and soon returned with a large pail filled with a
frightful-looking mixture of milk, blood, and corrupt matter. The old
woman got it into the chum, and made preparations for churning.

"Now," she said, "you both must chum, make fast the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

door and windows, and let there be no light but from the fire; do not
open your lips until I desire you, and by observing my directions, I
make no doubt but, ere the sun goes down, we will find out the infernal
villain who is robbing you."

Bryan secured the doors and windows, and commenced churning. The old
sorceress sat down by a blazing fire which had been specially lighted
for the occasion, and commenced singing the same wild song which she had
sung at the pulling of the cow-hairs, and after a little time she cast
one of the nine hairs into the fire, still singing her mysterious
strain, and watching, with intense interest, the witching process.

A loud cry, as if from a female in distress, was now heard approaching
the house; the old witch discontinued her incantations, and listened
attentively. The crying voice approached the door.

"Open the door quickly," shouted the charmer.

Bryan unbarred the door, and all three rushed out in the yard, when they
heard the same cry down the *boreheen*, but could see nothing.

"It is all over," shouted the old witch; "something has gone amiss, and
our charm for the present is ineffectual."

They now turned back quite crest-fallen, when, as they were entering the
door, the sybil cast her eyes downwards, and perceiving a piece of
horse-shoe nailed on the threshold, <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)
she vociferated--

"Here I have it; no wonder our charm was abortive. The person that was
crying abroad is the villain who has your cattle bewitched; I brought
her to the house, but she was not able to come to the door on account of
that horse-shoe. Remove it instantly, and we will try our luck again."

Bryan removed the horse-shoe from the doorway, and by

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the hag's directions placed it on the floor under the chum, having
previously reddened it in the fire.

They again resumed their manual operations. Bryan and his wife began to
chum, and the witch again to sing her strange verses, and casting her
cow-hairs into the fire until she had them all nearly exhausted. Her
countenance now began to exhibit evident traces of vexation and
disappointment. She got quite pale, her teeth gnashed, her hand
trembled, and as she cast the ninth and last hair into the fire, her
person exhibited more the appearance of a female demon than a human
being.

Once more the cry was heard, and an aged red-haired woman <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md) was seen approaching the house quickly.

"Ho, ho!" roared the sorceress, "I knew it would be so; my charm has
succeeded; my expectations are realised, and here she comes, the villain
who has destroyed you."

"What are we to do now?" asked Bryan.

"Say nothing to her," said the hag; "give her whatever she demands, and
leave the rest to me."

The woman advanced screeching vehemently, and Bryan went out to meet
her. She was a neighbour, and she said that one of her best cows was
drowning in a pool of water--that there was no one at home but herself,
and she implored Bryan to go rescue the cow from destruction.

Bryan accompanied her without hesitation; and having rescued the cow
from her perilous situation, was back again in a quarter of an hour.

It was now sunset, and Mrs. Costigan set about preparing supper.

During supper they reverted to the singular transactions of the day. The
old witch uttered many a fiendish laugh at the success of her
incantations, and inquired who was the woman whom they had so curiously
discovered.

Bryan satisfied her in every particular. She was the wife of a
neighbouring farmer; her name was Rachel Higgins; and she had been long
suspected to be on familiar terms with the spirit of darkness. She had
five or six cows;

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

but it was observed by her sapient neighbours that she sold more butter
every year than other farmers' wives who had twenty. Bryan had, from the
commencement of the decline in his cattle, suspected her for being the
aggressor, but as he had no proof, he held his peace.

"Well," said the old beldame, with a grim smile, "it is not enough that
we have merely discovered the robber; all is in vain, if we do not take
steps to punish her for the past, as well as to prevent her inroads for
the future."

"And how will that be done?" said Bryan.

"I will tell you; as soon as the hour of twelve o'clock arrives tonight,
do you go to the pasture, and take a couple of swift-running dogs with
you; conceal yourself in some place convenient to the cattle; watch them
carefully; and if you see anything, whether man or beast, approach the
cows, set on the dogs, and if possible make them draw the blood of the
intruder; then ALL will be accomplished. If nothing approaches before
sunrise, you may return, and we will try something else."

Convenient there lived the cow-herd of a neighbouring squire. He was a
hardy, courageous young man, and always kept a pair of ferocious
buff-dogs. To him Bryan applied for assistance, and he cheerfully agreed
to accompany him, and, moreover, proposed to fetch a couple of his
master's best greyhounds, as his own dogs, although extremely fierce and
bloodthirsty, could not be relied on for swiftness. He promised Bryan to
be with him before twelve o'clock, and they parted.

Bryan did not seek sleep that night; he sat up anxiously awaiting the
midnight hour. It arrived at last, and his friend, the herdsman, true to
his promise, came at the time appointed. After some further admonitions
from the *Collough*, they departed. Having arrived at the field, they
consulted as to the best position they could choose for concealment. At
last they pitched on a small brake of fem, situated at the extremity of
the field, adjacent to the boundary ditch, which was thickly studded
with large, old white-thorn bushes. Here they crouched themselves, and

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

made the dogs, four in number, lie down beside them, eagerly expecting
the appearance of their as yet unknown and mysterious visitor.

Here Bryan and his comrade continued a considerable time in nervous
anxiety, still nothing approached, and it became manifest that morning
was at hand; they were beginning to grow impatient, and were talking of
returning home, when on a sudden they heard a rushing sound behind them,
as if proceeding from something endeavouring to force a passage through
the thick hedge in their rear. They looked in that direction, and judge
of their astonishment, when they perceived a large hare in the act of
springing from the ditch, and leaping on the ground quite near them.
They were now convinced that this was the object which they had so
impatiently expected, and they were resolved to watch her motions
narrowly.

After arriving to the ground, she remained motionless for a few moments,
looking around her sharply. She then began to skip and jump in a playful
manner; now advancing at a smart pace towards the cows, and again
retreating precipitately, but still drawing nearer and nearer at each
sally. At length she advanced up to the next cow, and sucked her for a
moment; then on to the next, and so respectively to every cow on the
field--the cows all the time lowing loudly, and appearing extremely
frightened and agitated. Bryan, from the moment the hare commenced
sucking the first, was with difficulty restrained from attacking her;
but his more sagacious companion suggested to him, that it was better to
wait until she would have done, as she would then be much heavier, and
more unable to effect her escape than at present. And so the issue
proved; for being now done sucking them all, her belly appeared
enormously distended, and she made her exit slowly and apparently with
difficulty. She advanced towards the hedge where she had entered, and as
she arrived just at the clump of ferns where her foes were crouched,
they started up with a fierce yell, and hallooed the dogs upon her path.

The hare started off at a brisk pace, squirting up the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

milk she had sucked from her mouth and nostrils, and the dogs making
after her rapidly. Rachel Higgins's cabin appeared, through the grey
morning twilight, at a little distance; and it was evident that puss
seemed bent on gaining it, although she made a considerable circuit
through the fields in the rear. Bryan and his comrade, however, had
their thoughts, and made towards the cabin by the shortest route, and
had just arrived as the hare came up, panting and almost exhausted, and
the dogs at her very scut. She ran round the house, evidently confused
and disappointed at the presence of the men, but at length made for the
door. In the bottom of the door was a small, semi-circular aperture,
resembling those cut in fowl-house doors for the ingress and egress of
poultry. To gain this hole, puss now made a last and desperate effort,
and had succeeded in forcing her head and shoulders through it, when the
foremost of the dogs made a spring and seized her violently by the
haunch. She uttered a loud and piercing scream, and struggled
desperately to free herself from his gripe, and at last succeeded, but
not until she left a piece of her ramp in his teeth. The men now burst
open the door; a bright turf fire blazed on the hearth, and the whole
floor was streaming with blood. No hare, however, could be found, and
the men were more than ever convinced that it was old Rachel, who had,
by the assistance of some demon, assumed the form of the hare, and they
now determined to have her if she were over the earth. They entered the
bed-room, and heard some smothered groaning, as if proceeding from some
one in extreme agony. They went to the comer of the room from whence the
moans proceeded, and there, beneath a bundle of freshly-cut rushes,
found the form of Rachel Higgins, writhing in the most excruciating
agony, and almost smothered in a pool of blood. The men were astounded;
they addressed the wretched old woman, but she either could not, or
would not answer them. Her wound still bled copiously; her tortures
appeared to increase, and it was evident that she was dying. The aroused
family thronged around her with cries and lamentations;

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

she did not seem to heed them, she got worse and worse, and her piercing
yells fell awfully on the ears of the bystanders. At length she expired,
and her corpse exhibited a most appalling spectacle, even before the
spirit had well departed.

Bryan and his friend returned home. The old hag had been previously
aware of the fate of Rachel Higgins, but it was not known by what means
she acquired her supernatural knowledge. She was delighted at the issue
of her mysterious operations. Bryan pressed her much to accept of some
remuneration for her services, but she utterly rejected such proposals.
She remained a few days at his house, and at length took her leave and
departed, no one knew whither.

Old Rachel's remains were interred that night in the neighbouring
churchyard. Her fate soon became generally known, and her family,
ashamed to remain in their native village, disposed of their property,
and quitted the country for ever. The story, however, is stiff fresh in
the memory of the surrounding villagers; and often, it is said, amid the
grey haze of a summer twilight, may the ghost of Rachel Higgins, in the
form of a hare, be seen scudding over her favourite and well-remembered
haunts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[155:1](fip47.htm#fr_20.md) *Dublin University
Magazine*, 1839.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[155:2](fip47.htm#fr_21.md) *Aghavoe*--"the field
of kine"--a beautiful and romantic village near Borris-in-Ossory, in the
Queen's County. It was once a place of considerable importance, and for
centuries the episcopal seat of the diocese of Ossory, but for ages back
it has gone to decay, and is now remarkable for nothing but the
magnificent ruins of a priory of the Dominicans, erected here at an
early period by St. Canice, the patron saint of Ossory.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[160:1](fip47.htm#fr_22.md) It was once a common
practice in Ireland to nail a piece of horseshoe on the threshold of the
door, its a preservative against the influence of the fairies, who, it
is thought, dare not enter any house thus guarded. This custom, however,
is much on the wane, but still it is prevalent in some of the more
uncivilised districts of the country.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[161:1](fip47.htm#fr_23.md) Red-haired people are
thought to possess magic power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Horned Women, by Lady Wilde](fip48.md)
