[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip44)  [Next](fip46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### A QUEEN'S COUNTY WITCH <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19)

IT was about eighty years ago, in the month of May, that a Roman
Catholic clergyman, near Rathdowney, in the Queen's County, was awakened
at midnight to attend a dying man in a distant part of the parish. The
priest obeyed without a murmur, and having performed his duty to the
expiring sinner, saw him depart this world before he left the cabin. As
it was yet dark, the man who had called on the priest offered to
accompany him home, but he refused, and set forward on his journey
alone. The grey dawn began to appear over the hills. The good priest was
highly enraptured with the beauty of the scene, and rode on, now gazing
intently at every surrounding object, and again cutting with his whip at
the bats and big beautiful night-flies which flitted ever and anon from
hedge to hedge across his lonely way. Thus engaged, he journeyed on
slowly, until the nearer approach of sunrise began to render objects
completely discernible, when he dismounted from his horse, and slipping
his arm out of the rein, and drawing forth his "Breviary" from his
pocket, he commenced reading his "morning office" as he walked leisurely
along.

He had not proceeded very far, when he observed his horse, a very
spirited animal, endeavouring to stop on the road, and gazing intently
into a field on one side of the way where there were three or four cows
grazing. However, he did not pay any particular attention to this
circumstance, but went on a little farther, when the horse suddenly
plunged with great violence, and endeavoured to break away by force. The
priest with great difficulty succeeded in restraining him, and, looking
at him more closely, observed him shaking from head to foot, and
sweating profusely. He now stood calmly, and refused to move from where
he was, nor could threats or entreaty induce him to proceed. The father
was greatly astonished, but recollecting to have often heard of horses
labouring under affright being induced to go by

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

blindfolding them, he took out his handkerchief and tied it across his
eyes. He then mounted, and, striking him gently, he went forward without
reluctance, but still sweating and trembling violently. They had not
gone far, when they arrived opposite a narrow path or bridle-way,
flanked at either side by a tall, thick hedge, which led from the high
road to the field where the cows were grazing. The priest happened by
chance to look into the lane, and saw a spectacle which made the blood
curdle in his veins. It was the legs of a man from the hips downwards,
without head or body, trotting up the avenue at a smart pace. The good
father was very much alarmed, but, being a man of strong nerve, he
resolved, come what might, to stand, and be further acquainted with this
singular spectre. He accordingly stood, and so did the headless
apparition, as if afraid to approach him. The priest observing this,
pulled back a little from the entrance of the avenue, and the phantom
again resumed its progress. It soon arrived on the road, and the priest
now had sufficient opportunity to view it minutely. It wore yellow
buckskin breeches, tightly fastened at the knees with green ribbon; it
had neither shoes nor stockings on, and its legs were covered with long,
red hairs, and all full. of wet, blood, and clay, apparently contracted
in its progress through the thorny hedges. The priest, although very
much alarmed, felt eager to examine the phantom, and for this purpose
summoned all his philosophy to enable him to speak to it. The ghost was
now a little ahead, pursuing its march at its usual brisk trot, and the
priest urged on his horse speedily until he came up with it, and thus
addressed it--

"Hilloa, friend! who art thou, or whither art thou going so early?"

The hideous spectre made no reply, but uttered a fierce and superhuman
growl, or "Umph".

"A fine morning for ghosts to wander abroad," again said the priest.

Another "Umph" was the reply.

"Why don't you speak?"

"Umph."

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

"You don't seem disposed to be very loquacious this morning."

"Umph," again.

The good man began to feel irritated at the obstinate silence of his
unearthly visitor, and said, with some warmth--

"In the name of all that's sacred, I command you to answer me, Who art
thou, or where art thou travelling?"

Another "Umph", more loud and more angry than before, was the only
reply.

'Perhaps," said the father, "a taste of whipcord might render you a
little more communicative"; and so saying, he struck the apparition a
heavy blow with his whip on the breech.

The phantom uttered a wild and unearthly yell, and fell forward on the
road, and what was the priest's astonishment when he perceived the whole
place running over with milk. He was struck dumb with amazement; the
prostrate phantom still continued to eject vast quantities of milk from
every part; the priest's head swam, his eyes got dizzy; a stupor came
all over him for some minutes, and on his recovering, the frightful
spectre had vanished, and in its stead he found stretched on the road,
and half drowned in milk, the form of Sarah Kennedy, an old woman of the
neighbourhood, who had been long notorious in that district for her
witchcraft and superstitious practices, and it was now discovered that
she had, by infernal aid, assumed that monstrous shape, and was employed
that morning in sucking the cows of the village. Had a volcano burst
forth at his feet, he could not be more astonished; he gazed awhile in
silent amazement--the old woman groaning, and writhing convulsively.

"Sarah," said he, at length, "I have long admonished you to repent of
your evil ways, but you were deaf to my entreaties; and now, wretched
woman, you are surprised in the midst of your crimes."

"Oh, father, father," shouted the unfortunate woman, "can you do nothing
to save me? I am lost; hell is open for me, and legions of devils
surround me this moment, waiting to carry my soul to perdition."

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

'Me priest had not power to reply; the old wretch's pains increased; her
body swelled to an immense size; her eyes flashed as if on fire, her
face was black as night, her entire form writhed in a thousand different
contortions; her outcries were appalling, her face sunk, her eyes
closed, and in a few minutes she expired in the most exquisite tortures.

The priest departed homewards, and called at the next cabin to give
notice of the strange circumstances. The remains of Sarah Kennedy were
removed to her cabin, situate at the edge of a small wood at a little
distance. She had long been a resident in that neighbourhood, but still
she was a stranger, and came there no one knew from whence. She had no
relation in that country but one daughter, now advanced in years, who
resided with her. She kept one cow, but sold more butter, it was said,
than any farmer in the parish, and it was generally suspected that she
acquired it by devilish agency, as she never made a secret of being
intimately acquainted with sorcery and fairyism. She professed the Roman
Catholic religion, but never complied with the practices enjoined by
that church, and her remains were denied Christian sepulture, and were
buried in a sand-pit near her own cabin.

On the evening of her burial. the villagers assembled and burned her
cabin to the earth. Her daughter made her escape, and never after
returned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[151:1](fip45.htm#fr_19) *Dublin University
Magazine*, 1839.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Witch Hare, by Mr. and Mrs. S. C. Hall](fip46)
