[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip50)  [Next](fip52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE PUDDING BEWITCHED.

WILLIAM CARLETON.

"MOLL ROE RAFFERTY was the son--daughter I mane--of ould Jack Rafferty,
who was remarkable for a habit he had

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

of always wearing his head undher his hat; but indeed the same family
was a quare one, as everybody knew that was acquainted wid them. It was
said of them--but whether it was thrue or not I won't undhertake to say,
for 'fraid I'd tell a lie--that whenever they didn't wear shoes or boots
they always went barefooted; but I heard aftherwards that this was
disputed, so rather than say anything to injure their character, I'll
let that pass. Now, ould Jack Rafferty had two sons, Paddy and
Molly--hut! what are you all laughing at?--I mane a son and daughter,
and it was generally believed among the neighbours that they were
brother and sisther, which you know might be thrue or it might not: but
thats a thing that, wid the help o' goodness, we have nothing to say to.
Troth there was many ugly things put out on them that I don't wish to
repate, such that neither Jack nor his son Paddy ever walked a perch
without puttin' one foot afore the other like a salmon; an' I know it
was whispered about, that whinever Moll Roe slep', she had an
out-of-the-way custom of keepin' her eyes shut. If she did, however, for
that matther the loss was her own; for sure we all know that when one
comes to shut their eyes they can't see as far before them as another.

"Moll Roe was a fine young bouncin' girl, large and lavish, wid a purty
head o' hair on her like scarlet, that bein' one of the raisons why she
was called *Roe*, or red; her arms an' cheeks were much the colour of
the hair, an' her saddle nose was the purtiest thing of its kind that
ever was on a face. Her fists--for, thank goodness, she was well sarved
wid them too--had a strong simularity to two thumpin' turnips, reddened
by the sun; an' to keep all right and tight, she had a temper as fiery
as her head--for indeed, it was well known that all the Rafferties were
*warm*-hearted. Howandiver, it appears that God gives nothing in vain,
and of coorse the same fists, big and red as they were, if all that is
said about them is thrue, were not so much given to her for ornament as
use. At laist, takin' them in connection wid her lively temper, we have
it upon good authority, that there was no danger of their getting
blue-moulded for want of

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

practice. She had a twist, too, in one of her eyes that was very
becomin' in its way, and made her poor husband, when she got him, take
it into his head that she could see round a comer. She found him out in
many quare things, widout doubt; but whether it was owin' to that or
not, I wouldn't undertake to say *for fraid I'd tell a lie*.

"Well, begad, anyhow it was Moll Roe that was the *dilsy*. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) It happened that there was a nate vagabone
in the neighbourhood, just as much overburdened wid beauty as herself,
and he was named Gusty Gillespie. Gusty, the Lord guard us, was what
they call a black-mouth Prosbytarian, and wouldn't keep Christmas-day,
the blagard, except what they call 'ould style'. Gusty was rather
good-lookin' when seen in the dark, as well as Moll herself; and,
indeed, it was purty well known that--accordin' as the talk went--it was
in nightly meetings that they had an opportunity of becomin' detached to
one another. The quensequence was, that in due time both families began
to talk very seriously as to what was to be done. Moll's brother,
Pawdien O'Rafferty, gave Gusty the best of two choices. What they were
it's not worth spakin' about; but at any rate *one* of them was a poser,
an' as Gusty knew his man, he soon came to his senses. Accordianly
everything was deranged for their marriage, and it was appointed that
they should be spliced by the Rev. Samuel M'Shuttle, the Prosbytarian
parson, on the following Sunday.

"Now this was the first marriage that had happened for a long time in
the neighbourhood betune a black-mouth an' a Catholic, an' of coorse
there was strong objections on both sides against it; an' begad, only
for one thing, it would never 'a tuck place at all. At any rate, faix,
there was one of the bride's uncles, ould Harry Connolly, a fairy-man,
who could cure all complaints wid a secret he had, and as he didn't wish
to see his niece married upon sich a fellow, he fought bittherly against
the match. All Moll's friends, however, stood up for the marriage
barrin' him, an' of coorse the\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

Sunday was appointed, as I said, that they were to be dove-tailed
together.

"Well, the day arrived, and Moll, as became her, went to mass, and Gusty
to meeting, afther which they were to join one another in Jack
Rafferty's, where the priest, Father M'Sorley, was to slip up afther
mass to take his dinner wid them, and to keep Misther M'Shuttle, who was
to marry them, company. Nobody remained at home but ould Jack Rafferty
an' his wife, who stopped to dress the dinner, for, to tell the truth,
it was to be a great let-out entirely. Maybe, if all was known, too,
that Father M'Sorley was to give them a cast of his office over an'
above the ministher, in regard that Moll's friends were not altogether
satisfied at the kind of marriage which M'Shuttle could give them. The
sorrow may care about that--splice here--splice there--all I can say is,
that when Mrs. Rafferty was goin' to tie up a big bag pudden, in walks
Harry Connolly, the fairy-man, in a rage, and shouts out,--'Blood and
blunderbushes, what are yez here for?'

"'Arrah why, Harry? Why, avick?'

"'Why, the sun's in the suds and the moon in the high Horicks; there's a
clipstick comin' an, an' there you're both as unconsarned as if it was
about to rain mether. Go out and cross yourselves three times in the
name o' the four Mandromarvins, for as prophecy says:--Fill the pot,
Eddy, supernaculum---a blazing star's a rare spectaculum. Go out both of
you and look at the sun, I say, an' ye'll see the condition he's
in--off!'

"Begad, sure enough, Jack gave a bounce to the door, and his wife leaped
like a two-year-ould, till they were both got on a stile beside the
house to see what was wrong in the sky.

"'Arrah, what is it, Jack,' said she; 'can you see anything?'

"'No,' says he, 'sorra the full o' my eye of anything I can spy, barrin'
the sun himself, that's not visible in regard of the clouds. God guard
us! I doubt there's something to happen.'

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

"'If there wasn't, Jack, what 'ud put Harry, that knows so much, in the
state he's in?'

"'I doubt it's this marriage,' said Jack: 'betune ourselves, it's not
over an' above religious for Moll to marry a black-mouth, an' only for
------; but it can't be helped now, though you see not a taste o' the
sun willin' to show his face upon it.'

"'As to that,' says the wife, winkin' wid both her eyes, 'if Gusty's
satisfied wid Moll, it's enough. I know who'll carry the whip hand,
anyhow; but in the manetime let us ax Harry 'ithin what ails the sun.'

"Well, they accordianly went in an' put the question to him:

"'Harry, what's wrong, ahagur? What is it now, for if anybody alive
knows, 'tis yourself?'

"'Ah!' said Harry, screwin' his mouth wid a kind of a dhry smile, 'the
sun has a hard twist o' the cholic; but never mind that, I tell you
you'll have a merrier weddin' than you think, that's all;' and havin'
said this, he put on his hat and left the house.

"Now, Harry's answer relieved them very much, and so, afther calling to
him to be back for the dinner, Jack sat down to take a shough o' the
pipe, and the wife lost no time in tying up the pudden and puttin' it in
the pot to be boiled.

"In this way things went on well enough for a while, Jack smokin' away,
an' the wife cookin' and dhressin' at the rate of a hunt. At last, Jack,
while sittin', as I said, contentedly at the fire, thought he could
persave an odd dancin' kind of motion in the pot that puzzled him a good
deal.

"'Katty,' said he, 'what the dickens is in this pot on the fire?'

"'Nerra thing but the big pudden. Why do you ax?' says she.

"'Why,' said he, 'if ever a pot tuck it into its head to dance a jig,
and this did. Thundher and sparbles, look at it!'

"Begad, it was thrue enough; there was the pot bobbin' up an' down and
from side to side, jiggin' it away as merry

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

as a grig; an' it was quite aisy to see that it wasn't the pot itself,
but what was inside of it, that brought about the hornpipe.

"'Be the hole o' my coat,' shouted Jack, 'there's something alive in it,
or it would never cut sich capers!'

"'Be gorra, there is, Jack; something sthrange entirely has got into it.
Wirra, man alive, what's to be done?'

"Jist as she spoke, the pot seemed to cut the buckle in prime style, and
afther a spring that 'ud shame a dancin'-masther, off flew the lid, and
out bounced the pudden itself, hoppin', as nimble as a pea on a
drum-head, about the floor. Jack blessed himself, and Katty crossed
herself. Jack shouted, and Katty screamed. 'In the name of goodness,
keep your distance; no one here injured you!'

"The pudden, however, made a set at him, and Jack lepped first on a
chair and then on the kitchen table to avoid it. It then danced towards
Katty, who was now repatin' her prayers at the top of her voice, while
the cunnin' thief of a pudden was hoppin' and jiggin' it round her, as
if it was amused at her distress.

"'If I could get the pitchfork,' said Jack, 'I'd dale wid it--by goxty
I'd thry its mettle.'

"'No, no,' shouted Katty, thinkin' there was a fairy in it; 'let us
spake it fair. Who knows what harm it might do? Aisy now,' said she to
the pudden, 'aisy, dear; don't harm honest people that never meant to
offend you. It wasn't us--no, in troth, it was ould Harry Connolly that
bewitched you; pursue *him* if you wish, but spare a woman like me; for,
whisper, dear, I'm not in a condition to be frightened--troth I'm not.'

'The pudden, bedad, seemed to take her at her word, and danced away from
her towards Jack, who, like the wife believin' there was a fairy in it,
an' that spakin' it fair was the best plan, thought he would give it a
soft word as well as her.

"'Plase your honour,' said Jack, 'she only spaiks the truth; an', upon
my voracity, we both feels much oblaiged to your honour for your
quietness. Faith, it's quite clear

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

that if you weren't a gentlemanly pudden all out, you'd act otherwise.
Ould Harry, the rogue, is your mark; he's jist gone down the road there,
and if you go fast you'll overtake him. Be me song, your dancin' masther
did his duty, anyhow. Thank your honour! God speed you, an' may you
never meet wid a parson or alderman in your thravels!'

"Jist as Jack spoke the pudden appeared to take the hint, for it quietly
hopped out, and as the house was directly on the road-side, turned down
towards the bridge, the very way that ould Harry went. It was very
natural, of coorse, that Jack and Katty should go out to see how it
intended to thravel; and, as the day was Sunday, it was but natural,
too, that a greater number of people than usual were passin' the road.
This was a fact; and when Jack and his wife were seen followin' the
pudden, the whole neighbourhood was soon up and afther it.

"'Jack Rafferty, what is it? Katty, ahagur, will you tell us what it
manes?'

"'Why,' replied Katty, 'it's my big pudden that's bewitched, an' it's
now hot foot pursuin' ------;' here she stopped, not wishin' to mention
her brother's name--'*some one* or other that surely put *pishrogues* an
it.' <span id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

"This was enough; Jack, now seein' that he had assistance, found his
courage comin' back to him; so says he to Katty, 'Go home,' says he, an,
lose no time in makin' another pudden as good, an' here's Paddy
Scanlan's wife, Bridget, says she'll let you boil it on her fire, as
you'll want our own to dress the rest o' the dinner: and Paddy himself
will lend me a pitchfork, for purshuin to the morsel of that same pudden
will escape till I let the wind out of it, now that I've the neighbours
to back an' support me,' says Jack.

"This was agreed to, and Katty went back to prepare a fresh pudden,
while Jack an' half the townland pursued the other wid spades, graips,
pitchforks, scythes, flails, and all possible description of
instruments. On the pudden went, however, at the rate of about six Irish
miles an hour, an' sich a chase never was seen. Catholics, Prodestants,
an'\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

Prosbytarians, were all afther it, armed, as I said, an' bad end to the
thing but its own activity could save it. Here it made a hop, and there
a prod was made at it; but off it went, an' some one, as eager to get a
slice at it on the other side, got the prod instead of the pudden. Big
Frank Farrell, the miler of Ballyboulteen, got a prod backwards that
brought a hullabaloo out of him you might hear at the other end of the
parish. One got a slice of a scythe, another a whack of a flail, a third
a rap of a spade that made him look nine ways at wanst.

"'Where is it goin'?' asked one. 'My life for you, it's on it's way to
Meeting. Three cheers for it if it turns to Camtaul.' 'Prod the sowl out
of it, if it's a Prodestan',' shouted the others; 'if it turns to the
left, slice it into pancakes. We'll have no Prodestan' puddens here.'

"Begad, by this time the people were on the point of beginnin' to have a
regular fight about it, when, very fortunately, it took a short turn
down a little by-lane that led towards the Methodist praichin-house, an'
in an instant all parties were in an uproar against it as a Methodist
pudden. 'It's a Wesleyan,' shouted several voices; 'an' by this an' by
that, into a Methodist chapel it won't put a foot today, or we'll lose a
fall. Let the wind out of it. Come boys, where's your pitchforks?'

"The divle purshuin to the one of them, however, ever could touch the
pudden, an' jist when they thought they had it up against the gavel of
the Methodist chapel, begad it gave them the slip, and hops over to the
left, clane into the river, and sails away before all their eyes as
light as an egg-shell.

"Now, it so happened that a little below this place, the demesne-wall of
Colonel Bragshaw was built up to the very edge of the river on each side
of its banks; and so findin' there was a stop put to their pursuit of
it; they went home again, every man, woman, and child of them, puzzled
to think what the pudden was at all, what it meant, or where it was
goin'! Had Jack Rafferty an' his wife been willin' to, let out the
opinion they held about Harry Connolly bewitchin' it, there is no doubt
of it but poor Harry might

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

be badly trated by the crowd, when their blood was up. They had sense
enough, howandiver, to keep that to themselves, for Harry bein' an' ould
bachelor, was a kind friend to the Raffertys. So, of coorse, there was
all kinds of talk about it--some guessin' this, and some guessin'
that--one party sayin' the pudden was of there side, another party
denyin' it, an' insistin' it belonged to them, an' so on.

"In the manetime, Katty Rafferty, for 'fraid the dinner might come
short, went home and made another pudden much about the same size as the
one that had escaped, and bringin' it over to their next neighbour,
Paddy Scanlan's, it was put into a pot and placed on the fire to boil,
hopin' that it might be done in time, espishilly as they were to have
the ministher, who loved a warm slice of a good pudden as well as e'er a
gintleman in Europe.

"Anyhow, the day passed; Moll and Gusty were made man an' wife, an' no
two could be more lovin'. Their friends that had been asked to the
widdin' were saunterin' about in pleasant little groups till
dinner-time, chattin' an' laughin'; but, above all things, sthrivin' to
account for the figaries of the pudden; for, to tell the truth, its
adventures had now gone through the whole parish.

"Well, at any rate, dinner-time was dhrawin' near, and Paddy Scanlan was
sittin' comfortably wid his wife at the fire, the pudden boilen before
their eyes, when in walks Harry Connolly, in a flutter, shoutin'--'Blood
an' blunderbushes, what are yez here for?

"'Arra, why Harry--why, avick?' said Mrs. Scanlan.

"'Why,' said Harry, 'the sun's in the suds an' the moon in the high
Horicks! Here's a clipstick comin' an, an' there you sit as unconsarned
as if it was about to rain mether! Go out both of you, an' look at the
sun, I say, and ye'll see the condition he's in--off!'

"'Ay, but, Harry, what's that rowled up in the tail of your
cothamore <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) (big coat)?'

"'Out wid yez,' said Harry, 'an' pray against the clipstick--the sky's
fallin'!'

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

"Begad, it was hard to say whether Paddy or the wife got out first, they
were so much alarmed by Harry's wild thin face an' piercin' eyes; so out
they went to see what was wondherful in the sky, an' kep' lookin' an'
lookin' in every direction, but not a thing was to be seen, barrin' the
sun shinin' down wid great good-humour, an' not a single cloud in the
sky.

"Paddy an' the wife now came in laughin', to scould Harry, who, no
doubt, was a great wag in his way when he wished. 'Musha, bad scran to
you, Harry------.' They had time to say no more, howandiver, for, as
they were goin' into the door, they met him comin' out of it wid a reek
of smoke out of his tail like a lime-kiln.

"'Harry,' shouted Bridget, 'my sowl to glory, but the tail of your
cothamore's a-fire--you'll be burned. Don't you see the smoke that's out
of it?'

"'Cross yourselves three times,' said Harry, widout stoppin,' or even
lookin' behind him, 'for, as the prophecy says--Fill the pot,
Eddy-----.' They could hear no more, for Harry appeared to feel like a
man that carried something a great deal hotter than he wished, as anyone
might see by the liveliness of his motions, and the quare faces he was
forced to make as he went along.

"'What the dickens is he carryin' in the skirts of his big coat?' asked
Paddy.

"'My sowl to happiness, but maybe he has stole the pudden,' said
Bridget, 'for it's known that many a sthrange thing he does.'

"They immediately examined the pot, but found that the pudden was there
as safe as tuppence, an' this puzzled them the more, to think what it
was he could be carryin' about wid him in the manner he did. But little
they knew what he had done while they were sky-gazin!

"Well, anyhow, the day passed and the dinner was ready, an' no doubt but
a fine gatherin' there was to partake of it. The Prosbytarian ministher
met the Methodist praicher--a divilish stretcher of an appetite he had,
in throth--on their way to Jack Rafferty's, an' as he knew he

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

could take the liberty, why he insisted on his dinin' wid him; for,
afther all, begad, in thim times the clargy of all descriptions lived
upon the best footin' among one another, not all as one as now--but no
matther. Well, they had nearly finished their dinner, when Jack Rafferty
himself axed Katty for the pudden; but, jist as he spoke, in it came as
big as a mess-pot.

"'Gintlemen,' said he, 'I hope none of you will refuse tastin' a bit of
Katty's pudden; I don't mane the dancin' one that tuck to its thravels
today, but a good solid fellow that she med since.'

"'To be sure we won't,' replied the priest; 'so, Jack, put a thrifle on
them three plates at your right hand, and send then, over here to the
clargy, an' maybe,' he said, laughin'--for he was a droll good-humoured
man--'maybe, Jack, we won't set you a proper example.'

"'Wid a heart an' a half, yer reverence an' gintlemen; in troth, it's
not a bad example ever any of you set us at the likes, or ever will set
us, I'll go bail. An' sure I only wish it was betther fare I had for
you; but we're humble people, gintlemen, and so you can't expect to meet
here what you would in higher places.'

"'Betther a male of herbs,' said the Methodist praicher, 'where pace
is------.' He had time to go no farther, however; for much to his
amazement, the priest and the ministher started up from the table jist
as he was goin' to swallow the first spoonful of the pudden, and before
you could say Jack Robinson, started away at a lively jig down the
floor.

"At this moment a neighbour's son came runnin' in, an' tould them that
the parson was comin' to see the new-married couple, an' wish them all
happiness; an' the words were scarcely out of his mouth when he made his
appearance. What to think he knew not, when he saw the ministher footing
it away at the rate of a weddin'. He had very little time, however, to
think; for, before he could sit down, up starts the Methodist praicher,
and clappin' his two fists in his sides chimes in in great style along
wid him.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

"'Jack Rafferty,' says he-and, by the way, Jack was his tenant--'what
the dickens does all this mane?' says he; 'I'm amazed!'

"'The not a particle o' me can tell you,' says Jack; 'but will your
reverence jist taste a morsel o' pudden, merely that the young couple
may boast that you ait at their weddin'; for sure if you wouldn't, who
would?'

"'Well,' says he, 'to gratify them I will; so just a morsel. But, Jack,
this bates Bannagher,' says he again, puttin' the spoonful o' pudden
into his mouth, 'has there been dhrink here?'

"'Oh, the divle a *spudh*,' says Jack, 'for although there's plinty in
the house, faith, it appears the gintlemen wouldn't wait for it. Unless
they tuck it elsewhere, I can make nothin' of this.'

"He had scarcely spoken, when the parson, who was an active man, cut a
caper a yard high, an' you could bless yourself, the three clargy were
hard at work dancin', as if for a wager. Begad, it would be unpossible
for me to tell you the state the whole meetin' was in when they seen
this. Some were hoarse wid laughin'; some turned up their eyes wid
wondher; many thought them mad, an' others thought they had turned up
their little fingers a thrifle too often.

"'Be gory, it's a burnin' shame,' said one, 'to see three black-mouth
clargy in sich a state at this early hour!' 'Thundher an' ounze, what's
over them at all?' says others; 'why, one would think they're bewitched.
Holy Moses, look at the caper the Methodist cuts! An' as for the
Recther, who would think he could handle his feet at such a rate! Be
this an' be that, he cuts the buckle, and does the threblin' step aiquil
to Paddy Horaghan, the dancin'-masther himself? An' see! Bad cess to the
morsel of the parson that's not hard at *Peace upon a trancher*, an' it
of a Sunday too! Whirroo, gintlemen, the fun's in yez afther all--whish!
more power to yez!'

"The sorra's own fun they had, an' no wondher; but judge of what they
felt, when all at once they saw ould Jack\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Rafferty himself bouncin' in among them, and footing it away like the
best o' them. Bedad, no play could come up to it, an' nothin, could be
heard but laughin', shouts of encouragement, and clappin' of hands like
mad. Now the minute Jack Rafferty left the chair where he had been
carvin' the pudden, ould Harry Connolly comes over and claps himself
down in his place, in ordher to send it round, of coorse; an' he was
scarcely sated, when who should make his appearance but Barney Hartigan,
the piper. Barney, by the way, had been sent for early in the day, but
bein' from home when the message for him went, he couldn't come any
sooner.

"'Begorra,' said Barney, 'you're airly at the work, gintlemen! but what
does this mane? But, divle may care, yez; shan't want the music while
there's a blast in the pipes, anyhow!' So sayin' he gave them *Jig
Polthogue*, an' after that *Kiss my Lady*, in his best style.

"In the manetime the fun went on thick an' threefold, for it must be
remimbered that Harry, the ould knave, was at the pudden; an' maybe he
didn't sarve it about in double quick time too. The first he helped was
the bride, and, before you could say chopstick, she was at it hard an'
fast before the Methodist praicher, who gave a jolly spring before her
that threw them into convulsions. Harry liked this, and made up his mind
soon to find partners for the rest; so he accordianly sent the pudden
about like lightnin'; an' to make a long story short, barrin' the piper
himself, there wasn't a pair o' heels in the house but was as busy at
the dancin' as if their lives depinded on it.

"'Barney,' says Harry, 'just taste a morsel o' this pudden; divle the
such a bully of a pudden ever you ett; here, your sowl! thry a snig of
it--it's beautiful.'

"'To be sure I will,' says Barney. 'I'm not the boy to refuse a good
thing; but Harry, be quick, for you know my hands is engaged, an' it
would be a thousand pities not to keep them in music, an' they so well
inclined. Thank you, Harry; begad that is a famous pudden; but blood an'
turnips, what's this for?'

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

"The word was scarcely out of his mouth when he bounced up, pipes an'
all, an dashed into the middle of the party. 'Hurroo, your sowls, let us
make a night of it! The Ballyboulteen boys for ever! Go it, your
reverence--turn your partner--heel an' toe, ministher. Good! Well done
again-Whish! Hurroo! Here's for Ballyboulteen an' the sky over it! '

"Bad luck to the sich a set was seen together in this world, or will
again, I suppose. The worst, however, wasn't come yet, for jist as they
were in the very heat an' fury of the dance, what do you think comes
hoppin' in among them but another pudden, as nimble an' merry as the
first! That was enough; they all had heard of--the ministhers among the
rest--an' most o' them had seen the other pudden, and knew that there
must be a fairy in it, sure enough. Well, as I said, in it comes to the
thick o' them; but the very appearance of it was enough. Off the three
clargy danced, and off the whole weddiners danced afther them, every one
makin' the best of their way home; but not a sowl of them able to break
out of step, if they were to be hanged for it. Throth it wouldn't lave a
laugh in you to see the parson dancin' down the road on his way home,
and the ministher and Methodist praicher cuttin' the buckle as they went
along in the opposite direction. To make short work of it, they all
danced home at last, wid scarce a puff of wind in them; the bride and
bridegroom danced away to bed; an' now, boys, come an' let us dance the
*Horo Lheig* in the barn 'idout. But you see, boys, before we go, an' in
ordher that I may make everything plain, I had as good tell you that
Harry, in crossing the bridge of Ballyboulteen, a couple of miles below
Squire Bragshaw's demesne-wall, saw the pudden floatin' down the
river--the truth is he was waitin' for it; but be this as it may, he
took it out, for the wather had made it as clane as a new pin, and
tuckin' it up in the tail of his big coat, contrived, as you all guess,
I suppose, to change it while Paddy Scanlan an' the wife were examinin'
the sky; an' for the other, he contrived to bewitch it in the same
manner, by gettin' a fairy to go

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

into it, for, indeed, it was purty well known that the same Harry was
hand an' glove wid the *good people*. Others will tell you that it was
half a pound of quicksilver he put into it; but that doesn't stand to
raison. At any rate, boys, I have tould you the adventures of the Mad
Pudden of Ballyboulteen; but I don't wish to tell you many other things
about it that happened--*for fraid I'd tell a lie*." <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[187:1](fip51.htm#fr_37) Perhaps from Irish
*dilse*--*i.e.*, love.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[191:1](fip51.htm#fr_38) Put it under fairy
influence.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[193:1](fip51.htm#fr_39) Irish, *cóta mór*.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[199:1](fip51.htm#fr_40) Some will insist that a
fairy-man or fairy-woman has the power to bewitch a pudding by putting a
fairy into it; whilst others maintain that a competent portion of
quicksilver will make it dance over half the parish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tír-na-n-Og](fip52)
