[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip49)  [Next](fip51) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CONFESSIONS OF TOM BOURKE.

T. CROFTON CROKER.

TOM BOURKE lives in a low, long farm-house, resembling in outward
appearance a large barn, placed at the bottom of the hill, just where
the new road strikes off from the old one, leading from the town of
Kilworth to that of Lismore. He

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

is of a class of persons who are a sort of black swans in Ireland: he is
a wealthy farmer. Tom's father had, in the good old times, when a
hundred pounds were no inconsiderable treasure, either to lend or spend,
accommodated his landlord with that sum, at interest; and obtained as a
return for his civility a long lease about half-a-dozen times more
valuable than the loan which procured it. The old man died worth several
hundred pounds, the greater part of which, with his farm, he bequeathed
to his son, Tom. But besides all this, Tom received from his father,
upon his deathbed, another gift, far more valuable than worldly riches,
greatly as he prized and is still known to prize them. He was invested
with the privilege, enjoyed by few of the sons of men, of communicating
with those mysterious beings called "the good people".

Tom Bourke is a little, stout, healthy, active man, about fifty-five
years of age. His hair is perfectly white, short and bushy behind, but
rising in front erect and thick above his forehead, like a new
clothes-brush. His eyes are of that kind which I have often observed
with persons of a quick, but limited intellect--they are small, grey,
and lively. The large and projecting eyebrows under, or rather within,
which they twinkle, give them an expression of shrewdness and
intelligence, if not of cunning. And this is very much the character of
the man. If you want to make a bargain with Tom Bourke you must act as
if you were a general besieging a town, and make your advances a long
time before you can hope to obtain possession; if you march up boldly,
and tell him at once your object, you are for the most part sure to have
the gates closed in your teeth. Tom does not wish to part with what you
wish to obtain; or another person has been speaking to him for the whole
of the last week. Or, it may be, your proposal seems to meet the most
favourable reception. "Very well, sir"; "That's true, sir"; I'm very
thankful to your honour?" and other expressions of kindness and
confidence greet you in reply to every sentence; and you part from him
wondering how he can have obtained the character which he universally

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

bears, of being a man whom no one can make anything of in a bargain. But
when you next meet him the flattering illusion is dissolved: you find
you are a great deal further from your object than you were when you
thought you had almost succeeded; his eye and his tongue express a total
forgetfulness of what the mind within never lost sight of for an
instant; and you have to begin operations afresh, with the disadvantage
of having put your adversary completely upon his guard.

Yet, although Tom Bourke is, whether from supernatural revealings, or
(as many will think more probable) from the tell-truth experience, so
distrustful of mankind, and so close in his dealings with them, he is no
misanthrope. No man loves better the pleasures of the genial board. The
love of money, indeed, which is with him (and who will blame him?) a
very ruling propensity, and the gratification which it has received from
habits of industry, sustained throughout a pretty long and successful
life, have taught him the value of sobriety, during these seasons, at
least, when a man's business requires him to keep possession of his
senses. He has, therefore, a general rule, never to get drunk but on
Sundays. But in order that it should be a general one to all intents and
purposes, he takes a method which, according to better logicians than he
is, always proves the rule. He has many exceptions; among these, of
course, are the evenings of all the fair and market-days that happen in
his neighbourhood; so also all the days in which funerals, marriages,
and christenings take place among his friends within many miles of him.
As to this last class of exceptions, it may appear at first very
singular, that he is much more punctual in his attendance at the
funerals than at the baptisms or weddings of his friends. This may be
construed as an instance of disinterested affection for departed worth,
very uncommon in this selfish world. But I am afraid that the motives
which lead Tom Bourke to pay more court to the dead than the living are
precisely those which lead to the opposite conduct in the generality of
mankind--a hope of future benefit and a fear

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

of future evil. For the good people, who are a race as powerful as they
are capricious, have their favourites among those who inhabit this
world; often show their affection by easing the objects of it from the
load of this burdensome life; and frequently reward or punish the living
according to the degree of reverence paid to the obsequies and the
memory of the elected dead.

Some may attribute to the same cause the apparently humane and
charitable actions which Tom, and indeed the other members of his
family, are known frequently to perform. A beggar has seldom left their
farm-yard with an empty wallet, or without obtaining a night's lodging,
if required, with a sufficiency of potatoes and milk to satisfy even an
Irish beggar's appetite; in appeasing which, account must usually be
taken of the auxiliary jaws of a hungry dog, and of two or three still
more hungry children, who line themselves well within, to atone for
their nakedness without. If one of the neighbouring poor be seized with
a fever, Tom will often supply the sick wretch with some untenanted hut
upon one of his two large farms (for he has added one to his patrimony),
or will send his labourers to construct a shed at a hedge-side, and
supply straw for a bed while the disorder continues. His wife,
remarkable for the largeness of her dairy, and the goodness of
everything it contains, will furnish milk for whey; and their good
offices are frequently extended to the family of the patient, who are,
perhaps, reduced to the extremity of wretchedness, by even the temporary
suspension of a father's or a husband's labour.

If much of this arises from the hopes and fears to which I above
alluded, I believe much of it flows from a mingled sense of compassion
and of duty, which is sometimes seen to break from an Irish peasant's
heart, even where it happens to be enveloped in a habitual covering of
avarice and fraud; and which I once heard speak in terms not to be
misunderstood: "When we get a deal, 'tis only fair we should give back a
little of it."

It is not easy to prevail on Tom to speak of those good

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

people, with whom he is said to hold frequent and intimate
communications. To the faithful, who believe in their power, and their
occasional delegation of it to him, he seldom refuses, if properly
asked, to exercise his high prerogative when any unfortunate being is
*struck* in his neighbourhood. Still he will not be won unsued: he is at
first difficult of persuasion, and must be overcome by a little gentle
violence. On these occasions he is unusually solemn and mysterious, and
if one word of reward be mentioned he at once abandons the unhappy
patient, such a proposition being a direct insult to his supernatural
superiors. It is true that, as the labourer is worthy of his hire, most
persons gifted as he is do not scruple to receive a token of gratitude
from the patients or their friends *after* their recovery. It is
recorded that a very handsome gratuity was once given to a female
practitioner in this occult science, who deserves to be mentioned, not
only because she was a neighbour and a rival of Tom's, but from the
singularity of a mother deriving her name from her son. Her son's name
was Owen, and she was always called *Owen sa vauher* (Owen's mother).
This person was, on the occasion to which I have alluded, *persuaded* to
give her assistance to a young girl who had lost the use of her right
leg; *Owen sa vauher* found the cure a difficult one. A journey of about
eighteen miles was essential for the purpose, probably to visit one of
the good people, who resided at that distance; and this journey could
only be performed by *Owen sa vauher* travelling upon the back of a
white hen. The visit, however, was accomplished; and at a particular
hour, according to the prediction of this extraordinary woman, when the
hen and her rider were to reach their journey's end, the patient was
seized with an irresistible desire to dance, which she gratified with
the most perfect freedom of the diseased leg, much to the joy of her
anxious family. The gratuity in this case was, as it surely ought to
have been, unusually large, from the difficulty of procuring a hen
willing to go so long a journey with such a rider.

To do Tom Bourke justice, he is on these occasions, as\[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

I have heard from many competent authorities, perfectly disinterested.
Not many months since he recovered a young woman (the sister of a
tradesman living near him), who had been struck speechless after
returning from a funeral, and had continued so for several days. He
steadfastly refused receiving any compensation, saying that even if he
had not as much as would buy him his supper, he could take nothing in
this case, because the girl had offended at the funeral of one of the
*good people* belonging to his own family, and though he would do her a
kindness, he could take none from her.

About the time this last remarkable affair took place, my friend Mr.
Martin, who is a neighbour of Tom's, had some business to transact with
him, which it was exceedingly difficult to bring to a conclusion. At
last Mr. Martin, having tried an quiet means, had recourse to a legal
process, which brought Tom to reason, and the matter was arranged to
their mutual satisfaction, and with perfect good-humour between the
parties. The accommodation took place after dinner at Mr. Martin's
house, and he invited Tom to walk into the parlour and take a glass of
punch, made of some excellent *poteen*, which was on the table: he had
long wished to draw out his highly-endowed neighbour on the subject of
his supernatural powers, and as Mrs. Martin, who was in the room, was
rather a favourite of Tom's, this seemed a good opportunity.

"Well, Tom," said Mr. Martin, "that was a curious business of Molly
Dwyer's, who recovered her speech so suddenly the other day."

"You may say that, sir," replied Tom Bourke; "but I had to travel far
for it: no matter for that now. Your health, ma'am," said he, turning to
Mrs. Martin.

"Thank you, Tom. But I am told you had some trouble once in that way in
your own family," said Mrs. Martin.

"So I had, ma'am; trouble enough: but you were only a child at that
time."

"Come, Tom," said the hospitable Mr. Martin, interrupting

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

him, "take another tumbler;" and he then added, "I wish you would tell
us something of the manner in which so many of your children died. I am
told they dropped off, one after another, by the same disorder, and that
your eldest son was cured in a most extraordinary way, when the
physicians had given him over."

"'Tis true for you, sir," returned Tom; "your father, the doctor (God be
good to him, I won't belie him in his grave), told me. when my fourth
boy was a week sick, that himself and Dr. Barry did all that man could
do for him; but they could not keep him from going after the rest. No
more they could, if the people that took away the rest wished to take
him too. But they left him; and sorry to the heart I am I did not know
before why they were taking my boys from me; if I did, I would not be
left trusting to two of 'em now."

"And how did you find it out, Tom?" inquired Mr. Martin.

"Why, then, I'll tell you, sir," said Bourke. "When your father said
what I told you, I did not know very well what to do. I walked down the
little *bohereen* <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) you know, sir,
that goes to the river-side near Dick Heafy's ground; for 'twas a
lonesome place, and I wanted to think of myself. I was heavy, sir, and
my heart got weak in me, when I thought I was to lose my little boy; and
I did not well know how to face his mother with the news, for she doated
down upon him. Besides, she never got the better of all she cried at his
brother's *berrin* <span id="fr_31"></span>[2](#fn_31) the week before.
As I was going down the *bohereen* I met an old *bocough*, that used to
come about the place once or twice a-year, and used always to sleep in
our barn while he staid in the neighbourhood. So he asked me how I was.
'Bad enough, Shamous,' <span id="fr_32"></span>[3](#fn_32) says I. 'I'm
sorry for your trouble,' says he; 'but you're a foolish man, Mr. Bourke.
Your son would be well enough if you would only do what you ought with
him.' 'What more can I do with him, Shamous?'

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

says I; 'the doctors give him over.' 'The doctors know no more what ails
him than they do what ails a cow when she stops her milk,' says Shamous;
'but go to such a one,' telling me his name, (and try what he'll say to
you.'"

"And who was that, Tom?" asked Mr. Martin.

"I could not tell you that, sir," said Bourke, with a mysterious look;
"howsomever, you often saw him, and he does not live far from this. But
I had a trial of him before; and if I went to him at first, maybe I'd
have now some of them that's gone, and so Shamous often told me. Well,
sir, I went to this man, and he came with me to the house. By course, I
did everything as he bid me. According to his order, I took the little
boy out of the dwelling-house immediately, sick as he was, and made a
bed for him and myself in the cow-house. Well, sir, I lay down by his
side in the bed, between two of the cows, and he fell asleep. He got
into a perspiration, saving your presence, as if he was drawn through
the river, and breathed hard, with a great *impression* on his chest,
and was very bad--very bad entirely through the night. I thought about
twelve o'clock he was going at last, and I was just getting up to go
call the man I told you of; but there was no occasion. My friends were
getting the better of them that wanted to take him away from me. There
was nobody in the cow-house but the child and myself. There was only one
halfpenny candle lighting it, and that was stuck in the wall at the far
end of the house. I had just enough of light where we were lying to see
a person walking or standing near us: and there was no more noise than
it was a churchyard, except the cows chewing the fodder in the stalls.

Just as I was thinking of getting up, as I told you--I won't belie my
father, sir, he was a good father to me--I saw him standing at the
bedside, holding out his right hand to me, and leaning his other on the
stick he used to carry when he was alive, and looking pleasant and
smiling at me, all as if he was telling me not to be afeard, for I would
not lose the child. 'Is that you, father?' says I. He said nothing. 'If
that's you,' says I again, 'for the love of them that's gone,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

let me catch your hand.' And so he did, sir; and his hand was as soft as
a child's. He stayed about as long as you'd be going from this to the
gate below at the end of the avenue, and then went away. In less than a
week the child was as well as if nothing ever ailed him; and there isn't
tonight a healthier boy of nineteen, from this blessed house to the town
of Ballyporeen, across the Kilworth mountains."

"But I think, Tom," said Mr. Martin, "it appears as if you are more
indebted to your father than to the man recommended to you by Shamous;
or do you suppose it was he who made favour with your enemies among the
good people, and that then your father--"

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Bourke, interrupting him; "but don't call
them my enemies. 'Twould not be wishing to me for a good deal to sit by
when they are called so. No offence to you, sir. Here's wishing you a
good health and long life."

"I assure you," returned Mr. Martin, "I meant no offence, Tom; but was
it not as I say?"

"I can't tell you that, sir," said Bourke; "I'm bound down, sir.
Howsoever, you may be sure the man I spoke of and my father, and those
they know, settled it between them."

There was a pause, of which Mrs. Martin took advantage to inquire of Tom
whether something remarkable had not happened about a goat and a pair of
pigeons, at the time of his son's illness--circumstances often
mysteriously hinted at by Tom.

"See that, now," said he, turning to Mr. Martin, "how well she remembers
it! True for you, ma'am. The goat I gave the mistress, your mother, when
the doctors ordered her goats' whey?"

Mrs. Martin nodded assent, and Tom Bourke continued, "Why then, I'll
tell you how that was. The goat was as well as e'er goat ever was, for a
month after she was sent to Killaan, to your father's. The morning after
the night I just told you of, before the child woke, his mother was
standing at the gap leading out of the barn-yard into the

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

road, and she saw two pigeons flying from the town of Kilworth off the
church down towards her. Well, they never stopped, you see, till they
came to the house on the hill at the other side of the river, facing our
farm. They pitched upon the chimney of that house, and after looking
about them for a minute or two, they flew straight across the river, and
stopped on the ridge of the cow-house where the child and I were lying.
Do you think they came there for nothing, sir?"

"Certainly not, Tom," returned Mr. Martin.

"Well, the woman came in to me, frightened, and told me. She began to
cry. 'Whisht, you fool?' says I; '\`tis all for the better.' 'Twas true
for me. What do you think, ma'am; the goat that I gave your mother, that
was seen feeding at sunrise that morning by Jack Cronin, as merry as a
bee, dropped down dead without anybody knowing why, before Jack's face;
and at that very moment he saw two pigeons fly from the top of the house
out of the town, towards the Lismore road. 'Twas at the same time my
woman saw them, as I just told you."

"'Twas very strange, indeed, Tom," said Mr. Martin; "I wish you could
give us some explanation of it."

"I wish I could, sir," was Tom Bourke's answer; "but I'm bound down. I
can't tell but what I'm allowed to tell, any more than a sentry is let
walk more than his rounds."

"I think you said something of having had some former knowledge of the
man that assisted in the cure of your son," said Mr. Martin.

"So I had, sir," returned Bourke. "I had a trial of that man. But that's
neither here nor there. I can't tell you anything about that, sir. But
would you like to know how he got his skill?"

"Oh! very much, indeed," said Mr. Martin.

"But you can tell us his Christian name, that we may know him better
through the story," added Mrs. Martin.

Tom Bourke paused for a minute to consider this proposition.

Well I believe that I may tell you that, anyhow; his

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

name is Patrick. He was always a smart, 'cute <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) boy, and would be a great clerk if he
stuck to it. The first time I knew him, sir, was at My mother's wake. I
was in great trouble, for I did not know where to bury her. Her people
and my father's people--I mean their friends, sir, among the *good
people*--had the greatest battle that was known for many a year, at
Dunmanwaycross, to see to whose churchyard she'd be taken. They fought
for three nights, one after another, without being able to settle it.
The neighbours wondered how long before I buried my mother; but I had my
reasons, though I could not tell them at that time. Well, sir, to make
my story short, Patrick came on the fourth morning and told me he
settled the business, and that day we buried her in Kilcrumper
churchyard, with my father's people."

"He was a valuable friend, Tom," said Mrs. Martin, with difficulty
suppressing a smile. "But you were about to tell how he became so
skilful."

"So I will and welcome," replied Bourke. "Your health, ma'am. I'm
drinking too much of this punch, sir; but to tell the truth, I never
tasted the like of it; it goes down one's throat like sweet oil. But
what was I going to say? Yes--well--Patrick, many a long year ago, was
coming home from a *berrin* late in the evening, and walking by the side
of a river, opposite the big inch, <span id="fr_34"></span>[2](#fn_34)
near Ballyhefaan ford. He had taken a drop, to be sure; but he was only
a little merry, as you may say, and knew very well what he was doing.
The moon was shining, for it was in the month of August, and the river
was as smooth and as bright as a looking-glass. He heard nothing for a
long time but the fall of the water at the mill weir about a mile down
the river, and now and then the crying of the lambs on the other side of
the river. All at once there was a noise of a great number of people
laughing as if they'd break their hearts, and of a piper playing among
them. It came from the inch at the other side of the ford, and he saw,
through the mist

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

that hung over the river, a whole crowd of people dancing on the inch.
Patrick was as fond of a dance, as he was of a glass, and that's saying
enough for him; so he whipped off his shoes and stockings, and away with
him across the ford. After putting on his shoes and stockings at the
other side of the river he walked over to the crowd, and mixed with them
for some time without being minded. He thought, sir, that he'd show them
better dancing than any of themselves, for he was proud of his feet,
sir, and a good right he had, for there was not a boy in the same parish
could foot a double or treble with him. But pwah! his dancing was no
more to theirs than mine would be to the mistress' there. They did not
seem as if they had a bone in their bodies, and they kept it up as if
nothing could tire them. Patrick was 'shamed within himself, for he
thought he had not his fellow in all the country round; and was going
away, when a little old man, that was looking at the company bitterly,
as if he did not like what was going on, came up to him. 'Patrick,' says
he. Patrick started, for he did not think anybody there knew him.
'Patrick,' says he, 'you're discouraged, and no wonder for you. But you
have a friend near you. I'm your friend, and your father's friend, and I
think worse <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) of your little finger
than I do of all that are here, though they think no one is as good as
themselves. Go into the ring and call for a lilt. Don't, be afeard. I
tell you the best of them did not do it as well as you shall, if you
will do as I bid you.' Patrick felt something within him as if he ought
not to gainsay the old man. He went into the ring, and called the piper
to play up the best double he had. And sure enough, all that the others
were able for was nothing to him! He bounded like an eel, now here and
now there, as light as a feather, although the people could hear the
music answered by his steps, that beat time to every turn of it, like
the left foot of the piper. He first danced a hornpipe on the ground.
Then they got a table, and he danced a treble on it that drew down
shouts from the whole company. At last he called for a trencher;

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

and when they saw him, all as if he was spinning on it like a top, they
did not know what to make of him. Some praised him for the best dancer
that ever entered a ring; others hated him because he was better than
themselves; although they had good right to think themselves better than
him or any other man that ever went the long journey."

"And what was the cause of his great success?" inquired Mr. Martin.

"He could not help it, sir," replied Tom Bourke. "They that could make
him do more than that made him do it. Howsomever, when he had done, they
wanted him to dance again, but he was tired, and they could not persuade
him. At last he got angry, and swore a big oath, saving your presence,
that he would not dance a step more; and the word was hardly out of his
mouth when he found himself all alone, with nothing but a white cow
grazing by his side."

"Did he ever discover why he was gifted with these extraordinary powers
in the dance, Tom?" said Mr. Martin.

"I'll tell you that too, sir," answered Bourke, "when I come to it. When
he went home, sir, he was taken with a shivering and went to bed; and
the next day they found he had got the fever, or something like it, for
he raved like as if he was mad. But they couldn't make out what it was
he was saying, though he talked constant. The doctors gave him over. But
it's little they knew what ailed him. When he was, as you may say, about
ten days sick, and everybody thought he was going, one of the neighbours
came in to him with a man, a friend of his, from Ballinlacken, that was
keeping with him some time before. I can't tell you his name either,
only it was Darby. The minute Darby saw Patrick he took a little bottle,
with the juice of herbs in it, out of his pocket, and gave Patrick a
drink of it. He did the same every day for three weeks, and then Patrick
was able to walk about, as stout and as hearty as ever he was in his
life. But he was a long time

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

before he came to himself; and he used to walk the whole day sometimes
by the ditch-side, talking to himself, like as if there was someone
along with him. And so there was, surely, or he wouldn't be the man he
is today.

"I suppose it was from some such companion he learned his skill," said
Mr. Martin.

"You have it all now, sir," replied Bourke. "Darby told him his friends
were satisfied with what he did the night of the dance; and though they
couldn't hinder the fever, they'd bring him over it, and teach him more
than many knew beside him. And so they did. For you see, all the people
he met on the inch that night were friends of a different faction; only
the old man that spoke to him, he was a friend of Patrick's family, and
it went again his heart, you see, that the others were so light and
active, and he was bitter in himself to hear 'em boasting how they'd
dance with any set in the whole country round. So he gave Patrick the
gift that night, and afterwards gave him the skill that makes him the
wonder of all that know him. And to be sure it was only learning he was
at that time when he was wandering in his mind after the fever."

"I have heard many strange stories about that inch near Ballyhefaan
ford," said Mr. Martin. "'Tis a great place for the good people, isn't
it, Tom?"

"You may say that, sir," returned Bourke. "I could tell you a great deal
about it. Many a time I sat for as good as two hours by moonlight, at
th' other side of the river, looking at 'em playing goal as if they'd
break their hearts over it; with their coats and waistcoats off, and
white handkerchiefs on the heads of one party, and red ones on th'
other, just as you'd see on a Sunday in Mr. Simming's big field. I saw
'em. one night play till the moon set, without one party being able to
take the ball from th' other. I'm sure they were going to fight, only
'twas near morning. I'm told your grandfather, ma'am used to see 'em
there too," said Bourke, turning to Mrs. Martin.

"So I have been told, Tom," replied Mrs. Martin. "But don't they say
that the churchyard of Kilcrumper is just

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

as favourite a place with the good people as Ballyhefaan inch?"

"Why, then, maybe you never heard, ma'am, what happened to Davy Roche in
that same churchyard," said Bourke; and turning to Mr. Martin, added,
"'Twas a long time before he went into your service, sir. He was walking
home, of an evening, from the fair of Kilcumber, a little merry, to be
sure, after the day, and he came up with a berrin. So he walked along
with it, and thought it very queer that he did not know a mother's soul
in the crowd but one man, and he was sure that man was dead many years
afore. Howsomever, he went on with the berrin till they came to
Kilcrumper churchyard; and faith, he went in and stayed with the rest,
to see the corpse buried. As soon as the grave was covered, what should
they do but gather about a piper that *come* along with 'em, and fall to
dancing as if it was a wedding. Davy longed to be among 'em (for he
hadn't a bad foot of his own, that time, whatever he may now); but he
was loth to begin, because they all seemed strange to him, only the man
I told you that he thought was dead. Well, at last this man saw what
Davy wanted, and came up to him. 'Davy,' says he, 'take out a partner,
and show what you can do, but take care and don't offer to kiss her.'
'That I won't,' says Davy, 'although her lips were made of honey.' And
with that he made his bow to the purtiest girl in the ring, and he and
she began to dance. 'Twas a jig they danced, and they did it to th'
admiration, do you see, of all that were there. 'Twas all very well till
the jig was over; but just as they had done, Davy, for he had a drop in,
and was warm with the dancing, forgot himself, and kissed his partner,
according to custom. The smack was no sooner off of his lips, you see,
than he was left alone in the churchyard, without a creature near him,
and all he could see was the tall tombstones. Davy said they seemed as
if they were dancing too, but I suppose that was only the wonder that
happened him, and he being a little in drink. Howsomever, he found it
was a great many hours later than he thought it; 'twas near morning

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

when he came home; but they couldn't get a word out of him till the next
day, when he woke out of a dead sleep about twelve o'clock."

When Tom had finished the account of Davy Roche and the berrin, it
became quite evident that spirits, of some sort, were working too strong
within him to admit of his telling many more tales of the good people.
Tom seemed conscious of this. He muttered for a few minutes broken
sentences concerning churchyards, river-sides, leprechauns, and *dina
magh*, <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) which were quite
unintelligible, perhaps, to himself, certainly to Mr. Martin and his
lady. At length he made a slight motion of the head upwards, as if he
would say, "I can talk no more"; stretched his arm on the table, upon
which he placed the empty tumbler slowly, and with the most knowing and
cautious air; and rising from his chair, walked, or rather rolled, to
the parlour door. Here he turned round to face his host and hostess; but
after various ineffectual attempts to bid them good-night, the words, as
they rose, being always choked by a violent hiccup, while the door,
which he held by the handle, swung to and fro, carrying his unyielding
body along with it, he was obliged to depart in silence. The cow-boy,
sent by Tom's wife, who knew well what sort of allurement detained him
when he remained out after a certain hour, was in attendance to conduct
his master home. I have no doubt that he returned without meeting any
material injury, as I know that within the last month he was, to use his
own words, "as stout and hearty a man as any of his age in the county
Cork."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[176:1](fip50.htm#fr_30) *Bohereen*, or
*bogheen*, *i.e.*, a green lane.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[176:2](fip50.htm#fr_31) *Berrin*, burying.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[176:3](fip50.htm#fr_32) Shamous, James.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[180:1](fip50.htm#fr_33) *'Cute*, acute.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[180:2](fip50.htm#fr_34) *Inch*, low meadow
ground near a river.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[181:1](fip50.htm#fr_35) Worse, more.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[185:1](fip50.htm#fr_36) *Daoine maithe*,
*i.e.*, the good people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Pudding Bewitched, by William Carleton](fip51)
