[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip58)  [Next](fip60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### THE PRIEST'S SOUL <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)

Lady Wilde

In former days there were great schools in Ireland, where every sort of
learning was taught to the people, and even the poorest had more
knowledge at that time than many a gentleman has now. But as to the
priests, their learning was above all, so that the fame of Ireland went
over the whole world, and many kings from foreign lands used to send
their sons all the way to Ireland to be brought up in the Irish schools.

Now, at this time there was a little boy learning at one of them who was
a wonder to everyone for his cleverness. His parents were only labouring
people, and of course poor; but young as he was, and as poor as he was,
no king's or lord's son could come up to him in learning. Even the
masters were put to shame; for when they were trying to teach him he
would tell them something they never heard of before, and show them
their ignorance. One of his great triumphs was in argument; and he would
go on till he proved to you that black was white, and then when you gave
in, for no one could beat him in talk, he would turn round and show you
that white was black, or maybe that there was no colour at all in the
world. When he grew up his poor father and mother were so proud of him
that they resolved to make him a priest, which they did at last, though
they nearly starved themselves to get the money. Well, such another
learned man was not in Ireland, and he was as great in argument as ever,
so that no one could stand before him. Even the bishops tried to talk to
him. but he showed them at once they knew nothing at all.

Now. there were no schoolmasters in those times, but it was the priests
taught the people; and as this man was the cleverest in Ireland, all the
foreign kings sent their sons to him, as long as he had house-room to
give them. So he

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

grew very proud, and began to forget how low he had been, and worst of
all, even to forget God, who had made him what he was. And the pride of
arguing got hold of him, so that from one thing to another he went on to
prove that there was no Purgatory, and then no Hell, and then no Heaven,
and then no God; and at last that men had no souls, but were no more
than a dog or a cow, and when they died there was an end of them.
"Whoever saw a soul?" he would say. "I you can show me one, I will
believe." No one could make any answer to this; and at last they all
came to believe that as there was no other world, everyone might do what
they liked in this; the priest setting the example, for he took a
beautiful young girl to wife. But as no priest or bishop in the whole
land could be got to marry them, he was obliged to read the service for
himself. It was a great scandal, yet no one dared to say a word, for all
the king's sons were on his side, and would have slaughtered anyone who
tried to prevent his wicked goings-on. Poor boys; they all believed in
him, and thought every word he said was the truth. In this way his
notions began to spread about, and the whole world was going to the bad,
when one night an angel came down from Heaven, and told the priest he
had but twenty-four hours to live. He began to tremble, and asked for a
little more time.

But the angel was stiff, and told him that could not be.

"What do you want time for, you sinner?" he asked.

"Oh sir, have pity on my poor soul!" urged the priest.

"Oh no! You have a soul then," said the angel. "Pray, how did you find
that out?"

"It has been fluttering in me ever since you appeared," answered the
priest. "What a fool I was not to think of it before."

"A fool, indeed," said the angel. "What good was all your learning, when
it could not tell you that you had a soul?"

"Ah, my lord," said the priest, "I am to die, tell me how soon I may be
in Heaven?"

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

"Never," replied the angel. "You denied there was a Heaven."

"Then, my lord, may I go to Purgatory?"

"You denied Purgatory also; you must go straight to Hell," said the
angel.

"But, my lord, I denied Hell also," answered the priest, "so you can't
send me there either."

The angel was a little puzzled.

"Well," said he, "I'll tell you what I can do for you. You may either
live now on earth for a hundred years, enjoying every pleasure, and then
be cast into Hell for ever; or you may die in twenty-four hours in the
most horrible torments, and pass through Purgatory, there to remain till
the Day of Judgment, if only you can find some one person that believes,
and through his belief mercy will be vouchsafed to you, and your soul
will be saved."

The priest did not take five minutes to make up his mind.

"I will have death in the twenty-four hours," he said, "so that my soul
may be saved at last."

On this the angel gave him directions as to what he was to do, and left
him.

Then immediately the priest entered the large room where all the
scholars and the kings' sons were seated, and called out to them--

"Now, tell me the truth, and let none fear to contradict me; tell me
what is your belief--have men souls?"

"Master," they answered, "once we believed that men had souls; but
thanks to your teaching, we believe so no longer. There is no Hell, and
no Heaven, and no God. This is our belief, for it is thus you taught
us."

Then the priest grew pale with fear, and cried out--

"Listen! I taught you a lie. There is a God, and man has an immortal
soul. I believe now all I denied before."

But the shouts of laughter that rose up drowned the priest's voice, for
they thought he was only trying them for argument.

"Prove it, master," they cried. "Prove it. Who has ever seen God? Who
has ever seen the soul?"

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

And the room was stirred with their laughter.

The priest stood up to answer them, but no word could he utter. All his
eloquence, all his powers of argument had gone from him; and he could do
nothing but wring his hands and cry out, "There is a God! there is a
God! Lord have mercy on my soul!"

And they all began to mock him! and repeat his own words that he had
taught them--

"Show him to us; show us your God." And he fled from them, groaning with
agony, for he saw that none believed; and how, then could his soul be
saved?

But he thought next of his wife "She will believe," he said to himself;
"women never give up God."

And he went to her; but she told him that she believed only what he
taught her, and that a good wife should believe in her husband first and
before and above all things in Heaven or earth.

Then despair came on him, and he rushed from the house, and began to ask
every one he met if they believed. But the same answer came from one and
all--"We believe only what you have taught us", for his doctrine had
spread far and wide through the country.

Then he grew half mad with fear, for the hours were passing, and he
flung himself down on the ground in a lonesome spot, and wept and
groaned in terror, for the time was coming fast when he must die.

Just then a little child came by. "God save you kindly," said the child
to him.

The priest started up.

"Do you believe in God?" he asked.

"I have come from a far country to learn about him," said the child.
"Will your honour direct me to the best school they have in these
parts?"

"The best school and the best teacher is close by," said the priest, and
he named himself.

"Oh, not to that man," answered the child, "for I am told he denies God,
and Heaven, and Hell, and even that

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

man has a soul, because he cannot see it; but I would soon put him
down."

The priest looked at him earnestly. "How?" he inquired.

"Why," said the child, "I would ask him if he believed he had life to
show me his life."

"But he could not do that, my child," said the priest. "Life cannot be
seen; we have it, but it is invisible."

"Then if we have life, though we cannot see it, we may also have a soul,
though it is invisible," answered the child.

When the priest heard him speak these words, he fell down on his knees
before him, weeping for joy, for now he know his soul was safe; he had
met one at last that believed. And he told the child his whole
story--all his wickedness, and pride, and blasphemy against the great
God; and how the angel had come to him, and told him of the only way in
which he could be saved, through the faith and prayers of someone that
believed.

"Now, then," he said to the child, "take this penknife and strike it
into my breast, and go on stabbing the flesh until you see the paleness
of death on my face. Then watch--for a living thing will soar from my
body as I die, and you will then know that my soul has ascended to the
presence of God. And when you see this thing, make haste and run to my
school, and call on all my scholars to come and see that the soul of
their master has left the body, and that all he taught them was a lie,
for that there is a God who punishes sin, and a Heaven and a Hell, and
that man has an immortal soul destined for eternal happiness or misery."

"I will pray," said the child, "to have courage to do this work."

And he kneeled down and prayed. Then when he rose up he took the
penknife and struck it into the priest's heart, and struck and struck
again till all the flesh was lacerated; but still the priest lived,
though the agony was horrible, for he could not die until the
twenty-four hours had expired.

At last the agony seemed to cease, and the stillness of

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

death settled on his face. Then the child, who was watching, saw a
beautiful living creature, with four snow-white wings, mount from. the
dead man's body into the air and go fluttering round his head.

So he ran to bring the scholars; and when they saw it, they all knew it
was the soul of their master; and they watched with wonder and awe until
it passed from sight into the clouds.

And this was the first butterfly that was ever seen in Ireland; and now
all men know that the butterflies are the souls of the dead, waiting for
the moment when they may enter Purgatory, and so pass through torture to
purification and peace.

But the schools of Ireland were quite deserted after that time, for
people said, What is the use of going so far to learn, when the wisest
man in all Ireland did not know if he had a soul till he was near losing
it, and was only saved at last through the simple belief of a little
child.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[215:1](fip59.htm#fr_51.md) *Ancient Legends of
Ireland*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Priest of Coloony](fip60.md)
