[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip63)  [Next](fip65) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

# THE DEVIL.

### THE DEMON CAT. <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55)

LADY WILDE.

THERE was a woman in Connemara, the wife of a fisherman; as he had
always good luck, she had plenty of fish at all times stored away in the
house ready for market. But, to her great annoyance, she found that a
great cat used to come in at night and devour all the best and finest
fish. So she kept a big stick by her, and determined to watch.

One day, as she and a woman were spinning together, the house suddenly
became quite dark; and the door was burst open as if by the blast of the
tempest, when in walked a huge black cat, who went straight up to the
fire, then turned round and growled at them.

"Why, surely this is the devil," said a young girl, who was by, sorting
fish.

"I'll teach you how to call me names," said the cat; and, jumping at
her, he scratched her arm till the blood came. "There, now," he said,
"you will be more civil another time when a gentleman comes to see you."
And with that he walked over to the door and shut it close, to prevent
any of them going out, for the poor young girl, while crying loudly from
fright and pain, had made a desperate rush to get away.

Just then a man was going by, and hearing the cries, he pushed open the
door and tried to get in; but the cat stood

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

on the threshold, and would let no one pass. On this the man attacked
him with his stick, and gave him a sound blow; the cat, however, was
more than a match in the fight, for it flew at him and tore his face and
hands so badly that the man at last took to his heels and ran away as
fast as he could.

"Now, it's time for my dinner," said the cat, going up to examine the
fish that was laid out on the tables. "I hope the fish is good today.
Now, don't disturb me, nor make a fuss; I can help myself." With that he
jumped up, and began to devour all the best fish, while he growled at
the woman.

"Away, out of this, you wicked beast," she cried, giving it a blow with
the tongs that would have broken its back only it was a devil; "out of
this, no fish you have today."

But the cat only grinned at her, and went on tearing and spoiling and
devouring the fish, evidently not a bit the worse for the blow. On this,
both the women attacked it with sticks, and struck hard blows enough to
kill it, on which the cat glared at them, and spit fire; then, making a
leap, it tore their heads and arms till the blood came, and the
frightened women rushed shrieking from the house.

But presently the mistress returned, carrying with her a bottle of holy
water; and, looking in, she saw the cat still devouring the fish, and
not minding. So she crept over quietly and threw holy water on it
without a word. No sooner was this done than a dense black smoke filled
the place, through which nothing was seen but the two red eyes of the
cat, burning like coals of fire. Then the smoke gradually cleared away,
and she saw the body of the creature burning slowly till it became
shrivelled and black like a cinder, and finally disappeared. And from
that time the fish remained untouched and safe from harm, for the power
of the evil one was broken, and the demon cat was seen no more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[229:1](fip64.htm#fr_55) *Ancient Legends of
Ireland*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Long Spoon, by Patrick Kennedy](fip65)
