[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip68)  [Next](fip70.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GIANT'S STAIRS <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md)

T. Crofton Croker

On the road between Passage and Cork there is an old mansion called
Ronayne's Court. It may be easily known from the stack of chimneys and
the gable-ends, which are to be seen, look at it which way you will.
Here it was that Maurice Ronayne and his wife Margaret Gould kept house,
as may be learned to this day from the great old chimney-piece, on which
is carved their arms. They were a mighty worthy couple, and had but one
son, who was called Philip, after no less a person than the King of
Spain.

Immediately on his smelling the cold air of this world the child
sneezed, which was naturally taken to be a good sign of his having a
clear head; and the subsequent rapidity of his learning was truly
amazing, for on the very first day a primer was put into his hands he
tore out the A, B, C page and destroyed it, as a thing quite beneath his
notice. No wonder, then, that both father and mother were proud of their
heir, who gave such indisputable proofs of genius, or, as they called it
in that part of the world, "*genus*".

One morning, however, Master Phil, who was then just

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

seven years old, was missing, and no one could tell what had become of
him: servants were sent in all directions to seek him, on horseback and
on foot, but they returned without any tidings of the boy, whose
disappearance altogether was most unaccountable. A large reward was
offered, but it produced them no intelligence, and years rolled away
without Mr. and Mrs. Ronayne having obtained any satisfactory account of
the fate of their lost child.

There lived at this time, near Carrigaline, one Robert Kelly, a
blacksmith by trade. He was what is termed a handy man, and his
abilities were held in much estimation by the lads and the lasses of the
neighbourhood; for independent of shoeing horses, which he did to great
perfection, and making plough-irons, he interpreted dreams for the young
women, sung "Arthur O'Bradley" at their weddings, and was so
good-natured a fellow at a christening, that he was gossip to half the
country round.

Now it happened that Robin had a dream himself, and young Philip Ronayne
appeared to him in it, at the dead hour of the night. Robin thought he
saw the boy mounted upon a beautiful white horse, and that he told him
how he was made a page to the giant Mahon MacMahon, who had carried him
off, and who held his court in the hard heart of the rock. "The seven
years--my time of service--are clean out, Robin," said he, "and if you
release me this night I will be the making of you for ever after."

"And how will I know," said Robin-cunning enough, even in his
sleep--"but this is all a dream?"

'Take that," said the boy, "for a token"--and at the word the white
horse struck out with one of his hind legs, and gave poor Robin such a
kick in the forehead that, thinking he was a dead man, he roared as loud
as he could after his brains, and woke up, calling a thousand murders.
He found himself in bed, but he had the mark of the blow, the regular
print of a horse-shoe, upon his forehead as red as blood; and Robin
Kelly, who never before found himself puzzled at the dream of any other
person, did not know what to think of his own.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

Robin was well acquainted with the Giant's Stairs--as, indeed, who is
not that knows the harbour? They consist of great masses of rock, which,
piled one above another, rise like a flight of steps from very deep
water, against the bold cliff of Carrigmahon. Nor are they badly suited
for stairs to those who have legs of sufficient length to stride over a
moderate-sized house, or to enable them to clear the space of a mile in
a hop, step, and jump. Both these feats the giant MacMahon was said to
have performed in the days of Finnian glory; and the common tradition of
the country placed his dwelling within the cliff up whose side the
stairs led.

Such was the impression which the dream made on Robin, that he
determined to put its truth to the test. It occurred to him, however,
before setting out on his adventure, that a plough-iron may be no bad
companion, as, from experience, he knew that it was an excellent
knock-down argument, having on more occasions than one settled a little
disagreement very quietly: so, putting one on his shoulder, off he
marched, in the cool of the evening, through Glaun a Thowk (the Hawk's
Glen) to Monkstown. Here an old gossip of his (Tom Clancey by name)
lived, who on hearing Robin's dream, promised him the use of his skiff,
and moreover, offered to assist in rowing it to the Giant's Stairs.

After supper, which was of the best, they embarked. It was a beautiful
still night, and the little boat glided swiftly along. The regular dip
of the oars, the distant song of the sailor, and sometimes the voice of
a belated traveller at the ferry of Carrigaloe, alone broke the
quietness of the land and sea and sky. The tide was in their favour, and
in a few minutes Robin and his gossip rested on their oars under the
dark shadow of the Giant's Stairs. Robin looked anxiously for the
entrance to the Giant's palace, which, it was said, may be found by any
one seeking it at midnight; but no such entrance could he see. His
impatience had hurried him there before that time, and after waiting a
considerable space in a state of suspense not to be
described,\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

Robin, with pure vexation, could not help exclaiming to his companion,
"'Tis a pair of fools we are, Tom Clancey, for coming here at all on the
strength of a dream."

"And whose doing is it," said Tom, "but your own?"

At the moment he spoke they perceived a faint glimmering of light to
proceed from the cliff, which gradually increased until a porch big
enough for a king's palace unfolded itself almost on a level with the
water. They pulled the skiff towards the opening, and Robin Kelly,
seizing his plough-iron, boldly entered with a strong hand and a stout
heart. Wild and strange was that entrance, the whole of which appeared
formed of grim and grotesque faces, blending so strangely each with the
other that it was impossible to define any: the chin of one formed the
nose of another; what appeared to be a fixed and stem eye, if dwelt
upon, changed to a gaping mouth; and the lines of the lofty forehead
grew into a majestic and flowing beard. The more Robin allowed himself
to contemplate the forms around him, the more terrific they became; and
the stony expression of this crowd of faces assumed a savage ferocity as
his imagination converted feature after feature into a different shape
and character. Losing the twilight in which these indefinite forms were
visible, he advanced through a dark and devious passage, whilst a deep
and rumbling noise sounded as if the rock was about to close upon him,
and swallow him up alive for ever. Now, indeed, poor Robin felt afraid.

"Robin, Robin," said he, "if you were a fool for coming here, what in
the name of fortune are you now?" But, as before, he had scarcely
spoken, when he saw a small light twinkling through the darkness of the
distance, like a star in the midnight sky. To retreat was out of the
question; for so many turnings and windings were in the passage, that he
considered he had but little chance of making his way back. He,
therefore, proceeded towards the bit of light, and came at last into a
spacious chamber, from the roof of which hung the solitary lamp that had
guided him. Emerging from such profound gloom the single lamp afforded
Robin

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

abundant light to discover several gigantic figures seated round a
massive stone table, as if in serious deliberation, but no word
disturbed the breathless silence which prevailed. At the head of this
table sat Mahon MacMahon himself, whose majestic beard had taken root,
and in the course of ages grown into the stone slab. He was the first
who perceived Robin; and instantly starting up, drew his long beard from
out the huge piece of rock in such haste and with so sudden a jerk that
it was shattered into a thousand pieces.

"What seek you?" he demanded in a voice of thunder.

"I come," answered Robin, with as much boldness as he could put on, for
his heart was almost fainting within him; "I come," said he, "to claim
Philip Ronayne, whose time of service is out this night."

"And who sent you here?" said the giant.

"'Twas of my own accord I came," said Robin.

"Then you must single him out from among my pages," said the giant; "and
if you fix on the wrong one, your life is forfeit. Follow me." He led
Robin into a hall of vast extent and fined with lights; along either
side of which were rows of beautiful children, all apparently seven
years old, and none beyond that age, dressed in green, and every one
exactly dressed alike.

"Here," said Mahon, "you are free to take Philip Ronayne, if you will;
but, remember, I give you but one choice."

Robin was sadly perplexed; for there were hundreds upon hundreds of
children; and he had no very clear recollection of the boy he sought.
But he walked along the hall, by the side of Mahon, as if nothing was
the matter, although his great iron dress clanked fearfully at every
step, sounding louder than Robin's own sledge battering on his anvil.

They had nearly reached the end without speaking, when Robin, seeing
that the only means he had was to make friends with the giant,
determined to try what effect a few soft words might have.

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

"'Tis a fine wholesome appearance the poor children carry," remarked
Robin, "although they have been here so long shut out from the fresh air
and the blessed light of heaven. 'Tis tenderly your honour must have
reared them!"'

"Ay," said the giant, "that is true for you; so give me your hand; for
you are, I believe, a very honest fellow for a blacksmith."

Robin at the first look did not much like the huge size of the hand,
and, therefore, presented his plough-iron, which the giant seizing,
twisted in his grasp round and round again as if it had been a potato
stalk. On seeing this all the children set up a shout of laughter. In
the midst of their mirth Robin thought he heard his name called; and all
ear and eye, he put his hand on the boy who he fancied had spoken,
crying out at the same time, "Let me live or die for it, but this is
young Phil Ronayne."

"It is Philip Ronayne--happy Philip Ronayne," said his young companions;
and in an instant the hall became dark. Crashing noises were heard, and
all was in strange confusion; but Robin held fast his prize, and found
himself lying in the grey dawn of the morning at the head of the Giant's
Stairs with the boy clasped in his arms.

Robin had plenty of gossips to spread the story of his wonderful
adventure: Passage, Monkstown, Carrigaline--the whole barony of
Kerricurrihy rung with it.

"Are you quite sure, Robin, it is young Phil Ronayne you have brought
back with you?" was the regular question; for although the boy had been
seven years away, his appearance now was just the same as on the day he
was missed. He had neither grown taller nor older in look, and he spoke
of things which had happened before he was carried off as one awakened
from sleep, or as if they had occurred yesterday.

"Am I sure? Well, that's a queer question," was Robin's reply; "Seeing
the boy has the blue eye of the mother, with the foxy hair of the
father; to say nothing of the *purty* wart on the right side of his
little nose."

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

However Robin Kelly may have been questioned, the worthy couple of
Ronayne's Court doubted not that he was the deliverer of their child
from the power of the giant MacMahon; and the reward they bestowed on
him equalled their gratitude.

Philip Ronayne lived to be an old man; and he was remarkable to the day
of his death for his skill in working brass and iron, which it was
believed he had learned during his seven years' apprenticeship to the
giant Mahon MacMahon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_61"></span>[260:1](fip69.htm#fr_61.md) *Fairy Legends of the
South of Ireland*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Legend of Knockmany, by William Carleton](fip70.md)
