[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip60)  [Next](fip62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

### THE STORY OF THE LITTLE BIRD <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)

T. Crofton Croker

MANY years ago there was a very religious and holy man, one of the monks
of a convent, and he was one day kneeling at his prayers in the garden
of his monastery, when he heard a little bird singing in one of the
rose-trees of the garden, and there never was anything that he had heard
in the world so sweet as the song of that little bird.

And the holy man rose up from his knees where he was kneeling at his
prayers to listen to its song; for he thought he never in all his life
heard anything so heavenly.

And the little bird, after singing for some time longer on the
rose-tree, flew away to a grove at some distance from the monastery, and
the holy man followed it to listen to its singing, for he felt as if he
would never be tired of listening to the sweet song it was singing out
of its throat.

And the little bird after that went away to another distant tree, and
sung there for a while, and then to another tree, and so on in the same
manner, but ever farther and farther away from the monastery, and the
holy man still following it farther, and farther, and farther still
listening delighted to its enchanting song.

But at last he was obliged to give up, as it was growing late in the
day, and he returned to the convent; and as he approached it in the
evening, the sun was setting in the west with all the most heavenly
colours that were ever seen in the world, and when he came into the
convent, it was nightfall.

And he was quite surprised at everything he saw, for they were all
strange faces about him in the monastery that he had never seen before,
and the very place itself, and everything about it, seemed to be
strangely altered; and, altogether, it seemed entirely different from
what it was when he had left in the morning; and the garden was not

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

like the garden where he had been kneeling at his devotion when he first
heard the singing of the little bird.

And while he was wondering at all he saw, one of the monks of the
convent came up to him, and the holy man questioned him, "Brother, what
is the cause of all these strange changes that have taken place here
since the morning?"

And the monk that he spoke to seemed to wonder greatly at his question,
and asked him what he meant by the change since morning? for, sure,
there was no change; that all was just as before. And then he said,
Brother, why do you ask these strange questions, and what is your name?
for you wear the habit of our order, though we have never seen you
before."

So upon this the holy man told his name. and said that he had been at
mass in the chapel in the morning before he had wandered away from the
garden listening to the song of a little bird that was singing among the
rose-trees, near where he was kneeling at his prayers.

And the brother, while he was speaking, gazed at him very earnestly, and
then told him that there was in the convent a tradition of a brother of
his name, who had left it two hundred years before, but that what was
become of him was never known.

And while he was speaking, the holy man said, "My hour of death is come;
blessed be the name of the Lord for all his mercies to me, through the
merits of his only-begotten Son."

And he kneeled down that very moment, and said, "Brother, take my
confession, for my soul is departing."

And he made his confession, and received his absolution, and was
anointed, and before midnight he died.

The little bird, you see, was an angel, one of the cherubims or
seraphims; and that was the way the Almighty was pleased in His mercy to
take to Himself the soul of that holy man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[222:1](fip61.htm#fr_54) *Amulet*, 1827. T. C.
Croker wrote this, he says, word for word as he heard it from an old
woman at a holy well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conversion Of King Laoghair's Daughters](fip62)
