[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip75)  [Next](fip77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DONALD AND HIS NEIGHBOURS.

From Hibernian Tales. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)

Hudden and Dudden and Donald O'Nery were near neighbours in the barony
of Balinconlig, and ploughed with three bullocks; but the two former,
envying the present

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

prosperity of the latter, determined to kill his bullock, to prevent his
farm being properly cultivated and laboured, that going back in the
world he might be induced to sell his lands, which they meant to get
possession of. Poor Donald finding his bullock killed, immediately
skinned it, and throwing the skin over his shoulder, with the fleshy
side out, set off to the next town with it, to dispose of it to the best
of his advantage. Going along the road a magpie flew on the top of the
hide, and began picking it, chattering all the time. The bird had been
taught to speak, and imitate the human voice, and Donald, thinking he
understood some words it was saying, put round his hand and caught hold
of it. Having got possession of it, he put it under his great-coat, and
so went to town. Having sold the hide, he went into an inn to take a
dram, and following the landlady into the cellar, he gave the bird a
squeeze which made it chatter some broken accents that surprised her
very much. "What is that I hear?" said she to Donald. "I think it is
talk, and yet I do not understand." "Indeed," said Donald, "it is a bird
I have that tells me everything, and I always carry it with me to know
when there is any danger. Faith," says he, "it says you have far better
liquor than you are giving me." "That is strange," said she, going to
another cask of better quality, and asking him if he would sell the
bird. "I will," said Donald, "if I get enough for it." I will fill your
hat with silver if you leave it with me." Donald was glad to hear the
news, and taking the silver, set off, rejoicing at his good luck. He had
not been long at home until he met with Hudden and Dudden. "Mr.," said
he, "you thought you had done me a bad turn, but you could not have done
me a better; for look here, what I have got for the hide," showing them
a hatful of silver; "you never saw such a demand for hides in your life
as there is at present." Hudden and Dudden that very night killed their
bullocks, and set out the next morning to sell their hides. On coming to
the place they went through all the merchants, but could only get a
trifle for them; at last they had to take what they

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

could get, and came home in a great rage, and vowing revenge on poor
Donald. He had a pretty good guess how matters would turn out, and he
being under the kitchen window, he was afraid they would rob him, or
perhaps kill him when asleep, and on that account when he was going to
bed he left his old mother in his place, and lay down in her bed, which
was in the other side of the house, and they taking the old woman for
Donald, choked her in her bed, but he making some noise, they had to
retreat, and leave the money behind them, which grieved them very much.
However, by daybreak, Donald got his mother on his back, and carried her
to town. Stopping at a well, he fixed his mother with her staff, as if
she was stooping for a drink, and then went into a public-house
convenient and called for a dram. "I wish," said he to a woman that
stood near him, "you would tell my mother to come in; she is at yon well
trying to get a drink, and she is hard of hearing; if she does not
observe you, give her a little shake and tell her that I want her." The
woman called her several times, but she seemed to take no notice; at
length she went to her and shook her by the arm, but when she let her go
again, she tumbled on her head into the well, and, as the woman thought,
was drowned. She, in her great surprise and fear at the accident, told
Donald what had happened. "O mercy," said he, "what is this?" He ran and
pulled her out of the well, weeping and lamenting all the time, and
acting in such a manner that you would imagine that he had lost his
senses. The woman, on the other hand, was far worse than Donald, for his
grief was only feigned, but she imagined herself to be the cause of the
old woman's death. The inhabitants of the town hearing what had
happened, agreed to make Donald up a good sum of money for his loss, as
the accident happened in their place, and Donald brought a greater sum
home with him than he got for the magpie. They buried Donald's mother,
and as soon as he saw Hudden he showed them the last purse of money he
had got. "You thought to kill me last night," said he, "but it was good

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

for me it happened on my mother, for I got all the purse for her to make
gunpowder."

That very night Hudden and Dudden killed their mothers, and the next
morning set off with them to town. On coming to the town with their
burthen on their backs, they went up and down crying, "Who will buy old
wives for gunpowder," so that everyone laughed at them, and the boys at
last clotted them out of the place. They then saw the cheat, and vowed
revenge on Donald, buried the old women, and set off in pursuit of him.
Coming to his house they found him sitting at his breakfast, and seizing
him, put him in a sack, and went to drown him in a river at some
distance. As they were going along the highway they raised a hare, which
they saw had but three feet, and throwing off the sack, ran after her,
thinking by her appearance she would be easily taken. In their absence
there came a drover that way, and hearing Donald singing in the sack,
wondered greatly what could be the matter. "What is the reason," said
he, "that you are singing, and you confined?" "O, I am going to heaven,"
said Donald, "and in a short time I expect to be free from trouble." "O
dear," said the drover, "what will I give you if you let me to your
place?" "Indeed, I do not know," said he, "it would take a good sum." "I
have not much money," said the drover, "but I have twenty head of fine
cattle, which I will give you to exchange places with me." "Well," says
Donald, "I do not care if I should lose the sack, and I will come out."
In a moment the drover liberated him, and went into the sack himself,
and Donald drove home the fine heifers, and left them in his pasture.

Hudden and Dudden having caught the hare, returned, and getting the sack
on one of their backs, carried Donald, as they thought, to the river and
threw him in, where he immediately sank. They then marched home,
intending to take immediate possession of Donald's property, but how
great was their surprise when they found him safe at home before them,
with such a fine head of cattle, whereas they knew he had none before.
"Donald," said they, "what is

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

all this? We thought you were drowned, and yet you are here before us."
"Ah!" said he, "if I had but help along with me when you threw me in, it
would have been the best job ever I met with, for of all the sight of
cattle and gold that ever was seen is there, and no one to own them, but
I was not able to manage more than what you see, and I could show you
the spot where you might get hundreds." They both swore they would be
his friend, and Donald accordingly led them to a very deep part of the
river, and lifted up a stone. "Now," said he, "watch this," throwing it
into the stream; "there is the very place, and go in, one of you first,
and if you want help, you have nothing to do but call." Hudden jumping
in, and sinking to the bottom, rose up again, and making a bubbling
noise, as these do that are drowning, attempted to speak, but could not.
"What is that he is saying now?" says Dudden. "Faith," says Donald, "he
is calling for help; don't you hear him? Stand about," said he, running
back, "till I leap in. I know how to do it better than any of you."
Dudden, to have the advantage of him, jumped in off the bank, and was
drowned along with Hudden, and this was the end of Hudden and Dudden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[299:1](fip76.htm#fr_69) A chap-book mentioned
by Thackeray in his *Irish Sketch Book*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Jackdaw](fip77)
