[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip77)  [Next](fip79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE STORY OF CONN-EDA; OR THE GOLDEN APPLES OF LOUGH ERNE. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70)

Translated from the original Irish of the Story-teller,  
ABRAHAM M'COY, *by* NICHOLAS O'KEARNEY.

It was long before the time the western districts of *Innis
Fodhla* <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71) had any settled name, but
were indiscriminately called after the person who took possession of
them, and whose name they retained only as long as his sway lasted, that
a powerful king reigned over this part of the sacred island. He was a
puissant warrior, and no individual was found able to compete with him
either on land or sea, or question his right to his conquest. The great
king of the west held uncontrolled sway from the island of Rathlin to
the mouth of the Shannon by sea, and far as the glittering length by
land. The ancient king of the west, whose name was Conn, was good as
well as great, and passionately loved by his people. His queen was a
*Breaton* (British) princess, and was equally beloved and esteemed,
because she was the great counterpart of the king in every respect; for
whatever

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

good qualification was wanting in the one, the other was certain to
indemnify the omission. It was plainly manifest that heaven approved of
the career in life of the virtuous couple; for during their reign the
earth produced exuberant crops, the trees fruit ninefold commensurate
with their usual bearing, the rivers, lakes, and surrounding sea teemed
with abundance of choice fish, while herds and flocks were unusually
prolific, and kine and sheep yielded such abundance of rich milk that
they shed it in torrents upon the pastures; and furrows and cavities
were always filled with the pure lacteal produce of the dairy. All these
were blessings heaped by heaven upon the western districts of *Innis
Fodhla*, over which the benignant and just Conn swayed his sceptre, m
approbation of the course of government he had marked out for his own
guidance. It is needless to state that the people who owned the
authority of this great and good sovereign were the happiest on the face
of the wide expanse of earth. It was during his reign, and that of his
son and successor, that Ireland acquired the title of the "happy isle of
the west" among foreign nations. Con Mór and his good Queen Eda reigned
in great glory during many years; they were blessed with an only son,
whom they named Conn-eda, after both his parents, because the Druids
foretold at his birth that he would inherit the good qualities of both.
According as the young prince grew in years, his amiable and benignant
qualities of mind, as well as his great strength of body and manly
bearing, became more manifest. He was the idol of his parents, and the
boast of his people; he was beloved and respected to that degree that
neither prince, lord, nor plebeian swore an oath by the sun, moon,
stars, or elements, except by the head of Conn-eda. This career of
glory, however, was doomed to meet a powerful but temporary impediment,
for the good Queen Eda took a sudden and severe illness, of which she
died in a few days, thus plunging her spouse, her son, and all her
people into a depth of grief and sorrow from which it was found
difficult to relieve them.

The good king and his subjects mourned the loss of\[paragraph
continues\]

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

Queen Eda for a year and a day, and at the expiration of that time Conn
Mór reluctantly yielded to the advice of his Druids and counsellors, and
took to wife the daughter of his Arch-Druid. The new queen appeared to
walk in the footsteps of the good Eda for several years, and gave great
satisfaction to her subjects. But, in course of time, having had several
children, and perceiving that Conn-eda was the favourite son of the king
and the darling of the people, she clearly foresaw that he would become
successor to the throne after the demise of his father, and that her son
would certainly be excluded. This excited the hatred and inflamed the
jealousy of the Druid's daughter against her stepson to such an extent,
that she resolved in her own mind to leave nothing in her power undone
to secure his death, or even exile from the kingdom. She began by
circulating evil reports of the prince; but, as he was above suspicion
the king only laughed at the weakness of the queen; and the great
princes and chieftains, supported by the people in general, gave an
unqualified contradiction; while the prince himself bore all his trials
with the utmost patience, and always repaid her bad and malicious acts
towards him with good and benevolent ones. The enmity of the queen
towards Conn-eda knew no bounds when she saw that the false reports she
circulated could not injure him. As a last resource, to carry out her
wicked projects, she determined to consult her *Cailleach-chearc*
(hen-wife), who was a reputed enchantress.

Pursuant to her resolution, by the early dawn of morning she hied to the
cabin of the *Cailleach-chearc*, and divulged to her the cause of her
trouble. "I cannot render you any help," said the *Cailleach*, "until
you name the *duais*" (reward). "What *duais* do you require?" asked the
queen, impatiently. "My *duais*," replied the enchantress, "is to fill
the cavity of my arm with wool, and the hole I shall bore with my
dtistaff with red wheat" "Your *duais* is granted, and shall be
immediately given you," said the queen. The enchantress thereupon stood
in the door of her hut, and bending her arm into a circle with her side,

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

directed the royal attendants to thrust the wool into her house through
her arm, and she never permitted them to cease until all the available
space within was filled with wool. She then got on the roof of her
brother's house, and, having made a hole through it with her distaff
caused red wheat to be spilled through it, until that was filled up to
the roof with red wheat, so that there was no room for another grain
within. "Now," said the queen, "since you have received your *duais*,
tell me how I can accomplish my purpose." "Take this chess-board and
chess, and invite the prince to play with you; you shall win the first
game. The condition you shall make is, that whoever wins a game shall be
at liberty to impose whatever *geasa* (conditions) the winner pleases on
the loser. When you win, you must bid the prince, under the penalty
either to go into *ionarbadh* (exile), or procure for you, within the
space of a year and a day, the three golden apples that grew in the
garden, the *each dubh* (black steed), and *coileen con na mbuadh*
(hound of supernatural powers), called Samer, which are in the
possession of the king of the Firbolg race, who resides in Lough
Erne. <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) Those two things are so
precious, and so well guarded, that he can never attain them by his own
power; and, if he would rashly attempt to seek them, he should lose his
life."

The queen was greatly pleased at the advice, and lost no time in
inviting Conn-eda to play a game at chess, under the conditions she had
been instructed to arrange by the enchantress. The queen won the game,
as the enchantress foretold, but so great was her anxiety to have the
prince completely in her power, that she was tempted to challenge him to
play a second game, which Conn-eda, to her astonishment, and no less
mortification, easily won. "Now," said the prince, "since you won the
first game, it is your duty to impose your *geis* first." "My *geis*,"
said the queen, "which I impose upon you, is to procure me the three
golden apples

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

that grow in the garden, the *each dubh* (black steed), and *cuileen con
na mbuadh* (hound of supernatural powers), which are in the keeping of
the king of the Firbolgs, in Lough Erne, within the space of a year and
a day; or, in case you fail, to go into *ionarbadh* (exile), and never
return, except you surrender yourself to lose your head and *comhead
beatha* (preservation of life). "Well, then," said the prince, "the
*geis* which I bind you by, is to sit upon the pinnacle of yonder tower
until my return, and to take neither food nor nourishment of any
description, except what red-wheat you can pick up with the point of
your bodkin; but if I do not return, you are at perfect liberty to come
down at the expiration of the year and a day."

In consequence of the severe *geis* imposed upon him Conn-eda was very
much troubled in mind; and, well knowing he had a long journey to make
before he would reach his destination, immediately prepared to set out
on his way, not, however, before he had the satisfaction of witnessing
the ascent of the queen to the place where she was obliged to remain
exposed to the scorching sun of the summer and the blasting storms of
winter, for the space of one year and a day, at least. Conn-eda being
ignorant of what steps he should take to procure the *each dubh* and
*cuileen con na mbuadh*, though he was well aware that human energy
would prove unavailing, thought proper to consult the great Druid, Fionn
Dadhna, of Sleabh Badhna, who was a friend of his, before he ventured to
proceed to Lough Erne. When he arrived at the bruighean of the Druid, he
was received with cordial friendship, and the *failte* (welcome), as
usual, was poured out before him, and when he was seated, warm water was
fetched, and his feet bathed, so that the fatigue he felt after his
journey was greatly relieved. The Druid, after he had partaken of
refreshments, consisting of the newest of food and oldest of liquors,
asked him the reason for paying the visit, and more particularly the
cause of his sorrow; for the prince appeared exceedingly depressed in
spirit. Conn-eda told his friend the whole history of the transaction
with his stepmother

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

from the beginning to end. "Can you not assist me?" asked the Prince,
with downcast countenance. "I cannot, indeed, assist you at present,"
replied the Druid; "but I will retire to my *grianan* (green place) at
sun-rising on the morrow, and learn by virtue of my Druidism what can be
done to assist you." The Druid, accordingly, as the sun rose on the
following morning, retired to his *grianan*, and consulted the god he
adored, through the power of his *draoidheacht*. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73) When he returned, he called Conn-eda aside
on the plain, and addressed him thus: "My dear son, I find you have been
under a severe--an almost impossible--*geis* intended for your
destruction; no person m earth could have advised the queen to impose it
except the Cailleach of Lough Corrib, who is the greatest Druidess now
in Ireland, and sister to the Firbolg, King of Lough Erne. It is not in
my power, nor in that of the Deity I adore, to interfere in your behalf;
but go directly to Sliabh Mis, and consult *Eánchinn-duine* (the bird of
the human head), and if there be any possibility of relieving you, that
bird can do it, for there is not a bird in the western world so
celebrated as that bird, because it knows all things that are past, all
things that are present and exist, and all things that shall hereafter
exist. It is difficult to find access to his place of concealment, and
more difficult still to obtain an answer from him; but I will endeavour
to regulate that matter for you; and that is all I can do for you at
present."

The Arch-Druid then instructed him thus: "Take," said he, "yonder little
shaggy steed, and mount him immediately, for in three days the bird will
make himself visible, and the little shaggy steed will conduct you to
his place of abode. But lest the bird should refuse to reply to your
queries, take this precious stone (*leag lorgmhar*), and present it to
him, and then little danger and doubt exist but that he will give you a
ready answer." The prince returned heartfelt thanks to the Druid, and,
having saddled and mounted the little shaggy horse without much delay,
received the precious stone from the Druid, and, after having taken his
leave of him, set out on his journey. He

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

suffered the reins to fall loose upon the neck of the horse according as
he had been instructed, so that the animal took whatever road he chose.

It would be tedious to relate the numerous adventures he had with the
little shaggy horse, which had the extraordinary gift of speech, and was
a *draoidheacht* horse during his journey.

The Prince having reached the hiding-place of the strange bird at the
appointed time, and having presented him with the *leag lorgmhar*,
according to Fionn Badhna's instructions, and proposed his questions
relative to the manner he could best arrange for the fulfilment of his
*geis*, the bird took up in his mouth the jewel from the stone on which
it was placed, and flew to an inaccessible rock at some distance, and,
when there perched, he thus addressed the prince, "Conn-eda, son of the
King of Cruachan," said he, in a loud, croaking human voice, "remove the
stone just under your right foot, and take the ball of iron and *corna*
(cup) you shall find under it; then mount your horse cast the ball
before you, and having so done, your horse will tell you all the other
things necessary to be done." The bird, having said this, immediately
flew out of sight.

Conn-eda took great care to do everything according to the instructions
of the bird. He found the iron ball and *corna* in the place which had
been pointed out. He took them up, mounted his horse, and cast the ball
before him. The ball rolled on at a regular gait, while the little
shaggy horse followed on the way it led until they reached the margin of
Lough Erne. Here the ball rolled in the water and became invisible.
"Alight now," said the *draoidheacht* pony, "and put your hand into mine
ear; take from thence the small bottle of *íce* (all-heal) and the
little wicker basket which you will find there, and remount with speed,
for just now your great dangers and difficulties commence." Conn-eda,
ever faithful to the kind advice of his *draoidheacht* pony, did what he
had been advised. Having taken the basket and bottle of *íce* from the
animal's ear, he remounted and proceeded on his journey, while the water
of the lake

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

appeared only like an atmosphere above his head. When he entered the
lake the ball again appeared, and rolled along until it came to the
margin, across which was a causeway, guarded by three frightful
serpents; the hissings of the monsters were heard at a great distance,
while, on a nearer approach, their yawning mouths and formidable fangs
were quite sufficient to terrify the stoutest heart. "Now," said the
horse, "open the basket and cast a piece of the meat you find in it into
the mouth of each serpent; when you have done this, secure yourself in
your seat in the best manner you can, so that we may make all due
arrangements to pass those *draoidheacht peists*. If you cast the pieces
of meat into the mouth of each *peist* unerringly, we shall pass them
safely, otherwise we are lost." Conn-eda flung the pieces of meat into
the jaws of the serpents with unerring aim. "Bare a benison and
victory," said the *draoidheacht* steed, "for you are a youth that will
win and prosper." And, on saying these words, he sprang aloft, and
cleared in his leap the river and ford, guarded by the serpents, seven
measures beyond the margin. "Are you still mounted, prince Conn-eda?"
said the steed. "It has taken only half my exertion to remain so,"
replied Conn-eda. "I find," said the pony, "that you are a young prince
that deserves to succeed; one danger is now over, but two others
remain." They proceeded onwards after the ball until they came in view
of a great mountain flaming with fire. "Hold yourself in readiness for
another dangerous leap," said the horse. The trembling prince had no
answer to make, but seated himself as securely as the magnitude of the
danger before him would permit. The horse in the next instant sprang
from the earth, and flew like an arrow over the burning mountain. "Are
you still alive, Conn-eda, son of Conn-mór?" inquired the faithful
horse. "I'm just alive, and no more, for I'm greatly scorched," answered
the prince. "Since you are yet alive, I feel assured that you are a
young man destined to meet supernatural success and benisons," said the
Druidic steed. "Our greatest dangers are over," added he, "and there is
hope that we shall overcome

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

the next and last danger." After they had proceeded a short distance,
his faithful steed, addressing Conn-eda, said, "Alight, now, and apply a
portion of the little bottle of *íce* to your wounds." The prince
immediately followed the advice of his monitor, and, as soon as he
rubbed the *íce* (all-heal) to his wounds, he became as whole and fresh
as ever he had been before. After having done this, Conn-eda remounted,
and following the track of the ball, soon came in sight of a great city
surrounded by high walls. The only gate that was visible was not
defended by armed men, but by two great towers that emitted flames that
could be seen at a great distance. "Alight on this plain," said the
steed, "and take a small knife from my other ear; and with this knife
you shall kill and flay me. When you have done this, envelop yourself in
my hide, and you can pass the gate unscathed and unmolested. When you
get inside you can come out at pleasure; because when once you enter
there is no danger, and you can pass and repass whenever you wish; and
let me tell you that all I have to ask of you in return is that you,
when once inside the gates, will immediately return and drive away the
birds of prey that may be fluttering round to feed on my carcass; and
more, that you will pour any drop of that powerful *íce*, if such still
remain in the bottle, upon my flesh, to preserve it from corruption.
When you do this in memory of me, if it be not too troublesome, dig a
pit, and cast my remains into it."

"Well," said Conn-eda, "my noblest steed, because you have been so
faithful to me hitherto, and because you still would have rendered me
further service, I consider such a proposal insulting to my feelings as
a man, and totally in variance with the spirit which can feel the value
of gratitude, not to speak of my feelings as a prince. But as a prince I
am able to say, Come what may--come death itself in its most hideous
forms and terrors--I never will sacrifice private friendship to personal
interest. Hence, I am, I swear by my arms of valour, prepared to meet
the worst--even death itself--sooner than violate the principles of
humanity, honour, and friendship! What a sacrifice do you

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

propose!" "Pshaw, man! heed not that; do what I advise you, and
prosper." "Never! never!" exclaimed the prince. "Well, then, son of the
great western monarch," said the horse, with a tone of sorrow, "if you
do not follow my advice on this occasion, I tell you that both you and I
shall perish, and shall never meet again; but, if you act as I have
instructed you, matters shall assume a happier and more pleasing aspect
than you may imagine. I have not misled you heretofore, and, if I have
not, what need have you to doubt the most important portion of my
counsel? Do exactly as I have directed you, else you will cause a worse
fate than death to befall me. And, moreover, I can tell you that, if you
persist in your resolution, I have done with you for ever."

When the prince found that his noble steed could not be persuaded from
his purpose, he took the knife out of his car with reluctance, and with
a faltering and trembling hand essayed experimentally to point the
weapon at his throat. Conn-eda's eyes were bathed in tears; but no
sooner had he pointed the Druidic *scian* to the throat of his good
steed than the dagger, as if impelled by some Druidic power, stuck in
his neck, and in an instant the work of death was done, and the noble
animal fell dead at his feet. When the prince saw his noble steed fall
dead by his hand, he cast himself on the ground, and cried aloud until
his consciousness was gone. When he recovered, he perceived that the
steed was quite dead; and, as he thought there was no hope of
resuscitating him, he considered it the most prudent course he could
adopt to act according to the advice he had given him. After many
misgivings of mind and abundant showers of tears, he essayed the task of
flaying him, which was only that of a few minutes. When he found he had
the hide separated from the body, he, in the derangement of the moment,
enveloped himself in it, and proceeding towards the magnificent city in
rather a demented state of mind, entered it without any molestation or
opposition. It was a surprisingly populous city, and an extremely
wealthy place; but its beauty, magnificence, and wealth had no

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

charms for Conn-eda, because the thoughts of the loss he sustained in
his dear steed wore paramount to those of all other earthly
considerations.

He scarcely proceeded more than fifty paces from the gate, when the last
request of his beloved *draoidheacht* steed forced itself upon his mind,
and compelled him to return to perform the last solemn injunctions upon
him. When he came to the spot upon which the remains of his beloved
*draoidheacht* steed lay, an appalling sight presented itself; ravens
and other carnivorous birds of prey were tearing and devouring the flesh
of his dear steed. It was but short work to put them to flight; and
having uncorked his little jar of *íce*, he deemed it a labour of love
to embalm the now mangled remains with the precious ointment. The potent
*íce* had scarcely touched the inanimate flesh, when, to the surprise of
Conn-eda, it commenced to undergo some strange change, and in a few
minutes, to his unspeakable astonishment and joy, it assumed the form of
one of the handsomest and noblest young men imaginable, and in the
twinkling of an eye the prince was locked in his embrace, smothering him
with kisses, and drowning him with tears of joy. When one recovered from
his ecstasy of joy, the other from his surprise, the strange youth thus
addressed the prince: "Most noble and puissant prince, you are the best
sight I ever saw with my eyes, and I am the most fortunate being in
existence for having met you! Behold in my person, changed to the
natural shape, your little shaggy *draoidheacht* steed! I am brother of
the king of the city; and it was the wicked, Druid, Fion Badlina, who
kept me so long in bondage; but he was forced to give me up when you
came to *consult* him, for my *geis* was then broken; yet I could not
recover my pristine shape and appearance unless you had acted as you
have kindly done. It was my own sister that urged the queen, your
step-mother, to send you in quest of the steed and powerful puppy hound,
which my brother has now in keeping. My sister, rest assured, had no
thought of doing you the least injury, but much good, as

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

you will find hereafter; because, if she wore maliciously inclined
towards you, she could have accomplished her end without any trouble. In
short, she only wanted to free you from all future danger and disaster,
and recover me from my relentless enemies through your instrumentality.
Come with me, my friend and deliverer, and the steed and the puppy-hound
of extraordinary powers, and the golden apples, shall be yours, and a
cordial welcome shall greet you in my brother's abode; for you will
deserve all this and much more."

The exciting joy felt on the occasion was mutual, and they lost no time
in idle congratulations, but proceeded on to the royal residence of the
King of Lough Erne. Here they were both received with demonstrations of
joy by the king and his chieftains; and, when the purpose of Conn-eda's
visit became known to the king, he gave a free consent to bestow on
Conn-eda the black steed, the *coileen con-na-mbuadh*, called Samer, and
the three apples of health that were growing in his garden, under the
special condition, however, that he would consent to remain as his guest
until he could set out on his journey in proper time to fulfil his
*geis*. Conn-eda, at the earnest solicitation of his friends, consented,
and remained in the royal residence of the Firbolg, King of Lough Erne,
in the enjoyment of the most delicious and fascinating pleasures during
that period.

When the time of his departure came, the three golden apples were
plucked from the crystal tree in the midst of the pleasure-garden, and
deposited in his bosom; the puppy-hound, Samer, was leashed, and the
leash put into his hand; and the black steed, richly harnessed, was got
in readiness for him to mount. The king himself helped him on horseback,
and both he and his brother assured him that he might not fear burning
mountains or hissing serpents, because none would impede him, as his
steed was always a passport to and from his subaqueous kingdom. And both
he and his brother extorted a promise from Conn-eda, that he would visit
them once every year at least.

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

Conn-eda took leave of his dear friend, and the king his brother. The
parting was a tender one, soured by regret on both sides. He proceeded
on his way without meeting anything to obstruct him, and in due time
came in sight of the *dún* of his father, where the queen had been
placed on the pinnacle of the tower, in full hope that, as it was the
last day of her imprisonment there, the prince would not make his
appearance, and thereby forfeit all pretensions and right to the crown
of his father for ever. But her hopes were doomed to meet a
disappointment, for when it had been announced to her by her couriers,
who had been posted to watch the arrival of the prince, that he
approached, she was incredulous; but when she saw him mounted on a
foaming black steed, richly harnessed, and leading a strange kind of
animal by a silver chain, she at once knew he was returning in triumph,
and that her schemes laid for his destruction were frustrated. In the
excess of grief at her disappointment, she cast herself from the top of
the tower, and was instantly dashed to pieces. Conn-eda met a welcome
reception from his father, who mourned him as lost to him for ever,
during his absence; and, when the base conduct of the queen became
known, the king and his chieftains ordered her remains to be consumed to
ashes for her perfidy and wickedness.

Conn-eda planted the three golden apples in his garden, and instantly a
great tree, bearing similar fruit, sprang up. This tree caused all the
district to produce an exuberance of crops and fruits, so that it became
as fertile and plentiful as the dominions of the Firbolgs, in
consequence of the extraordinary powers possessed by the golden fruit.
The hound Samer and the steed were of the utmost utility to him; and his
reign was long and prosperous, and celebrated among the old people for
the great abundance of corn, fruit, milk, fowl, and fish that prevailed
during this happy reign. It was after the name Conn-eda the province of
Connaucht, or *Conneda*, or *Connacht*, was so called.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_70"></span>[306:1](fip78.htm#fr_70) Printed first in the
*Cambrian Journal*, 1855; reprinted and re-edited in the *Folk-Lore
Record*, vol. ii.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[306:2](fip78.htm#fr_71) *Innis Fodhla*--Island
of Destiny, an old name for Ireland.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[309:1](fip78.htm#fr_72) The Firbolgs believed
their elysium to be under water. The peasantry still believe many lakes
to be peopled.--See section on *T'yeer-na-n-Oge*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[311:1](fip78.htm#fr_73) *Draoidheacht*, *i.e.*,
the Druidic worship; magic, sorcery, divination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gods of the Earth](fip79)
