[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip71)  [Next](fip73) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LAZY BEAUTY AND HER AUNTS. <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65)

PATRICK KENNEDY.

There was once a poor widow woman, who had a daughter that was as
handsome as the day, and as lazy as a pig, saving your presence. The
poor mother was the most industrious person in the townland, and was a
particularly good hand at the spinning-wheel. It was the wish of her
heart that her daughter should be as handy as herself; but she'd get up
late, eat her breakfast before she'd finished her prayers, and then go
about dawdling, and anything she handled seemed to be burning her
fingers. She drawled her words as if it was a great trouble to her to
speak, or as if her tongue was as lazy as her body. Many a heart-scald
her poor mother got with her, and still she was only improving like dead
fowl in August.

Well, one morning that things were as bad as they could be, and the poor
woman was giving tongue at the rate of a mill-clapper, who should be
riding by but the king's son. "Oh dear, oh dear, good woman!" said he,
"you must have a very bad child to make you scold so terribly. Sure it
can't be this handsome girl that vexed you!" "Oh, please your Majesty,
not at all," says the old dissembler. "I was only checking her for
working herself too much. Would your majesty believe it? She spins three
pounds of flax in a day, weaves it into linen the next, and makes it all
into shirts the day after." "My gracious," says the prince, "she's the
very lady that will just fill my mother's eye, and herself's the
greatest spinner in the kingdom. Will you put

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

on your daughter's bonnet and cloak, if you please, ma'am, and set her
behind me? Why, my mother will be so delighted with her, that perhaps
she'll make her her daughter-in-law in a week, that is, if the young
woman herself is agreeable."

Well, between the confusion, and the joy, and the fear of being found
out, the women didn't know what to do; and before they could make up
their minds, young Anty (Anastasia) was set behind the prince, and away
he and his attendants went, and a good heavy purse was left behind with
the mother. She *pullillued* a long time after all was gone, in dread of
something bad happening to the poor girl.

The prince couldn't judge of the girl's breeding or wit from the few
answers he pulled out of her. The queen was struck in a heap when she
saw a young country girl sitting behind her son, but when she saw her
handsome face, and heard all she could do, she didn't think she could
make too much of her. The prince took an opportunity of whispering her
that if she didn't object to be his wife she must strive to please his
mother. Well, the evening went by, and the prince and Anty were getting
fonder and fonder of one another, but the thought of the spinning used
to send the cold to her heart every moment. When bed-time came, the old
queen went along with her to a beautiful bedroom, and when she was
bidding her good-night, she pointed to a heap of fine flax, and said,
"You may begin as soon as you like tomorrow morning, and I'll expect to
see these three pounds in nice thread the morning after." Little did the
poor girl sleep that night. She kept crying and lamenting that she
didn't mind her mother's advice better. When she was left alone next
morning, she began with a heavy heart; and though she had a nice
mahogany wheel and the finest flax you ever saw, the thread was breaking
every moment. One while it was as fine as a cobweb, and the next as
coarse as a little boy's whipcord. At last she pushed her chair back,
lot her hands fall in her lap, and burst out a-crying.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

A small, old woman with surprising big feet appeared before her at the
same moment, and said, "What ails you, you handsome colleen?" "An'
haven't I all that flax to spin before tomorrow morning, and I'll never
be able to have even five yards of fine thread of it put together." "An'
would you think bad to ask poor Colliagh Cushmōr (Old woman Big-foot) to
your wedding with the young prince? If you promise me that, all your
three pounds will be made into the finest of thread while you're taking
your sleep tonight." "Indeed, you must be there and welcome, and I'll
honour you all the days of your life." "Very well; stay in your room
till tea-time, and tell the queen she may come in for her thread as
early as she likes tomorrow morning." It was all as she said; and the
thread was finer and evener than the gut you see with fly-fishers. "My
brave girl you were!" says the queen. "I'll get my own mahogany loom
brought into you, but you needn't do anything more today. Work and rest,
work and rest, is my motto. Tomorrow you'll weave all this thread, and
who knows what may happen?"

The poor girl was more frightened this time than the last, and she was
so afraid to lose the prince. She didn't even know how to put the warp
in the gears, nor how to use the shuttle, and she was sitting in the
greatest grief, when a little woman, who was mighty well-shouldered
about the hips, all at once appeared to her, told her her name was
*Colliach Cromanmōr*, and made the same bargain with her as Colliach
Cushmōr. Great was the queen's pleasure when she found early in the
morning a web as fine and white as the finest paper you ever saw. "The
darling you were!" says she. "Take your ease with the ladies and
gentlemen today, and if you have all this made into nice shirts tomorrow
you may present one of them to my son, and be married to him out of
hand."

Oh, wouldn't you pity poor Anty the next day, she was now so near the
prince, and, maybe, would be soon so far from him. But she waited as
patiently as she could with scissors, needle, and thread in hand, till a
minute after noon.\[paragraph continues\]

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

Then she was rejoiced to see the third woman appear. She had a big red
nose, and informed Anty that people called her *Shron Mor Rua* on that
account. She was up to her as good as others, for a dozen fine shirts
were lying on the table when the queen paid her an early visit.

Now there was nothing talked of but the wedding, and I needn't tell you
it was grand. The poor mother was there along with the rest, and at the
dinner the old queen could talk of nothing but the lovely shirts, and
how happy herself and the bride would be after the honeymoon, spinning,
and weaving, and sewing shirts and shifts without end. The bridegroom
didn't like the discourse, and the bride liked it less, and he was going
to say something, when the footman came up to the head of the table and
said to the bride, "Your ladyship's aunt, Colliach Cushmōr, bade me ask
might she come in." The bride blushed and wished she was seven miles
under the floor, but well became the prince. "Tell Mrs. Cushmōr," said
he, "that any relation of my bride's will be always heartily welcome
wherever she and I are." In came the woman with the big foot, and got a
seat near the prince. The old queen didn't like it much, and after a few
words she asked rather spitefully, "Dear ma'am, what's the reason your
foot is so big?" "*Musha*, faith, your majesty, I was standing almost
all my life at the spinning-wheel, and that's the reason." "I declare to
you, my darling," said the prince, "I'll never allow you to spend one
hour at the same spinning-wheel." The same footman said again, "Your
ladyship's aunt, Colliach Cromanmōr, wishes to come in, if the genteels
and yourself have no objection." Very *sharoose* (displeased) was
Princess Anty, but the prince sent her welcome, and she took her seat,
and drank healths apiece to the company. "May I ask, ma'am?" says the
old queen, "why you're so wide half-way between the head and the feet?"
"That, your majesty, is owing to sitting all my life at the loom." "By
my sceptre," says the prince, "my wife shall never sit there an hour."
The footman again came up. "Your ladyship's aunt, Colliach Shron Mor
Rua, is asking leave to

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

come into the banquet." More blushing on the bride's face, but the
bridegroom spoke out cordially, "Tell Mrs. Shron Mor Rua she's doing us
an honour." In came the old woman, and great respect she got near the
top of the table, but the people down low put up their tumblers and
glasses to their noses to hide the grins. "Ma'am," says the old queen,
"will you tell us, if you please, why your nose is so big and red?"
"Throth, your majesty, my head was bent down over the stitching all my
life, and all the blood in my body ran into my nose." "My darling," said
the prince to Anty, "if ever I see a needle in your hand, I'll run a
hundred miles from you."

"And in troth, girls and boys, though it's a diverting story, I don't
think the moral is good; and if any of you *thuckeens* go about
imitating Anty in her laziness, you'll find it won't thrive with you as
it did with her. She was beautiful beyond compare, which none of you
are, and she had three powerful fairies to help her besides. There's no
fairies now, and no prince or lord to ride by, and catch you idling or
working; and maybe, after all, the prince and herself were not so very
happy when the cares of the world or old age came on them."

Thus was the tale ended by poor old *Shebale* (Sybilla), Father Murphy's
housekeeper, in Coolbawn, Barony of Bantry, about half a century since.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[286:1](fip72.htm#fr_65) *The Fireside Stories
of Ireland*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Haughty Princess, by Patrick Kennedy](fip73)
