[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Sagas and
Legends](../../index)  [Yeats](../index)  [Celtic](../../celt/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fip86)  [Next](fip88) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A WITCH TRIAL.--Page [146](fip43.htm#page_146).

The last trial for witchcraft in Ireland--there were never very
many--thus given in MacSkimin's *History of Carrickfergus*: "1711, March
31st, Janet Mean, of Braid-island; Janet Latimer, Irish-quarter,
Carrickfergus; Janet Millar, Scotch-quarter, Carrickfergus; Margaret
Mitchel, Kilroot; Catharine M'Calmond, Janet Liston, *alias* Seller,
Elizabeth Seller, and Janet Carson, the four last from Island Magee,
were tried here, in the County of Antrim Court, for witchcraft."

Their alleged crime was tormenting a young woman, called Mary Dunbar,
about eighteen years of age, at the house of James Hattridge, Island
Magee, and at other places to which she was removed. The circumstances
sworn on the trial were as follows:--

"The afflicted person being, in the month of February, 1711, in the
house of James Hattridge, Island Magee (which had been for some time
believed to be haunted by evil spirits), found an apron on the parlour
floor, that had been missing some time, tied with *five strange knots*,
which she loosened.

"On the following day she was suddenly seized with a violent pain in her
thigh, and afterwards fell into fits and ravings; and, on recovering,
said she was tormented by several women, whose dress and personal
appearance she minutely described. Shortly after, she was again seized
with the like fits, and on recovering she accused five other women of
tormenting her, describing them also. The accused persons being brought
from different parts of the country, she appeared to suffer extreme fear
and additional torture as they approached the house.

"It was also deposed that strange noises, as of whistling, scratching,
etc., were heard in the house, and that a sulphureous smell was observed
in the rooms; that stones, turf, and the like were thrown about the
house, and the coverlets, etc., frequently taken off the beds and made
up in the shape of a corpse; and that a bolster once walked out of a
room into the kitchen with a nightgown about it! It likewise appeared in
evidence that in some of her fits three strong men were scarcely able to
hold her in the bed; that at times she vomited feathers, cotton yam,
pins, and buttons; and that on one occasion she slid off the bed and was
laid on the floor, as if supported and drawn by an invincible power. The
afflicted person was unable to give any evidence on the trial, being
during that time dumb, but had no violent fit during its continuance."

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

In defence of the accused, it appeared that they were mostly sober,
industrious people, who attended public worship, could repeat the Lord's
Prayer, and had been known to pray both in public and private; and that
some of them had lately received communion.

Judge Upton charged the jury, and observed on the regular attendance of
accused at public worship; remarking that he thought it improbable that
real witches could so far retain the form of religion as to frequent the
religious worship of God, both publicly and privately, which had been
proved in favour of the accused. He concluded by giving his opinion
"that the jury could not bring them in guilty upon the sole testimony of
the afflicted person's visionary images". He was followed by Judge
Macarthy, who differed from him in opinion "and thought the jury might,
from the evidence, bring them in guilty", which they accordingly did.

This trial lasted from six o'clock in the morning till two in the
afternoon; and the prisoners were sentenced to be imprisoned twelve
months, and to stand four times in the pillory of Carrickfergus.

Tradition says that the people were much exasperated against these
unfortunate persons, who were severely pelted in the pillory with boiled
cabbage stalks and the like, by which one of them had an eye beaten out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: T'yeer-na-n-Oge](fip88)
