[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](joh)  [Next](rom.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Acts

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> THE former treatise I made, O Theophilus,
of all things which Jesus began to do and to teach,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Until the day on which, giving commandments
by the Holy Ghost to the apostles whom he had chosen, he was taken up.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To whom also he shewed himself alive after
his passion, by many proofs, for forty days appearing to them, and
speaking of the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And eating together with them, he commanded
them, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but should wait for
the promise of the Father, which you have heard (saith he) by my mouth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For John indeed baptized with water, but
you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> They therefore who were come together,
asked him, saying: Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the
kingdom to Israel?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But he said to them: It is not for you to
know the times or moments, which the Father hath put in his own power:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But you shall receive the power of the Holy
Ghost coming upon you, and you shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem,
and in all Judea, and Samaria, and even to the uttermost part of the
earth.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And when he had said these things, while
they looked on, he was raised up: and a cloud received him out of their
sight.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And while they were beholding him going
up to heaven, behold two men stood by them in white garments.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Who also said: Ye men of Galilee, why
stand you looking up to heaven? This Jesus who is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come, as you have seen him going into heaven.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then they returned to Jerusalem from the
mount that is called Olivet, which is nigh Jerusalem, within a sabbath
day's journey.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And when they were come in, they went up
into an upper room, where abode Peter and John, James and Andrew, Philip
and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James of Alpheus, and Simon
Zelotes, and Jude the brother of James.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> All these were persevering with one mind
in prayer with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his
brethren.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> In those days Peter rising up in the
midst of the brethren, said: (now the number of persons together was
about an hundred and twenty:)

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Men, brethren, the scripture must needs
be fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost spoke before by the mouth of David
concerning Judas, who was the leader of them that apprehended Jesus:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Who was numbered with us, and had
obtained part of this ministry.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And he indeed hath possessed a field of
the reward of iniquity, and being hanged, burst asunder in the midst:
and all his bowels gushed out.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And it became known to all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem: so that the same field was called in their
tongue, Haceldama, that is to say, The field of blood.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For it is written in the book of Psalms:
Let their habitation become desolate, and let there be none to dwell
therein. And his bishopric let another take.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Wherefore of these men who have companied
with us all the time that the Lord Jesus came in and went out among us,

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Beginning from the baptism of John, until
the day wherein he was taken up from us, one of these must be made a
witness with us of his resurrection.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they appointed two, Joseph, called
Barsabas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And praying, they said: Thou, Lord, who
knowest the hearts of all men, shew whether of these two thou hast
chosen,

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> To take the place of this ministry and
apostleship, from which Judas hath by transgression fallen, that he
might go to his own place.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And they gave them lots, and the lot fell
upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> AND when the days of the Pentecost were
accomplished, they were all together in one place:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And suddenly there came a sound from
heaven, as of a mighty wind coming, and it filled the whole house where
they were sitting.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And there appeared to them parted tongues
as it were of fire, and it sat upon every one of them:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and they began to speak with divers tongues, according as the
Holy Ghost gave them to speak.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews,
devout men, out of every nation under heaven.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And when this was noised abroad, the
multitude came together, and were confounded in mind, because that every
man heard them speak in his own tongue.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And they were all amazed, and wondered,
saying: Behold, are not all these, that speak, Galileans?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And how have we heard, every man our own
tongue wherein we were born?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Phrygia, and Pamphylia, Egypt, and the
parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Jews also, and proselytes, Cretes, and
Arabians: we have heard them speak in our own tongues the wonderful
works of God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And they were all astonished, and
wondered, saying one to another: What meaneth this?

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> But others mocking, said: These men are
full of new wine.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But Peter standing up with the eleven,
lifted up his voice, and spoke to them: Ye men of Judea, and all you
that dwell in Jerusalem, be this known to you, and with your ears
receive my words.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For these are not drunk, as you suppose,
seeing it is but the third hour of the day:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But this is that which was spoken of by
the prophet Joel:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And it shall come to pass, in the last
days, (saith the Lord,) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh: and
your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your young men shall
see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And upon my servants indeed, and upon my
handmaids will I pour out in those days of my spirit, and they shall
prophesy.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And I will shew wonders in the heaven
above, and signs on the earth beneath: blood and fire, and vapour of
smoke.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> The sun shall be turned into darkness,
and the moon into blood, before the great and manifest day of the Lord
come.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And it shall come to pass, that whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Ye men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus
of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you, by miracles, and wonders,
and signs, which God did by him, in the midst of you, as you also know:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> This same being delivered up, by the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, you by the hands of wicked
men have crucified and slain.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Whom God hath raised up, having loosed
the sorrows of hell, as it was impossible that he should be holden by
it.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> For David saith concerning him: I foresaw
the Lord before my face: because he is at my right hand, that I may not
be moved.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> For this my heart hath been glad, and any
tongue hath rejoiced: moreover my flesh also shall rest in hope.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> Because thou wilt not leave my soul in
hell, nor suffer thy Holy One to see corruption.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> Thou hast made known to me the ways of
life: thou shalt make me full of joy with thy countenance.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Ye men, brethren, let me freely speak to
you of the patriarch David; that he died, and was buried; and his
sepulchre is with us to this present day.

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> Whereas therefore he was a prophet, and
knew that God hath sworn to him with an oath, that of the fruit of his
loins one should sit upon his throne.

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> Foreseeing this, he spoke of the
resurrection of Christ. For neither was he left in hell, neither did his
flesh see corruption.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> This Jesus hath God raised again, whereof
all we are witnesses.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> Being exalted therefore by the right hand
of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost,
he hath poured forth this which you see and hear.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> For David ascended not into heaven; but
he himself said: The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand,

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> Until I make thy enemies thy footstool.

<span id="an_2:36">2:36</span> Therefore let all the house of Israel
know most certainly, that God hath made both Lord and Christ, this same
Jesus, whom you have crucified.

<span id="an_2:37">2:37</span> Now when they had heard these things,
they had compunction in their heart, and said to Peter, and to the rest
of the apostles: What shall we do, men and brethren?

<span id="an_2:38">2:38</span> But Peter said to them: Do penance, and
be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of your sins: and you shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost.

<span id="an_2:39">2:39</span> For the promise is to you, and to your
children, and to all that are far off, whomsoever the Lord our God shall
call.

<span id="an_2:40">2:40</span> And with very many other words did he
testify and exhort them, saying: Save yourselves from this perverse
generation.

<span id="an_2:41">2:41</span> They therefore that received his word,
were baptized; and there were added in that day about three thousand
souls.

<span id="an_2:42">2:42</span> And they were persevering in the doctrine
of the apostles, and in the communication of the breaking of bread, and
in prayers.

<span id="an_2:43">2:43</span> And fear came upon every soul: many
wonders also and signs were done by the apostles in Jerusalem, and there
was great fear in all.

<span id="an_2:44">2:44</span> And all they that believed, were
together, and had all things common.

<span id="an_2:45">2:45</span> Their possessions and goods they sold,
and divided them to all, according as every one had need.

<span id="an_2:46">2:46</span> And continuing daily with one accord in
the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, they took their meat
with gladness and simplicity of heart;

<span id="an_2:47">2:47</span> Praising God, and having favour with all
the people. And the Lord increased daily together such as should be
saved.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> NOW Peter and John went up into the temple
at the ninth hour of prayer.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And a certain man who was lame from his
mother's womb, was carried: whom they laid every day at the gate of the
temple, which is called Beautiful, that he might ask alms of them that
went into the temple.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> He, when he had seen Peter and John about
to go into the temple, asked to receive an alms.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But Peter with John fastening his eyes upon
him, said: Look upon us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But he looked earnestly upon them, hoping
that he should receive something of them.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Peter said: Silver and gold I have
none; but what I have, I give thee: In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, arise, and walk.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And taking him by the right hand, he lifted
him up, and forthwith his feet and soles received strength.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And he leaping up, stood, and walked, and
went in with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising
God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And all the people saw him walking and
praising God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And they knew him, that it was he who sat
begging alms at the Beartiful gate of the temple: and they were filled
with wonder and amazement at that which had happened to him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And as he held Peter and John, all the
people ran to them to the porch which is called Solomon's, greatly
wondering.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> But Peter seeing, made answer to the
people: Ye men of Israel, why wonder you at this? or why look you upon
us, as if by our strength or power we had made this man to walk?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his Son
Jesus, whom you indeed delivered up and denied before the face of
Pilate, when he judged he should be released.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But you denied the Holy One and the Just,
and desired a murderer to be granted unto you.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But the author of life you killed, whom
God hath raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And in the faith of his name, this man,
whom you have seen and known, hath his name strengthened; and the faith
which is by him, hath given this perfect soundness in the sight of you
all.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And now, brethren, I know that you did it
through ignorance, as did also your rulers.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But those things which God before had
shewed by the mouth of all the prophets, that his Christ should suffer,
he hath so fulfilled.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Be penitent, therefore, and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> That when the times of refreshment shall
come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send him who hath been
preached unto you, Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Whom heaven indeed must receive, until
the times of the restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the
mouth of his holy prophets, from the beginning of the world.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> For Moses said: A prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me: him you shall
hear according to all things whatsoever he shall speak to you.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And it shall be, that every soul which
will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And all the prophets, from Samuel and
afterwards, who have spoken, have told of these days.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> You are the children of the prophets, and
of the testament which God made to our fathers, saying to Abraham: And
in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> To you first God, raising up his Son,
hath sent him to bless you; that every one may convert himself from his
wickedness.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> AND as they were speaking to the people,
the priests, and the officer of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon
them,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Being grieved that they taught the people,
and preached in Jesus the resurrection from the dead:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And they laid hands upon them, and put them
in hold till the next day; for it was now evening.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> But many of them who had heard the word,
believed; and the number of the men was made five thousand.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And it came to pass on the morrow, that
their princes, and ancients, and scribes, were gathered together in
Jerusalem;

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And Annas the high priest, and Caiphas, and
John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high
priest.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And setting them in the midst, they asked:
By what power, or by what name, have you done this?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost,
said to them: Ye princes of the people, and ancients, hear:

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> If we this day are examined concerning the
good deed done to the infirm man, by what means he hath been made whole:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Be it known to you all, and to all the
people of Israel, that by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth,
whom you crucified, whom God hath raised from the dead, even by him this
man standeth here before you whole.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> This is the stone which was rejected by
you the builders, which is become the head of the corner.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Neither is there salvation in any other.
For there is no other name under heaven given to men, whereby we must be
saved.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Now seeing the constancy of Peter and of
John, understanding that they were illiterate and ignorant men, they
wondered; and they knew them that they had been with Jesus.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Seeing the man also who had been healed
standing with them, they could say nothing against it.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> But they commanded them to go aside out
of the council; and they conferred among themselves,

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Saying: What shall we do to these men?
for indeed a known miracle hath been done by them, to all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem: it is manifest, and we cannot deny it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But that it may be no farther spread
among the people, let us threaten them that they speak no more in this
name to any man.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And calling them, they charged them not
to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> But Peter and John answering, said to
them: If it be just in the sight of God, to hear you rather than God,
judge ye.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> For we cannot but speak the things which
we have seen and heard.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> But they threatening, sent them away, not
finding how they might punish them, because of the people; for all men
glorified what had been done, in that which had come to pass.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For the man was above forty years old, in
whom that miraculous cure had been wrought.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And being let go, they came to their own
company, and related all that the chief priests and ancients had said to
them.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Who having heard it, with one accord
lifted up their voice to God, and said: Lord, thou art he that didst
make heaven and earth, the sea, and all things that are in them.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Who, by the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of
our father David, thy servant, hast said: Why did the Gentiles rage, and
the people meditate vain things?

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> The kings of the earth stood up, and the
princes assembled together against the Lord and his Christ.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> For of a truth there assembled together
in this city against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed,
Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel,

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> To do what thy hand and thy counsel
decreed to be done.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And now, Lord, behold their threatenings,
and grant unto thy servants, that with all confidence they may speak thy
word,

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> By stretching forth thy hand to cures,
and signs, and wonders to be done by the name of thy holy Son Jesus.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And when they had prayed, the place was
moved wherein they were assembled; and they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and they spoke the word of God with confidence.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> And the multitude of believers had but
one heart and one soul: neither did any one say that aught of the things
which he possessed, was his own; but all things were common unto them.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> And with great power did the apostles
give testimony of the resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord; and great
grace was in them all.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> For neither was there any one needy among
them. For as many as were owners of lands or houses, sold them, and
brought the price of the things they sold,

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> And laid it down before the feet of the
apostles. And distribution was made to every one, according as he had
need.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> And Joseph, who, by the apostles, was
surnamed Barnabas, (which is, by interpretation, The son of
consolation,) a Levite, a Cyprian born,

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> Having land, sold it, and brought the
price, and laid it at the feet of the apostles.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> BUT a certain man named Ananias, with
Saphira his wife, sold a piece of land,

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And by fraud kept back part of the price of
the land, his wife being privy thereunto: and bringing a certain part of
it, laid it at the feet of the apostles.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> But Peter said: Ananias, why hath Satan
tempted thy heart, that thou shouldst lie to the Holy Ghost, and by
fraud keep part of the price of the land?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Whilst it remained, did it not remain to
thee? and after it was sold, was it not in thy power? Why hast thou
conceived this thing in thy heart? Thou hast not lied to men, but to
God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Ananias hearing these words, fell down,
and gave up the ghost. And there came great fear upon all that heard it.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And the young men rising up, removed him,
and carrying him out, buried him.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And it was about the space of three hours
after, when his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And Peter said to her: Tell me, woman,
whether you sold the land for so much? And she said: Yea, for so much.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Peter said unto her: Why have you
agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold the feet of them
who have buried thy husband are at the door, and they shall carry thee
out.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Immediately she fell down before his
feet, and gave up the ghost. And the young men coming in, found her
dead: and carried her out, and buried her by her husband.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And there came great fear upon the whole
church, and upon all that heard these things.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And by the hands of the apostles were
many signs and wonders wrought among the people. And they were all with
one accord in Solomon's porch.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> But of the rest no man durst join himself
unto them; but the people magnified them.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And the multitude of men and women who
believed in the Lord, was more increased:

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Insomuch that they brought forth the sick
into the streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that when Peter
came, his shadow at the least, might overshadow any of them, and they
might be delivered from their infirmities.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And there came also together to Jerusalem
a multitude out of the neighboring cities, bringing sick persons, and
such as were troubled with unclean spirits; who were all healed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Then the high prist rising up, and all
they that were with him, (which is the heresy of the Sadducees,) were
filled with envy.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And they laid hands on the apostles, and
put them in the common prison.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But an angel of the Lord by night opening
the doors of the prison, and leading them out, said:

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Go, and standing speak in the temple to
the people all the words of this life.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Who having heard this, early in the
morning, entered into the temple, and taught. And the high priest
coming, and they that were with him, called together the council, and
all the ancients of the children of Israel; and they sent to the prison
to have them brought.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But when the ministers came, and opening
the prison, found them not there, they returned and told,

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Saying: The prison indeed we found shut
with all diligence, and the keepers standing before the doors; but
opening it, we found no man within.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Now when the officer of the temple and
the chief priests heard these words, they were in doubt concerning them,
what would come to pass.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> But one came and told them: Behold, the
men whom you put in prison are in the temple standing, and teaching the
people.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Then went the officer with the ministers,
and brought them without violence; for they feared the people, lest they
should be stoned.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> And when they had brought them, they set
them before the council. And the high priest asked them,

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Saying: Commanding we commanded you, that
you should not teach in this name; and behold, you have filled Jerusalem
with your doctrine, and you have a mind to bring the blood of this man
upon us.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> But Peter and the apostles answering,
said: We ought to obey God, rather than men.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> The God of our fathers hath raised up
Jesus, whom you put to death, hanging him upon a tree.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> Him hath God exalted with his right hand,
to be Prince and Saviour, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of
sins.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And we are witnesses of these things and
the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to all that obey him.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> When they had heard these things, they
were cut to the heart, and they thought to put them to death.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But one in the council rising up, a
Pharisee, named Gamaliel, a doctor of the law, respected by all the
people, commanded the men to be put forth a little while.

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> And he said to them: Ye men of Israel,
take heed to yourselves what you intend to do, as touching these men.

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> For before these days rose up Theodas,
affirming himself to be somebody, to whom a number of men, about four
hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all that believed him
were scattered, and brought to nothing.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> After this man, rose up Judas of Galilee,
in the days of the enrolling, and drew away the people after him: he
also perished; and all, even as many as consented to him, were
dispersed.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> And now, therefore, I say to you, refrain
from these men, and let them alone; for if this council or this work be
of men, it will come to nought;

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But if it be of God, you cannot overthrow
it, lest perhaps you be found even to fight against God. And they
consented to him.

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And calling in the apostles, after they
had scourged them, they charged them that they should not speak at all
in the name of Jesus; and they dismissed them.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And they indeed went from the presence of
the council, rejoicing that they were accounted worthy to suffer
reproach for the name of Jesus.

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> And every day they ceased not in the
temple, and from house to house, to teach and preach Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> AND in those days, the number of the
disciples increasing, there arose a murmuring of the Greeks against the
Hebrews, for that their widows were neglected in the daily ministration.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Then the twelve calling together the
multitude of the disciples, said: It is not reason that we should leave
the word of God, and serve tables.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you
seven men of good reputation, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we
may appoint over this business.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> But we will give ourselves continually to
prayer, and to the ministry of the word.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And the saying was liked by all the
multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of faith, and of the Holy
Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas,
and Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> These they set before the apostles; and
they praying, imposed hands upon them.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And the word of the Lord increased; and the
number of the disciples was multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly: a great
multitude also of the priests obeyed the faith.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And Stephen, full of grace and fortitude,
did great wonders and signs among the people.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Now there arose some of that which is
called the synagogue of the Libertines, and of the Cyrenians, and of the
Alexandrians, and of them that were of Cilicia and Asia, disputing with
Stephen.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And they were not able to resist the
wisdom and the spirit that spoke.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Then they suborned men to say, they had
heard him speak words of blasphemy against Moses and against God.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And they stirred up the people, and the
ancients, and the scribes; and running together, they took him, and
brought him to the council.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And they set up false witnesses, who
said: This man ceaseth not to speak words against the holy place and the
law.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For we have heard him say, that this
Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the
traditions which Moses delivered unto us.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And all that sat in the council, looking
on him, saw his face as if it had been the face of an angel.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> THEN the high priest said: Are these things
so?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Who said: Ye men, brethren, and fathers,
hear. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in
Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charan.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And said to him: Go forth out of thy
country, and from thy kindred, and come into the land which I shall shew
thee.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Then he went out of the land of the
Chaldeans, and dwelt in Charan. And from thence, after his father was
dead, he removed him into this land, wherein you now dwell.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And he gave him no inheritance in it; no,
not the pace of a foot: but he promised to give it him in possession,
and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no child.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And God said to him: That his seed should
sojourn in a strange country, and that they should bring them under
bondage, and treat them evil four hundred years.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And the nation which they shall serve will
I judge, said the Lord; and after these things they shall go out, and
shall serve me in this place.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And he gave him the covenant of
circumcision, and so he begot Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day;
and Isaac begot Jacob; and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the patriarchs, through envy, sold
Joseph into Egypt; and God was with him,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And delivered him out of all his
tribulations: and he gave him favour and wisdom in the sight of Pharao,
the king of Egypt; and he appointed him governor over Egypt, and over
all his house.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now there came a famine upon all Egypt
and Chanaan, and great tribulation; and our fathers found no food.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But when Jacob had heard that there was
corn in Egypt, he sent our fathers first:

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And at the second time, Joseph was known
by his brethren, and his kindred was made known to Pharao.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And Joseph sending, called thither Jacob,
his father, and all his kindred, seventy-five souls.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> So Jacob went down into Egypt; and he
died, and our fathers.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And they were translated into Sichem, and
were laid in the sepulchre, that Abraham bought for a sum of money of
the sons of Hemor, the son of Sichem.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And when the time of the promise drew
near, which God had promised to Abraham, the people increased, and were
multiplied in Egypt,

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Till another king arose in Egypt, who
knew not Joseph.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> This same dealing craftily with our race,
afflicted our fathers, that they should expose their children, to the
end they might not be kept alive.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> At the same time was Moses born, and he
was acceptable to God: who was nourished three months in his father's
house.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And when he was exposed, Pharao's
daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And Moses was instructed in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians; and he was mighty in his words and in his
deeds.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And when he was full forty years old, it
came into his heart to visit his brethren, the children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And when he had seen one of them suffer
wrong, he defended him; and striking the Egyptian, he avenged him who
suffered the injury.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And he thought that his brethren
understood that God by his hand would save them; but they understood it
not.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And the day following, he shewed himself
to them when they were at strife; and would have reconciled them in
peace, saying: Men, ye are brethren; why hurt you one another?

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> But he that did the injury to his
neighbour thrust him away, saying: Who hath appointed thee prince and
judge over us?

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> What, wilt thou kill me, as thou didst
yesterday kill the Egyptian?

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> And Moses fled upon this word, and was a
stranger in the land of Madian, where he begot two sons.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> And when forty years were expired, there
appeared to him in the desert of mount Sina, an angel in a flame of fire
in a bush.

<span id="an_7:31">7:31</span> And Moses seeing it, wondered at the
sight. And as he drew near to view it, the voice of the Lord came unto
him, saying:

<span id="an_7:32">7:32</span> I am the God of thy fathers; the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses being
terrified, durst not behold.

<span id="an_7:33">7:33</span> And the Lord said to him: Loose the shoes
from thy feet, for the place wherein thou standest, is holy ground.

<span id="an_7:34">7:34</span> Seeing I have seen the affliction of my
people which is in Egypt, and I have heard their groaning, and am come
down to deliver them. And now come, and I will send thee into Egypt.

<span id="an_7:35">7:35</span> This Moses, whom they refused, saying:
Who hath appointed thee prince and judge? him God sent to be prince and
redeemer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.

<span id="an_7:36">7:36</span> He brought them out, doing wonders and
signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the desert forty
years.

<span id="an_7:37">7:37</span> This is that Moses who said to the
children of Israel: A prophet shall God raise up to you of your own
brethren, as myself: him shall you hear.

<span id="an_7:38">7:38</span> This is he that was in the church in the
wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on mount Sina, and with our
fathers; who received the words of life to give unto us.

<span id="an_7:39">7:39</span> Whom our fathers would not obey; but
thrust him away, and in their hearts turned back into Egypt,

<span id="an_7:40">7:40</span> Saying to Aaron: Make us gods to go
before us. For as for this Moses, who brought us out of the land of
Egypt, we know not what is become of him.

<span id="an_7:41">7:41</span> And they made a calf in those days, and
offered sacrifices to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their own
hands.

<span id="an_7:42">7:42</span> And God turned, and gave them up to serve
the host of heaven, as it is written in the books of the prophets: Did
you offer victims and sacrifices to me for forty years, in the desert, O
house of Israel?

<span id="an_7:43">7:43</span> And you took unto you the tabernacle of
Moloch, and the star of your god Rempham, figures which you made to
adore them. And I will carry you away beyond Babylon.

<span id="an_7:44">7:44</span> The tabernacle of the testimony was with
our fathers in the desert, as God ordained for them, speaking to Moses,
that he should make it according to the form which he had seen.

<span id="an_7:45">7:45</span> Which also our fathers receiving, brought
in with Jesus, into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drove out
before the face of our fathers, unto the days of David.

<span id="an_7:46">7:46</span> Who found grace before God, and desired
to find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob.

<span id="an_7:47">7:47</span> But Solomon built him a house.

<span id="an_7:48">7:48</span> Yet the most High dwelleth not in houses
made by hands, as the prophet saith:

<span id="an_7:49">7:49</span> Heaven is my throne, and the earth my
footstool. What house will you build me? saith the Lord; or what is the
place of my resting?

<span id="an_7:50">7:50</span> Hath not my hand made all these things?

<span id="an_7:51">7:51</span> You stiffnecked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did,
so do you also.

<span id="an_7:52">7:52</span> Which of the prophets have not your
fathers persecuted? And they have slain them who foretold of the coming
of the Just One; of whom you have been now the betrayers and murderers:

<span id="an_7:53">7:53</span> Who have received the law by the
disposition of angels, and have not kept it.

<span id="an_7:54">7:54</span> Now hearing these things, they were cut
to the heart, and they gnashed with their teeth at him.

<span id="an_7:55">7:55</span> But he, being full of the Holy Ghost,
looking up steadfastly to heaven, saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God. And he said: Behold, I see the
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.

<span id="an_7:56">7:56</span> And they crying out with a loud voice,
stopped their ears, and with one accord ran violently upon him.

<span id="an_7:57">7:57</span> And casting him forth without the city,
they stoned him; and the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet
of a young man, whose name was Saul.

<span id="an_7:58">7:58</span> And they stoned Stephen, invoking, and
saying: Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.

<span id="an_7:59">7:59</span> And falling on his knees, he cried with a
loud voice, saying: Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And when he
had said this, he fell asleep in the Lord. And Saul was consenting to
his death.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> AND at that time there was raised a great
persecution against the church which was at Jerusalem; and they were all
dispersed through the countries of Judea, and Samaria, except the
apostles.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And devout men took order for Stephen's
funeral, and made great mourning over him.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> But Saul made havock of the church,
entering in from house to house, and dragging away men and women,
committed them to prison.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> They therefore that were dispersed, went
about preaching the word of God.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And Philip going down to the city of
Samaria, preached Christ unto them.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And the people with one accord were
attentive to those things which were said by Philip, hearing, and seeing
the miracles which he did.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For many of them who had unclean spirits,
crying with a loud voice, went out.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And many, taken with the palsy, and that
were lame, were healed.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> There was therefore great joy in that city.
Now there was a certain man named Simon, who before had been a magician
in that city, seducing the people of Samaria, giving out that he was
some great one:

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> To whom they all gave ear, from the least
to the greatest, saying: This man is the power of God, which is called
great.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they were attentive to him, because,
for a long time, he had bewitched them with his magical practices.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But when they had believed Philip
preaching of the kingdom of God, in the name of Jesus Christ, they were
baptized, both men and women.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Then Simon himself believed also; and
being baptized, he adhered to Philip. And being astonished, wondered to
see the signs and exceeding great miracles which were done.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Now when the apostles, who were in
Jerusalem, had heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they
sent unto them Peter and John.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Who, when they were come, prayed for
them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> For he was not as yet come upon any of
them; but they were only baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> Then they laid their hands upon them, and
they received the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And when Simon saw, that by the
imposition of the hands of the apostles, the Holy Ghost was given, he
offered them money,

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> Saying: Give me also this power, that on
whomsoever I shall lay my hands, he may receive the Holy Ghost. But
Peter said to him:

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> Keep thy money to thyself, to perish with
thee, because thou hast thought that the gift of God may be purchased
with money.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Thou hast no part nor lot in this matter.
For thy heart is not right in the sight of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> Do penance therefore for this thy
wickedness; and pray to God, that perhaps this thought of thy heart may
be forgiven thee.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> For I see thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> Then Simon answering, said: Pray you for
me to the Lord, that none of these things which you have spoken may come
upon me.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And they indeed having testified and
preached the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the
gospel to many countries of the Samaritans.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Now an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip,
saying: Arise, go towards the south, to the way that goeth down from
Jerusalem into Gaza: this is desert.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And rising up, he went. And behold a man
of Ethiopia, an eunuch, of great authority under Candace the queen of
the Ethiopians, who had charge over all her treasures, had come to
Jerusalem to adore.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And he was returning, sitting in this
chariot, and reading Isaias the prophet.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And the Spirit said to Philip: Go near,
and join thyself to this chariot.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And Philip running thither, heard him
reading the prophet Isaias. And he said: Thinkest thou that thou
understandest what thou readest?

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Who said: And how can I, unless some man
shew me? And he desired Philip that he would come up and sit with him.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And the place of the scripture which he
was reading was this: He was led as a sheep to the slaughter; and like a
lamb without voice before his shearer, so openeth he not his mouth.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> In humility his judgment was taken away.
His generation who shall declare, for his life shall be taken from the
earth?

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And the eunuch answering Philip, said: I
beseech thee, of whom doth the prophet speak this? of himself, or of
some other man?

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Then Philip, opening his mouth, and
beginning at this scripture, preached unto him Jesus.

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> And as they went on their way, they came
to a certain water; and the eunuch said: See, here is water: what doth
hinder me from being baptized?

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> And Philip said: If thou believest with
all thy heart, thou mayest. And he answering, said: I believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> And he commanded the chariot to stand
still; and they went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch:
and he baptized him.

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> And when they were come up out of the
water, the Spirit of the Lord took away Philip; and the eunuch saw him
no more. And he went on his way rejoicing.

<span id="an_8:40">8:40</span> But Philip was found in Azotus; and
passing through, he preached the gospel to all the cities, till he came
to Caesarea.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> AND Saul, as yet breathing out threatenings
and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high
priest,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And asked of him letters to Damascus, to
the synagogues: that if he found any men and wemen of this way, he might
bring them bound to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And as he went on his journey, it came to
pass that he drew nigh to Damascus; and suddenly a light from heaven
shined round about him.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And falling on the ground, he heard a voice
saying to him: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Who said: Who art thou, Lord? And he: I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kick against the
goad.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And he trembling and astonished, said:
Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And the Lord said to him: Arise, and go
into the city, and there it shall be told thee what thou must do. Now
the men who went in company with him, stood amazed, hearing indeed a
voice, but seeing no man.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And Saul arose from the ground; and when
his eyes were opened, he saw nothing. But they leading him by the hands,
brought him to Damascus.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And he was there three days, without sight,
and he did neither eat nor drink.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Now there was a certain disciple at
Damascus, named Ananias. And the Lord said to him in a vision: Ananias.
And he said: Behold I am here, Lord.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the Lord said to him: Arise, and go
into the street that is called Stait, and seek in the house of Judas,
one named Saul of Tarsus. For behold he prayeth.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> (And he saw a man named Ananias coming
in, and putting his hands upon him, that he might receive his sight.)

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> But Ananias answered: Lord, I have heard
by many of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And here he hath authority from the chief
priests to bind all that invoke thy name.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And the Lord said to him: Go thy way; for
this man is to me a vessel of election, to carry my name before the
Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For I will shew him how great things he
must suffer for my name's sake.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And Ananias went his way, and entered
into the house. And laying his hands upon him, he said: Brother Saul,
the Lord Jesus hath sent me, he that appeared to thee in the way as thou
camest; that thou mayest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy
Ghost.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And immediately there fell from his eyes
as it were scales, and he received his sight; and rising up, he was
baptized.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And when he had taken meat, he was
strengthened. And he was with the disciples that were at Damascus, for
some days.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And immediately he preached Jesus in the
synagogues, that he is the Son of God.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And all that heard him, were astonished,
and said: Is not this he who persecuted in Jerusalem those that called
upon this name: and came hither for that intent, that he might carry
them bound to the chief priests?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Saul increased much more in strength,
and confounded the Jews who dwelt at Damascus, affirming that this is
the Christ.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when many days were passed, the Jews
consulted together to kill him.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> But their laying in wait was made known
to Saul. And they watched the gates also day and night, that they might
kill him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> But the disciples taking him in the
night, conveyed him away by the wall, letting him down in a basket.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And when he was come into Jerusalem, he
essayed to join himself to the disciples; and they all were afraid of
him, not believing that he was a disciple.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> But Barnabas took him, and brought him to
the apostles, and told them how he had seen the Lord, and that he had
spoken to him; and how in Damascus he had dealt confidently in the name
of Jesus.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And he was with them coming in and going
out in Jerusalem, and dealing confidently in the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> He spoke also to the Gentiles, and
disputed with the Greeks; but they sought to kill him.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> Which when the brethren had known, they
brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him away to Tarsus.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Now the church had peace throughout all
Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria; and was edified, walking in the fear of
the Lord, and was filled with the consolation of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And it came to pass that Peter, as he
passed through, visiting all, came to the saints who dwelt at Lydda.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And he found there a certain man named
Eneas, who had kept his bed for eight years, who was ill of the palsy.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And Peter said to him: Eneas, the Lord
Jesus Christ healeth thee: arise, and make thy bed. And immediately he
arose.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron,
saw him: who were converted to the Lord.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And in Joppe there was a certain disciple
named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Dorcas. This woman was
full of good works and almsdeeds which she did.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> And it came to pass in those days that
she was sick, and died. Whom when they had washed, they laid her in an
upper chamber.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And forasmuch as Lydda was nigh to Joppe,
the disciples hearing that Peter was there, sent unto him two men,
desiring him that he would not be slack to come unto them.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> And Peter rising up, went with them. And
when he was come, they brought him into the upper chamber. And all the
widows stood about him weeping, and shewing him the coats and garments
which Dorcas made them.

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> And they all being put forth, Peter
kneeling down prayed, and turning to the body, he said: Tabitha, arise.
And she opened her eyes; and seeing Peter, she sat up.

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And giving her his hand, he lifted her
up. And when he had called the saints and the widows, he presented her
alive.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> And it was made known throughout all
Joppe; and many believed in the Lord.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And it came to pass, that he abode many
days in Joppe, with one Simon a tanner.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> AND there was a certain man in Caesarea,
named Cornelius, a centurion of that which is called the Italian band;

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> A religious man, and fearing God with all
his house, giving much alms to the people, and always praying to God.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> This man saw in a vision manifestly,
about the ninth hour of the day, an angel of God coming in unto him, and
saying to him: Cornelius.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> And he, beholding him, being seized with
fear, said: What is it, Lord? And he said to him: Thy prayers and thy
alms are ascended for a memorial in the sight of God.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And now send men to Joppe, and call
hither one Simon, who is surnamed Peter:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner, whose
house is by the sea side. He will tell thee what thou must do.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And when the angel who spoke to him was
departed, he called two of his household servants, and a soldier who
feared the Lord, of them that were under him.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> To whom when he had related all, he sent
them to Joppe.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And on the next day, whilst they were
going on their journey, and drawing nigh to the city, Peter went up to
the higher parts of the house to pray, about the sixth hour.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And being hungry, he was desirous to
taste somewhat. And as they were preparing, there came upon him an
ecstasy of mind.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And he saw the heaven opened, and a
certain vessel descending, as it were a great linen sheet let down by
the four corners from heaven to the earth:

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Wherein were all manner of fourfooted
beasts, and creeping things of the earth, and fowls of the air.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And there came a voice to him: Arise,
Peter; kill and eat.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> But Peter said: Far be it from me; for
I never did eat any thing that is common and unclean.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the voice spoke to him again the
second time: That which God hath cleansed, do not thou call common.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And this was done thrice; and presently
the vessel was taken up into heaven.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Now, whilst Peter was doubting within
himself, what the vision that he had seen should mean, behold the men
who were sent from Cornelius, inquiring for Simon's house, stood at the
gate.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And when they had called, they asked,
if Simon, who is surnamed Peter, were lodged there.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And as Peter was thinking of the
vision, the Spirit said to him: Behold three men seek thee.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Arise, therefore, get thee down and go
with them, doubting nothing: for I have sent them.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Then Peter, going down to the men,
said: Behold, I am he whom you seek; what is the cause for which you are
come?

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Who said: Cornelius, a centurion, a
just man, and one that feareth God, and having good testimony from all
the nation of the Jews, received an answer of an holy angel, to send for
thee into his house, and to hear words of thee.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Then bringing them in, he lodged them.
And the day following he arose, and went with them: and some of the
brethren from Joppe accompanied him.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And the morrow after, he entered into
Caesarea. And Cornelius waited for them, having called together his
kinsmen and special friends.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> And it came to pass, that when Peter
was come in, Cornelius came to meet him, Cornelius came to meet him, and
falling at his feet adored.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> But Peter lifted him up, saying: Arise,
I myself also am a man.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And talking with him, he went in, and
found many that were come together.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And he said to them: You know how
abominable it is for a man that is a Jew, to keep company or to come
unto one of another nation: but God hath shewed to me, to call no man
common or unclean.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> For which cause, making no doubt, I
came when I was sent for. I ask, therefore, for what cause you have sent
for me?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And Cornelius said: Four days ago, unto
this hour, I was praying in my house, at the ninth hour, and behold a
man stood before me in white apparel, and said:

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Cornelius, thy prayer is heard, and thy
alms are had in remembrance in the sight of God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Send therefore to Joppe, and call
hither Simon, who is surnamed Peter: he lodgeth in the house of Simon a
tanner, by the sea side.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Immediately therefore I sent to thee:
and thou hast done well in coming. Now therefore all we are present in
thy sight, to hear all things whatsoever are commanded thee by the Lord.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And Peter opening his mouth, said: In
very deed I perceive, that God is not a respecter of persons.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> But in every nation, he that feareth
him, and worketh justice, is acceptable to him.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> God sent the word to the children of
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ: (he is Lord of all.)

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> You know the word which hath been
published through all Judea: for it began from Galilee, after the
baptism which John preached,

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> Jesus of Nazareth: how God anointed him
with the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed by the devil, for God was with him.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> And we are witnesses of all things that
he did in the land of the Jews and in Jerusalem, whom they killed,
hanging him upon a tree.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> Him God raised up the third day, and
gave him to be made manifest,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> Not to all the people, but to witnesses
preordained by God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he
arose again from the dead;

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And he commanded us to preach to the
people, and to testify that it is he who was appointed by God, to be
judge of the living and of the dead.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> To him all the prophets give testimony,
that by his name all receive remission of sins, who believe in him.

<span id="an_10:44">10:44</span> While Peter was yet speaking these
words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word.

<span id="an_10:45">10:45</span> And the faithful of the circumcision,
who came with Peter, were astonished, for that the grace of the Holy
Ghost was poured out upon the Gentiles also.

<span id="an_10:46">10:46</span> For they heard them speaking with
tongues, and magnifying God.

<span id="an_10:47">10:47</span> Then Peter answered: Can any man forbid
water, that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy
Ghost, as well as we?

<span id="an_10:48">10:48</span> And he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Then they desired him to tarry with
them some days.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> AND the apostles and brethren, who were
in Judea, heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem,
they that were of the circumcision contended with him,

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Saying: Why didst thou go in to men
uncircumcised, and didst eat with them?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But Peter began and declared to them the
matter in order, saying:

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> I was in the city of Joppe praying, and I
saw in an ecstasy of mind a vision, a certain vessel descending, as it
were a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners, and it came
even unto me.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> Into which looking, I considered, and saw
fourfooted creatures of the earth, and beasts, and creeping things, and
fowls of the air:

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And I heard also a voice saying to me:
Arise, Peter; kill and eat.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And I said: Not so, Lord; for nothing
common or unclean hath ever entered into my mouth.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And the voice answered again from heaven:
What God hath made clean, do not thou call common.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And this was done three times: and all
were taken up again into heaven.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And behold, immediately there were
three men come to the house wherein I was, sent to me from Caesarea.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And the Spirit said to me, that I
should go with them, nothing doubting. And these six brethren went with
me also: and we entered into the man's house.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And he told us how he had seen an angel
in his house, standing, and saying to him: Send to Joppe, and call
hither Simon, who is surnamed Peter,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Who shall speak to thee words, whereby
thou shalt be saved, and all thy house.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And when I had begun to speak, the Holy
Ghost fell upon them, as upon us also in the beginning.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And I remembered the word of the Lord,
how that he said: John indeed baptized with water, but you shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> If then God gave them the same grace,
as to us also who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ; who was I, that
could withstand God?

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Having heard these things, they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying: God then hath also to the
Gentiles given repentance unto life.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Now they who had been dispersed by the
persecution that arose on occasion of Stephen, went about as far as
Phenice and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to none, but to the
Jews only.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But some of them were men of Cyprus and
Cyrene, who, when they were entered into Antioch, spoke also to the
Greeks, preaching the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And the hand of the Lord was with them:
and a great number believing, were converted to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And the tidings came to the ears of the
church that was at Jerusalem, touching these things: and they sent
Barnabas as far as Antioch.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> Who, when he was come, and had seen the
grace of God, rejoiced: and he exhorted them all with purpose of heart
to continue in the Lord.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For he was a good man, and full of the
Holy Ghost and of faith. And a great multitude was added to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> And Barnabas went to Tarsus to seek
Saul: whom, when he had found, he brought to Antioch.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And they conversed there in the church
a whole year; and they taught a great multitude, so that at Antioch the
disciples were first named Christians.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And in these days there came prophets
from Jerusalem to Antioch:

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And one of them named Agabus, rising
up, signified by the Spirit, that there should be a great famine over
the whole world, which came to pass under Claudius.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> And the disciples, every man according
to his ability, purposed to send relief to the brethren who dwelt in
Judea:

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> Which also they did, sending it to the
ancients, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> AND at the same time, Herod the king
stretched forth his hands, to afflict some of the church.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And he killed James, the brother of John,
with the sword.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And seeing that it pleased the Jews, he
proceeded to take up Peter also. Now it was in the days of the Azymes.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And when he had apprehended him, he cast
him into prison, delivering him to four files of soldiers to be kept,
intending, after the pasch, to bring him forth to the people.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Peter therefore was kept in prison. But
prayer was made without ceasing by the church unto God for him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And when Herod would have brought him
forth, the same night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound
with two chains: and the keepers before the door kept the prison.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And behold an angel of the Lord stood by
him: and a light shined in the room: and he striking Peter on the side,
raised him up, saying: Arise quickly. And the chains fell off from his
hands.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And the angel said to him: Gird thyself,
and put on thy sandals. And he did so. And he said to him: Cast thy
garment about thee, and follow me.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And going out, he followed him, and he
knew not that it was true which was done by the angel: but thought he
saw a vision.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And passing through the first and the
second ward, they came to the iron gate that leadeth to the city, which
of itself opened to them. And going out, they passed on through one
street: and immediately the angel departed from him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And Peter coming to himself, said: Now
I know in very deed, that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath
delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of
the people of the Jews.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And considering, he came to the house
of Mary the mother of John, who was surnamed Mark, where many were
gathered together and praying.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And when he knocked at the door of the
gate, a damsel came to hearken, whose name was Rhode.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And as soon as she knew Peter's voice,
she opened not the gate for joy, but running in she told that Peter
stood before the gate.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> But they said to her: Thou art mad. But
she affirmed that it was so. Then said they: It is his angel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> But Peter continued knocking. And when
they had opened, they saw him, and were astonished.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> But he beckoning to them with his hand
to hold their peace, told how the Lord had brought him out of prison,
and he said: Tell these things to James, and to the brethren. And going
out, he went into another place.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Now when day was come, there was no
small stir among the soldiers, what was become of Peter.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And when Herod had sought for him, and
found him not; having examined the keepers, he commanded they should be
put to death; and going down from Judea to Caesarea, he abode there.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> And he was angry with the Tyrians and
the Sidonians. But they with one accord came to him, and having gained
Blastus, who was the king's chamberlain, they desired peace, because
their countries were nourished by him.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And upon a day appointed, Herod being
arrayed in kingly apparel, sat in the judgment seat, and made an oration
to them.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And the people made acclamation,
saying: It is the voice of a god, and not of a man.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And forthwith an angel of the Lord
struck him, because he had not given the honour to God: and being eaten
up by worms, he gave up the ghost.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the word of the Lord increased and
multiplied.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Barnabas and Saul returned from
Jerusalem, having fulfilled their ministry, taking with them John, who
was surnamed Mark.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> NOW there were in the church which was at
Antioch, prophets and doctors, among whom was Barnabas, and Simon who
was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manahen, who was the foster
brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And as they were ministering to the Lord,
and fasting, the Holy Ghost said to them: Separate me Saul and Barnabas,
for the work whereunto I have taken them.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Then they, fasting and praying, and
imposing their hands upon them, sent them away.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> So they being sent by the Holy Ghost,
went to Seleucia: and from thence they sailed to Cyprus.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And when they were come to Salamina, they
preached the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews. And they had
John also in the ministry.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when they had gone through the whole
island, as far as Paphos, they found a certain man, a magician, a false
prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar-jesu:

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Who was with the proconsul Sergius
Paulus, a prudent man. He sending for Barnabas and Saul, desired to hear
the word of God.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> But Elymas the magician (for so his name
is interpreted) withstood them, seeking to turn away the proconsul from
the faith.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Then Saul, otherwise Paul, filled with
the Holy Ghost, looking upon him,

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Said: O full of all guile, and of all
deceit, child of the devil, enemy of all justice, thou ceasest not to
pervert the right ways of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And now behold, the hand of the Lord is
upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a time. And
immediately there fell a mist and darkness upon him, and going about, he
sought some one to lead him by the hand.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Then the proconsul, when he had seen
what was done, believed, admiring at the doctrine of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Now when Paul and they that were with
him had sailed from Paphos, they came to Perge in Pamphylia. And John
departing from them, returned to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But they passing through Perge, came to
Antioch in Pisidia: and entering into the synagogue on the sabbath day,
they sat down.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And after the reading of the law and
the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying: Ye men,
brethren, if you have any word of exhortation to make to the people,
speak.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Then Paul rising up, and with his hand
bespeaking silence, said: Ye men of Israel, and you that fear God, give
ear.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The God of the people of Israel chose
our fathers, and exalted the people when they were sojourners in the
land of Egypt, and with an high arm brought them out from thence,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And for the space of forty years
endured their manners in the desert.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And destroying seven nations in the
land of Chanaan, divided their land among them, by lot,

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> As it were, after four hundred and
fifty years: and after these things, he gave unto them judges, until
Samuel the prophet.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And after that they desired a king: and
God gave them Saul the son of Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, forty
years.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And when he had removed him, he raised
them up David to be king: to whom giving testimony, he said: I have
found David, the son of Jesse, a man according to my own heart, who
shall do all my wills.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Of this man's seed God according to his
promise, hath raised up to Israel a Saviour, Jesus:

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> John first preaching, before his
coming, the baptism of penance to all the people of Israel.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And when John was fulfilling his
course, he said: I am not he, whom you think me to be: but behold, there
cometh one after me, whose shoes of his feet I am not worthy to loose.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> Men, brethren, children of the stock of
Abraham, and whosoever among you fear God, to you the word of this
salvation is sent.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> For they that inhabited Jerusalem, and
the rulers thereof, not knowing him, nor the voices of the prophets,
which are read every sabbath, judging him have fulfilled them.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And finding no cause of death in him,
they desired of Pilate, that they might kill him.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And when they had fulfilled all things
that were written of him, taking him down from the tree, they laid him
in a sepulchre.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> But God raised him up from the dead the
third day:

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Who was seen for many days, by them who
came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who to this present are his
witnesses to the people.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> And we declare unto you, that the
promise which was made to our fathers,

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> This same God hath fulfilled to our
children, raising up Jesus, as in the second psalm also is written: Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> And to shew that he raised him up from
the dead, not to return now any more to corruption, he said thus: I will
give you the holy things of David faithful.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> And therefore, in another place also,
he saith: Thou shalt not suffer thy holy one to see corruption.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> For David, when he had served in his
generation, according to the will of God, slept: and was laid unto his
fathers, and saw corruption.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> But he whom God hath raised from the
dead, saw no corruption.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> Be it known therefore to you, men,
brethren, that through him forgiveness of sins is preached to you: and
from all the things, from which you could not be justified by the law of
Moses.

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> In him every one that believeth, is
justified.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> Beware, therefore, lest that come upon
you which is spoken in the prophets:

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which you will not
believe, if any man shall tell it you.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And as they went out, they desired
them, that on the next sabbath, they would speak unto them these words.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> And when the synagogue was broken up,
many of the Jews, and of the strangers who served God, followed Paul and
Barnabas: who speaking to them, persuaded them to continue in the grace
of God.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> But the next sabbath day, the whole
city almost came together, to hear the word of God.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> And the Jews seeing the multitudes,
were filled with envy, and contradicted those things which were said by
Paul, blaspheming.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> Then Paul and Barnabas said boldly: To
you it behoved us first to speak the word of God: but because you reject
it, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold we turn to the
Gentiles.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> For so the Lord hath commanded us: I
have set thee to be the light of the Gentiles; that thou mayest be for
salvation unto the utmost part of the earth.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> And the Gentiles hearing it, were glad,
and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to life
everlasting, believed.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> And the word of the Lord was published
throughout the whole country.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> But the Jews stirred up religious and
honourable women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution
against Paul and Barnabas: and cast them out of their coasts.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> But they, shaking off the dust of their
feet against them, came to Iconium.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> And the disciples were filled with joy
and with the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> AND it came to pass in Iconium, that they
entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a
very great multitude both of the Jews and of the Greeks did believe.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> But the unbelieving Jews stirred up and
incensed the minds of the Gentiles against the brethren.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> A long time therefore they abode there,
dealing confidently in the Lord, who gave testimony to the word of his
grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And the multitude of the city was
divided; and some of them indeed held with the Jews, but some with the
apostles.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And when there was an assault made by the
Gentiles and the Jews with their rulers, to use them contumeliously, and
to stone them:

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> They understanding it, fled to Lystra,
and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia, and to the whole country round about, and
were there preaching the gospel.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And there sat a certain man at Lystra,
impotent in his feet, a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had
walked.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> This same heard Paul speaking. Who
looking upon him, and seeing that he had faith to be healed,

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Said with a loud voice: Stand upright on
thy feet. And he leaped up, and walked.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And when the multitudes had seen what
Paul had done, they lifted up their voice in the Lycaonian tongue,
saying: The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men;

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they called Barnabas, Jupiter: but
Paul, Mercury; because he was chief speaker.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> The priest also of Jupiter that was
before the city, bringing oxen and garlands before the gate, would have
offered sacrifice with the people.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Which, when the apostles Barnabas and
Paul had heard, rending their clothes, they leaped out among the people,
crying,

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And saying: Ye men, why do ye these
things? We also are mortals, men like unto you, preaching to you to be
converted from these vain things, to the living God, who made the
heaven, and the earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them:

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Who in times past suffered all nations
to walk in their own ways.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Nevertheless he left not himself
without testimony, doing good from heaven, giving rains and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And speaking these things, they scarce
restrained the people from sacrificing to them.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> Now there came thither certain Jews
from Antioch, and Iconium: and persuading the multitude, and stoning
Paul, drew him out of the city, thinking him to be dead.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But as the disciples stood round about
him, he rose up and entered into the city, and the next day he departed
with Barnabas to Derbe.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And when they had preached the gospel
to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra, and to
Iconium, and to Antioch:

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Confirming the souls of the disciples,
and exhorting them to continue in the faith: and that through many
tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And when they had ordained to them
priests in every church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended
them to the Lord, in whom they believed.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And passing through Pisidia, they came
into Pamphylia.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And having spoken the word of the Lord
in Perge, they went down into Attalia:

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And thence they sailed to Antioch, from
whence they had been delivered to the grace of God, unto the work which
they accomplished.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And when they were come, and had
assembled the church, they related what great things God had done with
them, and how he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And they abode no small time with the
disciples.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> AND some coming down from Judea, taught
the brethren: That except you be circumcised after the manner of Moses,
you cannot be saved.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> And when Paul and Barnabas had no small
contest with them, they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain
others of the other side, should go up to the apostles and priests to
Jerusalem about this question.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> They therefore being brought on their way
by the church, passed through Phenice, and Samaria, relating the
conversion of the Gentiles; and they caused great joy to all the
brethren.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And when they were come to Jerusalem,
they were received by the church, and by the apostles and ancients,
declaring how great things God had done with them.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But there arose some of the sect of the
Pharisees that believed, saying: They must be circumcised, and be
commanded to observe the law of Moses.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the apostles and ancients assembled
to consider of this matter.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And when there had been much disputing,
Peter, rising up, said to them: Men, brethren, you know, that in former
days God made choice among us, that by my mouth the Gentiles should hear
the word of the gospel, and believe.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And God, who knoweth the hearts, gave
testimony, giving unto them the Holy Ghost, as well as to us;

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And put no difference between us and
them, purifying their hearts by faith.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Now therefore, why tempt you God to put
a yoke upon the necks of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we
have been able to bear?

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> But by the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, we believe to be saved, in like manner as they also.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And all the multitude held their peace;
and they heard Barnabas and Paul telling what great signs and wonders
God had wrought among the Gentiles by them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> And after they had held their peace,
James answered, saying: Men, brethren, hear me.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Simon hath related how God first
visited to take of the Gentiles a people to his name.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And to this agree the words of the
prophets, as it is written:

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> After these things I will return, and
will rebuild the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down; and the
ruins thereof I will rebuild, and I will set it up:

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> That the residue of men may seek after
the Lord, and all nations upon whom my name is invoked, saith the Lord,
who doth these things.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> To the Lord was his own work known from
the beginning of the world.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For which cause I judge that they, who
from among the Gentiles are converted to God, are not to be disquieted.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> But that we write unto them, that they
refrain themselves from the pollutions of idols, and from fornication,
and from things strangled, and from blood.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> For Moses of old time hath in every
city them that preach him in the synagogues, where he is read every
sabbath.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Then it pleased the apostles and
ancients, with the whole church, to choose men of their own company, and
to send to Antioch, with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas, who was
surnamed Barsabas, and Silas, chief men among the brethren.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Writing by their hands: The apostles
and ancients, brethren, to the brethren of the Gentiles that are at
Antioch, and in Syria and Cilicia, greeting.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Forasmuch as we have heard, that some
going out from us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls;
to whom we gave no commandment:

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> It hath seemed good to us, being
assembled together, to choose out men, and to send them unto you, with
our well beloved Barnabas and Paul:

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Men that have given their lives for the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> We have sent therefore Judas and Silas,
who themselves also will, by word of mouth, tell you the same things.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> For it hath seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us, to lay no further burden upon you than these necessary
things:

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> That you abstain from things sacrificed
to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from
fornication; from which things keeping yourselves, you shall do well.
Fare ye well.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> They therefore being dismissed, went
down to Antioch; and gathering together the multitude, delivered the
epistle.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> Which when they had read, they rejoiced
for the consolation.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> But Judas and Silas, being prophets
also themselves, with many words comforted the brethren, and confirmed
them.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And after they had spent some time
there, they were let go with peace by the brethren, unto them that had
sent them.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> But it seemed good unto Silas to remain
there; and Judas alone departed to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And Paul and Barnabas continued at
Antioch, teaching and preaching, with many others, the word of the Lord.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And after some days, Paul said to
Barnabas: Let us return and visit our brethren in all the cities wherein
we have preached the word of the Lord, to see how they do.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And Barnabas would have taken with them
John also, that was surnamed Mark;

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> But Paul desired that he (as having
departed from them out of Pamphylia, and not gone with them to the work)
might not be received.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And there arose a dissension, so that
they departed one from another; and Barnabas indeed taking Mark, sailed
to Cyprus.

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> But Paul choosing Silas, departed,
being delivered by the brethren to the grace of God.

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And he went through Syria and Cilicia,
confirming the churches, commanding them to keep the precepts of the
apostles and the ancients.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> AND he came to Derbe and Lystra. And
behold, there was a certain disciple there named Timothy, the son of a
Jewish woman that believed; but his father was a Gentile.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> To this man the brethren that were in
Lystra and Iconium, gave a good testimony.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Him Paul would have to go along with him:
and taking him he circumcised him, because of the Jews who were in those
places. For they all knew that his father was a Gentile.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And as they passed through the cities,
they delivered unto them the decrees for to keep, that were decreed by
the apostles and ancients who were at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And the churches were confirmed in faith,
and increased in number daily.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And when they had passed through Phrygia,
and the country of Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Ghost to
preach the word in Asia.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And when they were come into Mysia, they
attempted to go into Bythynia, and the Spirit of Jesus suffered them
not.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And when they had passed through Mysia,
they went down to Troas.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And a vision was shewed to Paul in the
night, which was a man of Macedonia standing and beseeching him, and
saying: Pass over into Macedonia, and help us.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And as soon as he had seen the vision,
immediately we sought to go into Macedonia, being assured that God had
called us to preach the gospel to them.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And sailing from Troas, we came with a
straight course to Samothracia, and the day following to Neapolis;

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And from thence to Philippi, which is
the chief city of part of Macedonia, a colony. And we were in this city
some days conferring together.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And upon the sabbath day, we went forth
without the gate by a river side, where it seemed that there was prayer;
and sitting down, we spoke to the women that were assembled.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And a certain woman named Lydia, a
seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, one that worshipped God, did
hear: whose heart the Lord opened to attend to those things which were
said by Paul.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when she was baptized, and her
household, she besought us, saying: If you have judged me to be faithful
to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there. And she constrained
us.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And it came to pass, as we went to
prayer, a certain girl, having a pythonical spirit, met us, who brought
to her masters much gain by divining.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> This same following Paul and us, cried
out, saying: These men are the servants of the most high God, who preach
unto you the way of salvation.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And this she did many days. But Paul
being grieved, turned, and said to the spirit: I command thee, in the
name of Jesus Christ, to go out from her. And he went out the same hour.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> But her masters, seeing that the hope
of their gain was gone, apprehending Paul and Silas, brought them into
the marketplace to the rulers.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And presenting them to the magistrates,
they said: These men disturb our city, being Jews;

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> And preach a fashion which it is not
lawful for us to receive nor observe, being Romans.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And the people ran together against
them; and the magistrates rending off their clothes, commanded them to
be beaten with rods.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And when they had laid many stripes
upon them, they cast them into prison, charging the gaoler to keep them
diligently.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Who having received such a charge,
thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the
stocks.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And at midnight, Paul and Silas
praying, praised God. And they that were in prison, heard them.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And suddenly there was a great
earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken. And
immediately all the doors were opened, and the bands of all were loosed.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the keeper of the prison, awaking
out of his sleep, and seeing the doors of the prison open, drawing his
sword, would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been
fled.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> But Paul cried with a loud voice,
saying: Do thyself no harm, for we all are here.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> Then calling for a light, he went in,
and trembling, fell down at the feet of Paul and Silas.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And bringing them out, he said:
Masters, what must I do, that I may be saved?

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> But they said: Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And they preached the word of the Lord
to him and to all that were in his house.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And he, taking them the same hour of
the night, washed their stripes, and himself was baptized, and all his
house immediately.

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> And when he had brought them into his
own house, he laid the table for them, and rejoiced with all his house,
believing God.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And when the day was come, the
magistrates sent the serjeants, saying, Let those men go.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> And the keeper of the prison told these
words to Paul: The magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore
depart, and go in peace.

<span id="an_16:37">16:37</span> But Paul said to them: They have beaten
us publicly, uncondemned, men that are Romans, and have cast us into
prison: and now do they thrust us out privately? Not so; but let them
come,

<span id="an_16:38">16:38</span> And let us out themselves. And the
serjeants told these words to the magistrates. And they were afraid,
hearing that they were Romans.

<span id="an_16:39">16:39</span> And coming, they besought them; and
bringing them out, they desired them to depart out of the city.

<span id="an_16:40">16:40</span> And they went out of the prison, and
entered into the house of Lydia; and having seen the brethren, they
comforted them, and departed.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> AND when they had passed through
Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a
synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And Paul, according to his custom, went
in unto them; and for three sabbath days he reasoned with them out of
the scriptures:

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Declaring and insinuating that the Christ
was to suffer, and to rise again from the dead; and that this is Jesus
Christ, whom I preach to you.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And some of them believed, and were
associated to Paul and Silas; and of those that served God, and of the
Gentiles a great multitude, and of noble women not a few.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> But the Jews, moved with envy, and taking
unto them some wicked men of the vulgar sort, and making a tumult, set
the city in an uproar; and besetting Jason's house, sought to bring them
out unto the people.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And not finding them, they drew Jason and
certain brethren to the rulers of the city, crying: They that set the
city in an uproar, are come hither also;

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Whom Jason hath received; and these all
do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king,
Jesus.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And they stirred up the people, and the
rulers of the city hearing these things,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And having taken satisfaction of Jason
and of the rest, they let them go.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> But the brethren immediately sent away
Paul and Silas by night unto Berea. Who, when they were come thither,
went into the synagogue of the Jews.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> Now these were more noble than those in
Thessalonica, who received the word with all eagerness, daily searching
the scriptures, whether these things were so.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And many indeed of them believed, and
of honourable women that were Gentiles, and of men not a few.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And when the Jews of Thessalonica had
knowledge that the word of God was also preached by Paul at Berea, they
came thither also, stirring up and troubling the multitude.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And then immediately the brethren sent
away Paul, to go unto the sea; but Silas and Timothy remained there.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And they that conducted Paul, brought
him as far as Athens; and receiving a commandment from him to Silas and
Timothy, that they should come to him with all speed, they departed.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Now whilst Paul waited for them at
Athens, his spirit was stirred within him, seeing the city wholly given
to idolatry.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> He disputed, therefore, in the
synagogue with the Jews, and with them that served God, and in the
marketplace, every day with them that were there.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> And certain philosophers of the
Epicureans and of the Stoics disputed with him; and some said: What is
it, that this word sower would say? But others: He seemeth to be a
setter forth of new gods; because he preached to them Jesus and the
resurrection.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> And taking him, they brought him to the
Areopagus, saying: May we know what this new doctrine is, which thou
speakest of?

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> For thou bringest in certain new things
to our ears. We would know therefore what these things mean.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> (Now all the Athenians, and strangers
that were there, employed themselves in nothing else, but either in
telling or in hearing some new thing.)

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> But Paul standing in the midst of the
Areopagus, said: Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things you are
too superstitious.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> For passing by, and seeing your idols,
I found an altar also, on which was written: To the unknown God. What
therefore you worship, without knowing it, that I preach to you:

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> God, who made the world, and all things
therein; he, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples
made with hands;

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> Neither is he served with men's hands,
as though he needed any thing; seeing it is he who giveth to all life,
and breath, and all things:

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> And hath made of one, all mankind, to
dwell upon the whole face of the earth, determining appointed times, and
the limits of their habitation.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> That they should seek God, if happily
they may feel after him or find him, although he be not far from every
one of us:

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> For in him we live, and move, and are;
as some also of your own poets said: For we are also his offspring.

<span id="an_17:29">17:29</span> Being therefore the offspring of God,
we must not suppose the divinity to be like unto gold, or silver, or
stone, the graving of art, and device of man.

<span id="an_17:30">17:30</span> And God indeed having winked at the
times of this ignorance, now declareth unto men, that all should every
where do penance.

<span id="an_17:31">17:31</span> Because he hath appointed a day wherein
he will judge the world in equity, by the man whom he hath appointed;
giving faith to all, by raising him up from the dead.

<span id="an_17:32">17:32</span> And when they had heard of the
resurrection of the dead, some indeed mocked, but others said: We will
hear thee again concerning this matter.

<span id="an_17:33">17:33</span> So Paul went out from among them.

<span id="an_17:34">17:34</span> But certain men adhering to him, did
believe; among whom was also Dionysius, the Areopagite, and a woman
named Damaris, and others with them.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> AFTER these things, departing from
Athens, he came to Corinth.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And finding a certain Jew, named Aquila,
born in Pontus, lately come from Italy, with Priscilla his wife,
(because that Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome,) he
came to them.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And because he was of the same trade, he
remained with them, and wrought; (now they were tentmakers by trade.)

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And he reasoned in the synagogue every
sabbath, bringing in the name of the Lord Jesus; and he persuaded the
Jews and the Greeks.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And when Silas and Timothy were come from
Macedonia, Paul was earnest in preaching, testifying to the Jews, that
Jesus is the Christ.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But they gainsaying and blaspheming, he
shook his garments, and said to them: Your blood be upon your own heads;
I am clean: from henceforth I will go unto the Gentiles.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And departing thence, he entered into the
house of a certain man, named Titus Justus, one that worshipped God,
whose house was adjoining to the synagogue.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue,
believed in the Lord, with all his house; and many of the Corinthians
hearing, believed, and were baptized.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And the Lord said to Paul in the nights,
by a vision: Do not fear, but speak; and hold not thy peace,

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> Because I am with thee: and no man
shall set upon thee, to hurt thee; for I have much people in this city.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And he stayed there a year and six
months, teaching among them the word of God.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> But when Gallio was proconsul of
Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul, and brought him
to the judgment seat,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Saying: This man persuadeth men to
worship God contrary to the law.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And when Paul was beginning to open his
mouth, Gallio said to the Jews: If it were some matter of injustice, or
an heinous deed, O Jews, I should with reason bear with you.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> But if they be questions of word and
names, and of your law, look you to it: I will not be judge of such
things.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And he drove them from the judgment
seat.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And all laying hold on Sosthenes, the
ruler of the synagogue, beat him before the judgment seat; and Gallio
cared for none of those things.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> But Paul, when he had stayed yet many
days, taking his leave of the brethren, sailed thence into Syria (and
with him Priscilla and Aquila), having shorn his head in Cenchrae: for
he had a vow.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And he came to Ephesus, and left them
there. But he himself entering into the synagogue, disputed with the
Jews.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And when they desired him, that he
would tarry a longer time, he consented not;

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> But taking his leave, and saying: I
will return to you again, God willing, he departed from Ephesus.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And going down to Caesarea, he went up
to Jerusalem, and saluted the church, and so came down to Antioch.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And after he had spent some time there,
he departed, and went through the country of Galatia and Phrygia, in
order, confirming all the disciples.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> Now a certain Jew, named Apollo, born
at Alexandria, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus, one mighty in the
scriptures.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> This man was instructed in the way of
the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, spoke, and taught diligently the
things that are of Jesus, knowing only the baptism of John.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> This man therefore began to speak
boldly in the synagogue. Whom when Priscilla and Aquila had heard, they
took him to them, and expounded to him the way of the Lord more
diligently.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And whereas he was desirous to go to
Achaia, the brethren exhorting, wrote to the disciples to receive him.
Who, when he was come, helped them much who had believed.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> For with much vigour he convinced the
Jews openly, shewing by the scriptures, that Jesus is the Christ.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> AND it came to pass, while Apollo was at
Corinth, that Paul having passed through the upper coasts, came to
Ephesus, and found certain disciples.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And he said to them: Have you received
the Holy Ghost since ye believed? But they said to him: We have not so
much as heard whether there be a Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And he said: In what then were you
baptized? Who said: In John's baptism.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Then Paul said: John baptized the people
with the baptism of penance, saying: That they should believe in him who
was to come after him, that is to say, in Jesus.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> Having heard these things, they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And when Paul had imposed his hands on
them, the Holy Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with tongues and
prophesied.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> And all the men were about twelve.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And entering into the synagogue, he spoke
boldly for the space of three months, disputing and exhorting concerning
the kingdom of God.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> But when some were hardened, and believed
not, speaking evil of the way of the Lord, before the multitude,
departing from them, he separated the disciples, disputing daily in the
school of one Tyrannus.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And this continued for the space of two
years, so that all they who dwelt in Asia, heard the word of the Lord,
both Jews and Gentiles.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And God wrought by the hand of Paul
more than common miracles.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> So that even there were brought from
his body to the sick, handkerchiefs and aprons, and the diseases
departed from them, and the wicked spirits went out of them.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Now some also of the Jewish exorcists
who went about, attempted to invoke over them that had evil spirits, the
name of the Lord Jesus, saying: I conjure you by Jesus, whom Paul
preacheth.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And there were certain men, seven sons
of Sceva, a Jew, a chief priest, that did this.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> But the wicked spirit, answering, said
to them: Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are you?

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And the man in whom the wicked spirit
was, leaping upon them, and mastering them both, prevailed against them,
so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And this became known to all the Jews
and the Gentiles that dwelt at Ephesus; and fear fell on them all, and
the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And many of them that believed, came
confessing and declaring their deeds.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And many of them who had followed
curious arts, brought together their books, and burnt them before all;
and counting the price of them, they found the money to be fifty
thousand pieces of silver.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> So mightily grew the word of God, and
was confirmed.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And when these things were ended, Paul
purposed in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia,
to go to Jerusalem, saying: After I have been there, I must see Rome
also.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And sending into Macedonia two of them
that ministered to him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself remained for a
time in Asia.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Now at that time there arose no small
disturbance about the way of the Lord.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> For a certain man named Demetrius, a
silversmith, who made silver temples for Diana, brought no small gain to
the craftsmen;

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Whom he calling together, with the
workmen of like occupation, said: Sirs, you know that our gain is by
this trade;

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And you see and hear, that this Paul by
persuasion hath drawn away a great multitude, not only of Ephesus, but
almost of all Asia, saying: They are not gods which are made by hands.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> So that not only this our craft is in
danger to be set at nought, but also the temple of great Diana shall be
reputed for nothing; yea, and her majesty shall begin to be destroyed,
whom all Asia and the world worshippeth.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> Having heard these things, they were
full of anger, and cried out, saying: Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And the whole city was filled with
confusion; and having caught Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia,
Paul's companions, they rushed with one accord into the theatre.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And when Paul would have entered in
unto the people, the disciples suffered him not.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> And some also of the rulers of Asia,
who were his friends, sent unto him, desiring that he would not venture
himself into the theatre.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> Now some cried one thing, some another.
For the assembly was confused, and the greater part knew not for what
cause they were come together.

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And they drew forth Alexander out of
the multitude, the Jews thrusting him forward. And Alexander beckoning
with his hand for silence, would have given the people satisfaction.

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> But as soon as they perceived him to be
a Jew, all with one voice, for the space of about two hours, cried out:
Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And when the town clerk had appeased
the multitudes, he said: Ye men of Ephesus, what man is there that
knoweth not that the city of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great
Diana, and of Jupiter's offspring.

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> For as much therefore as these things
cannot be contradicted, you ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> For you have brought hither these men,
who are neither guilty of sacrilege, nor of blasphemy against your
goddess.

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> But if Demetrius and the craftsmen that
are with him, have a matter against any man, the courts of justice are
open, and there are proconsuls: let them accuse one another.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> And if you inquire after any other
matter, it may be decided in a lawful assembly.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> For we are even in danger to be called
in question for this day's uproar, there being no man guilty (of whom we
may give account) of this concourse. And when he had said these things,
he dismissed the assembly.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> AND after the tumult was ceased, Paul
calling to him the disciples, and exhorting them, took his leave, and
set forward to go into Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And when he had gone over those parts,
and had exhorted them with many words, he came into Greece;

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Where, when he had spent three months,
the Jews laid wait for him, as he was about to sail into Syria; so he
took a resolution to return through Macedonia.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And there accompanied him Sopater the son
of Pyrrhus, of Berea; and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus, and
Secundus, and Gaius of Derbe, and Timothy; and of Asia, Tychicus and
Trophimus.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> These going before, stayed for us at
Troas.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> But we sailed from Philippi after the
days of the Azymes, and came to them to Troas in five days, where we
abode seven days.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And on the first day of the week, when we
were assembled to break bread, Paul discoursed with them, being to
depart on the morrow: and he continued his speech until midnight.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And there were a great number of lamps in
the upper chamber where we were assembled.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> And a certain young man named Eutychus,
sitting on the window, being oppressed with a deep sleep, (as Paul was
long preaching,) by occasion of his sleep fell from the third loft down,
and was taken up dead.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> To whom, when Paul had gone down, he
laid himself upon him, and embracing him, said: Be not troubled, for his
soul is in him.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> Then going up, and breaking bread and
tasting, and having talked a long time to them, until daylight, so he
departed.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And they brought the youth alive, and
were not a little comforted.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But we, going aboard the ship, sailed
to Assos, being there to take in Paul; for so he had appointed, himself
purposing to travel by land.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> And when he had met with us at Assos,
we took him in, and came to Mitylene.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And sailing thence, the day following
we came over against Chios; and the next day we arrived at Samos; and
the day following we came to Miletus.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> For Paul had determined to sail by
Ephesus, lest he should be stayed any time in Asia. For he hasted, if it
were possible for him, to keep the day of Pentecost at Jerusalem.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And sending from Miletus to Ephesus, he
called the ancients of the church.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And when they were come to him, and
were together, he said to them: You know from the first day that I came
into Asia, in what manner I have been with you, for all the time,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Serving the Lord with all humility, and
with tears, and temptations which befell me by the conspiracies of the
Jews;

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> How I have kept back nothing that was
profitable to you, but have preached it to you, and taught you publicly,
and from house to house,

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Testifying both to Jews and Gentiles
penance towards God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And now, behold, being bound in the
spirit, I go to Jerusalem: not knowing the things which shall befall me
there:

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Save that the Holy Ghost in every city
witnesseth to me, saying: That bands and afflictions wait for me at
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> But I fear none of these things,
neither do I count my life more precious than myself, so that I may
consummate my course and the ministry of the word which I received from
the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And now behold, I know that all you,
among whom I have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face
no more.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Wherefore I take you to witness this
day, that I am clear from the blood of all men;

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> For I have not spared to declare unto
you all the counsel of God.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Take heed to yourselves, and to the
whole flock, wherein the Holy Ghost hath placed you bishops, to rule the
church of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> I know that, after my departure,
ravening wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And of your own selves shall arise men
speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> Therefore watch, keeping in memory,
that for three years I ceased not, with tears to admonish every one of
you night and day.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And now I commend you to God, and to
the word of his grace, who is able to build up, and to give an
inheritance among all the sanctified.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> I have not coveted any man's silver,
gold, or apparel, as

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> You yourselves know: for such things as
were needful for me and them that are with me, these hands have
furnished.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> I have shewed you all things, how that
so labouring you ought to support the weak, and to remember the word of
the Lord Jesus, how he said: It is a more blessed thing to give, rather
than to receive.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> And when he had said these things,
kneeling down, he prayed with them all.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And there was much weeping among them
all; and falling on the neck of Paul, they kissed him,

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Being grieved most of all for the word
which he had said, that they should see his face no more. And they
brought him on his way to the ship.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> AND when it came to pass that, being
parted from them, we set sail, we came with a straight course to Coos,
and the day following to Rhodes, and from thence to Patara.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And when we had found a ship sailing over
to Phenice, we went aboard, and set forth.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And when we had discovered Cyprus,
leaving it on the left hand, we sailed into Syria, and came to Tyre: for
there the ship was to unlade her burden.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And finding disciples, we tarried there
seven days: who said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go
up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And the days being expired, departing we
went forward, they all bringing us on our way, with their wives and
children, till we were out of the city: and we kneeled down on the
shore, and we prayed.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And when we had bid one another farewell,
we took ship; and they returned home.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> But we having finished the voyage by sea,
from Tyre came down to Ptolemais: and saluting the brethren, we abode
one day with them.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the next day departing, we came to
Caesarea. And entering into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was
one of the seven, we abode with him.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And he had four daughters, virgins, who
did prophesy.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And as we tarried there for some days,
there came from Judea a certain prophet, named Agabus.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Who, when he was come to us, took
Paul's girdle: and binding his own feet and hands, he said: Thus saith
the Holy Ghost: The man whose girdle this is, the Jews shall bind in
this manner in Jerusalem, and shall deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> Which when we had heard, both we and
they that were of that place, desired him that he would not go up to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> Then Paul answered, and said: What do
you mean weeping and afflicting my heart? For I am ready not only to be
bound, but to die also in Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And when we could not persuade him, we
ceased, saying: The will of the Lord be done.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And after those days, being prepared,
we went up to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And there went also with us some of the
disciples from Caesarea, bringing with them one Mnason a Cyprian, an old
disciple, with whom we should lodge.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And when we were come to Jerusalem, the
brethren received us gladly.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And the day following, Paul went in
with us unto James; and all the ancients were assembled.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> Whom when he had saluted, he related
particularly what things God had wrought among the Gentiles by his
ministry.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> But they hearing it, glorified God, and
said to him: Thou seest, brother, how many thousands there are among the
Jews that have believed: and they are all zealous for the law.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Now they have heard of thee that thou
teachest those Jews, who are among the Gentiles, to depart from Moses:
saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children, nor walk
according to the custom.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> What is it therefore? the multitude
must needs come together: for they will hear that thou art come.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> Do therefore this that we say to thee.
We have four men, who have a vow on them.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Take these, and sanctify thyself with
them: and bestow on them, that they may shave their heads: and all will
know that the things which they have heard of thee, are false; but that
thou thyself also walkest keeping the law.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But as touching the Gentiles that
believe, we have written, decreeing that they should only refrain
themselves from that which has been offered to idols, and from blood,
and from things strangles, and from fornication.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> Then Paul took the men, and the next
day being purified with them, entered into the temple, giving notice of
the accomplishment of the days of purification, until an oblation should
be offered for every one of them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> But when the seven days were drawing to
an end, those Jews that were of Asia, when they saw him in the temple,
stirred up all the people, and laid hands upon him, crying out:

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> Men of Israel, help: This is the man
that teacheth all men every where against the people, and the law, and
this place; and moreover hath brought in Gentiles into the temple, and
hath violated this holy place.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> (For they had seen Trophimus the
Ephesian in the city with him, whom they supposed that Paul had brought
into the temple.)

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And the whole city was in an uproar:
and the people ran together. And taking Paul, they drew him out of the
temple, and immediately the doors were shut.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> And as they went about to kill him, it
was told the tribune of the band, That all Jerusalem was in confusion.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Who, forthwith taking with him soldiers
and centurions, ran down to them. And when they saw the tribune and the
soldiers they left off beating Paul.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Then the tribune coming near, took him,
and commanded him to be bound with two chains: and demanded who he was,
and what he had done.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And some cried one thing, some another,
among the multitude. And when he could not know the certainty for the
tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the castle.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And when he was come to the stairs, it
fell out that he was carried by the soldiers, because of the violence of
the people.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> For the multitude of the people
followed after, crying: Away with him.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> And as Paul was about to be brought
into the castle, he saith to the tribune: May speak something to thee?
Who said: Canst thou speak Greek?

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> Art not thou that Egyptian who before
these days didst raise a tumult, and didst lead forth into the desert
four thousand men that were murderers?

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> But Paul said to him: I am a Jew of
Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no mean city. And I beseech thee, suffer
me to speak to the people.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> And when he had given him leave, Paul
standing on the stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. And a
great silence being made, he spoke unto them in the Hebrew tongue,
saying:

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> MEN, brethren, and fathers, hear ye the
account which I now give unto you.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> (And when they heard that he spoke to
them in the Hebrew tongue, they kept the more silence.)

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And he saith: I am a Jew, born at Tarsus
in Cilicia, but brought up in this city, at the feet of Gamaliel, taught
according to the truth of the law of the fathers, zealous for the law,
as also all you are this day:

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Who persecuted this way unto death,
binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> As the high priest doth bear me witness,
and all the ancients: from whom also receiving letters to the brethren,
I went to Damascus, that I might bring them bound from thence to
Jerusalem to be punished.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And it came to pass, as I was going, and
drawing nigh to Damascus at midday, that suddenly from heaven there
shone round about me a great light:

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And falling on the ground, I heard a
voice saying to me: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And I answered: Who art thou, Lord? And
he said to me: I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And they that were with me, saw indeed
the light, but they heard not the voice of him that spoke with me.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And I said: What shall I do, Lord? And
the Lord said to me: Arise, and go to Damascus; and there it shall be
told thee of all things that thou must do.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And whereas I did not see for the
brightness of that light, being led by the hand by my companions, I came
to Damascus.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And one Ananias, a man according to the
law, having testimony of all the Jews who dwelt there,

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Coming to me, and standing by me, said
to me: Brother Saul, look up. And I the same hour looked upon him.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> But he said: The God of our fathers
hath preordained thee that thou shouldst know his will, and see the Just
One, and shouldst hear the voice from his mouth.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> For thou shalt be his witness to all
men, of those things which thou hast seen and heard.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And now why tarriest thou? Rise up, and
be baptized, and wash away thy sins, invoking his name.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> And it came to pass, when I was come
again to Jerusalem, and was praying in the temple, that I was in a
trance,

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And saw him saying unto me: Make haste,
and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem; because they will not receive thy
testimony concerning me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I said: Lord, they know that I cast
into prison, and beat in every synagogue, them that believed in thee.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And when the blood of Stephen thy
witness was shed, I stood by and consented, and kept the garments of
them that killed him.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And he said to me: Go, for unto the
Gentiles afar off, will I send thee.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And they heard him until this word, and
then lifted up their voice, saying: Away with such an one from the
earth; for it is not fit that he should live.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And as they cried out and threw off
their garments, and cast dust into the air,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> The tribune commanded him to be brought
into the castle, and that he should be scourged and tortured: to know
for what cause they did so cry out against him.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And when they had bound him with
thongs, Paul saith to the centurion that stood by him: Is it lawful for
you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncondemned?

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Which the centurion hearing, went to
the tribune, and told him, saying: What art thou about to do? For this
man is a Roman citizen.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And the tribune coming, said to him:
Tell me, art thou a Roman? But he said: Yea.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And the tribune answered: I obtained
the being free of this city with a great sum. And Paul said: But I was
born so.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Immediately therefore they departed
from him that were about to torture him. The tribune also was afraid
after he understood that he was a Roman citizen, and because he had
bound him.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> But on the next day, meaning to know
more diligently for what cause he was accused by the Jews, he loosed
him, and commanded the priests to come together, and all the council:
and bringing forth Paul, he set him before them.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> AND Paul looking upon the council, said:
Men, brethren, I have conversed with all good conscience before God
until this present day.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And the high priest Ananias commanded
them that stood by him to strike him on the mouth.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Then Paul said to him: God shall strike
thee, thou whited wall. For sittest thou to judge me according to the
law, and contrary to the law commandest me to be struck?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And they that stood by said: Dost thou
revile the high priest of God?

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And Paul said: I knew not, brethren, that
he is the high priest. For it is written: Thou shalt not speak evil of
the prince of thy people.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And Paul knowing that the one part were
Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, cried out in the council: Men,
brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of Pharisees: concerning the hope and
resurrection of the dead I am called in question.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And when he had so said, there arose a
dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees; and the multitude
was divided.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> For the Sadducees say that there is no
resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisees confess both.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And there arose a great cry. And some of
the Pharisees rising up, strove, saying: We find no evil in this man.
What if a spirit hath spoken to him, or an angel?

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> And when there arose a great
dissension, the tribune fearing lest Paul should be pulled in pieces by
them, commanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from
among them, and to bring him into the castle.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> And the night following the Lord
standing by him, said: Be constant; for as thou hast testified of me in
Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And when day was come, some of the Jews
gathered together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying, that they
would neither eat, nor drink, till they killed Paul.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> And they were more than forty men that
had made this conspiracy.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Who came to the chief priests and the
ancients, and said: We have bound ourselves under a great curse that we
will eat nothing till we have slain Paul.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Now therefore do you with the council
signify to the tribune, that he bring him forth to you, as if you meant
to know something more certain touching him. And we, before he come
near, are ready to kill him.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Which when Paul's sister's son had
heard, of their lying in wait, he came and entered into the castle and
told Paul.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And Paul, calling to him one of the
centurions, said: Bring this young man to the tribune, for he hath some
thing to tell him.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And he taking him, brought him to the
tribune, and said: Paul, the prisoner, desired me to bring this young
man unto thee, who hath some thing to say to thee.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> And the tribune taking him by the hand,
went aside with him privately, and asked him: What is it that thou hast
to tell me?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> And he said: The Jews have agreed to
desire thee, that thou wouldst bring forth Paul to morrow into the
council, as if they meant to inquire some thing more certain touching
him.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> But do not thou give credit to them;
for there lie in wait for him more than forty men of them, who have
bound themselves by oath neither to eat, nor to drink, till they have
killed him: and they are now ready, looking for a promise from thee.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> The tribune therefore dismissed the
young man, charging him that he should tell no man, that he had made
known these things unto him.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Then having called two centurions, he
said to them: Make ready two hundred soldiers to go as far as Caesarea,
and seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen for the third hour of the
night:

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> And provide beasts, that they may set
Paul on, and bring him safe to Felix the governor.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> (For he feared lest perhaps the Jews
might take him away by force and kill him, and he should afterwards be
slandered, as if he was to take money.) And he wrote a letter after this
manner:

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Claudius Lysias to the most excellent
governor, Felix, greeting.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> This man being taken by the Jews, and
ready to be killed by them, I rescued coming in with an army,
understanding that he is a Roman:

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> And meaning to know the cause which
they objected unto him, I brought him forth into their council.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Whom I found to be accused concerning
questions of their law; but having nothing laid to his charge worthy of
death or of bands.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And when I was told of ambushes that
they had prepared for him, I sent him to thee, signifying also to his
accusers to plead before thee. Farewell.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Then the soldiers, according as it was
commanded them, taking Paul, brought him by night to Antipatris.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> And the next day, leaving the horsemen
to go with him, they returned to the castle.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Who, when they were come to Caesarea,
and had delivered the letter to the governor, did also present Paul
before him.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And when he had read it, and had asked
of what province he was, and understood that he was of Cilicia;

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> I will hear thee, said he, when thy
accusers come. And he commanded him to be kept in Herod's judgment hall.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> AND after five days the high priest
Ananias came down, with some of the ancients, and one Tertullus an
orator, who went to the governor against Paul.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Paul being called for, Tertullus
began to accuse him, saying: Whereas through thee we live in much peace,
and many things are rectified by thy providence,

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> We accept it always and in all places,
most excellent Felix, with all thanksgiving.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> But that I be no further tedious to thee,
I desire thee of thy clemency to hear us in few words.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> We have found this to be a pestilent man,
and raising seditions among all the Jews throughout the world, and
author of the sedition of the sect of the Nazarenes.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Who also hath gone about to profane the
temple: whom, we having apprehended, would also have judged according to
our law.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> But Lysias the tribune coming upon us,
with great violence took him away out of our hands;

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Commanding his accusers to come to thee:
of whom thou mayest thyself, by examination, have knowledge of all these
things, whereof we accuse him.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And the Jews also added, and said that
these things were so.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> Then Paul answered, (the governor
making a sign to him to speak:) Knowing that for many years thou hast
been judge over this nation, I will with good courage answer for myself.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> For thou mayest understand, that there
are yet but twelve days, since I went up to adore in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And neither in the temple did they find
me disputing with any man, or causing any concourse of the people,
neither in the synagogues, nor in the city:

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Neither can they prove unto thee the
things whereof they now accuse me.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> But this I confess to thee, that
according to the way, which they call a heresy, so do I serve the Father
and my God, believing all things which are written in the law and the
prophets:

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Having hope in God, which these also
themselves look for, that there shall be a resurrection of the just and
unjust.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And herein do I endeavour to have
always a conscience without offence toward God, and towards men.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Now after many years, I came to bring
alms to my nation, and offerings, and vows.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> In which I was found purified in the
temple: neither with multitude, nor with tumult.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> But certain Jews of Asia, who ought to
be present before thee, and to accuse, if they had any thing against me:

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Or let these men themselves say, if
they found in me any iniquity, when standing before the council,

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> Except it be for this one voice only
that I cried, standing among them, Concerning the resurrection of the
dead am I judged this day by you.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And Felix put them off, having most
certain knowledge of this way, saying: When Lysias the tribune shall
come down, I will hear you.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> And he commanded a centurion to keep
him, and that he should be easy, and that he should not prohibit any of
his friends to minister unto him.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And after some days, Felix, coming with
Drusilla his wife, who was a Jew, sent for Paul, and heard of him the
faith, that is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And as he treated of justice, and
chastity, and of the judgment to come, Felix being terrified, answered:
For this time, go thy way: but when I have a convenient time, I will
send for thee.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> Hoping also withal, that money should
be given him by Paul; for which cause also oftentimes sending for him,
he spoke with him.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> But when two years were ended, Felix
had for successor Portius Festus. And Felix being willing to shew the
Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> NOW when Festus was come into the
province, after three days, he went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And the chief priests, and principal men
of the Jews, went unto him against Paul: and they besought him,

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Requesting favour against him, that he
would command him to be brought to Jerusalem, laying wait to kill him in
the way.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But Festus answered: That Paul was kept
in Caesarea, and that he himself would very shortly depart thither.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Let them, therefore, saith he, among you
that are able, go down with me, and accuse him, if there be any crime in
the man.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And having tarried among them no more
than eight or ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and the next day he
sat in the judgment seat; and commanded Paul to be brought.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Who being brought, the Jews stood about
him, who were come down from Jerusalem, objecting many and grievous
causes, which they could not prove;

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> Paul making answer for himself: Neither
against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar,
have I offended in any thing.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> But Festus, willing to shew the Jews a
pleasure, answering Paul, said: Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there
be judged of these things before me?

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Then Paul said: I stand at Caesar's
judgment seat, where I ought to be judged. To the Jews I have done no
injury, as thou very well knowest.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> For if I have injured them, or have
committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die. But if there
be none of these things whereof they accuse me, no man may deliver me to
them: I appeal to Caesar.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> Then Festus having conferred with the
council, answered: Hast thou appealed to Caesar? To Caesar shalt thou
go.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> And after some days, king Agrippa and
Bernice came down to Caesarea to salute Festus.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And as they tarried there many days,
Festus told the king of Paul, saying: A certain man was left prisoner by
Felix.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> About whom, when I was at Jerusalem,
the chief priests, and the ancients of the Jews, came unto me, desiring
condemnation against him.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> To whom I answered: It is not the
custom of the Romans to condemn any man, before that he who is accused
have his accusers present, and have liberty to make his answer, to clear
himself of the things laid to his charge.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> When therefore they were come hither,
without any delay, on the day following, sitting in the judgment seat, I
commanded the man to be brought.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Against whom, when the accusers stood
up, they brought no accusation of things which I thought ill of:

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> But had certain questions of their own
superstition against him, and of one Jesus deceased, whom Paul affirmed
to be alive.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> I therefore being in a doubt of this
manner of question, asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and
there be judged of these things.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> But Paul appealing to be reserved unto
the hearing of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept, till I might send
him to Caesar.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And Agrippa said to Festus: I would
also hear the man, myself. To morrow, said he, thou shalt hear him.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> And on the next day, when Agrippa and
Bernice were come with great pomp, and had entered into the hall of
audience, with the tribunes, and principal men of the city, at Festus'
commandment, Paul was brought forth.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And Festus saith: King Agrippa, and all
ye men who are here present with us, you see this man, about whom all
the multitude of the Jews dealt with me at Jerusalem, requesting and
crying out that he ought not to live any longer.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> Yet have I found nothing that he hath
committed worthy of death. But forasmuch as he himself hath appealed to
Augustus, I have determined to send him.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Of whom I have nothing certain to write
to my lord. For which cause I have brought him forth before you, and
especially before thee, O king Agrippa, that examination being made, I
may have what to write.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> For it seemeth to me unreasonable to
send a prisoner, and not to signify the things laid to his charge.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> THEN Agrippa said to Paul: Thou art
permitted to speak for thyself. Then Paul stretching forth his hand,
began to make his answer.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> I think myself happy, O king Agrippa,
that I am to answer for myself this day before thee, touching all the
things whereof I am accused by the Jews.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Especially as thou knowest all, both
customs and questions that are among the Jews: Wherefore I beseech thee
to hear me patiently.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And my life indeed from my youth, which
was from the beginning among my own nation in Jerusalem, all the Jews do
know:

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Having known me from the beginning (if
they will give testimony) that according to the most sure sect of our
religion I lived a Pharisee.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And now for the hope of the promise that
was made by God to the fathers, do I stand subject to judgment:

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> Unto which, our twelve tribes, serving
night and day, hope to come. For which hope, O king, I am accused by the
Jews.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> Why should it be thought a thing
incredible, that God should raise the dead?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> And I indeed did formerly think, that I
ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Which also I did at Jerusalem, and many
of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority of the
chief priests: and when they were put to death, I brought the sentence.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> And oftentimes punishing them, in every
synagogue, I compelled them to blaspheme: and being yet more mad against
them, I persecuted them even unto foreign cities.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Whereupon when I was going to Damascus
with authority and permission of the chief priest,

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> At midday, O king, I saw in the way a
light from heaven above the brightness of the sun, shining round about
me, and them that were in company with me.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> And when we were all fallen down on the
ground, I heard a voice speaking to me in the Hebrew tongue: Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? It is hard for thee to kick against the goad.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And I said: Who art thou, Lord? And the
Lord answered: I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> But rise up, and stand upon thy feet:
for to this end have I appeared to thee, that I may make thee a
minister, and a witness of those things which thou hast seen, and of
those things wherein I will appear to thee,

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> Delivering thee from the people, and
from the nations, unto which now I send thee:

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> To open their eyes, that they may be
converted from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and a lot among the saints,
by the faith that is in me.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Whereupon, O king Agrippa, I was not
incredulous to the heavenly vision:

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> But to them first that are at Damascus,
and at Jerusalem, and unto all the country of Judea, and to the Gentiles
did I preach, that they should do penance, and turn to God, doing works
worthy of penance.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For this cause the Jews, when I was in
the temple, having apprehended me, went about to kill me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> But being aided by the help of God, I
stand unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no other
thing than those which the prophets, and Moses did say should come to
pass:

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> That Christ should suffer, and that he
should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew
light to the people, and to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> As he spoke these things, and made his
answer, Festus said with a loud voice: Paul, thou art beside thyself:
much learning doth make thee mad.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And Paul said: I am not mad, most
excellent Festus, but I speak words of truth and soberness.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> For the king knoweth of these things,
to whom also I speak with confidence. For I am persuaded that none of
these things are hidden from him. For neither was any of these things
done in a corner.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> Believest thou the prophets, O king
Agrippa? I know that thou believest.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And Agrippa said to Paul: In a little
thou persuadest me to become a Christian.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And Paul said: I would to God, that
both in a little and in much, not only thou, but also all that hear me,
this day, should become such as I also am, except these bands.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And the king rose up, and the governor,
and Bernice, and they that sat with them.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> And when they were gone aside, they
spoke among themselves, saying: This man hath done nothing worthy of
death or of bands.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And Agrippa said to Festus: This man
might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed to Caesar.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> AND when it was determined that he should
sail into Italy, and that Paul, with the other prisoners, should be
delivered to a centurion, named Julius, of the band Augusta,

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Going on board a ship of Adrumetum, we
launched, meaning to sail by the coasts of Asia, Aristarchus, the
Macedonian of Thessalonica, continuing with us.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And the day following we came to Sidon.
And Julius treating Paul courteously, permitted him to go to his
friends, and to take care of himself.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And when we had launched from thence, we
sailed under Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And sailing over the sea of Cilicia, and
Pamphylia, we came to Lystra, which is in Lycia:

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> And there the centurion finding a ship of
Alexandria sailing into Italy, removed us into it.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And when for many days we had sailed
slowly, and were scarce come over against Gnidus, the wind not suffering
us, we sailed near Crete by Salmone:

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> And with much ado sailing by it, we came
into a certain place, which is called Good-havens, nigh to which was the
city of Thalassa.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> And when much time was spent, and when
sailing now was dangerous, because the fast was now past, Paul comforted
them,

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Saying to them: Ye men, I see that the
voyage beginneth to be with injury and much damage, not only of the
lading and ship, but also of our lives.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> But the centurion believed the pilot
and the master of the ship, more than those things which were said by
Paul.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And whereas it was not a commodious
haven to winter in, the greatest part gave counsel to sail thence, if by
any means they might reach Phenice to winter there, which is a haven of
Crete, looking towards the southwest and northwest.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And the south wind gently blowing,
thinking that they had obtained their purpose, when they had loosed from
Asson, they sailed close by Crete.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> But not long after, there arose against
it a tempestuous wind, called Euroaquilo.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And when the ship was caught, and could
not bear up against the wind, giving up the ship to the winds, we were
driven.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And running under a certain island,
that is called Cauda, we had much work to come by the boat.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Which being taken up, they used helps,
undergirding the ship, and fearing lest they should fall into the
quicksands, they let down the sail yard, and so were driven.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> And we being mightily tossed with the
tempest, the next day they lightened the ship.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And the third day they cast out with
their own hands the tackling of the ship.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> And when neither sun nor stars appeared
for many days, and no small storm lay on us, all hope of our being saved
was now taken away.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And after they had fasted a long time,
Paul standing forth in the midst of them, said: You should indeed, O ye
men, have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Crete, and have
gained this harm and loss.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And now I exhort you to be of good
cheer. For there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but only
of the ship.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> For an angel of God, whose I am, and
whom I serve, stood by me this night,

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> Saying: Fear not, Paul, thou must be
brought before Caesar; and behold, God hath given thee all them that
sail with thee.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer; for
I believe God that it shall so be, as it hath been told me.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> And we must come unto a certain island.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> But after the fourteenth night was
come, as we were sailing in Adria, about midnight, the shipmen deemed
that they discovered some country.

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> Who also sounding, found twenty
fathoms; and going on a little further, they found fifteen fathoms.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> Then fearing lest we should fall upon
rough places, they cast four anchors out of the stern, and wished for
the day.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> But as the shipmen sought to fly out of
the ship, having let down the boat into the sea, under colour, as though
they would have cast anchors out of the forepart of the ship,

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> Paul said to the centurion, and to the
soldiers: Except these stay in the ship, you cannot be saved.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of
the boat, and let her fall off.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And when it began to be light, Paul
besought them all to take meat, saying: This day is the fourteenth day
that you have waited, and continued fasting, taking nothing.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> Wherefore I pray you to take some meat
for your health's sake; for there shall not an hair of the head of any
of you perish.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And when he had said these things,
taking bread, he gave thanks to God in the sight of them all; and when
he had broken it, he began to eat.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> Then were they all of better cheer, and
they also took some meat.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And we were in all in the ship, two
hundred threescore and sixteen souls.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> And when they had eaten enough, they
lightened the ship, casting the wheat into the sea.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And when it was day, they knew not the
land; but they discovered a certain creek that had a shore, into which
they minded, if they could, to thrust in the ship.

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> And when they had taken up the anchors,
they committed themselves to the sea, loosing withal the rudder bands;
and hoisting up the mainsail to the wind, they made towards shore.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> And when we were fallen into a place
where two seas met, they run the ship aground; and the forepart indeed,
sticking fast, remained unmoveable: but the hinder part was broken with
the violence of the sea.

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> And the soldiers' counsel was, that
they should kill the prisoners, lest any of them, swimming out, should
escape.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> But the centurion, willing to save
Paul, forbade it to be done; and he commanded that they who could swim,
should cast themselves first into the sea, and save themselves, and get
to land.

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And the rest, some they carried on
boards, and some on those things that belonged to the ship. And so it
came to pass, that every soul got safe to land.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> AND when we had escaped, then we knew
that the island was called Melita. But the barbarians shewed us no small
courtesy.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> For kindling a fire, they refreshed us
all, because of the present rain, and of the cold.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And when Paul had gathered together a
bundle of sticks, and had laid them on the fire, a viper coming out of
the heat, fastened on his hand.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And when the barbarians saw the beast
hanging on his hand, they said one to another: Undoubtedly this man is a
murderer, who though he hath escaped the sea, yet vengeance doth not
suffer him to live.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And he indeed shaking off the beast into
the fire, suffered no harm.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> But they supposed that he would begin to
swell up, and that he would suddenly fall down and die. But expecting
long, and seeing that there came no harm to him, changing their minds,
they said, that he was a god.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> Now in these places were possessions of
the chief man of the island, named Publius, who receiving us, for three
days entertained us courteously.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And it happened that the father of
Publius lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody flux. To whom Paul entered
in; and when he had prayed, and laid his hands on him, he healed him.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Which being done, all that had diseases
in the island, came and were healed:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Who also honoured us with many honours,
and when we were to set sail, they laded us with such things as were
necessary.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> And after three months, we sailed in a
ship of Alexandria, that had wintered in the island, whose sign was the
Castors.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And when we were come to Syracusa, we
tarried there three days.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> From thence, compassing by the shore,
we came to Rhegium: and after one day, the south wind blowing, we came
the second day to Puteoli;

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Where, finding brethren, we were
desired to tarry with them seven days: and so we went to Rome.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And from thence, when the brethren had
heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii Forum, and the Three
Taverns: whom when Paul saw, he gave thanks to God, and took courage.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And when we were come to Rome, Paul was
suffered to dwell by himself, with a soldier that kept him.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And after the third day, he called
together the chief of the Jews. And when they were assembled, he said to
them: Men, brethren, I, having done nothing against the people, or the
custom of our fathers, was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the
hands of the Romans;

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> Who, when they had examined me, would
have released me, for that there was no cause of death in me;

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> But the Jews contradicting it, I was
constrained to appeal unto Caesar; not that I had any thing to accuse my
nation of.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For this cause therefore I desired to
see you, and to speak to you. Because that for the hope of Israel, I am
bound with this chain.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> But they said to him: We neither
received letters concerning thee from Judea, neither did any of the
brethren that came hither, relate or speak any evil of thee.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> But we desire to hear of thee what thou
thinkest; for as concerning this sect, we know that it is every where
contradicted.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And when they had appointed him a day,
there came very many to him unto his lodgings; to whom he expounded,
testifying the kingdom of God, and persuading them concerning Jesus, out
of the law of Moses and the prophets, from morning until evening.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And some believed the things that were
said; but some believed not.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And when they agreed not among
themselves, they departed, Paul speaking this one word: Well did the
Holy Ghost speak to our fathers by Isaias the prophet,

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Saying: Go to this people, and say to
them: With the ear you shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing
you shall see, and shall not perceive.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For the heart of this people is grown
gross, and with their ears have they heard heavily, and their eyes they
have shut; lest perhaps they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted,
and I should heal them.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> Be it known therefore to you, that this
salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will hear it.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And when he had said these things, the
Jews went out from him, having much reasoning among themselves.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And he remained two whole years in his
own hired lodging; and he received all that came in to him,

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> Preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching the things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all
confidence, without prohibition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans](rom.md)
