[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sir)  [Next](aza) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Baruch

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> And these are the words of the book, which
Baruch the son of Nerias, the son of Maasias, the son of Sedecias, the
son of Sedei, the son of Helcias, wrote in Babylonia.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> In the fifth year, in the seventh day of
the month, at the time that the Chaldeans took Jerusalem, and burnt it
with fire.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And Baruch read the words of this book in
the hearing of Jechonias the son of Joakim king of Juda, and in the
hearing of all the people that came to hear the book.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And in the hearing of the nobles, the sons
of the kings, and in the hearing of the ancients, and in the hearing of
the people, from the least even to the greatest of them that dwelt in
Babylonia, by the river Sedi.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And when they heard it they wept, and
fasted, and prayed before the Lord.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And they made a collection of money,
according to every man's power.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And they sent it to Jerusulem to Joakim the
priest, the son of Helcias, the son of Salom, and to the priests, and to
all the people, that were found with him in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> At the time when he received the vessels of
the temple of the Lord, which had been taken away out of the temple, to
return them into the land of Juda the tenth day of the month Sivan, the
silver vessels, which Sedecias the son of Josias king of Juda had made,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> After that Nabuchodonosor the king of
Babylon had carried away Jechonias, and the princes, and all the
powerful men, and the people of the land from Jerusalem, and brought
them bound to Babylon.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And they said: Behold we have sent you
money, buy with it holocausts, and frankincense, and make meat
offerings, and offerings for sin at the altar of the Lord our God:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And pray ye for the life of
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, and for the life of Balthasar his
son, that their days may be upon earth as the days of heaven:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And that the Lord may give us strength,
and enlighten our eyes, that we may live under the shadow of
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, and under the shadow of Balthasar
his son, and may serve them many days, and may find favour in their
sight.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And pray ye for us to the Lord our God:
for we have sinned against the Lord our God, and his wrath is not turned
away from us even to this day.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And read ye this book, which we have sent
to you to be read in the temple of the Lord, on feasts, and proper days.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And you shall say: To the Lord our God
belongeth justice, but to us confusion of our face: as it is come to
pass at this day to all Juda, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> To our kings, and to our princes, and to
our priests, and to our prophets, and to our fathers.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> We have sinned before the Lord our God,
and have not believed him, nor put our trust in him:

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And we were not obedient to him, and we
have not harkened to the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his
commandments, which he hath given us.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> From the day that he brought our fathers
out of the land of Egypt, even to this day, we were disobedient to the
Lord our God: and going astray we turned away from hearing his voice.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And many evils have cleaved to us, and
the curses which the Lord foretold by Moses his servant: who brought our
fathers out of the land of Egypt, to give us a land flowing with milk
and honey, as at this day.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And we have not hearkened to the voice of
the Lord our God according to all the words of the prophets whom he sent
to us:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> And we have gone away every man after the
inclinations of his own wicked heart, to serve strange gods, and to do
evil in the sight of the Lord our God.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Wherefore the Lord our God hath made good
his word, that he spoke to us, and to our judges that have judged
Israel, and to our kings, and to our princes, and to all Israel and
Juda:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That the Lord would bring upon us great
evils, such as never happened under heaven, as they have come to pass in
Jerusalem, according to the things that are written in the law of Moses:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> That a man should eat the flesh of his own
son, and the flesh of his own daughter.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And he hath delivered them up to be under
the hand of all the kings that are round about us, to be a reproach, and
desolation among all the people, among whom the Lord hath scattered us.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And we are brought under, and are not
uppermost: because we have sinned against the Lord our God, by not
obeying his voice.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> To the Lord our God belongeth justice: but
to us, and to our fathers confusion of face, as at this day.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For the Lord hath pronounced against us all
these evils that are come upon us:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And we have not entreated the face of the
Lord our God, that we might return every one of us from our most wicked
ways.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And the Lord hath watched over us for evil,
and hath brought it upon us: for the Lord is just in all his works which
he hath commanded us:

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And we have not hearkened to his voice to
walk in the commandments of the Lord which he hath set before us.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And now, O Lord God of Israel, who hast
brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a strong hand, and with
signs, and with wonders, and with thy great power, and with a mighty
arm, and hast made thee a name as at this day,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> We have sinned, we have done wickedly, we
have acted unjustly, O Lord our God, against all thy justices.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Let thy wrath be turned away from us: for
we are left a few among the nations where thou hast scattered us.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Hear, O Lord, our prayers, and our
petitions, and deliver us for thy own sake: and grant that we may find
favour in the sight of them that have led us away:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> That all the earth may know that thou art
the Lord our God, and that thy name is called upon Israel, and upon his
posterity.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Look down upon us, O Lord, from thy holy
house, and incline thy ear, and hear us.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Open thy eyes, and behold: for the dead
that are in hell, whose spirit is taken away from their bowels, shall
not give glory and justice to the Lord:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> But the soul that is sorrowful for the
greatness of evil she hath done, and goeth bowed down, and feeble, and
the eyes that fail, and the hungry soul giveth glory and justice to thee
the Lord.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> For it is not for the justices of our
fathers that we pour out our prayers, and beg mercy in thy sight, O Lord
our God:

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But because thou hast sent out thy wrath,
and thy indignation upon us, as thou hast spoken by the hand of thy
servants the prophets, saying:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Thus saith the Lord: Bow down your
shoulder, and your neck, and serve the king of Babylon: and you shall
remain in the land which I have given to your fathers.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But if you will not hearken to the voice
of the Lord your God, to serve the king of Babylon: I will cause you to
depart out of the cities of Juda, and from without Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I will take away from you the voice
of mirth, and the voice of joy, and the voice of the bridegroom, and the
voice of the bride, and all the land shall be without any footstep of
inhabitants.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And they hearkened not to thy voice, to
serve the king of Babylon: and thou hast made good thy words, which thou
spokest by the hands of thy servants the prophets, that the bones of our
kings, and the bones of our fathers should be removed out of their
place:

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And behold they are cast out to the heat
of the sun, and to the frost of the night: and they have died in
grievous pains, by famine, and by the sword, and in banishment.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And thou hast made the temple, in which
thy name was called upon, as it is at this day, for the iniquity of the
house of Israel, and the house of Juda.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And thou hast dealt with us, O Lord our
God, according to all thy goodness, and according to all that great
mercy of thine:

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> As thou spokest by the hand of thy
servant Moses, in the day when thou didst command him to write thy law
before the children of Israel,

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> Saying: If you will not hear my voice,
this great multitude shall be turned into a very small number among the
nations, where I will scatter them:

<span id="an_2:30">2:30</span> For I know that the people will not hear
me, for they are a people of a stiff neck: but they shall turn to their
heart in the land of their captivity:

<span id="an_2:31">2:31</span> And they shall know that I am the Lord
their God: and I will give them a heart, and they shall understand: and
ears, and they shall hear.

<span id="an_2:32">2:32</span> And they shall praise me in the land of
their captivity, and shall be mindful of my name.

<span id="an_2:33">2:33</span> And they shall turn away themselves from
their stiff neck, and from their wicked deeds: for they shall remember
the way of their fathers, that sinned against me.

<span id="an_2:34">2:34</span> And I will bring them back again into the
land which I promised with an oath to their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and they shall be masters thereof: and I will multiply them, and
they shall not be diminished.

<span id="an_2:35">2:35</span> And I will make with them another
covenant that shall be everlasting, to be their God, and they shall be
my people: and I will no more remove my people, the children of Israel,
out of the land that I have given them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And now, O Lord Almighty, the God of
Israel, the soul in anguish, and the troubled spirit crieth to thee:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for thou art
a merciful God, and have pity on us: for we have sinned before thee.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For thou remainest for ever, and shall we
perish everlastingly?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> O Lord Almighty, the God of Israel, hear
now the prayer of the dead of Israel, and of their children, that have
sinned before thee, and have not hearkened to the voice of the Lord
their God, wherefore evils have cleaved fast to us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Remember not the iniquities of our fathers,
but think upon thy hand, and upon thy name at this time:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For thou art the Lord our God, and we will
praise thee, O Lord:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Because for this end thou hast put thy fear
in our hearts, to the intent that we should call upon thy name, and
praise thee in our captivity, for we are converted from the iniquity of
our fathers, who sinned before thee.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And behold we are at this day in our
captivity, whereby thou hast scattered us to be a reproach, and a curse,
and an offence, according to all the iniquities of our fathers, who
departed from thee, O Lord our God.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Hear, O Israel, the commandments of life:
give ear, that thou mayst learn wisdom.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> How happeneth it, O Israel, that thou art
in thy enemies' land?

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Thou art grown old in a strange country,
thou art defiled with the dead: thou art counted with them that go down
into hell.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Thou hast forsaken the fountain of wisdom
:

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For if thou hadst walked in the way of
God, thou hadst surely dwelt in peace for ever.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Learn where is wisdom, where is strength,
where is understanding: that thou mayst know also where is length of
days and life, where is the light of the eyes, and peace.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Who hath found out her place? and who
hath gone in to her treasures?

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Where are the princes of the nations, and
they that rule over the beasts that are upon the earth?

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> That take their diversion with the birds
of the air.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> That hoard up silver and gold, wherein
men trust, and there is no end of their getting? who work in silver and
are solicitous, and their works are unsearchable.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> They are cut off, and are gone down to
hell, and others are risen up in their place.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Young men have seen the light, and dwelt
upon the earth: but the way of knowledge they have not known,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Nor have they understood the paths
thereof, neither have their children received it, it is far from their
face.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> It hath not been heard of in the land of
Chanaan, neither hath it been seen in Theman.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> The children of Agar also, that search
after the wisdom that is of the earth, the merchants of Merrha, and of
Theman, and the tellers of fables, and searchers of prudence and
understanding: but the way of wisdom they have not known, neither have
they remembered her paths.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> O Israel, how great is the house of God,
and how vast is the place of his possession!

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> It is great, and hath no end: it is high
and immense.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> There were the giants, those renowned men
that were from the beginning, of great stature, expert in war.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> The Lord chose not them, neither did they
find the way of knowledge: therefore did they perish.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And because they had not wisdom, they
perished through their folly.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Who hath gone up into heaven, and taken
her, and brought her down from the clouds?

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Who hath passed over the sea, and found
her, and brought her preferably to chosen gold?

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> There is none that is able to know her
ways, nor that can search out her paths :

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> But he that knoweth all things, knoweth
her, and hath found her out with his understanding: he that prepared the
earth for evermore, and filled it with cattle and fourfooted beasts:

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> He that sendeth forth light, and it
goeth: and hath called it, and it obeyeth him with trembling.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> And the stars have given light in their
watches, and rejoiced:

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> They were called, and they said: Here we
are: and with cheerfuIness they have shined forth to him that made them.

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> This is our God, and there shall no other
be accounted of in comparison of him.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> He found out all the way of knowledge,
and gave it to Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved.

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> Afterwards he was seen upon earth, and
conversed with men.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> This is the book of the commandments of
God, and the law, that is for ever: all they that keep it, shall come to
life: but they that have forsaken it, to death.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Return, O Jacob, and take hold of it, walk
in the way by its brightness, in the presence of the light thereof.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Give not thy honour to another, nor thy
dignity to a strange nation.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> We are happy, O Israel: because the things
that are pleasing to God, are made known to us.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Be of good comfort, O people of God, the
memorial of Israel:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> You have been sold to the Gentiles, not for
your destruction: but because you provoked God to wrath, you are
delivered to your adversaries.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> For you have provoked him who made you, the
eternal God, offering sacrifice to devils, and not to God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For you have forgotten God, who brought you
up, and you have grieved Jerusalem that nursed you.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> For she saw the wrath of God coming upon
you, and she said: Give ear, all you that dwell near Sion, for God hath
brought upon me great mourning:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For I have seen the captivity of my
people, of my sons, and my daughters, which the Eternal hath brought
upon them.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For I nourished them with joy: but I sent
them away with weeping and mourning.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no man rejoice over me, a widow, and
desolate: I am forsaken of many for the sins of my children, because
they departed from the law of God.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And they have not known his justices, nor
walked by the ways of God's commandments, neither have they entered by
the paths of his truth and justice.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Let them that dwell about Sion come, and
remember the captivity of my sons and daughters, which the Eternal hath
brought upon them.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For he hath brought a nation upon them
from afar, a wicked nation, and of a strange tongue:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Who have neither reverenced the ancient,
nor pitied children, and have carried away the beloved of the widow, and
have left me all alone without children.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But as for me, what help can I give you?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But he that hath brought the evils upon
you, he will deliver you out of the hands of your enemies.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Go your way, my children, go your way:
for I am left alone.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> I have put off the robe of peace, and
have put upon me the sackcloth of supplication, and I will cry to the
most High in my days.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Be of good comfort, my children, cry to
the Lord, and he will deliver you out of the hand of the princes your
enemies.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For my hope is in the Eternal that he
will save you: and joy is come upon me from the Holy One, because of the
mercy which shall come to you from our everlasting Saviour.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> For I sent you forth with mourning and
weeping: but the Lord will bring you back to me with joy and gladness
for ever.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> For as the neighbours of Sion have now
seen your captivity from God: so shall they also shortly see your
salvation from God, which shall come upon you with great honour, and
everlasting glory.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> My children, suffer patiently the wrath
that is come upon you: for thy enemy hath persecuted thee, but thou
shalt quickly see his destruction: and thou shalt get up upon his neck.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> My delicate ones have walked rough ways,
for they were taken away as a flock made a prey by the enemies.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Be of good comfort, my children, and cry
to the Lord: for you shall be remembered by him that hath led you away.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> For as it was your mind to go astray from
God; so when you return again you shall seek him ten times as much.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> For he that hath brought evils upon you,
shall bring you everlasting joy again with your salvation.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> Be of good heart, O Jerusalem: for he
exhorteth thee, that named thee.

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> The wicked that have afflicted thee,
shall perish: and they that have rejoiced at thy ruin, shall be
punished.

<span id="an_4:32">4:32</span> The cities which thy children have
served, shall be punished: and she that received thy sons.

<span id="an_4:33">4:33</span> For as she rejoiced at thy ruin, and was
glad of thy fall: so shall she be grieved for her own desolation.

<span id="an_4:34">4:34</span> And the joy of her multitude shall be cut
off: and her gladness shall be turned to mourning.

<span id="an_4:35">4:35</span> For fire shall come upon her from the
Eternal, long to endure, and she shall be inhabited by devils for a
great time.

<span id="an_4:36">4:36</span> Look about thee, O Jerusalem, towards the
east, and behold the joy that cometh to thee from God.

<span id="an_4:37">4:37</span> For behold thy children come, whom thou
sentest away scattered, they come gathered together from the east even
to the west, at the word of the Holy One rejoicing for the honour of
God.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Put off, O Jerusalem, the garment of thy
mourning, and affliction: and put on the beauty, and honour of that
everlasting glory which thou hast from God.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> God will clothe thee with the double
garment of justice, and will set a crown on thy head of everlasting
honour.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For God will shew his brightness in thee,
to every one under heaven.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For thy name shall be named to thee by God
for ever: the peace of justice, and honour of piety.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand on high: and
look about towards the east, and behold thy children gathered together
from the rising to the setting sun, by the word of the Holy One
rejoicing in the remembrance of God.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For they went out from thee on foot, led by
the enemies: but the Lord will bring them to thee exalted with honour as
children of the kingdom.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For God hath appointed to bring down every
high mountain, and the everlasting rocks, and to fill up the valleys to
make them even with the ground: that Israel may walk diligently to the
honour of God.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Moreover the woods, and every
sweet-smelling tree have overshadowed Israel by the commandment of God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> For God will bring Israel with joy in the
light of his majesty, with mercy, and justice, that cometh from him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> A copy of the epistle that Jeremias sent to
them that were to be led away captives into Babylon, by the king of
Babylon, to declare to them according to what was commanded him by God.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> For the sins that you have committed before
God, you shall be carried away captives into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor
the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And when you are come into Babylon, you
shall be there many years, and for a long time, even to seven
generations: and after that I will bring you away from thence with
peace.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> But now, you shall see in Babylon gods of
gold, and of silver, and of stone, and of wood borne upon shoulders,
causing fear to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Beware therefore that you imitate not the
doings of others, and be afraid, and the fear of them should seize upon
you.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> But when you see the multitude behind, and
before, adoring them, say you in your hearts: Thou oughtest to be
adored, O Lord.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> For my angel is with you: And I myself will
demand an account of your souls.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For their tongue that is polished by the
craftsman, and themselves laid over with gold and silver, are false
things, and they cannot speak.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And as if it were for a maiden that loveth
to go gay: so do they take gold and make them up.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Their gods have golden crowns upon their
heads: whereof the priests secretly convey away from them gold, and
silver, and bestow it on themselves.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Yea and they give thereof to prostitutes,
and they dress out harlots: and again when they receive it of the
harlots, they adorn their gods.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And these gods cannot defend themselves
from the rust, and the moth.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> But when they have covered them with a
purple garment, they wipe their face because of the dust of the house,
which is very much among them.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> This holdeth a sceptre as a man, as a
judge of the country, but cannot put to death one that offendeth him.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And this hath in his hand a sword, or an
axe, but cannot save himself from war, or from robbers, whereby be it
known to you, that they are not gods.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Therefore fear them not. For as a vessel
that a man uses when it is broken becometh useless, even so are their
gods:

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> When they are placed in the house, their
eyes are full of dust by the feet of them that go in.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And as the gates are made sure on every
side upon one that hath offended the king, or like a dead man carried to
the grave, so do the priests secure the doors with bars and locks, lest
they be stripped by thieves.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> They light candles to them, and in great
number, of which they cannot see one: but they are like beams in the
house.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And they say that the creeping things
which are of the earth, gnaw their hearts, while they eat them and their
garments, and they feel it not.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Their faces are black with the smoke that
is made in the house.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Owls, and swallows, and other birds fly
upon their bodies, and upon their heads, and cats in like manner.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Whereby you may know that they are no
gods. Therefore fear them not.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> The gold also which they have, is for
shew, but except a man wipe off the rust, they will not shine: for
neither when they were molten, did they feel it.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Men buy them at a high price, whereas
there is no breath in them.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> And having not the use of feet they are
carried upon shoulders, declaring to men how vile they are. Be they
confounded also that worship them.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Therefore if they fall to the ground,
they rise not up again of themselves, nor if a man set them upright,
will they stand by themselves, but their gifts shall be set before them,
as to the dead.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> The things that are sacrificed to them,
their priests sell and abuse: in like manner also their wives take part
of them, but give nothing of it either to the sick, or to the poor.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> The childbearing and menstruous women
touch their sacrifices: knowing therefore by these things that they are
not gods, fear them not.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> For how can they be called gods? because
women set offerings before the gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood:

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And priests sit in their temples, having
their garments rent, and their heads and beards shaven, and nothing upon
their heads.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And they roar and cry before their gods,
as men do at the feast when one is dead.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> The priests take away their garments, and
clothe their wives and their children.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> And whether it be evil that one doth unto
them, or good, they are not able to recompense it: neither can they set
up a king nor put him down:

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> In like manner they can neither give
riches, nor requite evil. If a man make a vow to them, and perform it
not, they cannot require it.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> They cannot deliver a man from death nor
save the weak from the mighty.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> They cannot restore the blind man to his
sight: nor deliver a man from distress.

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> They shall not pity the widow, nor do
good to the fatherless.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> Their gods, of wood, and of stone, and of
gold, and of silver, are like the stones that are hewn out of the
mountains: and they that worship them shall be confounded.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> How then is it to be supposed, or to be
said, that they are gods?

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> Even the Chaldeans themselves dishonour
them: who when they hear of one dumb that cannot speak, they present him
to Bel, entreating him, that he may speak,

<span id="an_6:41">6:41</span> As though they could be sensible that
have no motion themselves: and they, when they shall perceive this, will
leave them: for their gods themselves have no sense.

<span id="an_6:42">6:42</span> The women also with cords about them, sit
in the ways, burning olive stones.

<span id="an_6:43">6:43</span> And when any one of them, drawn away by
some passenger, lieth with him, she upbraideth her neighbour, that she
was not thought as worthy as herself, nor her cord broken.

<span id="an_6:44">6:44</span> But all things that are done about them,
are false: how is it then to be thought, or to be said, that they are
gods?

<span id="an_6:45">6:45</span> And they are made by workmen, and by
goldsmiths. They shall be nothing else but what the priests will have
them to be.

<span id="an_6:46">6:46</span> For the artificers themselves that make
them, are of no long continuance. Can those things then that are made by
them be gods?

<span id="an_6:47">6:47</span> But they have left false things and
reproach to them that come after.

<span id="an_6:48">6:48</span> For when war cometh upon them, or evils,
the priests consult with themselves where they may hide themselves with
them.

<span id="an_6:49">6:49</span> How then can they be thought to be gods,
that can neither deliver themselves from war, nor save themselves from
evils?

<span id="an_6:50">6:50</span> For seeing they are but of wood, and laid
over with gold, and with silver, it shall be known hereafter that they
are false things, by all nations and kings: and it shall be manifest
that they are no gods, but the work of men's hands, and that there is no
work of God in them.

<span id="an_6:51">6:51</span> Whence therefore is it known that they
are not gods, but the work of men's hands, and no work of God is in
them?

<span id="an_6:52">6:52</span> They cannot set up a king over the land,
nor give rain to men.

<span id="an_6:53">6:53</span> They determine no causes, nor deliver
countries from oppression; because they can do nothing, and are as daws
between heaven and earth.

<span id="an_6:54">6:54</span> For when fire shall fall upon the house
of these gods of wood, and of silver, and of gold, their priests indeed
will flee away, and be saved: but they themselves shall be burnt in the
midst like beams.

<span id="an_6:55">6:55</span> And they cannot withstand a king and war.
How then can it be supposed, or admitted that they are gods?

<span id="an_6:56">6:56</span> Neither are these gods of wood, and of
stone, and laid over with gold, and with silver, able to deliver
themselves from thieves or robbers: they that are stronger than them

<span id="an_6:57">6:57</span> Shall take from them the gold, and
silver, and the raiment wherewith they are clothed, and shall go their
way, neither shall they help themselves.

<span id="an_6:58">6:58</span> Therefore it is better to be a king that
sheweth his power: or else a profitable vessel in the house, with which
the owner thereof will be well satisfied: or a door in the house, to
keep things safe that are therein, than such false gods.

<span id="an_6:59">6:59</span> The sun, and the moon, and the stars
being bright, and sent forth for profitable uses, are obedient.

<span id="an_6:60">6:60</span> In like manner the lightning, when it
breaketh forth, is easy to be seen: and after the same manner the wind
bloweth in every country.

<span id="an_6:61">6:61</span> And the clouds when God commandeth them
to go over the whole world, do that which is commanded them.

<span id="an_6:62">6:62</span> The fire also being sent from above to
consume mountains and woods, doth as it is commanded. But these neither
in shew, nor in power are like to any one of them.

<span id="an_6:63">6:63</span> Wherefore it is neither to be thought,
nor to be said, that they are gods: since they are neither able to judge
causes, nor to do any good to men.

<span id="an_6:64">6:64</span> Knowing therefore that they are not gods,
fear them not.

<span id="an_6:65">6:65</span> For neither can they curse kings, nor
bless them.

<span id="an_6:66">6:66</span> Neither do they shew signs in the heaven
to the nations, nor shine as the sun, nor give light as the moon.

<span id="an_6:67">6:67</span> Beasts are better than they, which can
fly under a covert, and help themselves.

<span id="an_6:68">6:68</span> Therefore there is no manner of
appearance that they are gods: so fear them not.

<span id="an_6:69">6:69</span> For as a scarecrow in a garden of
cucumbers keepeth nothing, so are their gods of wood, and of silver, and
laid over with gold.

<span id="an_6:70">6:70</span> They are no better than a white thorn in
a garden, upon which every bird sitteth. In like manner also their gods
of wood, and laid over with gold, and with silver, are like to a dead
body cast forth in the dark.

<span id="an_6:71">6:71</span> By the purple also and the scarlet which
are motheaten upon them, you shall know that they are not gods. And they
themselves at last are consumed, and shall be a reproach in the country.

<span id="an_6:72">6:72</span> Better therefore is the just man that
hath no idols: for he shall be far from reproach.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prayer of Azariah](aza)
