[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pro)  [Next](sol) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Ecclesiastes

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The words of Ecclesiastes, the son of
David, king of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Vanity of vanities, said Ecclesiastes
vanity of vanities, and all is vanity.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> What hath a man more of all his labour,
that he taketh under the sun?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> One generation passeth away, and another
generation cometh: but the earth standeth for ever.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> The sun riseth, and goeth down, and
returneth to his place: and there rising again,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Maketh his round by the south, and turneth
again to the north: the spirit goeth forward surveying all places round
about, and returneth to his circuits.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> All the rivers run into the sea, yet the
sea doth not overflow: unto the place from whence the rivers come, they
return, to flow again.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> All things are hard: man cannot explain
them by word. The eye is not filled with seeing, neither is the ear
filled with hearing.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> What is it that hath been? the same thing
that shall be. What is it that hath been done? the same that shall be
done.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Nothing under the sun is new, neither is
any man able to say: Behold this is new: for it hath already gone before
in the ages that were before us.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> There is no remembrance of former things:
nor indeed of those things which hereafter are to come, shall there be
any remembrance with them that shall be in the latter end.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I Ecclesiastes was king over Israel in
Jerusalem,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I proposed in my mind to seek and
search out wisely concerning all things that are done under the sun.
This painful occupation hath God given to the children of men, to be
exercised therein.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> I have seen all things that are done
under the sun, and behold all is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> The perverse are hard to be corrected,
and the number of fools is infinite.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> I have spoken in my heart, saying: Behold
I am become great, and have gone beyond all in wisdom, that were before
me in Jerusalem: and my mind hath contemplated many things wisely, and I
have learned.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And I have given my heart to know
prudence, and learning, and errors, and folly: and I have perceived that
in these also there was labour, and vexation of spirit,

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Because In much wisdom there is much
indignation: and he that addeth knowledge, addeth also labour.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I said in my heart: I will go, and abound
with delights, and enjoy good things. And I saw that this also was
vanity.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Laughter I counted error: and to mirth I
said: Why art thou vainly deceived?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> I thought in my heart, to withdraw my flesh
from wine, that I might turn my mind to wisdom, and might avoid folly,
till I might see what was profitable for the children of men: and what
they ought to do under the sun, all the days of their life.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> I made me great works, I built me houses,
and planted vineyards,

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> I made gardens, and orchards, and set them
with trees of all kinds,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And I made me ponds of water, to water
therewith the wood of the young trees,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I got me menservants, and maidservants, and
had a great family: and herds of oxen, and great flocks of sheep, above
all that were before me in Jerusalem:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I heaped together for myself silver and
gold, and the wealth of kings, and provinces: I made me singing men, and
singing women, and the delights of the sons of men, cups and vessels to
serve to pour out wine:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And I surpassed in riches all that were
before me in Jerusalem: my wisdom also remained with me.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And whatsoever my eyes desired, I refused
them not: and I withheld not my heart from enjoying every pleasure, and
delighting itself in the things which I had prepared: and esteemed this
my portion, to make use of my own labour.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And when I turned myself to all the works
which my hands had wrought, and to the labours wherein I had laboured in
vain, I saw in all things vanity, and vexation of mind, and that nothing
was lasting under the sun.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I passed further to behold wisdom, and
errors and folly, (What is man, said I, that he can follow the King his
maker?)

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And I saw that wisdom excelled folly, as
much as light differeth from darkness.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> The eyes of a wise man are in his head:
the fool walketh in darkness: and I learned that they were to die both
alike.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And I said in my heart: If the death of
the fool and mine shall be one, what doth it avail me, that I have
applied myself more to the study of wisdom? And speaking with my own
mind, I perceived that this also was vanity.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For there shall be no remembrance of the
wise no more than of the fool for ever, and the times to come shall
cover all things together with oblivion: the learned dieth in like
manner as the unlearned.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And therefore I was weary of my life,
when I saw that all things under the sun are evil, and all vanity and
vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Again I hated all my application
wherewith I had earnestly laboured under the sun, being like to have an
heir after me,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Whom I know not whether he will be a wise
man or a fool, and he shall have rule over all my labours with which I
have laboured and been solicitous: and is there any thing so vain?

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Wherefore I left off and my heart
renounced labouring any more under the sun.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For when a man laboureth in wisdom, and
knowledge, and carefulness, he leaveth what he hath gotten to an idle
man: so this also is vanity, and a great evil.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For what profit shall a man have of all
his labour, and vexation of spirit, with which he bath been tormented
under the sun?

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> All his days axe full of sorrows and
miseries, even in the night he doth not rest in mind: and is not this
vanity?

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> Is it not better to eat and drink, and to
shew his soul good things of his labours? and this is from the hand of
God.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Who shall so feast and abound with
delights as I?

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> God hath given to a man that is good in
his sight, wisdom, and knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he hath
given vexation, and superfluous care, to heap up and to gather together,
and to give it to him that hath pleased God: but this also is vanity,
and a fruitless solicitude of the mind.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> All things have their season, and in their
times all things pass under heaven.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> A time to be born and a time to die. A time
to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> A time to kill, and a time to heal. A time
to destroy, and a time to build.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> A time to weep, and a time to laugh. A time
to mourn, and a time to dance.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> A time to scatter stones, and a time to
gather. A time to embrace, and a time to be far from embraces.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> A time to get, and a time to lose. A time
to keep, and a time to cast away.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> A time to rend, and a time to sew. A time
to keep silence, and a time to speak.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> A time of love, and a time of hatred. A
time of war, and a time of peace.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What hath man more of his labour?

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> I have seen the trouble, which God hath
given the sons of men to be exercised in it.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> He hath made all things good in their
time, and hath delivered the world to their consideration, so that man
cannot flnd out the work which God hath made from the beginning to the
end.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And I have known that there was no better
thing than to rejoice, and to do well in this life.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For every man that eateth and drinketh,
and seeth good of his labour, this is the gift of God.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> I have learned that all the works which
God hath made, continue for ever: we cannot add any thing, nor take away
from those things which God hath made that he may be feared.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> That which hath been made, the same
continueth: the things that shall be, have already been: and God
restoreth that which is past.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> I saw under the sun in the place of
judgment wickedness, and in the place of justice iniquity.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And I said in my heart: God shall judge
both the just and the wicked, and then shall be the time of every thing.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> I said in my heart concerning the sons of
men, that God would prove them, and shew them to be like beasts.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Therefore the death of man, and of beasts
is one, and the condition of them both is equal: as man dieth, so they
also die: all things breathe alike, and man hath nothing more than
beast: all things are subject to vanity.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And all things go to one place: of earth
they were made, and into earth they return together.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Who knoweth if the spirit of the children
of Adam ascend upward, and if the spirit of the beasts descend downward?

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And I have found that nothing is better
than for a man to rejoice in his work, and that this is his portion. For
who shall bring him to know the things that shall be after him?

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I turned myself to other things, and I saw
the oppressions that are done under the sun, and the tears of the
innocent, and they had no comforter; and they were not able to resist
their violence, being destitute of help from any.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And I praised the dead rather than the
living:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And I judged him happier than them both,
that is not yet born, nor hath seen the evils that are done under the
sun.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Again I considered all the labours of men,
and I remarked that their industries are exposed to the envy of their
neighhour: so in this also there is vanity, and fruitless care.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> The fool foldeth his hands together, and
eateth his own flesh, saying:

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Better is a handful with rest, than both
hands full with labour, and vexation of mind.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Considering I found also another vanity
under the sun:

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> There is but one, and he hath not a second,
no child, no brother, and yet he ceaseth not to labour, neither are his
eyes satisfied with riches, neither doth he reflect, saying: For whom do
I labour, and defraud my soul of good things? in this also is vanity,
and a grievous vexation.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> It is better therefore that two should be
together, than one: for they have the advantage of their society:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> If one fall he shall be supported by the
other: woe to him that is alone, for when he falleth, he hath none to
lift him up.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And if two lie together, they shall warm
one another: how shall one alone be warmed?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And if a man prevail against one, two
shall withstand him: a threefold cord is not easily broken.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Better is a child that is poor and wise,
than a king that is old and foolish, who knoweth not to foresee for
hereafter.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Because out of prison and chains
sometimes a man cometh forth to a kingdom: and another born king is
consumed with poverty.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> I saw all men living, that walk under the
sun with the second young man, who shall rise up in his place.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The number of the people, of all that
were before him is infinite: and they that shall come afterwards, shall
not rejoice in him: but this also is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Keep thy foot, when thou goest into the
house of God, and draw nigh to hear. For much better is obedience, than
the victims of fools, who know not what evil they do.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Speak not any thing rashly, and let not thy
heart be hasty to utter a word before God. For God is in heaven, and
thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be few.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Dreams follow many cares: and in many words
shall be found folly.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> If thou hast vowed any thing to God, defer
not to pay it: for an unfaithful and foolish promise displeaseth him:
but whatsoever thou hast vowed, pay it.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And it is much better not to vow, than
after a vow not to perform the things promised.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Give not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to
sin: and say not before the angel: There is no providence: lest God be
angry at thy words, and destroy all the works of thy hands.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Where there are many dreams, there are many
vanities, and words without number: but do thou fear God.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> If thou shalt see the oppressions of the
poor, and violent judgments, and justice perverted in the province,
wonder not at this matter: for he that is high hath another higher, and
there are others still higher than these:

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Moreover there is the king that reigneth
over all the land subject to him.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> A covetous man shall not be satisfied with
money: and he that loveth riches shall reap no fruit from them: so this
also is vanity.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Where there are great riches, there are
also many to eat them. And what doth it profit the owner, but that he
seeth the riches with his eyes?

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Sleep is sweet to a labouring man,
whether he eat lttle or much: but the fulness of the rich will not
suffer him to sleep.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> There is also another grievous evil,
which I have seen under the sun: riches kept to the hurt of the owner.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For they are lost with very great
affliction: he hath begotten a son, who shall be in extremity of want.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> As he came forth naked from his mother's
womb, so shall he return, and shall take nothing away with him of his
labour.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> A most deplorable evil: as he came, so
shall he return. What then doth it profit him that he hath laboured for
the wind?

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> All the days of his life he eateth in
darkness, and in many cares, and in misery, and sorrow.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> This therefore hath seemed good to me,
that a man should eat and drink, and enjoy the fruit of his labour,
wherewith he hath laboured under the sun, all the days of his life,
which God hath given him: and this is his portion.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> And every man to whom God hath given
riches, and substance, and hath given him power to eat thereof, and to
enjoy his portion, and to rejoice of his labour: this is the gift of
God.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For he shall not much remember the days
of his life, because God entertaineth his heart with delight,

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> There is also another evil, which I have
seen under the sun, and that frequent among men:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> A man to whom God hath given riches, and
substance, and honour, and his soul wanteth nothing of all that he
desireth: yet God doth not give him power to eat thereof, but a stranger
shall eat it up. This is vanity and a great misery.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If a man beget a hundred children, and live
many years, and attain to a great age, and his soul make no use of the
goods of his substance, and he be without burial: of this man I
pronounce, that the untimely born is better than he.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For he came in vain, and goeth to darkness,
and his name shall be wholly forgotten.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> He hath not seen the sun, nor known the
distance of good and evil:

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Although he lived two thousand years, and
hath not enjoyed good things: do not all make haste to one place?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> All the labour of man is for his mouth, but
his soul shall not be filled.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> What hath the wise man more than the fool?
and what the poor man, but to go thither, where there is life?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Better it is to see what thou mayst desire,
than to desire that which thou canst not know. But this also is vanity,
and presumption of spirit.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> He that shall be, his name is already
called: and it is known, that he is man, and cannot contend in judgment
with him that is stronger than himself.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> There are many words that have much
vanity in disputing.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> What needeth a man to seek things that are
above him, whereas he knoweth not what is profitable for him in his
life, in all the days of his pilgrimage, and the time that passeth like
a shadow? Or who can tell him what shall be after him under the sun?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> A good name is better than precious
ointments: and the day of death than the day of one's birth.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> It is better to go to the house of
mourning, than to the house of feasting: for in that we are put in mind
of the end of all, and the living thinketh what is to come.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Anger is better than laughter: because by
the sadness of the countenance the mind of the offender is corrected.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> The heart of the wise is where there is
mourning, and the heart of fools where there is mirth.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> It is better to be rebuked by a wise man,
than to be deceived by the flattery of fools.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> For as the crackling of thorns burning
under a pot, so is the laughter of a fool: now this also is vanity.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Oppression troubleth the wise, and shall
destroy the strength of his heart.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Better is the end of a speech than the
beginning. Better is the patient man than the presumptuous.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Be not quickly angry: for anger resteth
in the bosom of a fool.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Say not: What thinkest thou is the cause
that former times were better than they are now? for this manner of
question is foolish.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Wisdom with riches is more profitable,
and bringeth more advantage to them that see the sun.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For as wisdom is a defence, so money is a
defence : but learning and wisdom excel in this, that they give life to
him that possesseth them.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Consider the works of God, that no man
can correct whom he hath despised.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> In the good day enjoy good things, and
beware beforehand of the evil day: for God hath made both the one and
the other, that man may not find against him any just complaint.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> These things also I saw in the days of my
vanity: A just man perisheth in his justice, and a wicked man liveth a
long time in his wickedness.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Be not over just: and be not more wise
than is necessary, lest thou become stupid.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Be not overmuch wicked: and be not
foolish, lest thou die before thy time.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> It is good that thou shouldst hold up the
just, yea and from him withdraw not thy hand: for he that feareth God,
neglecteth nothing.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Wisdom hath strengthened the wise more
than ten princes of the city.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For there is no just man upon earth, that
doth good, and sinneth not.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> But do not apply thy heart to all words
that are spoken: lest perhaps thou hear thy servant reviling thee.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> For thy conscience knoweth that thou also
hast often spoken evil of others.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> I have tried all things in wisdom. I have
said: I will be wise: and it departed farther from me,

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Much more than it was: it is a great
depth, who shall find it out?

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> I have surveyed all things with my mind,
to know, and consider, and seek out wisdom and reason: and to know the
wickedness of the fool, and the error of the imprudent:

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And I have found a woman more bitter than
death, who is the hunter's snare, and her heart is a net, and her hands
are bands. He that pleaseth God shall escape from her: but he that is a
sinner, shall be caught by her.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> Lo this have I found, said Ecclesiastes,
weighing one thing after another, that I might find out the account,

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> Which yet my soul seeketh, and I have not
found it. One man among a thousand I have found, a woman among them all
I have not found.

<span id="an_7:30">7:30</span> Only this I have found, that God made man
right, and he hath entangled himself with an infinity of questions. Who
is as the wise man? and who hath known the resolution of the word?

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> The wisdom of a man shineth in his
countenance, and the most mighty will change his face.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I observe the mouth of the king, and the
commandments of the oath of God.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Be not hasty to depart from his face, and
do not continue in an evil work: for he will do all that pleaseth him:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And his word is full of power: neither can
any man say to him: Why dost thou so?

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> He that keepeth the commandments shall find
no evil. The heart of a wise man understandeth time and answer.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> There is a time and opportunity for every
business, and great affliction for man:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Because he is ignorant of things past, and
things to come he cannot know by any messenger.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> It is not in man's power to stop the
spirit, neither hath he power in the day of death, neither is he
suffered to rest when war is at hand, neither shall wickedness save the
wicked.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> All these things I have considered, and
applied my heart to all the works that are done under the sun. Sometimes
one man ruleth over another to his own hurt.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> I saw the wicked buried: who also when
they were yet living were in the holy place, and were praised in the
city as men of just works: but this also is vanity.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For because sentence is not speedily
pronounced against the evil, the children of men commit evils without
any fear.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But though a sinner do evil a hundred
times, and by patience be borne withal, I know from thence that it shall
be well with them that fear God, who dread his face.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> But let it not be well with the wicked,
neither let his days be prolonged, but as a shadow let them pass away
that fear not the face of the Lord.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> There is also another vanity, which is
done upon the earth. There are just men to whom evils happen, as though
they had done the works of the wicked: and there are wicked men, who are
as secure, as though they had the deeds of the just: but this also I
judge most vain.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> Therefore I commended mirth, because
there was no good for a man under the sun, but to eat, and drink, and be
merry, and that he should take nothing else with him of his labour in
the days of his life, which God hath given him under the sun.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And I applied my heart to know wisdom,
and to understand the distraction that is upon earth: for there are some
that day and night take no sleep with their eyes.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I understood that man can find no
reason of all those works of God that are done under the sun: and the
more he shall labour to seek, so much the less shall he find: yea,
though the wise man shall say, that he knoweth it, he shall not be able
to find it.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> All these things have I considered in my
heart, that I might carefully understand them: there are just men and
wise men, and their works are in the hand of God: and yet man knoweth
not whether he be worthy of love, or hatred:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> But all things are kept uncertain for the
time to come, because all things equally happen to the just and to the
wicked, to the good and to the evil, to the clean and to the unclean, to
him that offereth victims, and to him that despiseth sacrifices. As the
good is, so also is the sinner: as the perjured, so he also that
sweareth truth.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> This is a very great evil among all things
that are done under the sun, that the same things happen to all men:
whereby also the hearts of the children of men are filled with evil, and
with contempt while they live, and afterwards they shall be brought down
to hell.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> There is no man that liveth always, or that
hopeth for this: a living dog is better than a dead lion.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For the living know that they shall die,
but the dead know nothing more, neither have they a reward any more: for
the memory of them is forgotten.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Their love also, and their hatred, and
their envy are all perished, neither have they any part in this world,
and in the work that is done under the sun.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Go then, and eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with gladness: because thy works please God.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> At all times let thy garments be white, and
let not oil depart from thy head.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Live joyfully with the wife whom thou
lovest, all the days of thy unsteady life, which are given to thee under
the sun, all the time of thy vanity: for this is thy portion in life,
and in thy labour wherewith thou labourest under the sun.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Whatsoever thy hand is able to do, do it
earnestly: for neither work, nor reason, nor wisdom, nor knowledge shall
be in hell, whither thou art hastening.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> I turned me to another thing, and I saw
that under the sun, the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong, nor bread to the wise, nor riches to the learned, nor favour to
the skilful: but time and chance in all.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Man knoweth not his own end: but as
fishes are taken with the hook, and as birds are caught with the snare,
so men are taken in the evil time, when it shall suddenly come upon
them.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> This wisdom also I have seen under the
sun, and it seemed to me to be very great:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> A little city, and few men in it: there
came against it a great king, and invested it, and built bulwarks round
about it, and the siege was perfect.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> Now there was found in it a man poor and
wise, and he delivered the city by his wisdom, and no man afterward
remembered that poor man.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And I said that wisdom is better than
strength: how then is the wisdom of the poor man slighted, and his words
not heard?

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> The words of the wise are heard in
silence, more than the cry of a prince among fools.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Better is wisdom, than weapons of war:
and he that shall offend in one, shall lose many good things.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> Dying flies spoil the sweetness of the
ointment. Wisdom and glory is more precious than a small and shortlived
folly.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> The heart of a wise man is in his right
hand, and the heart of a fool is in his left hand.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Yea, and the fool when he walketh in the
way, whereas be himself is a fool, esteemeth all men fools.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> If the spirit of him that hath power,
ascend upon thee, leave not thy place: because care will make the
greatest sins to cease.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> There is an evil that I have seen under
the sun, as it were by an error proceeding from the face of the prince:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> A fool set in high dignity, and the rich
sitting beneath.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> I have seen servants upon horses: and
princes walking on the ground as servants.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into
it: and he that breaketh a hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He that removeth stones, shall be hurt by
them: and he that cutteth trees, shall be wounded by them.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> If the iron be blunt, and be not as
before, but be made blunt, with much labour it shall be sharpened: and
after industry shall follow wisdom.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> If a serpent bite in silence, he is
nothing better that backbiteth secretly.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The words of the mouth of a wise man
are grace: but the lips of a fool shall throw him down headlong.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> The beginning of his words is folly,
and the end of his talk is a mischievous error.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> A fool multiplieth words. A man cannot
tell what hath been before him: and what shall be after him, who can
tell him?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The labour of fools shall afflict them
that know not bow to go to the city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a
child, and when the princes eat in the morning.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Blessed is the land, whose king is
noble, and whose princes eat in due season for refreshment, and not for
riotousness.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> By slothfulness a building shall be
brought down, and through the weakness of hands, the house shall drop
through.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> For laughter they make bread, and wine
that the living may feast: and all things obey money.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Detract not the king, no not in thy
thought; and speak not evil of the rich man in thy private chamber:
because even the birds of the air will carry thy voice, and he that hath
wings will tell what thou hast said.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Cast thy bread upon the running waters:
for after a long time thou shalt find it again.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Give a portion to seven, and also to
eight: for thou knowest not what evil shall be upon the earth.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> If the clouds be full, they will pour out
rain upon the earth. If the tree fall to the south, or to the north, in
what place soever it shall fall, there shall it be.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> He that observeth the wind, shall not
sow: and he that considereth the clouds, shall never reap.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> As thou knowest not what is the way of
the spirit, nor how the bones are joined together in the womb of her
that is with child: so thou knowest not the works of God, who is the
maker of all.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> In the morning sow thy seed, and In the
evening let not thy hand cease: for thou knowest not which may rather
spring up, this or that: and if both together, it shall be the better.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> The light is sweet, and it is delightful
for the eyes to see the sun.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> If a man live many years, and have
rejoiced in them all, he must remember the darksome time, and the many
days: which when they shall come, the things past shall be accused of
vanity.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Rejoice therefore, O young man, in thy
youth, and let thy heart be in that which is good in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thy eyes:
and know that for all these God will bring thee into judgment.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Remove anger from thy heart, and put
away evil from thy flesh. For youth and pleasure are vain.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, before the time of affliction come, and the years draw nigh of
which thou shalt say: They please me not:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Before the sun, and the light, and the
moon, and the stars be darkened, and the clouds return after the rain:

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> When the keepers of the house shall
tremble, and the strong men shall stagger, and the grinders shall be
idle in a small number, and they that look through the holes shall be
darkened:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And they shall shut the doors in the
street, when the grinder's voice shall be low, and they shall rise up at
the voice of the bird, and all the daughters of music shall grow deaf.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And they shall fear high things, and they
shall be afraid in the way, the almond tree shall flourish, the locust
shall be made fat, and the caper tree shall be destroyed: because man
shall go into the house of his eternity, and the mourners shall go round
about in the street.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Before the silver cord be broken, and the
golden fillet shrink back, and the pitcher be crushed at the fountain,
and the wheel be broken upon the cistern,

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And the dust return into its earth, from
whence it was, and the spirit return to God, who gave it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Vanity of vanities, said Ecclesiastes,
and all things are vanity.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And whereas Ecclesiastes was very wise,
he taught the people, and declared the things that he had done: and
seeking out, he set forth many parables.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> He sought profitable words, and wrote
words most right, and full of truth.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> The words of the wise are as goads, and
as nails deeply fastened in, which by the counsel of masters are given
from one shepherd.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> More than these, my son, require not.
Of making many books there is no end: and much study is an affliction of
the flesh.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Let us all hear together the conclusion
of the discourse. Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is all
man:

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And all things that are done, God will
bring into judgment for every error, whether it be good or evil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon](sol)
