[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gen)  [Next](lev) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Exodus

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> These are the names of the children of
Israel, that went into Egypt with Jacob: they went in, every man with
his household:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Ruben, Simeon, Levi, Juda,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Issachar, Zabulon, and Benjamin,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Dan, and Nephtali, Gad and Aser.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And all the souls that came out of Jacob's
thigh, were seventy: but Joseph was in Egypt.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> After he was dead, and all his brethren,
and all that generation,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The children of Israel increased, and
sprung up into multitudes, and growing exceedingly strong they filled
the land.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> In the mean time there arose a new king
over Egypt, that knew not Joseph:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And he said to his people: Behold the
people of the children of Israel are numerous and stronger than we.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Come, let us wisely oppress them, lest
they multiply: and if any war shall rise against us, join with our
enemies, and having overcome us, depart out of the land.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Therefore he set over them masters of the
works, to afflict them with burdens, and they built for Pharao cities of
tabernacles, Phithom and Ramesses.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But the more they oppressed them, the
more they were multiplied, and increased:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And the Egyptians hated the children of
Israel, and afflicted them and mocked them:

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And they made their life bitter with hard
works in clay, and brick, and with all manner of service, wherewith they
were overcharged in the works of the earth.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the king of Egypt spoke to the
midwives of the Hebrews: of whom one was called Sephora, the other Phua,

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Commanding them: When you shall do the
office of midwives to the Hebrew women, and the time of delivery is
come: if it be a man child, kill it: if a woman, keep it alive.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But the midwives feared God, and did not
do as the king of Egypt had commanded, but saved the men children.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the king called for them and said:
What is that you meant to do, that you would save the men children ?

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> They answered: The Hebrew women are not
as the Egyptian women: for they themselves are skillful in the office of
a midwife; and they are delivered before we come to them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Therefore God dealt well with the
midwives: and the people multiplied and grew exceedingly strong.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And because the midwives feared God, he
built them houses.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Pharao therefore charged all his people,
saying: Whatsoever shall be born of the male sex, ye shall cast into the
river: whatsoever of the female, ye shall save alive.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> After this there went a man of the house of
Levi; and took a wife of his own kindred.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And she conceived, and bore a son; and
seeing him a goodly child hid him three months.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And when she could hide him no longer, she
took a basket made of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and pitch: and
put the little babe therein, and laid him in the sedges by the river's
brink,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> His sister standing afar off, and taking
notice what would be done.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And behold the daughter of Pharao came down
to wash herself in the river: and her maids walked by the river's brink.
And when she saw the basket in the sedges, she sent one of her maids for
it: and when it was brought,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> She opened it and seeing within it an
infant crying, having compassion on it she said: This is one of the
babes of the Hebrews.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And the child's sister said to her Shall I
go and call to thee a Hebrew woman, to nurse the babe ?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> She answered: Go. The maid went and called
her mother.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And Pharao's daughter said to her. Take
this child and nurse him for me: I will give thee thy wages. The woman
took, and nursed the child: and when he was grown up, she delivered him
to Pharao's daughter.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And she adopted him for a son, and called
him Moses, saying: Because I took him out of the water.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> In those days after Moses was grown up,
he went out to his brethren: and saw their affliction, and an Egyptian
striking one of the Hebrews his brethren.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And when he had looked about this way and
that way, and saw no one there, he slew the Egyptian and hid him in the
sand.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And going out the next day, he saw two
Hebrews quarreling: and he said to him that did the wrong: Why strikest
thou thy neighbour?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But he answered: Who hath appointed thee
prince and judge over us: wilt thou kill me, as thou didst yesterday
kill the Egyptian? Moses feared, and said: How is this come to be known
?

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And Pharao heard of this word and sought
to kill Moses: but he fled from his sight, and abode in the land of
Madian, and he sat down by a well.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the priest of Madian had seven
daughters, who came to draw water: and when the troughs were filled,
desired to water their father's flocks.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the shepherds came and drove them
away: and Moses arose, and defending the maids, watered their sheep.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And when they returned to Raguel their
father, he said to them: Why are ye come sooner than usual?

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They answered: A man of Egypt delivered
us from the hands of the shepherds: and he drew water also with us, and
gave the sheep to drink.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But he said: Where is he? why have you
let the man go? call him that he may eat bread.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Moses swore that he would dwell with
him. And he took Sephora his daughter to wife:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And she bore him a son, whom he called
Gersam, saying: I have been a stranger in a foreign country. And she
bore another, whom he called Eliezer, saying: For the God of my father,
my helper hath delivered me out of the hand of Pharao.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Now after a long time the king of Egypt
died: and the children of Israel groaning, cried out because of the
works: and their cry went up unto God from the works.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And he heard their groaning, and
remembered the covenant which he made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And the Lord looked upon the children of
Israel, and he knew them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Now Moses fed the sheep of Jethro his
father in law, the priest of Madian: and he drove the flock to the inner
parts of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, Horeb.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And the Lord appeared to him in a flame of
fire out of the midst of a bush: and he saw that the bush was on fire
and was not burnt.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And Moses said: I will go and see this
great sight, why the bush is not burnt.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And when the Lord saw that he went forward
to see, he called to him out of the midst of the bush, and said: Moses,
Moses. And he answered: Here I am.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And he said: Come not nigh hither, put off
the shoes from thy feet: for the place whereon thou standest is holy
ground.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And he said: I am the God of thy father,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Moses hid
his face: for he durst not look at God.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the Lord said to him: I have seen the
affliction of my people in Egypt, and I have heard their cry because of
the rigour of them that are over the works:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And knowing their sorrow, I am come down to
deliver them out of the hands of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of
that land into a good and spacious land, into a land that floweth with
milk and honey, to the places of the Chanaanite, and Hethite, and
Amorrhite, and Pherezite, and Hevite, and Jebusite.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> For the cry of the children of Israel is
come unto me: and I have seen their affliction, wherewith they are
oppressed by the Egyptians.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But come, and I will send thee to Pharao,
that thou mayst bring forth my people, the children of Israel out of
Egypt.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And Moses said to God: Who am I that I
should go to Pharao, and should bring forth the children of Israel out
of Egypt?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And he said to him: I will be with thee:
and this thou shalt have for a sign, that I have sent thee: When thou
shalt have brought my people out of Egypt, thou shalt offer sacrifice to
God upon this mountain.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Moses said to God: Lo, I shall go to the
children of Israel, and say to them: The God of your fathers hath sent
me to you. If they should say to me: What is his name? what shall I say
to them?

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> God said to Moses: I AM WHO AM. He said:
Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel: HE WHO IS, hath sent me
to you.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And God said again to Moses: Thus shalt
thou say to the children of Israel: The Lord God of your fathers, the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me to
you: This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all
generations.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Go, gather together the ancients of
Israel, and thou shalt say to them: The Lord God of your fathers, the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared to
me, saying: Visiting I have visited you: and I have seen all that hath
befallen you in Egypt.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And I have said the word to bring you
forth out of the affliction of Egypt, into the land of the Chanaanite,
the Hethite, and the Amorrhite, and Pherezite, and Hevite, and Jebusite,
to a land that floweth with milk and honey.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And they shall hear thy voice: and thou
shalt go in, thou and the ancients of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and
thou shalt say to him: The Lord God of the Hebrews hath called us: we
will go three days' journey into the wilderness, to sacrifice unto the
Lord our God.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> But I know that the king of Egypt will
not let you go, but by a mighty hand.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For I will stretch forth my hand and will
strike Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst of them:
after these he will let you go.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And I will give favour to this people, in
the sight of the Egyptians: and when you go forth, you shall not depart
empty:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> But every woman shall ask of her
neighbour, and of her that is in her house, vessels of silver and of
gold, and raiment: and you shall put them on your sons and daughters,
and shall spoil Egypt.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Moses answered and said: They will not
believe me, nor hear my voice, but they will say: The Lord hath not
appeared to thee.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Then he said to him: What is that thou
holdest in thy hand? He answered: A rod.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the Lord said: Cast it down upon the
ground. He cast it down, and it was turned into a serpent: so that Moses
fled from it.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And the Lord said: Put out thy hand and
take it by the tail. He put forth his hand, and took hold of it, and it
was turned into a rod.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> That they may believe, saith he, that the
Lord God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob, hath appeared to thee.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And the Lord said again: Put thy hand into
thy bosom. And when he had put it into his bosom, he brought it forth
leprous as snow.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And he said: Put back thy hand into thy
bosom. He put it back, and brought it out again, and it was like the
other flesh.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> If they will not believe thee, saith he,
nor hear the voice of the former sign, they will believe the word of the
latter sign.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> But if they will not even believe these two
signs, nor hear thy voice: take of the river water, and pour it out upon
the dry land, and whatsoever thou drawest out of the river shall be
turned into blood.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Moses said: I beseech thee, Lord. I am
not eloquent from yesterday and the day before: and since thou hast
spoken to thy servant, I have more impediment and slowness of tongue.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The Lord said to him: Who made man's
mouth? or who made the dumb and the deaf, the seeing and the blind? did
not I?

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Go therefore and I will be in thy mouth:
and I will teach thee what thou shalt speak.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> But he said: I beseech thee, Lord send
whom thou wilt send.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> The Lord being angry at Moses, said Aaron
the Levite is thy brother, I know that he is eloquent: behold he cometh
forth to meet thee, and seeing thee shall be glad at heart.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Speak to him, and put my words in his
mouth: and I will be in thy mouth, and in his mouth, and will shew you
what you must do.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> He shall speak in thy stead to the
people, and shall be thy mouth: but thou shalt be to him in those things
that pertain to God.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And take this rod in thy hand, wherewith
thou shalt do the signs.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Moses went his way, and returned to
Jethro his father in law and said to him: I will go and return to my
brethren into Egypt, that I may see if they be yet alive. And Jethro
said to him: Go in peace.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And the Lord said to Moses, in Madian:
Go, and return into Egypt: for they are all dead that sought thy life.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Moses therefore took his wife, and his
sons, and set them upon an ass: and returned into Egypt, carrying the
rod of God in his hand.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And the Lord said to him as he was
returning into Egypt: See that thou do all the wonders before Pharao,
which I have put in thy hand: I shall harden his heart, and he will not
let the people go.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And thou shalt say to him: Thus saith the
Lord: Israel is my son, my firstborn.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> I have said to thee: Let my son go, that
he may serve me, and thou wouldst not let him go: behold I will kill thy
son, thy firstborn.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And when he was in his journey, in the
inn, the Lord met him, and would have killed him.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Immediately Sephora took a very sharp
stone, and circumcised the fore skin of her son, and touched his feet
and said: A bloody spouse art thou to me.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> And he let him go after she had said A
bloody spouse art thou to me, because of the circumcision.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> And the Lord said to Aaron: Go into the
desert to meet Moses. And he went forth to meet him in the mountain of
God, and kissed him.

<span id="an_4:28">4:28</span> And Moses told Aaron all the words of the
Lord, by which he had sent him, and the signs that he had commanded.

<span id="an_4:29">4:29</span> And they came together, and they
assembled all the ancients of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_4:30">4:30</span> And Aaron spoke all the words which the
Lord had said to Moses: and he wrought the signs before the people,

<span id="an_4:31">4:31</span> And the people believed. And they heard
that the Lord had visited the children of Israel: and that he had looked
upon their affliction: and falling down they adored.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> After these things Moses and Aaron went in,
and said to Pharao: Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: Let my people go
that they may sacrifice to me in the desert.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> But he answered: Who is the Lord, that I
should hear his voice, and let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And they said: The God of the Hebrews hath
called us, to go three days' journey into the wilderness and to
sacrifice to the Lord our God: lest a pestilence or the sword fall upon
us.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> The king of Egypt said to them: Why do you
Moses and Aaron draw off the people from their works? Get you gone to
your burdens.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And Pharao said: The people of the land is
numerous: you see that the multitude is increased: how much more if you
give them rest from their works?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Therefore he commanded the same day the
overseers of the works, and the taskmasters of the people, saying:

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> You shall give straw no more to the people
to make brick, as before: but let them go and gather straw.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And you shall lay upon them the task of
bricks, which they did before, neither shall you diminish any thing
thereof: for they are idle, and therefore they cry, saying: Let us go
and sacrifice to our God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let them be oppressed, with works, and let
them fulfill them: that they may not regard lying words.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the overseers of the works and the
taskmasters went out and said to the people: Thus saith Pharao, I allow
you no straw:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Go, and gather it where you can find it:
neither shall any thing of your work be diminished.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And the people was scattered through all
the land of Egypt to gather straw.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the overseers of the works pressed
them, saying: Fulfill your work every day as before you were wont to do
when straw was given you.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And they that were over the works of the
children of Israel were scourged by Pharao's taskmasters, saying: Why
have you not made up the task of bricks both yesterday and to day as
before?

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the officers of the children of
Israel came, and cried out to Pharao, saying: Why dealest thou so with
thy servants?

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Straw is not given us, and bricks are
required of us as before: behold we thy servants are beaten with whips,
and thy people is unjustly dealt withal.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And he said: You are idle, and therefore
you say: Let us go and sacrifice to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Go therefore, and work: straw shall not
be given you, and you shall deliver the accustomed number of bricks.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And the officers of the children of
Israel saw that they were in evil case, because it was said to them:
There shall not a whit be diminished of the bricks for every day.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood
over against them as they came out from Pharao:

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And they said to them: The Lord see and
judge, because you have made our savour to stink before Pharao and his
servants, and you have given him a sword to kill us.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> And Moses returned to the Lord, and said:
Lord, why hast thou afflicted this people? wherefore hast thou sent me?

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> For since the time that I went in to
Pharao to speak in thy name, he hath afflicted thy people: and thou hast
not delivered them.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Now thou shalt
see what I will do to Pharao: for by a mighty hand shall he let them go,
and with a strong hand shall he cast them out of his land.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: I am
the Lord,

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> That appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, by the name of God Almighty; and my name ADONAI I did not shew
them.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And I made a covenant with them, to give
them the land of Chanaan, the land of their pilgrimage wherein they were
strangers.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> I have heard the groaning of the children
of Israel, wherewith the Egyptians have oppressed them: and I have
remembered my covenant.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Therefore say to the children of Israel: I
am the Lord who will bring you out from the work prison of the
Egyptians, and will deliver you from bondage: and redeem you with a high
arm, and great judgments.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And I will take you to myself for my
people, I will be your God: and you shall know that I am the Lord your
God who brought you out from the work prison of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And brought you into the land, concerning
which I lifted up my hand to give it to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and I
will give it you to possess, I am the Lord.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And Moses told all this to the children of
Israel: but they did not hearken to him, for anguish of spirit, and most
painful work.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Go in, and speak to Pharao king of Egypt,
that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Moses answered before the Lord Behold the
children of Israel do no hearken to me; and how will Pharao hear me,
especially as I am of uncircumcised lips?

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron,
and he gave them a charge unto the children of Israel, and unto Pharao
the king of Egypt, that they should bring forth the children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> These are the heads of their house by
their families. The sons of Rubel the firstborn of Israel: Henoch and
Phallu, Hesron and Charmi.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> These are the kindreds of Ruben. The sons
of Simeon: Jamuel, and Jamin and Ahod, and Jachin, and Soar, and Saul
the son of a chanaanitess: these are the families of Simeon.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And these are the names of the sons of
Levi by their kindreds: Gerson, and Caath, and Merari. And the years of
the life of Levi were a hundred and thirty seven.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> The sons of Gerson: Lobni and Semei, by
their kindreds.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The sons of Caath: Amram, and Isaar, and
EIebron, and Oziel. And the years of Caath's life were a hundred and
thirty-three.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> The sons of Merari: Moholi and Musi.
These are the kindreds of Levi by their families.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And Amram took to wife Jochabed his aunt
by the father's side: and she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of
Amram's life were a hundred and thirty-seven.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> The sons also of Isaar: Core, and Nepheg,
and Zechri.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> The sons also of Oziel: Mizael, and
Elizaphan, and Sethri.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And Aaron took to wife Elizabeth the
daughter of Aminadab, sister of Nahason, who bore him Nadab, and Abiu,
and Eleazar, and Ithamar.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> The sons also of Core: Aser, and Elcana,
and Abiasaph. These are the kindreds of the Corites.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> But Eleazar the son of Aaron took a wife
of the daughters of Phutiel: and she bore him Phinees. These are the
heads of the Levitical families by their kindreds.

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> These are Aaron and Moses, whom the Lord
commanded to bring forth the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt
by their companies.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> These are they that speak to Pharao king
of Egypt, in order to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: these
are that Moses and Aaron

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> In the day when the Lord spoke to Moses
in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: I am
the Lord: speak thou to Pharao king of Egypt all that I say to thee.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And Moses said before the Lord: Lo I am
of uncircumcised lips, how will Pharao hear me?

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Behold I have
appointed thee the God of Pharao: and Aaron thy brother shall be thy
prophet.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Thou shalt speak to him all that I command
thee; and he shall speak to Pharao, that he let the children of Israel
go out of his land.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> But I shall harden his heart, and shall
multiply my signs and wonders in the land of Egypt,

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And he will not hear you: and I will lay my
hand upon Egypt, and will bring forth my army and my people the children
of Israel out of the land of Egypt, by very great judgments.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I am the
Lord, who have stretched forth my hand upon Egypt, and have brought
forth the children of Israel out of the midst of them.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had
commanded: so did they.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron
eighty-three, when they spoke to Pharao.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron:

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> When Pharao shall say to you, Shew signs:
thou shalt say to Aaron: Take thy rod, and cast it down before Pharao,
and it shall be turned into a serpent.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> So Moses and Aaron went in unto Pharao,
and did as the Lord had commanded. And Aaron took the rod before Pharao,
and his servants, and it was turned into a serpent.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And Pharao called the wise men and the
magicians: and they also by Egyptian enchantments and certain secrets
did in like manner.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And they every one cast down their rods,
and they were turned into serpents: but Aaron's rod devoured their rods.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And Pharao's heart was hardened, and he
did not hearken to them, as the Lord had commanded.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Pharao's
heart is hardened, he will not let the people go.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Go to him in the morning, behold he will
go out to the waters: and thou shalt stand to meet him on the bank of
the river: and thou shalt take in thy hand the rod that was turned into
a serpent.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And thou shalt say to him: The Lord God
of the Hebrews sent me to thee saying: Let my people go to sacrifice to
me in the desert: and hitherto thou wouldst not hear.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Thus therefore saith the Lord: In this
thou shalt know that I am the Lord: behold I will strike with the rods
that is in my hand, the water of the river, and it shall be turned into
blood.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And the fishes that are in the river
shall die, and the waters shall be corrupted, and the Egyptians shall be
afflicted when they drink the water of the river.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> The Lord also said to Moses: Say to
Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch forth thy hand upon the waters of
Egypt, and upon their rivers, and streams and pools, and all the ponds
of waters, that they may be turned into blood: and let blood be in all
the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and of stone.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And Moses and Aaron did as the Lord had
commanded: and lifting up the rod he struck the water of the river
before Pharao and his servants: and it was turned into blood.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And the fishes that were in the river
died: and the river corrupted, and the Egyptians could not drink the
water of the river, and there was blood in all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the magicians of the Egyptians with
their enchantments did in like manner: and Pharao's heart was hardened,
neither did he hear them, as the Lord had commanded.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And he turned himself away and went into
his house, neither did he set his heart to it this time also.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And all the Egyptians dug round about the
river for water to drink: for they could not drink of the water of the
river.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And seven days were fully ended, after
that the Lord struck the river.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to
Pharao, and thou shalt say to him: Thus saith the Lord: Let my people go
to sacrifice to me.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> But if thou wilt not let them go behold I
will strike all thy coasts with frogs.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And the river shall bring forth an
abundance of frogs: which shall come up, and enter into thy house, and
thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and in the houses of thy servants, and
to thy people, and into thy ovens, and into the remains of thy meats;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And the frogs shall come in to thee and to
thy people, and to all thy servants.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Say to Aaron,
Stretch forth thy hand upon the streams and upon the rivers and the
pools, and bring forth frogs upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And Aaron stretched forth his hand upon the
waters of Egypt, and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And the magicians also by their
enchantments did in like manner, and the brought forth frogs upon all
the land of Egypt

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> But Pharao called Moses and Aaron and said
to them: Pray ye to the Lord to take away the frogs from me and from my
people; and I will let the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And Moses said to Pharao: Set me a time
when I shall pray for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people,
that the frogs may be driven away from thee and from thy house, and from
thy servants, and from thy people: and may remain only in the river.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And he answered: To morrow. But he said:
I will do according to thy word; that thou mayst know that there is none
like to the Lord our God.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And the frogs shall depart from thee, and
from thy house, and from thy servants, and from thy people; and shall
remain only in the river.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Moses and Aaron went forth from
Pharao: and Moses cried to the Lord for the promise, which he had made
to Pharao concerning the frogs.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And the Lord did according to the word of
Moses: and the frogs died out of the houses, and out of the villages,
and out of the fields:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And they gathered them together into
immense heaps, and the land was corrupted.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And Pharao seeing that rest was given,
hardened his own heart, and did not hear them, as the Lord had
commanded.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Say to Aaron,
Stretch forth thy rod, and strike the dust of the earth: and may there
be sciniphs in all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And they did so. And Aaron stretched
forth his hand, holding the rod: and he struck the dust of the earth,
and there came sciniphs on men and on beasts: all the dust of the earth
was turned into sciniphs through all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And the magicians with their enchantments
practiced in like manner, to bring forth sciniphs, and they could not
and there were sciniphs as well on men as on beasts.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And the magicians said to Pharao This is
the finger of God. And Pharao heart was hardened, and he hearkened not
unto them, as the Lord had commanded.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> The Lord also said to Moses: Arise early,
and stand before Pharao: for he will go forth to the waters: and thou
shalt say to him: Thus saith the Lord: Let my people go to sacrifice to
me.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> But if thou wilt not let them go, behold
I will send in upon thee, and upon thy servants, and upon thy houses all
kind of flies: and the houses of the Egyptians shall be filled with
flies of divers kinds, and the whole land wherein they shall be.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And I will make the land of Gessen
wherein my people is, wonderful in that lay, so that flies shall not be
there: and thou shalt know that I am the Lord in the midst of the earth.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And I will put a division between my
people and thy people: to morrow shall this sign be.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And the Lord did so. And there came a
very grievous swarm of flies into he houses of Pharao and of his
servants, and into all the land of Egypt: and the land was corrupted by
this kind of flies.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and
said to them: Go, and sacrifice to your God in this land.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And Moses said: It cannot be so: for we
shall sacrifice the abominations of the Egyptians to the Lord our God:
now if we kill those things which the Egyptians worship, in their
presence, they will stone us.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> We will go three days' journey into the
wilderness: and we will sacrifice to the Lord our God, as he hath
commanded us.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And Pharao said: I will let you go to
sacrifice to the Lord your God in the wilderness: but go no farther:
pray for me.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And Moses said: I will go out from thee,
and will pray to the Lord: and the flies shall depart from Pharao, and
from his servants, and from his people to morrow: but do not deceive any
more, in not letting the people go to sacrifice to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> So Moses went out from Pharao, and prayed
to the Lord.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And he did according to his word: and he
took away the flies from Pharao, and from his servants, and from his
people: there was not left so much as one.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And Pharao's heart was hardened, so that
neither this time would he let the people go.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to
Pharao, and speak to him: Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews: Let my
people go to sacrifice to me.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> But if thou refuse, and withhold them
still:

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Behold my hand shall be upon thy fields:
and a very grievous murrain upon thy horses, and asses, and camels, and
oxen, and sheep.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And the Lord will make a wonderful
difference between the possessions of Israel and the possessions of the
Egyptians, that nothing at all shall die of those things that belong to
the children of Israel.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And the Lord appointed a time, saying: To
morrow will the Lord do this thing in the land.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> The Lord therefore did this thing the next
day: and all the beasts of the Egyptians died, but of the beasts of the
children of Israel there died not one.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And Pharao sent to see: and there was not
any thing dead of that which Israel possessed. And Pharao's heart was
hardened, and he did not let the people go.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron: Take
to you handfuls of ashes out of the chimney, and let Moses sprinkle it
in the air in the presence of Pharao.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And be there dust upon all the land of
Egypt: for there shall be boils and swelling blains both in men and
beasts in the whole land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And they took ashes out of the chimney,
and stood before Pharao, and Moses sprinkled it in the air: and there
came boils with swelling blains in men and beasts.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> Neither could the magicians stand before
Moses for the boils that were upon them, and in all the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart, and
he hearkened not unto them, as the Lord had spoken to Moses.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Arise in the
morning, and stand before Pharao, and thou shalt say to him: Thus saith
the Lord the God of the Hebrews: Let my people go to sacrifice to me.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> For I will at this time send all my
plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people: that
thou mayst know there is none like me in all the earth.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For now I will stretch out my hand to
strike thee, and thy people with pestilence, and thou shalt perish from
the earth.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And therefore have I raised thee, that I
may shew my power in thee, and my name may be spoken of throughout all
the earth.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Dost thou yet hold back my people: and
wilt thou not let them go?

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Behold I will cause it to rain to morrow
at this same hour, an exceeding great hail: such as hath not been in
Egypt from the day that it was founded, until this present time.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Send therefore now presently, and gather
together thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field: for men and
beasts, and all things that shall be found abroad, and not gathered
together out of the fields, which the hail shall fall upon, shall die.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> He that feared the word of the Lord among
Pharao's servants, made his servants and his cattle flee into houses:

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch forth
thy hand towards heaven, that there may be hail in the whole land of
Egypt, upon men, and upon beasts, and upon every herb of the field in
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod towards
heaven, and the Lord sent thunder and hail, and lightning running along
the ground: and the Lord rained hail upon the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And the hail and fire mixed with it drove
on together: and it was of so great bigness, as never before was seen in
the whole land of Egypt since that nation was founded.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And the hail destroyed through all the
land of Egypt all things that were in the fields, both man and beast:
and the hail smote every herb of the field, and it broke every tree of
the country.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> Only in the land of Gessen, where the
children of Israel were, the hail fell not.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Pharao sent and called Moses and
Aaron, saying to them: I have sinned this time also; the Lord is just: I
and my people are wicked.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> Pray ye to the Lord, that the thunderings
of God and the hail may cease: that I may let you go, and that you may
stay here no longer.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Moses said: As soon as I am gone out of
the city, I will stretch forth my hands to the Lord, and the thunders
shall cease, and the hail shall be no more: that thou mayst know that
the earth is the Lord's.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> But I know that neither thou, nor thy
servants do yet fear the Lord God.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> The flax therefore and the barley were
hurt, because the barley was green, and the flax was now boiled:

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> But the wheat, and other winter corn were
not hurt, because they were lateward.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And when Moses was gone from Pharao out
of the city, he stretched forth his hands to the Lord: and the thunders
and the hail ceased, neither did there drop any more rain upon the
earth.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> And Pharao seeing that the rain and the
hail, and the thunders were ceased, increased his sin.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And his heart was hardened, and the heart
of his servants, and it was made exceeding hard: neither did he let the
children of Israel go, as the Lord had commanded by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Go in to
Pharao; for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants:
that I may work these my signs in him.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And thou mayest tell in the ears of thy
sons, and of they grandsons, how often I have plagued the Egyptians, and
wrought my signs amongst them: and you may know that I am the Lord:

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Therefore Moses and Aaron went in to
Pharao, and said to him: Thus saith the Lord God of the Hebrews: How
long refusest thou to submit to me? let my people go, to sacrifice to
me.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> But if thou resist, and wilt not let them
go, behold I will bring in to morrow the locust into thy coasts:

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> To cover the face of the earth that
nothing thereof may appear, but that which the hail hath left may be
eaten: for they shall feed upon all the trees that spring in the fields.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And they shall fill thy houses, and the
houses of thy servants, and of all the Egyptians: such a number as thy
fathers have not seen, nor thy grandfathers, from the time they were
first upon the earth, until this present day. And he turned himself
away, and went forth from Pharao.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Pharao's servants said to him: How
long shall we endure this scandal? let the men go to sacrifice to the
Lord their God. Dost thou not see that Egypt is undone?

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And they called back Moses and Aaron to
Pharao: and he said to them: Go, sacrifice to the Lord your God: who are
they that shall go?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Moses said: We will go with our young and
old, with our sons and daughters, with our sheep and herds: for it is
the solemnity of the Lord our God.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And Pharao answered: So be the Lord
with you, as I shall let you and your children go: who can doubt but
that you intend some great evil?

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> It shall not be so: but go ye men only,
and sacrifice to the Lord: for this yourselves also desired. And
immediately they were cast out from Pharao's presence.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch
forth thy hand upon the land of Egypt unto the locust, that it may come
upon it, and devour every herb that is left after the hail.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And Moses stretched forth his rod upon
the land of Egypt: and the Lord brought a burning wind all that day, and
night: and when it was morning, the burning wind raised the locusts:

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And they came up over the whole land of
Egypt: and rested in all the coasts of the Egyptians innumerable, the
like as had not been before that time, nor shall be hereafter.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And they covered the whole face of the
earth, wasting all things. And the grass of the earth was devoured, and
what fruits soever were on the trees, which the hail had left: and there
remained not any thing that was green on the trees, or in the herbs of
the earth in all Egypt.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Wherefore Pharao in haste called Moses
and Aaron, and said to them: I have sinned against the Lord your God,
and against you.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But now forgive me my sin this time
also, and pray to the Lord your God, that he take away from me this
death.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And Moses going forth from the presence
of Pharao, prayed to the Lord.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And he made a very strong wind to blow
from the west, and it took the locusts and cast them into the Red Sea:
there remained not so much as one in all the coasts of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart,
neither did he let the children of Israel go.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch out
they hand towards heaven: and may there be darkness upon the land of
Egypt, so thick that it may be felt.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And Moses stretch forth his hand
towards heaven: and there came horrible darkness in all the land of
Egypt for three days.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> No man saw his brother, nor moved
himself out of the place where he was: but wheresoever the children of
Israel dwelt there was light.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And Pharao called Moses and Aaron, and
said to them: Go sacrifice to the Lord: let your sheep only, and herds
remain; let your children go with you.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Moses said: Thou shalt give us also
sacrifices and burnt offerings, to the Lord our God.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> All the flocks shall go with us: there
shall not a hoof remain of them: for they are necessary for the service
of the Lord our God: especially as we know not what must be offered,
till we come to the very place.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart,
and he would not let them go.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And Pharao said to Moses: Get thee from
me, and beware thou see not my face any more: in what day soever thou
shalt come in my sight, thou shalt die.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Moses answered: So shall it be as thou
hast spoken, I will not see thy face any more.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Yet one
plague more will I bring upon Pharao and Egypt, and after that he shall
let you go and thrust you out.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Therefore thou shalt tell all the people
that every man ask of his friend, and every woman of her neighbour,
vessels of silver, and of gold.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And the Lord will give favour to his
people in the sight of the Egyptians. And Moses was a very great man in
the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharao's servants, and of all the
people.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And he said: Thus said the Lord: At
midnight I will enter into Egypt.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And every firstborn in the land of the
Egyptians shall die, from the firstborn of Pharao who sitteth on his
throne, even to the first born of the handmaid that is at the mill, and
all the firstborn of beasts.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And there shall be a great cry in all the
land of Egypt, such as neither hath been before, nor shall be hereafter.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> But with all the children of Israel there
shall not a dog make the least noise, from man even to beast: that you
may know how wonderful a difference the Lord maketh between the
Egyptians and Israel.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And all these thy servants shall come
down to me, and shall worship me, saying: Go forth thou, and all the
people that is under thee: after that we will go out.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And he went out from Pharao exceeding
angry. But the Lord said to Moses: Pharao will not hear you, that many
signs may be done in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And Moses and Aaron did all the wonders
that are written, before Pharao. And the Lord hardened Pharao's heart,
neither did he let the children of Israel go out of his land.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron in
the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> This month shall be to you the beginning
of months: it shall be the first in the months of the year.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Speak ye to the whole assembly of the
children of Israel, and say to them: On the tenth day of this month let
every man take a lamb by their families and houses.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> But if the number be less than may
suffice to eat the lamb, he shall take unto him his neighbour that
joineth to his house, according to the number of souls which may be
enough to eat the lamb.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And it shall be a lamb without blemish, a
male, of one year: according to which rite also you shall take a kid.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And you shall keep it until the
fourteenth day of this month: and the whole multitude of the children of
Israel shall sacrifice it in the evening.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And they shall take of the blood thereof,
and put it upon both the side posts, and on the upper door posts of the
houses, wherein they shall eat it.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> And they shall eat the flesh that night
roasted at the fire, and unleavened bread with wild lettuce.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> You shall not eat thereof any thing raw,
nor boiled in water, but only roasted at the fire: you shall eat the
head with the feet and entrails thereof.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Neither shall there remain any thing of
it until morning. If there be any thing left, you shall burn it with
fire.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> And thus you shall eat it: you shall
gird your reins, and you shall have shoes on your feet, holding staves
in your hands, and you shall eat in haste: for it is the Phase (that is
the Passage) of the Lord.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And I will pass through the land of
Egypt that night, and will kill every firstborn in the land of Egypt
both man and beast: and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute
judgments: I am the Lord.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And the blood shall be unto you for a
sign in the houses where you shall be: and I shall see the blood, and
shall pass over you: and the plague shall not be upon you to destroy
you, when I shall strike the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And this day shall be for a memorial to
you: and you shall keep it a feast to the Lord in your generations with
an everlasting observance.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Seven days shall you eat unleavened
bread: in the first day there shall be no leaven in your houses:
whosoever shall eat any thing leavened, from the first day until the
seventh day, that soul shall perish out of Israel.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> The first day shall be holy and solemn,
and the seventh day shall be kept with the like solemnity: you shall do
no work in them, except those things that belong to eating.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And you shall observe the feast of the
unleavened bread: for in this same day I will bring forth your army out
of the land of Egypt, and you shall keep this day in your generations by
a perpetual observance.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> The first month, the fourteenth day of
the month in the evening, you shall eat unleavened bread, until the one
and twentieth day of the same month in the evening.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Seven days there shall not be found any
leaven in your houses: he that shall eat leavened bread, his soul shall
perish out of the assembly of Israel, whether he be a stranger or born
in the land.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> You shall not eat any thing leavened:
in all your habitations you shall eat unleavened bread.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And Moses called all the ancients of
the children of Israel, and said to them: Go take a lamb by your
families, and sacrifice the Phase.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> And dip a bunch of hyssop in the blood
that is at the door, and sprinkle the transom of the door therewith, and
both the door cheeks: let none of you go out of the door of his house
till morning.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> For the Lord will pass through striking
the Egyptians: and when he shall see the blood on the transom, and on
both the posts, he will pass over the door of the house, and not suffer
the destroyer to come into your houses and to hurt you.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> Thou shalt keep this thing as a law for
thee and thy children for ever.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And when you have entered into the land
which the Lord will give you as he hath promised, you shall observe
these ceremonies.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And when your children shall say to
you: What is the meaning of this service?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> You shall say to them: It is the victim
of the passage of the Lord, when he passed over the houses of the
children of Israel in Egypt, striking the Egyptians, and saving our
houses. And the people bowing themselves, adored.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> And the children of Israel going forth
did as the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> And it came to pass at midnight, the
Lord slew every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of
Pharao, who sat on his throne, unto the firstborn of the captive woman
that was in the prison, and all the firstborn of cattle.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> And Pharao arose in the night, and all
his servants, and all Egypt: for there was not a house wherein there lay
not one dead.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> And Pharao calling Moses and Aaron, in
the night, said: Arise and go forth from among my people, you and the
children of Israel: go, sacrifice to the Lord as you say.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> Your sheep and herds take along with
you, as you demanded, and departing, bless me.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> And the Egyptians pressed the people to
go forth out of the land speedily, saying: We shall all die.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> The people therefore took dough before
it was leavened: and tying it in their cloaks, put it on their
shoulders.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> And the children of Israel did as Moses
had commanded: and they asked of the Egyptians vessels of silver and
gold, and very much raiment.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> And the Lord gave favour to the people
in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they lent unto them: and they
stripped the Egyptians.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> And the children of Israel set forward
from Ramesse to Socoth, being about six hundred thousand men on foot,
beside children.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> And a mixed multitude without number
went up also with them, sheep and herds and beasts of divers kinds,
exceeding many.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> And they baked the meal, which a little
before they had brought out of Egypt, in dough: and they made earth
cakes unleavened: for it could not be leavened, the Egyptians pressing
them to depart, and not suffering them to make any stay: neither did
they think of preparing any meat.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> And the abode of the children of Israel
that they made in Egypt, was four hundred and thirty years.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> Which being expired, the same day all
the army of the Lord went forth out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> This is the observable night of the
Lord, when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt: this night
all the children of Israel must observe in their generations.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron:
This is the service of the Phase: No foreigner shall eat of it.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> But every bought servant shall be
circumcised, and so shall eat.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> The stranger and the hireling shall not
eat thereof.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> In one house shall it be eaten, neither
shall you carry forth of the flesh thereof out of the house, neither
shall you break a bone thereof.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> All the assembly of the children of
Israel shall keep it.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> And if any stranger be willing to dwell
among you, and to keep the Phase of the Lord, all his males shall first
be circumcised, and then shall he celebrate it according to the manner:
and he shall be as he that is born in the land: but if any man be
uncircumcised, he shall not eat thereof.

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> The same law shall be to him that is
born in the land, and to the proselyte that sojourneth with you.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> And all the children of Israel did as
the Lord had commanded Moses and Aaron.

<span id="an_12:51">12:51</span> And the same day the Lord brought forth
the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their companies.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Sanctify unto me every firstborn that
openeth the womb among the children of Israel, as well of men as of
beasts: for they are all mine.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And Moses said to the people: Remember
this day in which you came forth out of Egypt, and out of the house of
bondage, for with a strong hand hath the Lord brought you forth out of
this place: that you eat no leavened bread.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> This day you go forth in the month of new
corn.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And when the Lord shall have brought thee
into the land of the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, and the Amorrhite, and
the Hevite, and the Jebusite, which he swore to thy fathers that he
would give thee, a land that floweth with milk and honey, thou shalt
celebrate this manner of sacred rites in this month.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened
bread: and on the seventh day shall be the solemnity of the Lord.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Unleavened bread shall you eat seven
days: there shall not be seen any thing leavened with thee, nor in all
thy coasts.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And thou shalt tell thy son in that day,
saying: This is what the Lord did to me when I came forth out of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And it shall be as a sign in thy hand,
and as a memorial before thy eyes: and that the law of the Lord be
always in thy mouth, for with a strong hand the Lord hath brought thee
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Thou shalt keep this observance at the
set time from days to days.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And when the Lord shall have brought
thee into the land of the Chanaanite, as he swore to thee and thy
fathers, and shall give it thee:

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Thou shalt set apart all that openeth
the womb for the Lord, and all that is first brought forth of thy
cattle: whatsoever thou shalt have of the male sex, thou shalt
consecrate to the Lord.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> The firstborn of an ass thou shalt
change for a sheep: and if thou do not redeem it, thou shalt kill it.
And every firstborn of men thou shalt redeem with a price.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And when thy son shall ask thee to
morrow, saying: What is this? thou shalt answer him: With a strong hand
did the Lord bring us forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of bondage.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For when Pharao was hardened, and would
not let us go, the Lord slew every firstborn in the land of Egypt, from
the firstborn of man to the firstborn of beasts: therefore I sacrifice
to the Lord all that openeth the womb of the male sex, and all the
firstborn of my sons I redeem.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And it shall be as a sign in thy hand,
and as a thing hung between thy eyes, for a remembrance: because the
Lord hath brought us forth out of Egypt by a strong hand.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And when Pharao had sent out the
people, the Lord led them not by the way of the land of the Philistines
which is near: thinking lest perhaps they would repent, if they should
see wars arise against them, and would return into Egypt.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> But he led them about by the way of the
desert, which is by the Red Sea: and the children of Israel went up
armed out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Moses took Joseph's bones with him:
because he had adjured the children of Israel, saying: God shall visit
you, carry out my bones from hence with you.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And marching from Socoth they encamped
in Etham in the utmost coasts of the wilderness.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And the Lord went before them to shew
the way by day in a pillar of a cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire:
that he might be the guide of their journey at both times.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> There never failed the pillar of the
cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire by night, before the people.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel: Let them
turn and encamp over against Phihahiroth which is between Magdal and the
sea over against Beelsephon: you shall encamp before it upon the sea.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And Pharao will say of the children of
Israel: They are straitened in the land, the desert hath shut them in.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And I shall harden his heart, and he will
pursue you: and I shall be glorified in Pharao, and in all his army: and
the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord. And they did so.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And it was told the king of the Egyptians
that the people was fled: and the heart of Pharao and of his servants
was changed with regard to the people, and they said: What meant we to
do, that we let Israel go from serving us?

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> So he made ready his chariot, and took
all his people with him.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And he took six hundred chosen chariots,
and all the chariots that were in Egypt: and the captains of the whole
army.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharao
king of Egypt, and he pursued the children of Israel: but they were gone
forth in a mighty hand.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And when the Egyptians followed the steps
of them who were gone before, they found them encamped at the sea side:
all Pharao's horse and chariots, and the whole army were in Phihahiroth
before Beelsephon.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And when Pharao drew near, the children
of Israel, lifting up their eyes, saw the Egyptians behind them: and
they feared exceedingly, and cried to the Lord.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And they said to Moses: Perhaps there
were no graves in Egypt, therefore thou hast brought us to die in the
wilderness: why wouldst thou do this, to lead us out of Egypt?

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Is not this the word that we spoke to
thee in Egypt, saying: Depart from us that we may serve the Egyptians?
for it was much better to serve them, than to die in the wilderness.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Moses said to the people: Fear not:
stand and see the great wonders of the Lord, which he will do this day:
for the Egyptians, whom you see now, you shall see no more for ever.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> The Lord will fight for you, and you
shall hold your peace.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Why criest
thou to me? Speak to the children of Israel to go forward.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch
forth thy hand over the sea, and divide it: that the children of Israel
may go through the midst of the sea on dry ground.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And I will harden the heart of the
Egyptians to pursue you: and I will be glorified in Pharao, and in all
his host, and in his chariots, and in his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And the Egyptians shall know that I am
the Lord, when I shall be glorified in Pharao, and in his chariots and
in his horsemen.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the angel of God, who went before
the camp of Israel, removing, went behind them: and together with him
the pillar of the cloud, leaving the forepart,

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Stood behind, between the Egyptians'
camp and the camp of Israel: and it was a dark cloud, and enlightening
the night, so that they could not come at one another all the night.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And when Moses had stretched forth his
hand over the sea, the Lord took it away by a strong and burning wind
blowing all the night, and turned it into dry ground: and the water was
divided.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And the children of Israel went in
through the midst of the sea dried up: for the water was as a wall on
their right hand and on their left.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And the Egyptians pursuing went in
after them, and all Pharao's horses, his chariots and horsemen through
the midst of the sea,

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> And now the morning watch was come, and
behold the Lord looking upon the Egyptian army through the pillar of
fire and of the cloud, slew their host.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And overthrew the wheels of the
chariots, and they were carried into the deep. And the Egyptians said:
Let us flee from Israel: for the Lord fighteth for them against us.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Stretch
forth they hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the
Egyptians, upon their chariots and horsemen.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And when Moses had stretched forth his
hand towards the sea, it returned at the first break of day to the
former place: and as the Egyptians were fleeing away, the waters came
upon them, and the Lord shut them up in the middle of the waves.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And the waters returned, and covered
the chariots and the horsemen of all the army of Pharao, who had come
into the sea after them, neither did there so much as one of them
remain.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> But the children of Israel marched
through the midst of the sea upon dry land, and the waters were to them
as a wall on the right hand and on the left:

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And the Lord delivered Israel on that
day out of the hands of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And they saw the Egyptians dead upon
the sea shore, and the mighty hand that the Lord had used against them:
and the people feared the Lord, and they believed the Lord, and Moses
his servant.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Then Moses and the children of Israel
sung this canticle to the Lord: and said: Let us sing to the Lord: for
he is gloriously magnified, the horse and the rider he hath thrown into
the sea.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The Lord is my strength and my praise,
and he is become salvation to me: he is my God and I will glorify him:
the God of my father, and I will exalt him.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The Lord is as a man of war, Almighty is
his name.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Pharao's chariots and his army he hath
cast into the sea: his chosen captains are drowned in the Red Sea.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> The depths have covered them, they are
sunk to the bottom like a stone.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thy right hand, O Lord, is magnified in
strength: thy right hand, O Lord, hath slain the enemy.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And in the multitude of they glory thou
hast put down thy adversaries: thou hast sent thy wrath, which hath
devoured them like stubble.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And with the blast of thy anger the
waters were gathered together: the flowing water stood, the depth were
gathered together in the midst of the sea.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The enemy said: I will pursue and
overtake, I will divide the spoils, my soul shall have its fill: I will
draw my sword, my hand shall slay them.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Thy wind blew and the sea covered them:
they sunk as lead in the mighty waters.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Who is like to thee, among the strong,
O Lord? who is like to thee, glorious in holiness, terrible and
praiseworthy, doing wonders?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Thou stretchedst forth thy hand, and
the earth swallowed them.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> In thy mercy thou hast been a leader to
the people which thou hast redeemed: and in thy strength thou hast
carried them to thy holy habitation.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Nations rose up, and were angry:
sorrows took hold on the inhabitants of Philisthiim.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Then were the princes of Edom troubled,
trembling seized on the stout men of Moab: all the inhabitants of
Chanaan became stiff.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Let fear and dread fall upon them, in
the greatness of thy arm: let them become unmoveable as a stone, until
thy people, O Lord, pass by: until this thy people pass by, which thou
hast possessed.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Thou shalt bring them in, and plant
them in the mountain of thy inheritance, in thy most firm habitation
which thou hast made, O Lord; thy sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands
have established.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For Pharao went in on horseback with
his chariots and horsemen into the sea: and the Lord brought back upon
them the waters of the sea: but the children of Israel walked on dry
ground in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> So Mary the prophetess, the sister of
Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand: and all the women went forth after
her with timbrels and with dances:

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And she began the song to them, saying:
Let us sing to the Lord, for he is gloriously magnified, the horse and
his rider he hath thrown into the sea.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Moses brought Israel from the Red
Sea, and they went forth into the wilderness of Sur: and they marched
three days through the wilderness, and found no water.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And they came into Mara, and they could
not drink the waters of Mara, because they were bitter: whereupon he
gave a name also agreeable to the place, calling it Mara, that is,
bitterness.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And the people murmured against Moses,
saying: What shall we drink?

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But he cried to the Lord, and he shewed
him a tree, which when he had cast into the waters, they were turned
into sweetness. There he appointed him ordinances, and judgments, and
there he proved him,

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Saying: If thou wilt hear the voice of
the Lord thy God, and do what is right before him, and obey his
commandments, and keep all his precepts, none of the evils that I laid
upon Egypt, will I bring upon thee: for I am the Lord thy healer.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And the children of Israel came into
Elim, where there were twelve fountains of water, and seventy palm
trees: and they encamped by the waters.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And they set forward from Elim, and all
the multitude of the children of Israel came into the desert of Sin,
which is between Elim and Sinai: the fifteenth day of the second month,
after they came out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And all the congregation of the children
of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And the children of Israel said to them:
Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt,
when we sat over the flesh pots, and ate bread to the full. Why have you
brought us into this desert, that you might destroy all the multitude
with famine?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Behold I will
rain bread from heaven for you: let the people go forth, and gather what
is sufficient for every day: that I may prove them whether they will
walk in my law, or not.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> But the sixth day let them provide for to
bring in: and let it be double to that they were wont to gather every
day.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Moses and Aaron said to the children
of Israel: In the evening you shall know that the Lord hath brought you
forth out of the land of Egypt:

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And in the morning you shall see the
glory of the Lord: for he hath heard your murmuring against the Lord:
but as for us, what are we, that you mutter against us?

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Moses said: In the evening the Lord
will give you flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full: for he
hath heard your murmurings, with which you have murmured against him,
for what are we? your murmuring is not against us, but against the Lord.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Moses also said to Aaron: Say to the
whole congregation of the children of Israel: Come before the Lord: for
he hath heard your murmuring.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And when Aaron spoke to all the
assembly of the children of Israel, they looked towards the wilderness:
and behold the glory of the Lord appeared in a cloud.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> I have heard the murmuring of the
children of Israel: say to them: In the evening you shall eat flesh, and
in the morning you shall have your fill of bread: and you shall know
that I am the Lord your God.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> So it came to pass in the evening, that
quails coming up, covered the camp: and in the morning, a dew lay round
about the camp.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And when it had covered the face of the
earth, it appeared in the wilderness small, and as it were beaten with a
pestle, like unto the hoar frost on the ground.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And when the children of Israel saw it,
they said one to another: Manhu! which signifieth: What is this! for
they knew not what it was. And Moses said to them: This is the bread,
which the Lord hath given you to eat.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> This is the word, that the Lord hath
commanded: Let every one gather of it as much as is enough to eat: a
gomor for every man, according to the number of your souls that dwell in
a tent, so shall you take of it.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And the children of Israel did so: and
they gathered, one more, another less.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And they measured by the measure of a
gomor: neither had he more that had gathered more: nor did he find less
that had provided less: but every one had gathered, according to what
they were able to eat.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And Moses said to them: Let no man
leave thereof till the morning.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And they hearkened not to him, but some
of them left until the morning, and it began to be full of worms, an it
putrefied, and Moses was angry with them.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Now every one of them gathered in the
morning, as much as might suffice to eat: and after the sun grew hot, it
melted.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> But on the sixth day they gathered
twice as much, that is, two gomors every man: and all the rulers of the
multitude came, and told Moses.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And he said to them: This is what the
Lord hath spoken: To morrow is the rest of the sabbath sanctified to the
Lord. Whatsoever work is to be done, do it: and the meats that are to be
dressed, dress them: and whatsoever shall remain, lay it up until the
morning.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And they did so as Moses had commanded,
and it did not putrefy, neither was there worm found in it.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And Moses said: Eat it to day, because
it is the sabbath of the Lord: to day it shall not be found in the
field.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> Gather it six days: but on the seventh
day is the sabbath of the Lord, therefore it shall not be found.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> And the seventh day came: and some of
the people going forth to gather, found none.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> And the Lord said to Moses: How long
will you refuse to keep my commandments, and my law?

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> See that the Lord hath given you the
sabbath, and for this reason on the sixth day he giveth you a double
provision: let each man stay at home, and let none go forth out of his
place the seventh day.

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> And the people kept the sabbath on the
seventh day.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And the house of Israel called the name
thereof Manna: and it was like coriander seed white, and the taste
thereof like to flour with honey.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> And Moses said: This is the word, which
the Lord hath commanded: Fill a gomor of it, and let it be kept unto
generations to come hereafter, that they may know the bread, wherewith I
fed you in the wilderness, when you were brought forth out of the land
of Egypt.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> And Moses said to Aaron: Take a vessel,
and put manna into it, as much as a gomor can hold: and lay it up before
the Lord to keep unto your generations,

<span id="an_16:34">16:34</span> As the Lord commanded Moses. And Aaron
put it in the tabernacle to be kept.

<span id="an_16:35">16:35</span> And the children of Israel ate manna
forty years, till they came to a habitable land: with this meat were
they fed, until they reached the borders of the land of Chanaan.

<span id="an_16:36">16:36</span> Now a gomor is the tenth part of an
ephi.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Then all the multitude of the children of
Israel setting forward from the desert of Sin, by their mansions,
according to the word of the Lord, encamped in Raphidim, where there was
no water for the people to drink.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And they chode with Moses, and said: Give
us water, that we may drink. And Moses answered them: Why chide you with
me? Wherefore do you tempt the Lord?

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> So the people were thirsty there for want
of water, and murmured against Moses, saying: Why didst thou make us go
forth out of Egypt, to kill us and our children, and our beasts with
thirst?

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Moses cried to the Lord, saying: What
shall I do to this people? Yet a little more and they will stone me.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses: God before
the people, and take with thee of the ancients of Israel: and take in
thy hand the rod wherewith thou didst strike the river, and go.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Behold I will stand there before thee,
upon the rock Horeb: and thou shalt strike the rock, and water shall
come out of it that the people may drink. Moses did so before the
ancients of Israel:

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And he called the name of that place
Temptation, because the chiding of the children of Israel, and for that
they tempted the Lord, saying: Is the Lord amongst us or not?

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And Amalec came, and fought against
Israel in Raphidim.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And Moses said to Josue: Choose out men:
and go out and fight against Amalec: to morrow I will stand on the top
of the hill having the rod of God in my hand.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Josue did as Moses had spoken, and he
fought against Amalec; but Moses, and Aaron, and Hur went up upon the
top of the hill.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And when Moses lifted up his hands,
Israel overcame: but if he let them down a little, Amalec overcame.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And Moses' hands were heavy: so they
took a stone, and put under him, and he sat on it: and Aaron and Hur
stayed up his hands on both sides. And it came to pass that his hands
were not weary until sunset.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> And Josue put Amalec and his people to
flight, by the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Write this
for a memorial in a book, and deliver it to the ears of Josue: for I
will destroy the memory of Amalec from under heaven.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And Moses built an altar: and called
the name thereof, The Lord my exaltation, saying:

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Because the hand of the throne of the
Lord, and the war of the Lord shall be against Amalec, from generation
to generation.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And when Jethro the priest of Madian, the
kinsman of Moses, had heard all the things that God had done to Moses,
and to Israel his people, and that the Lord had brought forth Israel out
of Egypt,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> He took Sephora the wife of Moses whom he
had sent back:

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And her two sons, of whom one was called
Gersam, his father saying: I have been a stranger in a foreign country.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> And the other Eliezer: For the God of my
father, said he, is my helper, and hath delivered me from the sword of
Pharao.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And Jethro the kinsman of Moses came with
his sons and his wife, to Moses into the desert, where he was camped by
the mountain of God.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And he sent word to Moses, saying: I
Jethro thy kinsman come to thee, and thy wife, and thy two sons with
her.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> And he went out to meet his kinsman, and
worshipped and kissed him: and they saluted one another with words of
peace. And when he was come into the tent,

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> Moses told his kinsman all that the Lord
had done to Pharao, and the Egyptians, in favour of Israel: and all the
labour which had befallen them in the journey, and that the Lord had
delivered them.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And Jethro rejoiced for all the good
things that the Lord had done to Israel, because he had delivered them
out of the hands of the Egyptians.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And he said: Blessed is the Lord, who
hath delivered you out of the hand of Pharao, and out of the hand of the
Egyptians, who hath delivered his people out of the hand of Egypt.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Now I know that the Lord is great above
all gods: because they dealt proudly against them.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> So Jethro the kinsman of Moses offered
holocausts and sacrifices to God: and Aaron and all the ancients of
Israel came, to eat bread with them before God.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And the next day Moses sat, to judge
the people, who stood by Moses from morning until night.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And when his kinsman had seen all
things that he did among the people, he said: What is it that thou dost
among the people? Why sittest thou alone, and all the people wait from
morning till night.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And Moses answered him: The people come
to me to seek the judgment of God.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And when any controversy falleth out
among them, they come to me to judge between them, and to shew the
precepts of God, and his laws.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> But he said: The thing thou dost is not
good.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Thou are spent with foolish labour,
both thou and this people that is with thee: the business is above thy
strength, thou alone canst not bear it.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> But hear my words and counsels, and God
shall be with thee. Be thou to the people in those things that pertain
to God, to bring their words to him:

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> And to shew the people the ceremonies
and the manner of worshipping, and the way wherein they ought to walk,
and the work that they ought to do.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And provide out of all the people able
men, such as fear God, in whom there is truth, and that hate avarice,
and appoint of them rulers of thousands, and of hundreds, and of
fifties, and of tens.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Who may judge the people at all times:
and when any great matter soever shall fall out, let them refer it to
thee, and let them judge the lesser matters only: that so it may be
lighter for thee, the burden being shared out unto others.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> If thou dost this, thou shalt fulfil
the commandment of God, and shalt be able to bear his precepts: and all
this people shall return to their places with peace.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And when Moses heard this, he did all
things that he had suggested unto him.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And choosing able men out of all
Israel, he appointed them rulers of the people, rulers over thousands,
and over hundreds, and over fifties, and over tens.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And they judged the people at all
times: and whatsoever was of greater difficulty they referred to him,
and they judged the easier cases only.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And he let his kinsman depart: and he
returned and went into his own country.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> In the third month of the departure of
Israel out of the land of Egypt, on this day they came into the
wilderness of Sinai:

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> For departing out of Raphidim, and coming
to the desert of Sinai, they camped in the same place, and there Israel
pitched their tents over against the mountain.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And Moses went up to God: and the Lord
called unto him from the mountain, and said: Thus shalt thou say to the
house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel:

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> You have seen what I have done to the
Egyptians, how I have carried you upon the wings of eagles, and have
taken you to myself.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> If therefore you will hear my voice, and
keep my covenant, you shall be my peculiar possession above all people:
for all the earth is mine.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And you shall be to me a priestly
kingdom, and a holy nation. Those are the words thou shalt speak to the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Moses came, and calling together the
elders of the people, he declared all the words which the Lord had
commanded.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And all the people answered together: All
that the Lord hath spoken, we will do. And when Moses had related the
people's words to the Lord,

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> The Lord said to him: Lo, now will I come
to thee in the darkness of a cloud, that the people may hear me speaking
to thee, and may believe thee for ever. And Moses told the words of the
people to the Lord.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And he said to him: Go to the people,
and sanctify them to day, and to morrow, and let them wash their
garments.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And let them be ready against the third
day: for on the third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all
the people upon mount Sinai.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And thou shalt appoint certain limits
to the people round about, and thou shalt say to them: Take heed you go
not up into the mount, and that ye touch not the borders thereof: every
one that toucheth the mount dying he shall die.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> No hands shall touch him, but he shall
be stoned to death, or shall be shot through with arrows: whether it be
beast, or man, he shall not live. When the trumpet shall begin to sound,
then let them go up into the mount.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And Moses came down from the mount to
the people, and sanctified them. And when they had washed their
garments,

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> He said to them: Be ready against the
third day, and come not near your wives.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And now the third day was come, and the
morning appeared: and behold thunders began to be heard, and lightning
to flash, and a very thick cloud to cover the mount, and the noise of
the trumpet sounded exceeding loud, and the people that was in the camp,
feared.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And when Moses had brought them forth
to meet God from the place of the camp, they stood at the bottom of the
mount.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And all mount Sinai was on a smoke:
because the Lord was come down upon it in fire, and the smoke arose from
it as out of a furnace: and all the mount was terrible.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And the sound of the trumpet grew by
degrees louder and louder, and was drawn out to a greater length: Moses
spoke, and God answered him.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And the Lord came down upon mount
Sinai, in the very top of the mount, and he called Moses unto the top
thereof. And when he was gone up thither,

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> He said unto him: Go down, and charge
the people: lest they should have a mind to pass the limits to see the
Lord, and a very great multitude of them should perish.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> The priests also that come to the Lord,
let them be sanctified, lest he strike them.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And Moses said to the Lord: The people
cannot come up to mount Sinai: for thou did charge, and command, saying:
Set limits about the mount, and sanctify it.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And the Lord said to him: Go, get thee
down: and thou shalt come up, thou and Aaron with thee: but let not the
priests and the people pass the limits, nor come up to the Lord, lest he
kill them.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And Moses went down to the people and
told them all.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And the Lord spoke all these words:

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> Thou shalt not have strange gods before
me.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven
thing, nor the likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the
earth beneath, nor of those things that are in the waters under the
earth.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Thou shalt not adore them, nor serve
them: I am the Lord thy God, mighty, jealous, visiting the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of
them that hate me:

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And shewing mercy unto thousands to them
that love me, and keep my commandments.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain: for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that shall
take the name of the Lord his God in vain.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath
day.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Six days shalt thou labour, and shalt do
all thy works.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But on the seventh day is the sabbath
of the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work on it, thou nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy beast,
nor the stranger that is within thy gates.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> For in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them, and rested on
the seventh day: therefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and
sanctified it.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Honour thy father and thy mother, that
thou mayest be longlived upon the land which the Lord thy God will give
thee.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Thou shalt not kill.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Thou shalt not commit adultery.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Thou shalt not steal.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Thou shalt not bear false witness
against thy neighbour.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's
house: neither shalt thou desire his wife, nor his servant, nor his
handmaid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that is his.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And all the people saw the voices and
the flames, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mount smoking: and
being terrified and struck with fear, they stood afar off,

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Saying to Moses: Speak thou to us, and
we will hear: let not the Lord speak to us, lest we die.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And Moses said to the people: Fear not:
for God is come to prove you, and that the dread of him might be in you,
and you should not sin.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the people stood afar off. But
Moses went to the dark cloud wherein God was.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Thus shalt
thou say to the children of Israel: You have seen that I have spoken to
you from heaven.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> You shall not make gods of silver, nor
shall you make to yourselves gods of gold.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> You shall make an altar of earth unto
me, and you shall offer upon it your holocausts and peace offerings,
your sheep and oxen, in every place where the memory of my name shall
be: I will come to thee, and will bless thee.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> And if thou make an altar of stone unto
me, thou shalt not build it of hewn stones: for if thou lift up a tool
upon it, it shall be defiled.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Thou shalt not go up by steps unto my
altar, lest thy nakedness be discovered.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> These are the judgments which thou shalt
set before them.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years
shall he serve thee: in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> With what raiment he came in, with the
like let him go out: if having a wife, his wife also shall go out with
him.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> But if his master gave him a wife, and
she hath borne sons and daughters: the woman and her children shall be
her master's: but he himself shall go out with his raiment.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And if the servant shall say: I love my
master and my wife and children, I will not go out free:

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> His master shall bring him to the gods,
and he shall be set to the door and the posts, and he shall bore his ear
through with an awl: and he shall be his servant for ever.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> If any man sell his daughter to be a
servant, she shall not go out as bondwomen are wont to go out.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> If she displease the eyes of her master
to whom she was delivered, he shall let her go: but he shall have no
power to sell her to a foreign nation, if he despise her.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> But if he have betrothed her to his son,
he shall deal with her after the manner of daughters.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And if he take another wife for him, he
shall provide her a marriage, and raiment, neither shall he refuse the
price of her chastity.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> If he do not these three things, she
shall go out free without money.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> He that striketh a man with a will to
kill him, shall be put to death.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> But he that did not lie in wait for
him, but God delivered him into his hands: I will appoint thee a place
to which he must flee.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> If a man kill his neighbour on set
purpose and by lying in wait for him: thou shalt take him away from my
altar, that he may die.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> He that striketh his father or mother,
shall be put to death.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> He that shall steal a man, and sell
him, being convicted of guilt, shall be put to death.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He that curseth his father, or mother,
shall die the death.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> If men quarrel, and the one strike his
neighbour with a stone or with his fist, and he die not, but keepeth his
bed:

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> If he rise again and walk abroad upon
his staff, he that struck him shall be quit, yet so that he make
restitution for his work, and for his expenses upon the physicians.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> He that striketh his bondman or
bondwoman with a rod, and they die under his hands, shall be guilty of
the crime.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> But if the party remain alive a day or
two, he shall not be subject to the punishment, because it is his money.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> If men quarrel, and one strike a woman
with child, and she miscarry indeed, but live herself: he shall be
answerable for so much damage as the woman's husband shall require, and
as arbiters shall award.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> But if her death ensue thereupon, he
shall render life for life.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for
hand, foot for foot,

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> Burning for burning, wound for wound,
stripe for stripe.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> If any man strike the eye of his
manservant or maidservant, and leave them but one eye, he shall let them
go free for the eye which he put out.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Also if he strike out a tooth of his
manservant or maidservant, he shall in like manner make them free.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> If an ox gore a man or a woman, and
they die, he shall be stoned: and his flesh shall not be eaten, but the
owner of the ox shall be quit.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> But if the ox was wont to push with his
horn yesterday and the day before, and they warned his master, and he
did not shut him up, and he shall kill a man or a woman: then the ox
shall be stoned, an his owner also shall be put to death.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And if they set a price upon him, he
shall give for his life whatsoever is laid upon him.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> If he have gored a son, or a daughter,
he shall fall under the like sentence.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> If he assault a bondman or a bond
woman, he shall give thirty sicles of silver to their master, and the ox
shall be stoned.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> If a man open a pit, and dig one, and
cover it not, and an ox or an ass fall into it,

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> The owner of the pit shall pay the
price of the beasts: and that which is dead shall be his own.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> If one man's ox gore another man's ox,
and he die: they shall sell the live ox, and shall divide the price, and
the carcass of that which died they shall part between them:

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> But if he knew that his ox was wont to
push yesterday and the day before, and his master did not keep him in:
he shall pay ox for ox, and shall take the whole carcass.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> If any man steal an ox or a sheep, and
kill or sell it: he shall restore five oxen for one ox, and four sheep
for one sheep.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> If a thief be found breaking open a house
or undermining it, and be wounded so as to die: he that slew him shall
not be guilty of blood.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> But if he did this when the sun is risen,
he hath committed murder, and he shall die. If he have not wherewith to
make restitution for the theft, he shall be sold.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> If that which he stole be found with him,
alive, either ox, or ass, or sheep: he shall restore double.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> If any man hurt a field or a vineyard,
and put in his beast to feed upon that which is other men's: he shall
restore the best of whatsoever he hath in his own field, or in his
vineyard, according to the estimation of the damage.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> If a fire breaking out light upon thorns,
and catch stacks of corn, or corn standing in the fields, he that
kindled the fire shall make good the loss.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> If a man deliver money, or any vessel
unto his friend to keep, and they be stolen away from him that received
them: if the thief be found he shall restore double:

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> If the thief be not known, the master of
the house shall be brought to the gods, and shall swear that he did not
lay his hand upon his neighbour's goods,

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> To do any fraud, either in ox, or in ass,
or sheep, or raiment, or any thing that may bring damage: the cause of
both parties shall come to the gods: and if they give judgment, he shall
restore double to his neighbour.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> If a man deliver ass, ox, sheep, or any
beast, to his neighbour's custody, and it die, or be hurt, or be taken
by enemies, and no man saw it:

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> There shall be an oath between them,
that he did not put forth his hand to his neighbour's goods: and the
owner shall accept of the oath; and he shall not be compelled to make
restitution.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> But if it were taken away by stealth,
he shall make the loss good to the owner.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> If it were eaten by a beast, let him
bring to him that which was slain, and he shall not make restitution.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> If a man borrow of his neighbour any of
these things, and it be hurt or die, the owner not being present, he
shall be obliged to make restitution.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> But if the owner be present, he shall
not make restitution, especially if it were hired and came for the hire
of his work.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> If a man seduce a virgin not yet
espoused, and lie with her: he shall endow her, and have her to wife.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> If the maid's father will not give her
to him, he shall give money according to the dowry, which virgins are
wont to receive.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Wizards thou shalt not suffer to live.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Whosoever copulateth with a beast shall
be put to death.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> He that sacrificeth to gods, shall be
put to death, save only to the Lord.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Thou shalt not molest a stranger, nor
afflict him: for yourselves also were strangers in the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> You shall not hurt a widow or an
orphan.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If you hurt them they will cry out to
me, and I will hear their cry:

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And my rage shall be enkindled, and I
will strike you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your
children fatherless.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> If thou lend money to any of my people
that is poor, that dwelleth with thee, thou shalt not be hard upon them
as an extortioner, nor oppress them with usuries.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> If thou take of thy neighbour a garment
in pledge, thou shalt give it him again before sunset.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For that same is the only thing
wherewith he is covered, the clothing of his body, neither hath he any
other to sleep in: if he cry to me, I will hear him, because I am
compassionate.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Thou shalt not speak ill of the gods,
and the prince of thy people thou shalt not curse.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Thou shalt not delay to pay thy tithes
and thy firstfruits: thou shalt give the firstborn of thy sons to me.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> Thou shalt do the same with the
firstborn of thy oxen also and sheep: seven days let it be with its dam,
the eighth day thou shalt give it to me.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> You shall be holy men to me: the flesh
that beasts have tasted of before, you shall not eat, but shall cast it
to the dogs.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Thou shalt not receive the voice of a
lie: neither shalt thou join thy hand to bear false witness for a wicked
person.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Thou shalt not follow the multitude to do
evil: neither shalt thou yield in judgment, to the opinion of the most
part, to stray from the truth.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Neither shalt thou favour a poor man in
judgment.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> If thou meet thy enemy's ox or ass going
astray, bring it back to him.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> If thou see the ass of him that hateth
thee lie underneath his burden, thou shalt not pass by, but shalt lift
him up with him.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Thou shalt not go aside in the poor man's
judgment.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Thou shalt fly lying. The innocent and
just person thou shalt not put to death: because I abhor the wicked.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Neither shalt thou take bribes, which
even blind the wise, and pervert the words of the just.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Thou shalt not molest a stranger, for you
know the hearts of strangers: for you also were strangers in the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Six years thou shalt sow thy ground,
and shalt gather the corn thereof.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> But the seventh year thou shalt let it
alone, and suffer it to rest, that the poor of thy people may eat, and
whatsoever shall be left, let the beasts of the field eat it: so shalt
thou do with thy vineyard and thy oliveyard.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Six days thou shalt work: the seventh
day thou shalt cease, that thy ox and thy ass may rest: and the son of
thy handmaid and the stranger may be refreshed.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Keep all things that I have said to
you. And by the name of strange gods you shall not swear, neither shall
it be heard out of your mouth.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Three times every year you shall
celebrate feasts to me.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened
bread. Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee,
in the time of the month of new corn, when thou didst come forth out of
Egypt: thou shalt not appear empty before me.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And the feast of the harvest of the
firstfruits of thy work, whatsoever thou hast sown in the field. The
feast also in the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in all thy
corn out of the field.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Thrice a year shall all thy males
appear before the Lord thy God.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Thou shalt not sacrifice the blood of
my victim upon leaven, neither shall the fat of my solemnity remain
until the morning.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Thou shalt carry the firstfruits of the
corn of thy ground to the house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not boil
a kid in the milk of his dam.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Behold I will send my angel, who shall
go before thee, and keep thee in thy journey, and bring thee into the
place that I have prepared.

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Take notice of him, and hear his voice,
and do not think him one to be contemned: for he will not forgive when
thou hast sinned, and my name is in him.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> But if thou wilt hear his voice, and do
all that I speak, I will be an enemy to thy enemies, and will afflict
them that afflict thee.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> And my angel shall go before thee, and
shall bring thee in unto the Amorrhite, and the Hethite, and the
Pherezite, and the Chanaanite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite, whom I
will destroy.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Thou shalt not adore their gods, nor
serve them. Thou shalt not do their works, but shalt destroy them, and
break their statues.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> And you shall serve the Lord your God,
that I may bless your bread and your waters, and may take away sickness
from the midst of thee.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> There shall not be one fruitless nor
barren in thy land: I will fill the number of thy days.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> I will send my fear before thee, and
will destroy all the people to whom thou shalt come: and will turn the
backs of all thy enemies before thee.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> Sending out hornets before, that shall
drive away the Hevite, and the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, before thou
come in.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> I will not cast them out from thy face
in one year: lest the land be brought into a wilderness, and the beasts
multiply against thee.

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> By little and little I will drive them
out from before thee, till thou be increased, and dost possess the land.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> And I will set thy bounds from the Red
Sea to the sea of the Palestines, and from the desert to the river: I
will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hands, and will drive
them out from before you.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Thou shalt not enter into league with
them, nor with their gods.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Let them not dwell in thy land, lest
perhaps thy make thee sin against me, if thou serve their god: which
undoubtedly will be a scandal to thee.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And he said to Moses: Come up to the
Lord, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abiu, and seventy of the ancients of
Israel, and you shall adore afar off.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And Moses alone shall come up to the
Lord, but they shall not come nigh; neither shall the people come up
with him.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> So Moses came and told the people all the
words of the Lord, and all the judgments: and all the people answered
with one voice: We will do all the words of the Lord, which he hath
spoken.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Moses wrote all the words of the
Lord: and rising in the morning he built an altar at the foot of the
mount, and twelve titles according to the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And he sent young men of the children of
Israel, and they offered holocausts, and sacrificed pacific victims of
calves to the Lord.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Then Moses took half of the blood, and
put it into bowls: and the rest he poured upon the altar.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And taking the book of the covenant, he
read it in the hearing of the people: and they said: All things that the
Lord hath spoken we will do, we will be obedient.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And he took the blood and sprinkled it
upon the people, and he said: This is the blood of the covenant which
the Lord hath made with you concerning all these words.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abiu, and
seventy of the ancients of Israel went up:

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And they saw the God of Israel: and
under his feet as it were a work of sapphire stone, and as the heaven,
when clear.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Neither did he lay his hand upon those
of the children of Israel, that retired afar off, and they saw God, and
they did eat and drink.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Come up to
me into the mount, and be there: and I will give thee tables of stone,
and the law, and the commandments which I have written: that thou mayst
teach them.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Moses rose up, and his minister Josue:
and Moses going up into the mount of God,

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Said to the ancients: Wait ye here till
we return to you. You have Aaron and Hur with you: if any question shall
arise, you shall refer it to them.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> And when Moses was gone up, a cloud
covered the mount.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And the glory of the Lord dwelt upon
Sinai, covering it with a cloud six days: and the seventh day he called
him out of the midst of the cloud.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And the sight of the glory of the Lord
was like a burning fire upon the top of the mount, in the eyes of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And Moses, entering into the midst of
the cloud, went up into the mountain: and he was there forty days, and
forty nights.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Speak to the children of Israel, that
they bring firstfruits to me: of every man that offereth of his own
accord, you shall take them.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> And these are the things you must take:
gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Violet and purple, and scarlet twice
dyed, and fine linen, and goats' hair,

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And rams' skins dyed red, and violet
skins, and setim wood:

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Oil to make lights: spices for ointment,
and for sweetsmelling incense:

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Onyx stones, and precious stones to adorn
the ephod and the rational.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And they shall make me a sanctuary, and I
will dwell in the midst of them:

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> According to all the likeness of the
tabernacle which I will shew thee, and of all the vessels for the
service thereof: and thus you shall make it:

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Frame an ark of setim wood, the length
whereof shall be of two cubits and a half: the breadth, a cubit and a
half: the height, likewise, a cubit and a half.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And thou shalt overlay it with the
purest gold within and without: and over it thou shalt make a golden
crown round about:

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And four golden rings, which thou shall
put at the four corners of the ark: let two rings be on the one side,
and two on the other.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Thou shalt make bars also of setim
wood, and shalt overlay them with gold.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> And thou shalt put them in through the
rings that are in the sides of the ark, that it may be carried on them.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> And they shall be always in the rings,
neither shall they at any time be drawn out of them.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And thou shalt put in the ark the
testimony which I will give thee.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Thou shalt make also a propitiatory of
the purest gold: the length thereof shall be two cubits and a half, and
the breadth a cubit and a half.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> Thou shalt make also two cherubims of
beaten gold, on the two sides of the oracle.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> Let one cherub be on the one side, and
the other on the other.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> Let them cover both sides of the
propitiatory, spreading their wings, and covering the oracle, and let
them look one towards the other, their faces being turned towards the
propitiatory wherewith the ark is to be covered.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> In which thou shalt put the testimony
that I will give thee.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> Thence will I give orders, and will
speak to thee over the propitiatory, and from the midst of the two
cherubims, which shall be upon the ark of the testimony, all things
which I will command the children of Israel by thee.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> Thou shalt make a table also of setim
wood, of two cubits in length, and a cubit in breadth, and a cubit and
half in height.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> And thou shalt overlay it with the
purest gold: and thou shalt make to it a golden ledge round about.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And to the ledge itself a polished
crown, four inches high: and over the same another little golden crown.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> Thou shalt prepare also four golden
rings, and shalt put them in the four corners of the same table over
each foot.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Under the crown shall the golden rings
be, that the bars may be put through them, and the table may be carried.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> The bars also themselves thou shalt
make of setim wood, and shalt overlay them with gold to bear up the
table.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> Thou shalt prepare also dishes, and
bowls, censers, and cups, wherein the libations are to be offered of the
purest gold.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And thou shalt set upon the table
loaves of proposition in my sight always.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> Thou shalt make also a candlestick of
beaten work of the finest gold, the shaft thereof, and the branches, the
cups, and the bowls, and the lilies going forth from it.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> Six branches shall come out of the
sides, three out of the one side, and three out of the other.

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> Three cups as it were nuts to every
branch, and a bowl withal, and a lily; and three cups, likewise of the
fashion of nuts in the other branch, and a bowl withal, and a lily. Such
shall be the work of the six branches, that are to come out from the
shaft:

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> And in the candlestick itself shall be
four cups in the manner of a nut, and at every one, bowls and lilies.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> Bowls under two branches in three
places, which together make six coming forth out of one shaft.

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> And both the bowls and the branches
shall be of the same beaten work of the purest gold.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> Thou shalt make also seven lamps, and
shalt set them upon the candlestick, to give light over against.

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> The snuffers also and where the
snuffings shall be put out, shall be made of the purest gold.

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> The whole weight of the candlestick
with all the furniture thereof shall be a talent of the purest gold.

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> Look and make it according to the
pattern, that was shewn thee in the mount.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> And thou shalt make the tabernacle in
this manner: Thou shalt make ten curtains of fine twisted linen, and
violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, diversified with embroidery.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> The length of one curtain shall be
twenty-eight cubits, the breadth shall be four cubits. All the curtains
shall be of one measure.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Five curtains shall be joined one to
another, and the other five shall be coupled together in like manner.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Thou shalt make loops of violet in the
sides and tops of the curtains, that they may be joined one to another.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Every curtain shall have fifty loops on
both sides, so set on, that one loop may be against another loop, and
one may be fitted to the other.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Thou shalt make also fifty rings of gold
wherewith the veils of the curtains are to be joined, that it may be
made one tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> Thou shalt make also eleven curtains of
goats' hair, to cover the top of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> The length of one hair curtain shall be
thirty cubits: and the breadth four: the measure of all the curtains
shall be equal.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> Five of which thou shalt couple by
themselves, and the six others thou shalt couple one to another, so as
to double the sixth curtain in the front of the roof.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Thou shalt make also fifty loops in the
edge of one curtain, that it may be joined with the other: and fifty
loops in the edge of the other curtain, that it may be coupled with its
fellow.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Thou shalt make also fifty buckles of
brass, wherewith the loops may be joined, that of all there may be made
one covering.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> And that which shall remain of the
curtains, that are prepared for the roof, to wit, one curtain that is
over and above, with the half thereof thou shalt cover the back parts of
the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> And there shall hang down a cubit on
the one side, and another on the other side, which is over and above in
the length of the curtains, fencing both sides of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Thou shalt make also another cover to
the roof, of rams' skins dyed red; and over that again another cover of
violet coloured skins.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thou shalt make also the boards of the
tabernacle standing upright of setim wood.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Let every one of them be ten cubits in
length, and in breadth on cubit and a half.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> In the sides of the boards shall be
made two mortises, whereby one board may be joined to another board: and
after this manner shall all the boards be prepared.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> Of which twenty shall be in the south
side southward.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> For which thou shalt cast forty sockets
of silver, that under every board may be put two sockets at the two
corners.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> In the second side also the tabernacle
that looketh to the north, there shall be twenty boards,

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> Having forty sockets of silver, two
sockets shall be put under each board.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> But on the west side of the tabernacle
thou shalt make six boards.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> And again other two which shall be
erected in the corners at the back of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> And they shall be joined together from
beneath unto the top, and one joint shall hold them all. The like
joining shall be observed for the two boards also that are to be put in
the corners.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And they shall be in all eight boards,
and their silver sockets sixteen, reckoning two sockets for each board.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> Thou shalt make also five bars of setim
wood, to hold together the boards on one side of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And five others on the other side, and
as many at the west side:

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> And they shall be put along by the
midst of the boards from one end to the other.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> The boards also themselves thou shalt
overlay with gold, and shall cast rings of gold to be set upon them, for
places for the bars to hold together boardwork: which bars thou shalt
cover with plates of gold.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle
according to the pattern that was shewn thee in the mount.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> Thou shalt make also a veil of violet
and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen, wrought with
embroidered work, and goodly variety:

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> And thou shalt hang it up before four
pillars of setim wood, which themselves also shall be overlaid with
gold, and shall have heads of gold, but sockets of silver.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And the veils shall be hanged on with
rings, and within it thou shalt put the ark of the testimony, and the
sanctuary, and the holy of holies shall be divided with it.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> And thou shalt set the propitiatory
upon the ark of the testimony in the holy of holies.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> And the table without the veil: and
over against the table the candlestick in the south side of the
tabernacle; for the table shall stand in the north side.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> Thou shalt make also a hanging in the
entrance of the tabernacle of violet and purple, and scarlet twice dyed,
and fine twisted linen with embroidered work.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And thou shalt overlay with gold five
pillars of setim wood, before which the hanging shall be drawn: their
heads shall be of gold, and the sockets of brass.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Thou shalt make also an altar of setim
wood, which shall be five cubits long and as many broad, that is,
foursquare, and three cubits high.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And there shall be horns at the four
corners of the same: and thou shalt cover it with brass.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> And thou shalt make for the uses thereof
pans to receive the ashes, and tongs and fleshhooks, and firepans: all
its vessels thou shalt make of brass.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> And a grate of brass in manner of a net:
at the four corners of which shall be four rings of brass,

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Which thou shalt put under the hearth of
the altar: and the grate shall be even to the midst of the altar.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Thou shalt make also two bars for the
altar of setim wood, which thou shalt cover with plates of brass:

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And thou shalt draw them through rings,
and they shall be on both sides of the altar to carry it.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> Thou shalt not make it solid, but empty
and hollow in the inside, as it was shewn thee in the mount.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Thou shalt make also the court of the
tabernacle, in the south side whereof southward there shall be hangings
of fine twisted linen of a hundred cubits long for one side.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And twenty pillars with as many sockets
of brass, the heads of which with their engraving of silver.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> In like manner also on the north side
there shall be hangings of a hundred cubits long, twenty pillars, and as
many sockets of brass, and their heads with their engraving of silver.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> But in the breadth of the court, that
looketh to the west, there shall be hangings of fifty cubits, and ten
pillars, and as many sockets.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> In that breadth also of the court,
which looketh to the east, there shall be fifty cubits.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> In which there shall be for one side
hangings of fifteen cubits, and three pillars and as many sockets.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> And in the other side there shall be
hangings of fifteen cubits, with three pillars and as many sockets.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And in the entrance of the court there
shall be made a hanging of twenty cubits of violet and purple, and
scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen, with embroidered work: it
shall have four pillars with as many sockets.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> All the pillars of the court round
about shall be garnished with plates of silver, silver heads and sockets
of brass.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> In length the court shall take up a
hundred cubits, in breadth fifty, the height shall be of five cubits,
and it shall be made of fine twisted linen, and shall have sockets of
brass.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> All the vessels of the tabernacle for
all uses and ceremonies, and the pins both of it, and of the court, thou
shalt make of brass.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Command the children of Israel that
they bring thee the purest oil of the olives, and beaten with a pestle:
that a lamp may burn always,

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> In the tabernacle of the testimony
without the veil that hangs before the testimony. And Aaron and his sons
shall order it, that it may give light before the Lord until the
morning. It shall be a perpetual observance throughout their successions
among the children of Israel.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Take unto thee also Aaron thy brother
with his sons, from among the children of Israel, that they may minister
to me in the priest's office: Aaron, Nadab, and Abiu, Eleazar, and
Ithamar.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And thou shalt make a holy vesture for
Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And thou shalt speak to all the wise of
heart, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make
Aaron's vestments, in which he being consecrated may minister to me.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And these shall be the vestments that
they shall make: A rational and an ephod, a tunick and a strait linen
garment, a mitre and a girdle. They shall make the holy vestments for
thy brother Aaron and his sons, that they may do the office of
priesthood unto me.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And they shall take gold, and violet, and
purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine linen.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And they shall make the ephod of gold,
and violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen,
embroidered with divers colours.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> It shall have the two edges joined in the
top on both sides, that they may be closed together.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The very workmanship also and all the
variety of the work shall be of gold, and violet, and purple, and
scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and
shalt grave on them the names of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Six names on one stone, and the other
six on the other, according to the order of their birth.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> With the work of an engraver and the
graving of a jeweller, thou shalt engrave them with the names of the
children of Israel, set in gold and compassed about:

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And thou shalt put them in both sides
of the ephod, a memorial for the children of Israel. And Aaron shall
bear their names before the Lord upon both shoulders, for a remembrance.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Thou shalt make also hooks of gold.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And two little chains of the purest
gold linked one to another, which thou shalt put into the hooks.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> And thou shalt make the rational of
judgment with embroidered work of divers colours, according to the
workmanship of the ephod, of gold, violet, and purple, and scarlet twice
dyed, and fine twisted linen.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> It shall be foursquare and doubled: it
shall be the measure of a span both in length and in breadth.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And thou shalt set in it four rows of
stones: in the first row shall be a sardius stone, and a topaz, and an
emerald:

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> In the second a carbuncle, a sapphire
and a jasper.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> In the third a ligurius, an agate, and
an amethyst:

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> In the fourth a chrysolite, an onyx,
and a beryl. They shall be set in gold by their rows.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> And they shall have the names of the
children of Israel: with twelve names shall they be engraved, each stone
with the name of one according to the twelve tribes.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And thou shalt make on the rational
chains linked one to another of the purest gold:

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> And two rings of gold, which thou shalt
put in the two ends at the top of the rational.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> And the golden chains thou shalt join
to the rings, that are in the ends thereof:

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> And the ends of the chains themselves
thou shalt join together with two hooks on both sides of the ephod,
which is towards the rational.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> Thou shalt make also two rings of gold
which thou shalt put in the top parts of the rational, in the borders
that are over against the ephod, and look towards the back parts
thereof.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Moreover also other two rings of gold,
which are to be set on each side of the ephod beneath, that looketh
towards the nether joining, that the rational may be fitted with the
ephod,

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And may be fastened by the rings
thereof unto the rings of the ephod with a violet fillet, that the
joining artificially wrought may continue, and the rational and the
ephod may not be loosed one from the other.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> And Aaron shall bear the names of the
children of Israel in the rational of judgement upon his breast, when he
shall enter into the sanctuary, a memorial before the Lord for ever.

<span id="an_28:30">28:30</span> And thou shalt put in the rational of
judgment doctrine and truth, which shall be on Aaron's breast, when he
shall go in before the Lord: and he shall bear the judgment of the
children of Israel on his breast, in the sight of the Lord always.

<span id="an_28:31">28:31</span> And thou shalt make the tunick of the
ephod all of violet,

<span id="an_28:32">28:32</span> In the midst whereof above shall be a
hole for the head, and a border round about it woven, as is wont to be
made in the outmost parts of garments, that it may not easily be broken.

<span id="an_28:33">28:33</span> And beneath at the feet of the same
tunick round about, thou shalt make as it were pomegranates, of violet,
and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, with little bells set between:

<span id="an_28:34">28:34</span> So that there shall be a golden bell
and a pomegranate, and again another golden bell and a pomegranate.

<span id="an_28:35">28:35</span> And Aaron shall be vested with it in
the office of his ministry, that the sound may be heard, when he goeth
in and cometh out of the sanctuary, in the sight of the Lord, and that
he may not die.

<span id="an_28:36">28:36</span> Thou shalt make also a plate of the
purest gold: wherein thou shalt grave with engraver's work, Holy to the
Lord.

<span id="an_28:37">28:37</span> And thou shalt tie it with a violet
fillet, and it shall be upon the mitre,

<span id="an_28:38">28:38</span> Hanging over the forehead of the high
priest. And Aaron shall bear the iniquities of those things, which the
children of Israel have offered and sanctified, in all their gifts and
offerings. And the plate shall be always on his forehead, that the Lord
may be well pleased with them.

<span id="an_28:39">28:39</span> And thou shalt gird the tunick with
fine linen, and thou shalt make a fine linen mitre, and a girdle of
embroidered work.

<span id="an_28:40">28:40</span> Moreover for the sons of Aaron thou
shalt prepare linen tunicks, and girdles and mitres for glory and
beauty:

<span id="an_28:41">28:41</span> And with all these things thou shalt
vest Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him. And thou shalt consecrate
the hands of them all, and shalt sanctify them, that they may do the
office of priesthood unto me.

<span id="an_28:42">28:42</span> Thou shalt make also linen breeches, to
cover the flesh of their nakedness from the reins to the thighs:

<span id="an_28:43">28:43</span> And Aaron and his sons shall use them
when they shall go in to the tabernacle of the testimony, or when they
approach the altar to minister in the sanctuary, lest being guilty of
iniquity they die. It shall be a law for ever to Aaron, and to his seed
after him.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> And thou shalt also do this, that they
may be consecrated to me in priesthood. Take a calf from the herd, and
two rams without blemish,

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And unleavened bread, and a cake without
leaven, tempered with oil, wafers also unleavened anointed with oil:
thou shalt make them all of wheaten flour.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And thou shalt put them in a basket and
offer them: and the calf and the two rams.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons
to the door of the tabernacle of the testimony. And when thou hast
washed the father and his sons with water,

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> Thou shalt clothe Aaron with his
vestments, that is, with the linen garment and the tunick, and the ephod
and the rational, which thou shalt gird with the girdle.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And thou shalt put the mitre upon his
head, and the holy plate upon the mitre,

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And thou shalt pour the oil of unction
upon his head: and by this rite shall he be consecrated.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Thou shalt bring his sons also and shalt
put on them the linen tunicks, and gird them with a girdle:

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> To wit, Aaron and his children, and thou
shalt put mitres upon them: and they shall be priests to me by a
perpetual ordinance. After thou shalt have consecrated their hands,

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Thou shalt present also the calf before
the tabernacle of the testimony. And Aaron and his sons shall lay their
hands upon his head,

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And thou shalt kill him in the sight of
the Lord, beside the door of the tabernacle of the testimony.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And taking some of the blood of the
calf, thou shalt put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and
the rest of the blood thou shalt pour at the bottom thereof.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> Thou shalt take also all the fat that
covereth the entrails, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys,
and the fat that is upon them, and shalt offer a burnt offering upon the
altar:

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> But the flesh of the calf and the hide
and the dung, thou shalt burn abroad, without the camp, because it is
for sin.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Thou shalt take also one ram upon the
head whereof Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> And when thou hast killed him, thou
shalt take of the blood thereof, and pour round about the altar:

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> And thou shalt cut the ram in pieces,
and having washed his entrails and feet, thou shalt put them upon the
flesh that is cut in pieces, and upon his head.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And thou shalt offer the whole ram for
a burnt offering upon the altar: it is an oblation to the Lord, a most
sweet savour of the victim of the Lord.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> Thou shalt take also the other ram,
upon whose head Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> And when thou hast sacrificed him, thou
shalt take of his blood, and put upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron
and of his sons, and upon the thumbs and great toes of their right hand
and foot, and thou shalt pour the blood upon the altar round about.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> And when thou hast taken of the blood,
that is upon the altar, and of the oil of unction, thou shalt sprinkle
Aaron and his vesture, his sons and their vestments. And after they and
their vestments are consecrated,

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> Thou shalt take the fat of the ram, and
the rump, and the fat that covereth the lungs, and the caul of the
liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right
shoulder, because it is the ram of consecration.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> And one roll of bread, a cake tempered
with oil, a wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread, which is set in
the sight of the Lord.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And thou shalt put all upon the hands
of Aaron and of his sons, and shalt sanctify them elevating before the
Lord.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> And thou shalt take all from their
hands, and shalt burn them upon the altar for a holocaust, a most sweet
savour in the sight of the Lord, because it is his oblation.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Thou shalt take also the breast of the
ram, wherewith Aaron was consecrated, and elevating it thou shalt
sanctify it before the Lord, and it shall fall to thy share.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> And thou shalt sanctify both the
consecrated breast, and the shoulder that thou didst separate of the
ram,

<span id="an_29:28">29:28</span> Wherewith Aaron was consecrated and his
sons, and they shall fall to Aaron's share and his sons' by a perpetual
right from the children of Israel: because they are the choicest and the
beginnings of their peace victims which they offer to the Lord.

<span id="an_29:29">29:29</span> And the holy vesture, which Aaron shall
use, his sons shall have after him, that they may be anointed, and their
hands consecrated to it.

<span id="an_29:30">29:30</span> He of his sons that shall be appointed
high priest in his stead, and that shall enter into the tabernacle of
the testimony to minister in the sanctuary, shall wear it seven days.

<span id="an_29:31">29:31</span> And thou shalt take the ram of the
consecration, and shalt boil the flesh thereof in the holy place:

<span id="an_29:32">29:32</span> And Aaron and his sons shall eat it.
The loaves also, that are in the basket, they shall eat in the entry of
the tabernacle of the testimony,

<span id="an_29:33">29:33</span> That it may be an atoning sacrifice,
and the hands of the offerers may be sanctified. A stranger shall not
eat of them, because they are holy.

<span id="an_29:34">29:34</span> And if there remain of the consecrated
flash, or of the bread till the morning, thou shalt burn the remainder
with fire: they shall not be eaten, because they are sanctified.

<span id="an_29:35">29:35</span> All that I have commanded thee, thou
shalt do unto Aaron and his sons. Seven days shalt thou consecrate their
hands:

<span id="an_29:36">29:36</span> And thou shalt offer a calf for sin
every day for expiation. And thou shalt cleanse the altar when thou hast
offered the victim of expiation, and shalt anoint it to sanctify it.

<span id="an_29:37">29:37</span> Seven days shalt thou expiate the altar
and sanctify it, and it shall be most holy. Every one that shall touch
it shall be holy.

<span id="an_29:38">29:38</span> This is what thou shalt sacrifice upon
the altar: Two lambs of a year old every day continually.

<span id="an_29:39">29:39</span> One lamb in the morning and another in
the evening.

<span id="an_29:40">29:40</span> With one lamb a tenth part of flour
tempered with beaten oil, of the fourth part of a hin, and wine for
libation of the same measure.

<span id="an_29:41">29:41</span> And the other lamb thou shalt offer in
the evening, according to the rite of the morning oblation, and
according to what we have said, for a savour of sweetness:

<span id="an_29:42">29:42</span> It is a sacrifice to the Lord, by
perpetual oblation unto your generations, at the door of the tabernacle
of the testimony before the Lord, where I will appoint to speak unto
thee.

<span id="an_29:43">29:43</span> And there will I command the children
of Israel, and the altar shall be sanctified by my glory.

<span id="an_29:44">29:44</span> I will sanctify also the tabernacle of
the testimony with the altar, and Aaron with his sons, to do the office
of priesthood unto me.

<span id="an_29:45">29:45</span> And I will dwell in the midst of the
children of Israel, and will be their God:

<span id="an_29:46">29:46</span> And they shall know that I am the Lord
their God, who have brought them out of the land of Egypt, that I might
abide among them, I the Lord their God.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> Thou shalt make also an altar to burn
incense, of setim wood.

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> It shall be a cubit in length, and
another in breadth, that is, foursquare, and two in height. Horns shall
go out of the same.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And thou shalt overlay it with the purest
gold, as well as the grate thereof, as the walls round about and the
horns. And thou shalt make to it a crown of gold round about,

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And two golden rings under the crown on
either side, that the bars may be put into them, and the altar be
carried.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> And thou shalt make the bars also of
setim wood, and shalt overlay them with gold.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> And thou shalt set the altar over against
the veil, that hangeth before the ark of the testimony before the
propitiatory wherewith the testimony is covered, where I will speak to
thee.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> And Aaron shall burn sweet smelling
incense upon it in the morning. When he shall dress the lamps, he shall
burn it:

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> And when he shall place them in the
evening, he shall burn an everlasting incense before the Lord throughout
your generations.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> You shall not offer upon it incense of
another composition nor oblation, and victim, neither shall you offer
libations.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> And Aaron shall pray upon the horns
thereof once a year, with the blood of that which was offered for sin,
and shall make atonement upon it in your generations. It shall be most
holy to the Lord.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> When thou shalt take the sum of the
children of Israel according to their number, every one of them shall
give a price for their souls to the Lord, and there shall be no scourge
among them, when they shall be reckoned.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> And this shall every one give that
passeth at the naming, half a sicle according to the standard of the
temple. A sicle hath twenty obols. Half a sicle shall be offered to the
Lord.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> He that is counted in the number from
twenty years and upwards, shall give the price.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The rich man shall not add to half a
sicle, and the poor man shall diminish nothing.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And the money received which was
contributed by the children of Israel, thou shalt deliver unto the uses
of the tabernacle of the testimony, that it may be a memorial of them
before the Lord, and he may be merciful to their souls.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Thou shalt make also a brazen laver
with its foot, to wash in: and thou shalt set it between the tabernacle
of the testimony and the altar. And water being put into it,

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> Aaron and his sons shall wash their
hands and feet in it:

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> When they are going into the tabernacle
of the testimony, and when they are to come to the altar, to offer on it
incense to the Lord,

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Lest perhaps they die. It shall be an
everlasting law to him, and to his seed by successions.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses,

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> Saying: Take spices, of principal and
chosen myrrh five hundred sicles, and of cinnamon half so much, that is,
two hundred and fifty sicles, of calamus in like manner two hundred and
fifty.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And of cassia five hundred sicles by
the weight of the sanctuary, of oil of olives the measure hin:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And thou shalt make the holy oil of
unction, an ointment compounded after the art of the perfumer,

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And therewith thou shalt anoint the
tabernacle of the testimony, and the ark of the testament,

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> And the table with the vessels thereof,
the candlestick and furniture thereof, the altars of incense,

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> And of holocaust, and all the furniture
that belongeth to the service of them.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> And thou shalt sanctify all, and they
shall be most holy: he that shall touch them shall be sanctified.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> Thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons,
and shalt sanctify them, that they may do the office of priesthood unto
me.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> And thou shalt say to the children of
Israel: This oil of unction shall be holy unto me throughout your
generations.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> The flesh of man shall not be anointed
therewith, and you shall make none other of the same composition,
because it is sanctified, and shall be holy unto you.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> What man soever shall compound such,
and shall give thereof to a stranger, he shall be cut off from his
people.

<span id="an_30:34">30:34</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Take unto
thee spices, stacte, and onycha, galbanum of sweet savour, and the
clearest frankincense, all shall be of equal weight.

<span id="an_30:35">30:35</span> And thou shalt make incense compounded
by the work of the perfumer, well tempered together, and pure, and most
worthy of sanctification.

<span id="an_30:36">30:36</span> And when thou has beaten all into very
small powder, thou shalt set of it before the tabernacle of the
testimony, in the place where I will appear to thee. Most holy shall
this incense be to you.

<span id="an_30:37">30:37</span> You shall not make such a composition
for your own uses, because it is holy to the Lord.

<span id="an_30:38">30:38</span> What man soever shall make the like, to
enjoy the smell thereof, he shall perish out of his people.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> Behold, I have called by name Beseleel
the son of Uri the son of Hur of the tribe of Juda,

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> And I have filled him with the spirit of
God, with wisdom and understanding, and knowledge in all manner of work.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> To devise whatsoever may be artificially
made of gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> Of marble, and precious stones, and
variety of wood.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> And I have given him for his companion
Ooliab the son of Achisamech of the tribe of Dan. And I have put wisdom
in the heart of every skilful man, that they may make all things which I
have commanded thee,

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> The tabernacle of the covenant, and the
ark of the testimony, and the propitiatory that is over it, and all the
vessels of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And the table and the vessels thereof,
the most pure candlestick with the vessels thereof, and the altars of
incense,

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And of holocaust, and all their vessels,
the laver with its foot,

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> The holy vestments in the ministry for
Aaron the priest, and for his sons, that they may execute their office
about the sacred things:

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> The oil of unction, and the incense of
spices in the sanctuary, all things which I have commanded thee, shall
they make.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> Speak to the children of Israel, and
thou shalt say to them: See that thou keep my sabbath: because it is a
sign between me and you in your generations: that you may know that I am
the Lord, who sanctify you.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> Keep you my sabbath: for it is holy
unto you: he that shall profane it, shall be put to death: he that shall
do my work in it, his soul shall perish out of the midst of his people.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Six days shall you do work: in the
seventh day is the sabbath, the rest holy to the Lord. Every one that
shall do any work on this day, shall die.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> Let the children of Israel keep the
sabbath, and celebrate it in their generations. It is an everlasting
covenant

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> Between me and the children of Israel,
and a perpetual sign. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth,
and in the seventh he ceased from work.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> And the Lord, when he had ended these
words in mount Sinai, gave to Moses two stone tables of testimony,
written with the finger of God.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> And the people seeing that Moses delayed
to come down from the mount, gathering together against Aaron, said:
Arise, make us gods, that may go before us: for as to this Moses, the
man that brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has
befallen him.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And Aaron said to them: Take the golden
earrings from the ears of your wives, and your sons and daughters, and
bring them to me.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And the people did what he had commanded,
bringing the earrings to Aaron.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And when he had received them, he
fashioned them by founders' work, and made of them a molten calf. And
they said: These are thy gods, O Israel, that have brought thee out of
the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> And when Aaron saw this, he built an
altar before it, and made proclamation by a crier's voice, saying: To
morrow is the solemnity of the Lord.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> And rising in the morning, they offered
holocausts, and peace victims, and the people sat down to eat, and
drink, and they rose up to play.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: Go,
get thee down: thy people, which thou hast brought out of the land of
Egypt, hath sinned.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> They have quickly strayed from the way
which thou didst shew them: and they have made to themselves a molten
calf, and have adored it, and sacrificing victims to it, have said:
These are thy gods, O Israel, that have brought thee out of the land of
Egypt.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> And again the Lord said to Moses: See
that this people is stiffnecked:

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Let me alone, that my wrath may be
kindled against them, and that I may destroy them, and I will make of
thee a great nation.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> But Moses besought the Lord his God,
saying: Why, O Lord, is thy indignation kindled against thy people, whom
thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt, with great power, and with a
mighty hand?

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Let not the Egyptians say, I beseech
thee: He craftily brought them out, that he might kill them in the
mountains, and destroy them from the earth: let thy anger cease, and be
appeased upon the wickedness of thy people.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel,
thy servants, to whom thou sworest by thy own self, saying: I will
multiply your seed as the stars of heaven: and this whole land that I
have spoken of, I will give to you seed, and you shall possess it for
ever.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> And the Lord was appeased from doing
the evil which he had spoken against his people.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> And Moses returned from the mount,
carrying the two tables of the testimony in his hand, written on both
sides,

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And made by the work of God: the
writing also of God was graven in the tables.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And Josue hearing the noise of the
people shouting, said to Moses: The noise of battle is heard in the
camp.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> But he answered: It is not the cry of
men encouraging to fight, nor the shout of men compelling to flee: but I
hear the voice of singers.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> And when he came nigh to the camp, he
saw the calf, and the dances: and being very angry, he threw the tables
out of his hand, and broke them at the foot of the mount:

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> And laying hold of the calf which they
had made, he burnt it, and beat it to powder, which he strowed into
water, and gave thereof to the children of Israel to drink.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> And he said to Aaron: What has this
people done to thee, that thou shouldst bring upon them a most heinous
sin?

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> And he answered him: Let not my lord be
offended: for thou knowest this people, that they are prone to evil.

<span id="an_32:23">32:23</span> They said to me: Make us gods, that may
go before us: for as to this Moses, who brought us forth out of the land
of Egypt, we know not what is befallen him.

<span id="an_32:24">32:24</span> And I said to them: Which of you hath
any gold? and they took and brought it to me: and I cast it into the
fire, and this calf came out.

<span id="an_32:25">32:25</span> And when Moses saw that the people were
naked, (for Aaron had stripped them by occasion of the shame of the
filth, and had set them naked among their enemies,)

<span id="an_32:26">32:26</span> Then standing in the gate of the camp,
he said: If any man be on the Lord's side let him join with me. And all
the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him:

<span id="an_32:27">32:27</span> And he said to them: Thus saith the
Lord God of Israel: Put every man his sword upon his thigh: go, and
return from gate to gate through the midst of the camp, and let every
man kill his brother, and friend, and neighbour.

<span id="an_32:28">32:28</span> And the sons of Levi did according to
the words of Moses, and there were slain that day about three and twenty
thousand men.

<span id="an_32:29">32:29</span> And Moses said: You have consecrated
your hands this day to the Lord, every man in his son and in his
brother, that a blessing may be given to you.

<span id="an_32:30">32:30</span> And when the next day was come, Moses
spoke to the people: You have sinned a very great sin: I will go up to
the Lord, if by any means I may be able to entreat him for your crime.

<span id="an_32:31">32:31</span> And returning to the Lord, he said: I
beseech thee: this people hath sinned a heinous sin, and they have made
to themselves gods of gold: either forgive them this trespass,

<span id="an_32:32">32:32</span> Or if thou do not, strike me out of the
book that thou hast written.

<span id="an_32:33">32:33</span> And the Lord answered him: He that hath
sinned against me, him will I strike out of my book:

<span id="an_32:34">32:34</span> But go thou, and lead this people
whither I have told thee: my angel shall go before thee. And I in the
day of revenge will visit this sin also of theirs.

<span id="an_32:35">32:35</span> The Lord therefore struck the people
for the guilt on occasion of the calf which Aaron had made.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: God,
get thee up from this place, thou and thy people which thou has brought
out of the land of Egypt, into the land concerning which I swore to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, saying: To thy seed I will give it.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> And I will send an angel before thee,
that I may cast out the Chanaanite, and the Amorrhite, and the Hethite,
and the Pherezite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> That thou mayst enter into the land that
floweth with milk and honey. For I will not go up with thee, because
thou art a stiffnecked people: lest I destroy thee in the way.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And the people hearing these very bad
tidings, mourned: and no man put on his ornaments according to custom.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Say to the
children of Israel: Thou are a stiffnecked people; once I shall come up
in the midst of thee, and shall destroy thee. Now presently lay aside
thy ornaments, that I may know what to do with thee.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> So the children of Israel laid aside
their ornaments by mount Horeb.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Moses also taking the tabernacle, pitched
it without the camp afar off, and called the name thereof, The
tabernacle of the covenant. And all the people that had any question,
went forth to the tabernacle of the covenant, without the camp.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> And when Moses went forth to the
tabernacle, all the people rose up, and every one stood in the door of
his pavilion, and they beheld the back of Moses, till he went into the
tabernacle.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> And when he was gone into the tabernacle
of the covenant, the pillar of the cloud came down, and stood at the
door, and he spoke with Moses.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> And all saw that the pillar of the
cloud stood at the door of the tabernacle. And they stood, and
worshipped at the doors of their tents.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses face to
face, as a man is wont to speak to his friend. And when he returned into
the camp, his servant Josue the son of Nun, a young man, departed not
from the tabernacle.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And Moses said to the Lord; Thou
commandest me to lead forth this people: and thou dost not let me know
whom thou wilt send with me, especially whereas thou hast said: I know
thee by name, and thou hast found favour in my sight.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> If therefore I have found favour in thy
sight, show me thy face, that I may know thee, and may find grace before
thy eyes: look upon thy people this nation.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> And the Lord said: My face shall go
before thee, and I will give thee rest.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> And Moses said: If thou thyself dost
not go before, bring us not out of this place.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> For how shall we be able to know, I and
thy people, that we have found grace in thy sight, unless thou walk with
us, that we may be glorified by all people that dwell upon the earth?

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> And the Lord said to Moses: This word
also, which thou hast spoken, will I do: for thou hast found grace
before me, and thee I have known by name.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> And he said: Shew me thy glory.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> He answered: I will shew thee all good,
and I will proclaim in the name of the Lord before thee: and I will have
mercy on whom I will, and I will be merciful to whom it shall please me.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> And again he said: Thou canst not see
my face: for man shall not see me and live.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> And again he said: Behold there is a
place with me, and thou shalt stand upon the rock.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> And when my glory shall pass, I will
set thee in a hole of the rock, and protect thee with my right hand,
till I pass:

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> And I will take away my hand, and thou
shalt see my back parts: but my face thou canst not see.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And after this he said: Hew thee two
tables of stone like unto the former, and I will write upon them the
words which were in the tables, which thou brokest.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Be ready in the morning, that thou mayst
forthwith go up into mount Sinai, and thou shalt stand with me upon the
top of the mount.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Let no man go up with thee: and let not
any man be seen throughout all the mount: neither let the oxen nor the
sheep feed over against it.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Then he cut out two tables of stone, such
as had been before: and rising very early he went up into the mount
Sinai, as the Lord had commanded him, carrying with him the tables.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> And when the Lord was come down in a
cloud, Moses stood with him, calling upon the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> And when he passed before him, he said: O
the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, patient and of much
compassion, and true,

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> Who keepest mercy unto thousands: who
takest away iniquity, and wickedness, and sin, and no man of himself is
innocent before thee. Who renderest the iniquity of the fathers to the
children, and to the grandchildren, unto the third and fourth
generation.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> And Moses making haste, bowed down
prostrate unto the earth, and adoring,

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> Said: If I have found grace in thy sight:
O Lord, I beseech thee, that thou wilt go with us, (for it is a
stiffnecked people,) and take away our iniquities and sin, and possess
us.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> The Lord answered: I will make a
covenant in the sight of all. I will do signs such as were never seen
upon the earth, nor in any nation: that this people, in the midst of
whom thou art, may see the terrible work of the Lord which I will do.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> Observe all things which this day I
command thee: I myself will drive out before thy face the Amorrhite, and
the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, and the Pherezite, and the Hevite, and
the Jebusite.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> Beware thou never join in friendship
with the inhabitants of that land, which may be thy ruin:

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> But destroy their altars, break their
statues, and cut down their groves:

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> Adore not any strange god. The Lord his
name is Jealous, he is a jealous God.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> Make no covenant with the men of those
countries lest, when they have committed fornication with their gods,
and have adored their idols, some one call thee to eat of the things
sacrificed.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Neither shalt thou take of their
daughters a wife for thy son, lest after they themselves have committed
fornication, they make thy sons also to commit fornication with their
gods.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Thou shalt not make to thyself any
molten gods.

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Thou shalt keep the feast of the
unleavened bread. Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I
commanded thee in the time of the month of the new corn: for in the
month of the springtime thou camest out from Egypt.

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> All of the male kind, that openeth the
womb, shall be mine. Of all beasts, both of oxen and of sheep, it shall
be mine.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> The firstling of an ass thou shalt
redeem with a sheep: but if thou wilt not give a price for it, it shall
be slain. The firstborn of thy sons thou shalt redeem: neither shalt
thou appear before me empty.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> Six days shalt thou work, the seventh
day thou shalt cease to plough, and to reap.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> Thou shalt keep the feast of weeks with
the firstfruits of the corn of thy wheat harvest, and the feast when the
time of the year returneth that all things are laid in.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> Three times in a year all thy males
shall appear in the sight of the Almighty Lord the God of Israel.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> For when I shall have taken away the
nations from thy face, and shall have enlarged thy borders, no man shall
lie in wait against thy land when thou shalt go up, and appear in the
sight of the Lord thy God thrice in a year.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> Thou shalt not offer the blood of my
sacrifice upon leaven: neither shall there remain in the morning any
thing of the victim of the solemnity of the Lord.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> The first of the fruits of thy ground
thou shalt offer in the house of the Lord thy God. Thou shalt not boil a
kid in the milk of his dam.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> And the Lord said to Moses: Write these
words by which I have made a covenant both with thee and with Israel.

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> And he was there with the Lord forty
days and forty nights: he neither ate bread nor drank water, and he
wrote upon the tables the ten words of the covenant.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> And when Moses came down from the mount
Sinai, he held the two tables of the testimony, and he knew not that his
face was horned from the conversation of the Lord.

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> And Aaron and the children of Israel
seeing the face of Moses horned, were afraid to come near.

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> And being called by him, they returned,
both Aaron and the rulers of the congregation. And after that he spoke
to them.

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> And all the children of Israel came to
him: and he gave them in commandment all that he had heard of the Lord
in mount Sinai.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> And having done speaking, he put a veil
upon his face.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> But when he went in to the Lord, and
spoke with him, he took it away until he came forth, and then he spoke
to the children of Israel all things that had been commanded him.

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> And they saw that the face of Moses
when he came out was horned, but he covered his face again, if at any
time he spoke to them.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> And all the multitude of the children of
Israel being gathered together, he said to them: These are the things
which the Lord hath commanded to be done.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Six days you shall do work: the seventh
day shall be holy unto you, the sabbath, and the rest of the Lord: he
that shall do any work on it, shall be put to death.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> You shall kindle no fire in any of your
habitations on the sabbath day.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> And Moses said to all the assembly of the
children of Israel: This is the word the Lord hath commanded, saying:

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Set aside with you firstfuits to the
Lord. Let every one that is willing and hath a ready heart, offer them
to the Lord: gold, and silver, and brass,

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> Violet and purple, and scarlet twice
dyed, and fine linen, goats' hair,

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And rams' skins dyed red, and violet
coloured skins, setim wood,

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And oil to maintain lights, and to make
ointment, and most sweet incense.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> Onyx stones, and precious stones, for the
adorning of the ephod and the rational.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> Whosoever of you is wise, let him come,
and make that which the Lord hath commanded:

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> To wit, the tabernacle and the roof
thereof, and the cover, the rings, and the board work with the oars, the
pillars, and the sockets:

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> The ark and the staves, the
propitiatory, and the veil that is drawn before it:

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> The table with the bars and the
vessels, and the loaves of proposition:

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> The candlestick to bear up the lights,
the vessels thereof and the lamps, and the oil for the nourishing of
fires:

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> The altar of incense, and the bars, and
the oil of unction and the incense of spices: the hanging at the door of
the tabernacle:

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> The altar of holocaust, and its grate
of brass, with the bars and vessels thereof: the laver and its foot:

<span id="an_35:17">35:17</span> The curtains of the court with the
pillars and the sockets, the hanging in the doors of the entry,

<span id="an_35:18">35:18</span> The pins of the tabernacle and of the
court with their little cords:

<span id="an_35:19">35:19</span> The vestments that are to be used in
the ministry of the sanctuary, the vesture of Aaron the high priest, and
of his sons, to do the office of priesthood to me.

<span id="an_35:20">35:20</span> And all the multitude of the children
of Israel going out from the presence of Moses,

<span id="an_35:21">35:21</span> Offered firstfruits to the Lord with a
most ready and devout mind, to make the work of the tabernacle of the
testimony. Whatsoever was necessary to the service, and to the holy
vestments,

<span id="an_35:22">35:22</span> Both men and women gave bracelets and
earrings, rings and tablets: every vessel of gold was set aside to be
offered to the Lord.

<span id="an_35:23">35:23</span> If any man had violet, and purple, and
scarlet twice dyed, fine linen and goats' hair, rams' skins dyed red,
and violet coloured skins,

<span id="an_35:24">35:24</span> Metal of silver and brass, they offered
it to the Lord, and setim wood for divers uses.

<span id="an_35:25">35:25</span> The skilful women also gave such things
as they had spun, violet, purple, and scarlet, and fine linen,

<span id="an_35:26">35:26</span> And goats' hair, giving all of their
own accord.

<span id="an_35:27">35:27</span> But the princes offered onyx stone, and
precious stones, for the ephod and the rational,

<span id="an_35:28">35:28</span> And spices and oil for the lights, and
for the preparing of ointment, and to make the incense of most sweet
savour.

<span id="an_35:29">35:29</span> All both men and women with devout mind
offered gifts, that the works might be done which the Lord had commanded
by the hand of Moses. All the children of Israel dedicated voluntary
offerings to the Lord.

<span id="an_35:30">35:30</span> And Moses said to the children of
Israel: Behold the Lord hath called by name Beseleel the son of Uri the
son of Hur of the tribe of Juda.

<span id="an_35:31">35:31</span> And hath filled him with the spirit of
God, with wisdom and understanding and knowledge and all learning.

<span id="an_35:32">35:32</span> To devise and to work in gold and
silver and brass,

<span id="an_35:33">35:33</span> And in engraving stones, and in
carpenters' work. Whatsoever can be devised artificially,

<span id="an_35:34">35:34</span> He hath given in his heart: Ooliab also
the son of Achisamech of the tribe of Dan:

<span id="an_35:35">35:35</span> Both of them hath he instructed with
wisdom, to do carpenters' work and tapestry, and embroidery in blue and
purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine linen, and to weave all things,
and to invent all new things.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Beseleel, therefore, and Ooliab, and
every wise man, to whom the Lord gave wisdom and understanding, to know
how to work artificially, made the things that are necessary for the
uses of the sanctuary, and which the Lord commanded.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And when Moses had called them, and every
skilful man, to whom the Lord had given wisdom, and such as of their own
accord had offered themselves to the making of the work,

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> He delivered all the offerings of the
children of Israel unto them. And while they were earnest about the
work, the people daily in the morning offered their vows.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> Whereupon the workmen being constrained
to come,

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Said to Moses: The people offereth more
than is necessary.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Moses therefore commanded proclamation to
be made by the crier's voice: Let neither man nor woman offer any more
for the work of the sanctuary. And so they ceased from offering gifts,

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> Because the things that were offered did
suffice, and were too much.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And all the men that were wise of heart,
to accomplish the work of the tabernacle, made ten curtains of twisted
fine linen, and violet, and purple, and scarlet twice dyed, with varied
work, and the art of embroidering:

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> The length of one curtain was
twenty-eight cubits, and the breadth four: all the curtains were of the
same size.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And he joined five curtains, one to
another, and the other five he coupled one to another.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> He made also loops of violet in the
edge of the curtain on both sides, and in the edge of the other curtain
in like manner,

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> That the loops might meet on against
another, and might be joined each with the other.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Whereupon also he cast fifty rings of
gold, that might catch the loops of the curtains, and they might be made
one tabernacle.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> He made also eleven curtains of goats'
hair, to cover the roof of the tabernacle:

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> One curtain was thirty cubits long and
four cubits broad: all the curtains were of one measure.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Five of which he joined apart, and the
other six apart.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> And he made fifty loops in the edge of
one curtain, and fifty in the edge of another curtain, that they might
be joined one to another.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> And fifty buckles of brass wherewith
the roof might be knit together, that of all the curtains there might be
made one covering.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> He made also a cover for the tabernacle
of rams' skins dyed red: and another cover over that of violet skins.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> He made also the boards of the
tabernacle of setim wood standing.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> The length of one board was ten cubits:
and the breadth was one cubit and a half.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> There were two mortises throughout
every board, that one might be joined to the other. And in this manner
he made for all the boards of the tabernacle.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> Of which twenty were at the south side
southward,

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> With forty sockets of silver, two
sockets were put under one board on the two sides of the corners, where
the mortises of the sides end in the corners.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> At that side also of the tabernacle,
that looketh toward the north, he made twenty boards.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> With forty sockets of silver, two
sockets for every board.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> But against the west, to wit, at that
side of the tabernacle, which looketh to the sea, he made six boards,

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> And two others at each corner of the
tabernacle behind:

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> Which were also joined from beneath
unto the top, and went together into one joint. Thus he did on both
sides at the corners:

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> So there were in all eight boards and
they had sixteen sockets of silver, to wit, two sockets under every
board.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> He made also bars of setim wood, five
to hold together the boards of one side of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> And five others to join together the
boards of the other side: and besides these, five other bars at the west
side of the tabernacle towards the sea.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> He made also another bar, that might
come by the midst of the boards from corner to corner.

<span id="an_36:34">36:34</span> And the board works themselves he
overlaid with gold, casting for them sockets of silver. And their rings
he made of gold, through which the bars might be drawn: and he covered
the bars themselves with plates of gold.

<span id="an_36:35">36:35</span> He made also a veil of violet, and
purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen, varied and distinguished with
embroidery:

<span id="an_36:36">36:36</span> And four pillars of setim wood, which
with their heads be overlaid with gold, casting for them sockets of
silver.

<span id="an_36:37">36:37</span> He made also a hanging in the entry of
the tabernacle of violet, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen, with
the work of an embroiderer.

<span id="an_36:38">36:38</span> And five pillars with their heads,
which he covered with gold, and their sockets he cast of brass.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> And Beseleel made also the ark of setim
wood: it was two cubits and a half in length, and a cubit and a half in
breadth, and the height was of one cubit and a half: and he overlaid it
with the purest gold within and without.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he made to it a crown of gold round
about,

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> Casting four rings of gold at the four
corners thereof: two rings in one side, and two in the other.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> And he made bars of setim wood, which he
overlaid with gold,

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> And he put them into the rings that were
at the sides of the ark to carry it.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> He made also the propitiatory, that is,
the oracle, of the purest gold, two cubits and a half in length, and a
cubit and a half in breadth.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Two cherubims also of beaten gold, which
he set on the two sides of the propitiatory:

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> One cherub in the top of one side, and
the other cherub in the top of the other side: two cherubims at the two
ends of the propitiatory,

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Spreading their wings, and covering the
propitiatory, and looking one towards the other, and towards it.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> He made also the table of setim wood,
in length two cubits, and in breadth one cubit, and in height it was a
cubit and a half.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> And he overlaid it with the finest
gold, and he made to it a golden ledge round about.

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> And to the ledge itself he made a
polished crown of gold, of four fingers' breadth, and upon the same
another golden crown.

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> And he cast four rings of gold, which
he put in the four corners at each foot of the table,

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Over against the crown: and he put the
bars into them, that the table might be carried.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And the bars also themselves he made of
setim wood, and overlaid them with gold,

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> And the vessels for the divers uses of
the table, dishes, bowls, and cups, and censers of pure gold, wherein
the libations are to be offered.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> He made also the candlestick of beaten
work of the finest gold. From the shaft whereof its branches, its cups,
and bowls, and lilies came out:

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Six on the two sides: three branches on
one side, and three on the other.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Three cups in manner of a nut on each
branch, and bowls withal and lilies; and three cups of the fashion of a
nut in another branch, and bowls withal and lilies. The work of the six
branches that went out from the shaft of the candlestick was equal.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And in the shaft itself were four cups
after the manner of a nut, and bowls withal at every one, and lilies:

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And bowls under two branches in three
places, which together make six branches going out from one shaft.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> So both the bowls, and the branches
were of the same, all beaten work of the purest gold.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> He made also the seven lamps with their
snuffers, and the vessels where the snuffings were to be put out, of the
purest gold.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> The candlestick with all the vessels
thereof weighed a talent of gold.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> He made also the altar of incense of
setim wood, being a cubit on every side foursquare, and in height two
cubits: from the corners of which went out horns.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> And he overlaid it with the purest
gold, with its grate and the sides, and the horns.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> And he made to it a crown of gold round
about, and two golden rings under the crown at each side, that the bars
might be put into them, and the altar be carried.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> And the bars themselves he made also of
setim wood, and overlaid them with plates of gold.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> He compounded also the oil for the
ointment of sanctification, and incense of the purest spices, according
to the work of a perfumer.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> He made also the altar of holocaust of
setim wood, five cubits square, and three in height:

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> The horns whereof went out from the
corners, and he overlaid it with plates of brass.

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And for the uses thereof, he prepared
divers vessels of brass, cauldrons, tongs, fleshhooks, pothooks, and
firepans.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And he made the grate thereof of brass,
in manner of a net, and under it in the midst of the altar a hearth,

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Casting four rings at the four ends of
the net at the top, to put in bars to carry it.

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And he made the bars of setim wood, and
overlaid them with plates of brass:

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And he drew them through the rings that
stood out in the sides of the altar. And the altar itself was not solid,
but hollow, of boards, and empty within.

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> He made also the laver of brass, with the
foot thereof, of the mirrors of the women that watch at the door of the
tabernacle.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> He made also the court, in the south side
whereof were hangings of fine twisted linen, of a hundred cubits,

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> Twenty pillars of brass with their
sockets, the heads of the pillars, and the whole graving of the work, of
silver.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> In like manner at the north side the
hangings, the pillars, and the sockets and heads of the pillars were of
the same measure, and work and metal.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> But on that side that looketh to the
west, there were hangings of fifty cubits, ten pillars of brass with
their sockets, and the heads of the pillars, and all the graving of the
work, of silver.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> Moreover towards the east he prepared
hangings of fifty cubits:

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> Fifteen cubits of which were on one
side with three pillars, and their sockets:

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> And on the other side (for between the
two he made the entry of the tabernacle) there were hangings equally of
fifteen cubits, and three pillars, and as many sockets.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> All the hangings of the court were
woven with twisted linen.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> The sockets of the pillars were of
brass, and their heads with all their gravings of silver: and he
overlaid the pillars of the court also with silver.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> And he made in the entry thereof an
embroidered hanging of violet, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen,
that was twenty cubits long, and five cubits high according to the
measure of all the hangings of the court.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> And the pillars in the entry were four
with sockets of brass, and their heads and gravings of silver.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> The pins also of the tabernacle and of
the court round about he made of brass.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> These are the instruments of the
tabernacle of the testimony, which were counted according to the
commandment of Moses, in the ceremonies of the Levites, by the hand of
Ithamar son of Aaron the priest:

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Which Beseleel the son of Uri the son
of Hur of the tribe of Juda had made as the Lord commanded by Moses,

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Having for his companion Ooliab the son
of Achisamech of the tribe of Dan: who also was an excellent artificer
in wood, and worker in tapestry and embroidery in violet, purple,
scarlet, and fine linen.

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> All the gold that was spent in the work
of the sanctuary, and that was offered in gifts was nine and twenty
talents, and seven hundred and thirty sicles according to the standard
of the sanctuary.

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> And it was offered by them that went to
be numbered, from twenty years old and upwards, of six hundred and three
thousand five hundred and fifty men able to bear arms.

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> There were moreover a hundred talents
of silver, whereof were cast the sockets of the sanctuary, and of the
entry where the veil hangeth.

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> A hundred sockets were made of a
hundred talents, one talent being reckoned for every socket.

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> And of the thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five he made the heads of the pillars, which also he overlaid
with silver.

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> And there were offered of brass also
seventy-two thousand talents, and four hundred sicles besides.

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> Of which were cast the sockets in the
entry of the tabernacle of the testimony, and the altar of brass with
the grate thereof, and all the vessels that belong to the use thereof.

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> And the sockets of the court as well
round about as in the entry thereof, and the pins of the tabernacle and
of the court round about.

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> And he made, of violet and purple,
scarlet and fine linen, the vestments for Aaron to wear when he
ministered in the holy places, as the Lord commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> So he made an ephod of gold, violet, and
purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> With embroidered work: and he cut thin
plates of gold, and drew them small into threads, that they might be
twisted with the woof of the aforesaid colours,

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And two borders coupled one to the other
in the top on either side,

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And a girdle of the same colours, as the
Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> He prepared also two onyx stones, fast
set and closed in gold, and graven by the art of a lapidary, with the
names of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And he set them in the sides of the ephod
for a memorial of the children of Israel, as the Lord had commanded
Moses.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> He made also a rational with embroidered
work, according to the work of the ephod, of gold, violet, purple, and
scarlet twice dyed, and fine twisted linen,

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Foursquare, double, of the measure of a
span.

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> And he set four rows of precious stones
in it. In the first row was a sardius, a topaz, and emerald.

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> In the second, a carbuncle, a sapphire,
and a jasper.

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> In the third, a ligurius, an agate, and
an amethyst.

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> In the fourth, a chrysolite, an onyx,
and a beryl, set and enclosed in gold by their rows.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> And the twelve stones were engraved
with the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, each one with its several
name.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> They made also in the rational little
chains linked one to another of the purest gold,

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> And two hooks, and as many rings of
gold. And they set the rings on either side of the rational,

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> On which rings the two golden chains
should hang, which they put into the hooks that stood out in the corners
of the ephod.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> These both before and behind so
answered one another, that the ephod and the rational were bound
together,

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> Being fastened to the girdle and
strongly coupled with rings, which a violet fillet joined, lest they
should flag loose, and be moved one from the other, as the Lord
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> They made also the tunick of the ephod
all of violet,

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> And a hole for the head in the upper
part at the middle, and a woven border round about the hole:

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> And beneath at the feet pomegranates of
violet, purple, scarlet, and fine twisted linen:

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> And little bells of the purest gold,
which they put between the pomegranates at the bottom of the tunick
round about:

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> To wit, a bell of gold, and a
pomegranate, wherewith the high priest went adorned, when he discharged
his ministry, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> They made also fine linen tunicks with
woven work for Aaron and his sons:

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> And mitres with their little crowns of
fine linen:

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> And linen breeches of fine linen:

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> And a girdle of fine twisted linen,
violet, purple, and scarlet twice dyed, of embroidery work, as the Lord
had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> They made also the plate of sacred
veneration of the purest gold, and they wrote on it with the engraving
of a lapidary, The Holy of the Lord:

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> And they fastened it to the mitre with
a violet fillet, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:31">39:31</span> So all the work of the tabernacle and
of the roof of the testimony was finished: and the children of Israel
did all things which the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_39:32">39:32</span> And they offered the tabernacle and the
roof and the whole furniture, the rings, the boards, the bars, the
pillars, and their sockets,

<span id="an_39:33">39:33</span> The cover of rams' skins dyed red, and
the other cover of violet skins,

<span id="an_39:34">39:34</span> The veil, the ark, the bars, the
propitiatory,

<span id="an_39:35">39:35</span> The table, with the vessels thereof,
and the loaves of proposition:

<span id="an_39:36">39:36</span> The candlestick, the lamps, and the
furniture of them with the oil:

<span id="an_39:37">39:37</span> The altar of gold, and the ointment,
and the incense of spices:

<span id="an_39:38">39:38</span> And the hanging in the entry of the
tabernacle:

<span id="an_39:39">39:39</span> The altar of brass, the grate, the
bars, and all the vessels thereof: the laver with the foot thereof: the
hangings of the court, and the pillars with their sockets:

<span id="an_39:40">39:40</span> The hanging in the entry of the court,
and the little cords, and the pins thereof. Nothing was wanting of the
vessels, that were commanded to be made for the ministry of the
tabernacle, and for the roof of the covenant.

<span id="an_39:41">39:41</span> The vestments also, which the priests,
to wit, Aaron and his sons, used in the sanctuary,

<span id="an_39:42">39:42</span> The children of Israel offered as the
Lord had commanded.

<span id="an_39:43">39:43</span> And when Moses saw all things finished,
he blessed them.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying:

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> The first month, the first day of the
month, thou shalt set up the tabernacle of the testimony,

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> And shalt put the ark in it, and shalt
let down the veil before it:

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And thou shalt bring in the table, and
set upon it the things that are commanded according to the rite. The
candlestick shall stand with its lamps,

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And the altar of gold whereon the incense
is burnt, before the ark of the testimony. Thou shalt put the hanging in
the entry of the tabernacle,

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> And before it the altar of holocaust:

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> The laver between the altar and the
tabernacle, and thou shalt fill it with water.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> And thou shalt encompass the court with
hangings, and the entry thereof.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> And thou shalt take the oil of unction
and anoint the tabernacle with its vessels, that they may be sanctified:

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> The altar of holocaust and all its
vessels:

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> The laver with its foot: thou shalt
consecrate all with the oil of unction, that they may be most holy.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons
to the door of the tabernacle of the testimony, and having washed them
with water,

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Thou shalt put on them the holy
vestments, that they may minister to me, and that the unction of them
may prosper to an everlasting priesthood.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> And Moses did all that the Lord had
commanded.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> So in the first month of the second
year, the first day of the month, the tabernacle was set up.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Moses reared it up, and placed the
boards and the sockets and the bars, and set up the pillars,

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> And spread the roof over the
tabernacle, putting over it a cover, as the Lord had commanded.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> And he put the testimony in the ark,
thrusting bars underneath, and the oracle above.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> And when he had brought the ark into
the tabernacle, he drew the veil before it to fulfil the commandment of
the Lord.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> And he set the table in the tabernacle
of the testimony at the north side without the veil,

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> Setting there in order the loaves of
proposition, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> He set the candlestick also in the
tabernacle of the testimony over against the table on the south side,

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> Placing the lamps in order, according
to the precept of the Lord.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> He set also the altar of gold under the
roof of the testimony over against the veil,

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And burnt upon it the incense of
spices, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> And he put also the hanging in the
entry of the tabernacle of the testimony,

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> And the altar of holocaust of the entry
of the testimony, offering the holocaust, and the sacrifices upon it, as
the Lord had commanded.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> And he set the laver between the
tabernacle of the testimony and the altar, filling it with water.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> And Moses and Aaron, and his sons
washed their hands and feet,

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> When they went into the tabernacle of
the covenant, and went to the altar, as the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> He set up also the court round about
the tabernacle and the altar, drawing the hanging in the entry thereof.
After all things were perfected,

<span id="an_40:32">40:32</span> The cloud covered the tabernacle of the
testimony, and the glory of the Lord filled it.

<span id="an_40:33">40:33</span> Neither could Moses go into the
tabernacle of the covenant, the cloud covering all things and the
majesty of the Lord shining, for the cloud had covered all.

<span id="an_40:34">40:34</span> If at any time the cloud removed from
the tabernacle, the children of Israel went forward by their troops:

<span id="an_40:35">40:35</span> If it hung over, they remained in the
same place.

<span id="an_40:36">40:36</span> For the cloud of the Lord hung over the
tabernacle by day, and a fire by night, in the sight of all the children
of Israel throughout all their mansions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus](lev)
