[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](nah)  [Next](zep) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Habakkuk

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The burden that Habacuc the prophet saw.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> How long, O Lord, shall I cry, and thou
wilt not hear? shall I cry out to thee suffering violence, and thou wilt
not save?

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Why hast thou shewn me iniquity and
grievance, to see rapine and injustice before me? and there is a
judgment, but opposition is more powerful.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Therefore the law is torn in pieces, and
judgment cometh not to the end: because the wicked prevaileth against
the just, therefore wrong judgment goeth forth.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Behold ye among the nations, and see:
wonder, and be astonished: for a work is done in your days, which no man
will believe when it shall be told.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For behold, I will raise up the Chaldeans,
a bitter and swift nation, marching upon the breadth of the earth, to
possess the dwelling places that are not their own.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> They are dreadful, and terrible: from
themselves shall their judgment, and their burden proceed.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Their horses are lighter than leopards, and
swifter than evening wolves; and their horsemen shall be spread abroad:
for their horsemen shall come from afar, they shall fly as an eagle that
maketh haste to eat.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> They shall all come to the prey, their face
is like a burning wind: and they shall gather together captives as the
sand.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And their prince shall triumph over
kings, and princes shall be his laughingstock: and he shall laugh at
every strong hold, and shall cast up a mount, and shall take it.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Then shall his spirit be changed, and he
shall pass, and fall: this is his strength of his god.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Wast thou not from the beginning, O Lord
my God, my holy one, and we shall not die? Lord, thou hast appointed him
for judgment: and made him strong for correction.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Thy eyes are too pure to behold evil, and
thou canst not look on iniquity. Why lookest thou upon them that do
unjust things, and holdest thy peace when the wicked devoureth the man
that is more just than himself?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And thou wilt make men as the fishes of
the sea, and as the creeping things that have no ruler.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> He lifted up all them with his hook, he
drew them in his drag, and gathered them into his net: for this he will
be glad and rejoice.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Therefore will he offer victims to his
drag, and he will sacrifice to his net: because through them his portion
is made fat, and his meat dainty.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For this cause therefore he spreadeth his
net, and will not spare continually to slay the nations.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I will stand upon my watch, and fix my foot
upon the tower: and I will watch, to see what will be said to me, and
what I may answer to him that reproveth me.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the Lord answered me, and said: Write
the vision, and make it plain upon tables: that he that readeth it may
run over it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For as yet the vision is far off, and it
shall appear at the end, and shall not lie: if it make any delay, wait
for it: for it shall surely come, and it shall not be slack.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Behold, he that is unbelieving, his soul
shall not be right in himself: but the just shall live in his faith.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And as wine deceiveth him that drinketh it:
so shall the proud man be, and he shall not be honoured: who hath
enlarged his desire like hell: and is himself like death, and he is
never satisfied: but will gather together unto him all nations, and heap
together unto him all people.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Shall not all these take up a parable
against him, and a dark speech concerning him: and it shall be said: Woe
to him that heapeth together that which is not his own? how long also
doth he load himself with thick clay?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall
bite thee: and they be stirred up that shall tear thee, and thou shalt
be a spoil to them?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Because thou hast spoiled many nations, all
that shall be left of the people shall spoil thee: because of men's
blood, and for the iniquity of the land, of the city, and of all that
dwell therein.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Woe to him that gathereth together an evil
covetousness to his house, that his nest may be on high, and thinketh he
may be delivered out of the hand of evil.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Thou hast devised confusion to thy house,
thou hast cut off many people, and thy soul hath sinned.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For the stone shall cry out of the wall:
and the timber that is between the joints of the building, shall answer.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Woe to him that buildeth a town with
blood, and prepareth a city by iniquity.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Are not these things from the Lord of
hosts? for the people shall labour in a great fire: and the nations in
vain, and they shall faint.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For the earth shall be filled, that men
may know the glory of the Lord, as waters covering the sea.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Woe to him that giveth drink to his
friend, and presenteth his gall, and maketh him drunk, that he may
behold his nakedness.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Thou art filled with shame instead of
glory: drink thou also, and fall fast asleep: the cup of the right hand
of the Lord shall compass thee, and shameful vomiting shall be on thy
glory.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> For the iniquity of Libanus shall cover
thee, and the ravaging of beasts shall terrify them because of the blood
of men, and the iniquity of the land, and of the city, and of all that
dwell therein.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> What doth the graven thing avail, because
the maker thereof hath graven it, a molten, and a false image? because
the forger thereof hath trusted in a thing of his own forging, to make
dumb idols.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Woe to him that saith to wood: Awake: to
the dumb stone: Arise: can it teach? Behold, it is laid over with gold,
and silver, and there is no spirit in the bowels thereof.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But the Lord is in his holy temple: let
all the earth keep silence before him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> A PRAYER OF HABACUC THE PROPHET FOR
IGNORANCES.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> O Lord, I have heard thy hearing, and was
afraid. O Lord, thy work, in the midst of the years bring it to life: In
the midst of the years thou shalt make it known: when thou art angry,
thou wilt remember mercy.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> God will come from the south, and the holy
one from mount Pharan: His glory covered the heavens, and the earth is
full of his praise.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> His brightness shall be as the light; horns
are in his hands: There is his strength hid:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Death shall go before his face. And the
devil shall go forth before his feet.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> He stood and measured the earth. He beheld,
and melted the nations: and the ancient mountains were crushed to
pieces. The hills of the world were bowed down by the journeys of his
eternity.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> I saw the tents of Ethiopia for their
iniquity, the curtains of the land of Madian shall be troubled.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Wast thou angry, O Lord, with the rivers?
or was thy wrath upon the rivers? or thy indignation in the sea? Who
will ride upon thy horses: and thy chariots are salvation.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Thou wilt surely take up thy bow: according
to the oaths which thou hast spoken to the tribes. Thou wilt divide the
rivers of the earth.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The mountains saw thee, and were grieved:
the great body of waters passed away. The deep put forth its voice: the
deep lifted up its hands.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The sun and the moon stood still in their
habitation, in the light of thy arrows, they shall go in the brightness
of thy glittering spear.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> In thy anger thou wilt tread the earth
under foot: in thy wrath thou wilt astonish the nations.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Thou wentest forth for the salvation of
thy people: for salvation with thy Christ. Thou struckest the head of
the house of the wicked: thou hast laid bare his foundation even to the
neck.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Thou hast cursed his sceptres, the head
of his warriors, them that came out as a whirlwind to scatter me. Their
joy was like that of him that devoureth the poor man in secret.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Thou madest a way in the sea for thy
horses, in the mud of many waters.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> I have heard and my bowels were troubled:
my lips trembled at the voice. Let rottenness enter into my bones, and
swarm under me. That I may rest in the day of tribulation: that I may go
up to our people that are girded.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> For the fig tree shall not blossom: and
there shall be no spring in the vines. The labour of the olive tree
shall fail: and the fields shall yield no food: the flock shall be cut
off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But I will rejoice in the Lord: and I
will joy in God my Jesus.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The Lord God is my strength: and he will
make my feet like the feet of harts: and he the conqueror will lead me
upon my high places singing psalms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah](zep)
