[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](zep)  [Next](zac.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Haggai

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the second year of Darius the king, in
the sixth month, in the first day of the month, the word of the Lord
came by the hand of Aggeus the prophet, to Zorobabel the son of
Salathiel, governor of Juda, and to Jesus the son of Josedec the high
priest, saying:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Thus saith the Lord of hosts, saying: This
people saith: The time is not yet come for building the house of the
Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And the word of the Lord came by the hand
of Aggeus the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Is it time for you to dwell in ceiled
houses, and this house lie desolate?

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And now thus saith the Lord of hosts: Set
your hearts to consider your ways.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> You have sowed much, and brought in little:
you have eaten, but have not had enough: you have drunk, but have not
been filled with drink: you have clothed yourselves, but have not been
warmed: and he that hath earned wages, put them into a bag with holes.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Set Your
hearts upon your ways:

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Go up to the mountain, bring timber, and
build the house: and it shall be acceptable to me, and I shall be
glorified, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> You have looked for more, and behold it
became less, and you brought it home, and I blowed it away: why, saith
the Lord of hosts? because my house is desolate, and you make haste
every man to his own house.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Therefore the heavens over you were
stayed from giving dew, and the earth was hindered from yielding her
fruits:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And I called for a drought upon the land,
and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the wine, and upon
the oil, and upon all that the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and
upon beasts, and upon all the labour of the hands.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and
Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest, and all the remnant of the
people hearkened to the voice of the Lord their God, and to the words of
Aggeus the prophet, as the Lord their God sent him to them: and the
people feared before the Lord.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Aggeus the messenger of the Lord, as
one of the messengers of the Lord, spoke, saying to the people: I am
with you, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And the Lord stirred up the spirit of
Zorobabel the son of Salathiel governor of Juda, and the spirit of Jesus
the son of Josedec the high priest, and the spirit of all the rest of
the people: and they went in, and did the work in the house of the Lord
of hosts their God.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> In the four and twentieth day of the month,
in the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king, they began.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And in the seventh month, the word of the
Lord came by the hand of Aggeus the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Speak to Zorobabel the son of Salathiel the
governor of Juda, and to Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest, and
to the rest of the people, saying:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Who is left among you, that saw this house
in its first glory? and how do you see it now? is it not in comparison
to that as nothing in your eyes?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Yet now take courage, O Zorobabel, saith
the Lord, and take courage, O Jesus the son of Josedec the high priest,
and take courage, all ye people of the land, saith the Lord of hosts:
and perform (for I am with you, saith the Lord of hosts)

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The word that I covenanted with you when
you came out of the land of Egypt: and my spirit shall be in the midst
of you: fear not.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet one
little while, and I will move the heaven and the earth, and the sea, and
the dry land.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And I will move all nations: AND THE
DESIRED OF ALL NATIONS SHALL COME: and I will fill this house with
glory: saith the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,
saith the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Great shall be the glory of this last
house more than of the first, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place
I will give peace, saith the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> In the four and twentieth day of the
ninth month, in the second year of Darius the king, the word of the Lord
came to Aggeus the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Ask the
priests the law, saying:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> If a man carry sanctified flesh in the
skirt of his garment, and touch with his skirt, bread, or pottage, or
wine, or oil, or any meat: shall it be sanctified? And the priests
answered, and said: No.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Aggeus said: If one that is unclean
by occasion of a soul touch any of all these things, shall it be
defiled? And the priests answered, and said: It shall be defiled.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And Aggeus answered, and said: So is this
people, and so is this nation before my face, saith the Lord, and so is
all the work of their hands: and all that they have offered there, shall
be defiled.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And now consider in your hearts, from
this day and upward, before there was a stone laid upon a stone in the
temple of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> When you went to a heap of twenty
bushels, and they became ten: and you went into the press, to press out
fifty vessels, and they became twenty.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> I struck you with a blasting wind, and
all the works of your hand with the mildew and with hail, yet there was
none among you that returned to me, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Set your hearts from this day, and
henceforward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth month: from
the day that the foundations of the temple of the Lord were laid, and
lay it up in your hearts.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Is the seed as yet sprung up? or hath the
vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive tree as yet
flourished? from this day I will bless you.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And the word of the Lord came a second
time to Aggeus in the four and twentieth day of the month, saying:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Speak to Zorobabel the governor of Juda,
saying: I will move both heaven and earth.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And I will overthrow the throne of
kingdoms, and will destroy the strength of the kingdom of the Gentiles:
and I will overthrow the chariot, and him that rideth therein: and the
horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword of his
brother.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, I
will take thee, O Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, my servant, saith the
Lord, and will make thee as a signet, for I have chosen thee, saith the
Lord of hosts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah](zac.md)
