[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](plm)  [Next](jam) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Hebrews

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> God, who, at sundry times and in divers
manners, spoke in times past to the fathers by the prophets, last of
all,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> In these days hath spoken to us by his Son,
whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the
world.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Who being the brightness of his glory, and
the figure of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his
power, making purgation of sins, sitteth on the right hand of the
majesty on high.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Being made so much better than the angels,
as he hath inherited a more excellent name than they.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For to which of the angels hath he said at
any time, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee? And again, I
will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And again, when he bringeth in the first
begotten into the world, he saith: And let all the angels of God adore
him.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And to the angels indeed he saith: He that
maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But to the Son: Thy throne, O God, is for
ever and ever: a sceptre of justice is the sceptre of thy kingdom.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Thou hast loved justice, and hated
iniquity: therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And: Thou in the beginning, O Lord, didst
found the earth: and the works of thy hands are the heavens.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> They shall perish, but thou shalt
continue: and they shall all grow old as a garment.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And as a vesture shalt thou change them,
and they shall be changed: but thou art the selfsame, and thy years
shall not fail.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But to which of the angels said he at any
time: Sit on my right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool?

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Are they not all ministering spirits,
sent to minister for them, who shall receive the inheritance of
salvation?

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Therefore ought we more diligently to
observe the things which we have heard, lest perhaps we should let them
slip.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For if the word, spoken by angels, became
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? which having begun to be declared by the Lord, was confirmed
unto us by them that heard him.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> God also bearing them witness by signs, and
wonders, and divers miracles, and distributions of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For God hath not subjected unto angels the
world to come, whereof we speak.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But one in a certain place hath testified,
saying: What is man, that thou art mindful of him: or the son of man,
that thou visitest him?

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Thou hast made him a little lower than the
angels: thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, and hast set him
over the works of thy hands:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Thou hast subjected all things under his
feet. For in that he hath subjected all things to him, he left nothing
not subject to him. But now we see not as yet all things subject to him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But we see Jesus, who was made a little
lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory
and honour: that, through the grace of God, he might taste death for
all.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> For it became him, for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, who had brought many children into
glory, to perfect the author of their salvation, by his passion.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For both he that sanctifieth, and they
who are sanctified, are all of one. For which cause he is not ashamed to
call them brethren, saying:

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I will declare thy name to my brethren;
in the midst of the church will I praise thee.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And again: I will put my trust in him.
And again: Behold I and my children, whom God hath given me.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Therefore because the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself in like manner hath been
partaker of the same: that, through death, he might destroy him who had
the empire of death, that is to say, the devil:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And might deliver them, who through the
fear of death were all their lifetime subject to servitude.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For no where doth he take hold of the
angels: but of the seed of Abraham he taketh hold.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Wherefore it behoved him in all things to
be made like unto his brethren, that he might become a merciful and
faithful priest before God, that he might be a propitiation for the sins
of the people.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For in that, wherein he himself hath
suffered and been tempted, he is able to succour them also that are
tempted.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the
heavenly vocation, consider the apostle and high priest of our
confession, Jesus:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Who is faithful to him that made him, as
was also Moses in all his house.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For this man was counted worthy of greater
glory than Moses, by so much as he that hath built the house, hath
greater honour than the house.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For every house is built by some man: but
he that created all things, is God.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And Moses indeed was faithful in all his
house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be
said:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> But Christ as the Son in his own house:
which house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and glory of hope
unto the end.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost saith: To day
if you shall hear his voice,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Harden not your hearts, as in the
provocation; in the day of temptation in the desert,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Where your fathers tempted me, proved and
saw my works,

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Forty years: for which cause I was
offended with this generation, and I said: They always err in heart. And
they have not known my ways,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> As I have sworn in my wrath: If they
shall enter into my rest.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Take heed, brethren, lest perhaps there
be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, to depart from the living
God.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But exhort one another every day, whilst
it is called to day, that none of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> For we are made partakers of Christ: yet
so, if we hold the beginning of his substance firm unto the end.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> While it is said, To day if you shall
hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in that provocation.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> For some who heard did provoke: but not
all that came out of Egypt by Moses.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And with whom was he offended forty
years? Was it not with them that sinned, whose carcasses were overthrown
in the desert?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And to whom did he swear, that they
should not enter into his rest: but to them that were incredulous?

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And we see that they could not enter in,
because of unbelief.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Let us fear therefore lest the promise
being left of entering into his rest, any of you should be thought to be
wanting.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For unto us also it hath been declared, in
like manner as unto them. But the word of hearing did not profit them,
not being mixed with faith of those things they heard.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For we, who have believed, shall enter into
rest; as he said: As I have sworn in my wrath; If they shall enter into
my rest; and this indeed when the works from the foundation of the world
were finished.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For in a certain place he spoke of the
seventh day thus: And God rested the seventh day from all his works.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And in this place again: If they shall
enter into my rest.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Seeing then it remaineth that some are to
enter into it, and they, to whom it was first preached, did not enter
because of unbelief:

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in
David, To day, after so long a time, as it is above said: To day if you
shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For if Jesus had given them rest, he would
never have afterwards spoken of another day.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> There remaineth therefore a day of rest for
the people of God.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For he that is entered into his rest, the
same also hath rested from his works, as God did from his.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Let us hasten therefore to enter into
that rest; lest any man fall into the same example of unbelief.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> For the word of God is living and
effectual, and more piercing than any two edged sword; and reaching unto
the division of the soul and the spirit, of the joints also and the
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Neither is there any creature invisible
in his sight: but all things are naked and open to his eyes, to whom our
speech is.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Having therefore a great high priest that
hath passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God: let us hold fast our
confession.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For we have not a high priest, who can
not have compassion on our infirmities: but one tempted in all things
like as we are, without sin.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Let us go therefore with confidence to
the throne of grace: that we may obtain mercy, and find grace in
seasonable aid.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> For every high priest taken from among men,
is ordained for men in the things that appertain to God, that he may
offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Who can have compassion on them that are
ignorant and that err: because he himself also is compassed with
infirmity.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And therefore he ought, as for the people,
so also for himself, to offer for sins.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Neither doth any man take the honour to
himself, but he that is called by God, as Aaron was.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> So Christ also did not glorify himself,
that he might be made a high priest: but he that said unto him: Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> As he saith also in another place: Thou art
a priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Who in the days of his flesh, with a strong
cry and tears, offering up prayers and supplications to him that was
able to save him from death, was heard for his reverence.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And whereas indeed he was the Son of God,
he learned obedience by the things which he suffered:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And being consummated, he became, to all
that obey him, the cause of eternal salvation.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Called by God a high priest according to
the order of Melchisedech.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Of whom we have much to say, and hard to
be intelligibly uttered: because you are become weak to hear.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> For whereas for the time you ought to be
masters, you have need to be taught again what are the first elements of
the words of God: and you are become such as have need of milk, and not
of strong meat.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For every one that is a partaker of milk,
is unskillful in the word of justice: for he is a little child.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But strong meat is for the perfect; for
them who by custom have their senses exercised to the discerning of good
and evil.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Wherefore leaving the word of the beginning
of Christ, let us go on to things more perfect, not laying again the
foundation of penance from dead works, and of faith towards God,

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Of the doctrine of baptisms, and imposition
of hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And this will we do, if God permit.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For it is impossible for those who were
once illuminated, have tasted also the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Have moreover tasted the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come,

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And are fallen away: to be renewed again to
penance, crucifying again to themselves the Son of God, and making him a
mockery.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For the earth that drinketh in the rain
which cometh often upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by
whom it is tilled, receiveth blessing from God.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But that which bringeth forth thorns and
briers, is reprobate, and very near unto a curse, whose end is to be
burnt.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> But, my dearly beloved, we trust better
things of you, and nearer to salvation; though we speak thus.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For God is not unjust, that he should
forget your work, and the love which you have shewn in his name, you who
have ministered, and do minister to the saints.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And we desire that every one of you shew
forth the same carefulness to the accomplishing of hope unto the end:

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> That you become not slothful, but
followers of them, who through faith and patience shall inherit the
promises.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> For God making promise to Abraham,
because he had no one greater by whom he might swear, swore by himself,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Saying: Unless blessing I shall bless
thee, and multiplying I shall multiply thee.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> And so patiently enduring he obtained the
promise.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For men swear by one greater than
themselves: and an oath for confirmation is the end of all their
controversy.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Wherein God, meaning more abundantly to
shew to the heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel,
interposed an oath:

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> That by two immutable things, in which it
is impossible for God to lie, we may have the strongest comfort, who
have fled for refuge to hold fast the hope set before us.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Which we have as an anchor of the soul,
sure and firm, and which entereth in even within the veil;

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> Where the forerunner Jesus is entered for
us, made a high priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> For this Melchisedech was king of Salem,
priest of the most high God, who met Abraham returning from the
slaughter of the kings, and blessed him:

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> To whom also Abraham divided the tithes of
all: who first indeed by interpretation, is king of justice: and then
also king of Salem, that is, king of peace:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Without father, without mother, without
genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but likened
unto the Son of God, continueth a priest for ever.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Now consider how great this man is, to whom
also Abraham the patriarch gave tithes out of the principal things.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And indeed they that are of the sons of
Levi, who receive the priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of
the people according to the law, that is to say, of their brethren:
though they themselves also came out of the loins of Abraham.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But he, whose pedigree is not numbered
among them, received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the
promises.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And without all contradiction, that which
is less, is blessed by the better.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And here indeed, men that die, receive
thithes: but there he hath witness, that he liveth.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And (as it may be said) even Levi who
received tithes, paid tithes in Abraham:

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> For he was yet in the loins of his
father, when Melchisedech met him.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> If then perfection was by the Levitical
priesthood, (for under it the people received the law,) what further
need was there that another priest should rise according to the order of
Melchisedech, and not be called according to the order of Aaron?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> For the priesthood being translated, it
is necessary that a translation also be made of the law.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> For he, of whom these things are spoken,
is of another tribe, of which no one attended on the altar.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For it is evident that our Lord sprung
out of Juda: in which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priests.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And it is yet far more evident: if
according to the similitude of Melchisedech there ariseth another
priest,

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Who is made not according to the law of a
carnal commandment, but according to the power of an indissoluble life:

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> For he testifieth: Thou art a priest for
ever, according to the order of Melchisedech.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> There is indeed a setting aside of the
former commandment, because of the weakness and unprofitableness
thereof:

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> (For the law brought nothing to
perfection,) but a bringing in of a better hope, by which we draw nigh
to God.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And inasmuch as it is not without an
oath, (for the others indeed were made priests without an oath;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> But this with an oath, by him that said
unto him: The Lord hath sworn, and he will not repent, Thou art a priest
for ever.)

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> By so much is Jesus made a surety of a
better testament.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And the others indeed were made many
priests, because by reason of death they were not suffered to continue:

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> But this, for that he continueth for
ever, hath an everlasting priesthood,

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Whereby he is able also to save for ever
them that come to God by him; always living to make intercession for us.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> For it was fitting that we should have
such a high priest, holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners,
and made higher than the heavens;

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Who needeth not daily (as the other
priests) to offer sacrifices first for his own sins, and then for the
people's: for this he did once, in offering himself.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> For the law maketh men priests, who have
infirmity: but the word of the oath, which was since the law, the Son
who is perfected for evermore.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Now of the things which we have spoken,
this is the sum: We have such an high priest, who is set on the right
hand of the throne of majesty in the heavens,

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> A minister of the holies, and of the true
tabernacle, which the Lord hath pitched, and not man.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For every high priest is appointed to offer
gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is necessary that he also should have
some thing to offer.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> If then he were on earth, he would not be a
priest: seeing that there would be others to offer gifts according to
the law,

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Who serve unto the example and shadow of
heavenly things. As it was answered to Moses, when he was to finish the
tabernacle: See (saith he) that thou make all things according to the
pattern which was shewn thee on the mount.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> But now he hath obtained a better ministry,
by how much also he is a mediator of a better testament, which is
established on better promises.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> For if that former had been faultless,
there should not indeed a place have been sought for a second.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For finding fault with them, he saith:
Behold, the days shall come, saith the Lord: and I will perfect unto the
house of Israel, and unto the house of Juda, a new testament:

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Not according to the testament which I made
to their fathers, on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them
out of the land of Egypt: because they continued not in my testament:
and I regarded them not, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> For this is the testament which I will
make to the house of Israel after those days, saith the Lord: I will
give my laws into their mind, and in their heart will I write them: and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people:

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And they shall not teach every man his
neighbour and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all
shall know me from the least to the greatest of them:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Because I will be merciful to their
iniquities, and their sins I will remember no more.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Now in saying a new, he hath made the
former old. And that which decayeth and groweth old, is near its end.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> The former indeed had also justifications
of divine service, and a worldly sanctuary.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> For there was a tabernacle made the first,
wherein were the candlesticks, and the table, and the setting forth of
loaves, which is called the holy.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And after the second veil, the tabernacle,
which is called the holy of holies:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Having a golden censer, and the ark of the
testament covered about on every part with gold, in which was a golden
pot that had manna, and the rod of Aaron, that had blossomed, and the
tables of the testament.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And over it were the cherubims of glory
overshadowing the propitiatory: of which it is not needful to speak now
particularly.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Now these things being thus ordered, into
the first tabernacle the priests indeed always entered, accomplishing
the offices of sacrifices.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> But into the second, the high priest alone,
once a year: not without blood, which he offereth for his own, and the
people's ignorance:

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The Holy Ghost signifying this, that the
way into the holies was not yet made manifest, whilst the former
tabernacle was yet standing.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Which is a parable of the time present:
according to which gifts and sacrifices are offered, which can not, as
to the conscience, make him perfect that serveth, only in meats and in
drinks,

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And divers washings, and justices of the
flesh laid on them until the time of correction.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> But Christ, being come an high priest of
the good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle not
made with hand, that is, not of this creation:

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Neither by the blood of goats, or of
calves, but by his own blood, entered once into the holies, having
obtained eternal redemption.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> For if the blood of goats and of oxen,
and the ashes of an heifer being sprinkled, sanctify such as are
defiled, to the cleansing of the flesh:

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> How much more shall the blood of Christ,
who by the Holy Ghost offered himself unspotted unto God, cleanse our
conscience from dead works, to serve the living God?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And therefore he is the mediator of the
new testament: that by means of his death, for the redemption of those
trangressions, which were under the former testament, they that are
called may receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> For where there is a testament, the death
of the testator must of necessity come in.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For a testament is of force, after men
are dead: otherwise it is as yet of no strength, whilst the testator
liveth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Whereupon neither was the first indeed
dedicated without blood.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> For when every commandment of the law had
been read by Moses to all the people, he took the blood of calves and
goats, with water, and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the
book itself and all the people,

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> Saying: This is the blood of the
testament, which God hath enjoined unto you.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> The tabernacle also and all the vessels
of the ministry, in like manner, he sprinkled with blood.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> And almost all things, according to the
law, are cleansed with blood: and without shedding of blood there is no
remission.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> It is necessary therefore that the
patterns of heavenly things should be cleansed with these: but the
heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> For Jesus is not entered into the holies
made with hands, the patterns of the true: but into heaven itself, that
he may appear now in the presence of God for us.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> Nor yet that he should offer himself
often, as the high priest entereth into the holies, every year with the
blood of others:

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> For then he ought to have suffered often
from the beginning of the world: but now once at the end of ages, he
hath appeared for the destruction of sin, by the sacrifice of himself.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And as it is appointed unto men once to
die, and after this the judgment:

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> So also Christ was offered once to
exhaust the sins of many; the second time he shall appear without sin to
them that expect him unto salvation.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> For the law having a shadow of the good
things to come, not the very image of the things; by the selfsame
sacrifices which they offer continually every year, can never make the
comers thereunto perfect:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For then they would have ceased to be
offered: because the worshippers once cleansed should have no conscience
of sin any longer:

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> But in them there is made a commemoration
of sins every year.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For it is impossible that with the blood
of oxen and goats sin should be taken away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Wherefore when he cometh into the world,
he saith: Sacrifice and oblation thou wouldest not: but a body thou hast
fitted to me:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> Holocausts for sin did not please thee.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Then said I: Behold I come: in the head
of the book it is written of me: that I should do thy will, O God.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> In saying before, Sacrifices, and
oblations, and holocausts for sin thou wouldest not, neither are they
pleasing to thee, which are offered according to the law.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Then said I: Behold, I come to do thy
will, O God: he taketh away the first, that he may establish that which
followeth.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> In the which will, we are sanctified by
the oblation of the body of Jesus Christ once.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And every priest indeed standeth daily
ministering, and often offering the same sacrifices, which can never
take away sins.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> But this man offering one sacrifice for
sins, for ever sitteth on the right hand of God,

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> From henceforth expecting, until his
enemies be made his footstool.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> For by one oblation he hath perfected
for ever them that are sanctified.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the Holy Ghost also doth testify
this to us. For after that he said:

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And this is the testament which I will
make unto them after those days, saith the Lord. I will give my laws in
their hearts, and on their minds will I write them:

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And their sins and iniquities I will
remember no more.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Now where there is a remission of
these, there is no more an oblation for sin.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> Having therefore, brethren, a
confidence in the entering into the holies by the blood of Christ;

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> A new and living way which he hath
dedicated for us through the veil, that is to say, his flesh,

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And a high priest over the house of
God:

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> Let us draw near with a true heart in
fulness of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and our bodies washed with clean water.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> Let us hold fast the confession of our
hope without wavering (for he is faithful that hath promised),

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And let us consider one another, to
provoke unto charity and to good works:

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> Not forsaking our assembly, as some are
accustomed; but comforting one another, and so much the more as you see
the day approaching.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> For if we sin wilfully after having the
knowledge of the truth, there is now left no sacrifice for sins,

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> But a certain dreadful expectation of
judgment, and the rage of a fire which shall consume the adversaries.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> A man making void the law of Moses,
dieth without any mercy under two or three witnesses:

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> How much more, do you think he
deserveth worse punishments, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God,
and hath esteemed the blood of the testament unclean, by which he was
sanctified, and hath offered an affront to the Spirit of grace?

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> For we know him that hath said:
Vengeance belongeth to me, and I will repay. And again: The Lord shall
judge his people.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> But call to mind the former days,
wherein, being illuminated, you endured a great fight of afflictions.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> And on the one hand indeed, by
reproaches and tribulations, were made a gazingstock; and on the other,
became companions of them that were used in such sort.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> For you both had compassion on them
that were in bands, and took with joy the being stripped of your own
goods, knowing that you have a better and a lasting substance.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> Do not therefore lose your confidence,
which hath a great reward.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> For patience is necessary for you;
that, doing the will of God, you may receive the promise.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> For yet a little and a very little
while, and he that is to come, will come, and will not delay.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> But my just man liveth by faith; but if
he withdraw himself, he shall not please my soul.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> But we are not the children of
withdrawing unto perdition, but of faith to the saving of the soul.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Now faith is the substance of things to
be hoped for, the evidence of things that appear not.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> For by this the ancients obtained a
testimony.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> By faith we understand that the world was
framed by the word of God; that from invisible things visible things
might be made.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> By faith Abel offered to God a sacrifice
exceeding that of Cain, by which he obtained a testimony that he was
just, God giving testimony to his gifts; and by it he being dead yet
speaketh.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> By faith Henoch was translated, that he
should not see death; and he was not found, because God had translated
him: for before his translation he had testimony that he pleased God.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> But without faith it is impossible to
please God. For he that cometh to God, must believe that he is, and is a
rewarder to them that seek him.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> By faith Noe, having received an answer
concerning those things which as yet were not seen, moved with fear,
framed the ark for the saving of his house, by the which he condemned
the world; and was instituted heir of the justice which is by faith.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> By faith he that is called Abraham,
obeyed to go out into a place which he was to receive for an
inheritance; and he went out, not knowing whither he went.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> By faith he abode in the land, dwelling
in cottages, with Isaac and Jacob, the co-heirs of the same promise.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For he looked for a city that hath
foundations; whose builder and maker is God.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By faith also Sara herself, being
barren, received strength to conceive seed, even past the time of age;
because she believed that he was faithful who had promised,

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> For which cause there sprung even from
one (and him as good as dead) as the stars of heaven in multitude, and
as the sand which is by the sea shore innumerable.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> All these died according to faith, not
having received the promises, but beholding them afar off, and saluting
them, and confessing that they are pilgrims and strangers on the earth.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> For they that say these things, do
signify that they seek a country.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And truly if they had been mindful of
that from whence they came out, they had doubtless time to return.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But now they desire a better, that is
to say, a heavenly country. Therefore God is not ashamed to be called
their God; for he hath prepared for them a city.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> By faith Abraham, when he was tried,
offered Isaac: and he that had received the promises, offered up his
only begotten son;

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> (To whom it was said: In Isaac shall
thy seed be called.)

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Accounting that God is able to raise up
even from the dead. Whereupon also he received him for a parable.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> By faith also of things to come, Isaac
blessed Jacob and Esau.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> By faith Jacob dying, blessed each of
the sons of Joseph, and adored the top of his rod.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> By faith Joseph, when he was dying,
made mention of the going out of the children of Israel; and gave
commandment concerning his bones.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> By faith Moses, when he was born, was
hid three months by his parents; because they saw he was a comely babe,
and they feared not the king's edict.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> By faith Moses, when he was grown up,
denied himself to be the son of Pharao's daughter;

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Rather choosing to be afflicted with
the people of God, than to have the pleasure of sin for a time,

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Esteeming the reproach of Christ
greater riches than the treasure of the Egyptians. For he looked unto
the reward.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the
fierceness of the king: for he endured as seeing him that is invisible.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> By faith he celebrated the pasch, and
the shedding of the blood; that he, who destroyed the firstborn, might
not touch them.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> By faith they passed through the Red
Sea, as by dry land: which the Egyptians attempting, were swallowed up.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> By faith the walls of Jericho fell
down, by the going round them seven days.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> By faith Rahab the harlot perished not
with the unbelievers, receiving the spies with peace.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And what shall I yet say? For the time
would fail me to tell of Gedeon, Barac, Samson, Jephthe, David, Samuel,
and the prophets:

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> Who by faith conquered kingdoms,
wrought justice, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> Quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edge of the sword, recovered strength from weakness, became valiant
in battle, put to flight the armies of foreigners:

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Women received their dead raised to
life again. But others were racked, not accepting deliverance, that they
might find a better resurrection.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And others had trial of mockeries and
stripes, moreover also of bands and prisons.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> They were stoned, they were cut
asunder, they were tempted, they were put to death by the sword, they
wandered about in sheepskins, in goatskins, being in want, distressed,
afflicted:

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> Of whom the world was not worthy;
wandering in deserts, in mountains, and in dens, and in caved of the
earth.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And all these being approved by the
testimony of faith, received not the promise;

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> God providing some better thing for us,
that they should not be perfected without us.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> And therefore we also having so great a
cloud of witnesses over our head, laying aside every weight and sin
which surrounds us, let us run by patience to the fight proposed to us:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Looking on Jesus, the author and finisher
of faith, who having joy set before him, endured the cross, despising
the shame, and now sitteth on the right hand of the throne of God.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For think diligently upon him that
endured such opposition from sinners against himself; that you be not
wearied, fainting in your minds.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> For you have not yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin:

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And you have forgotten the consolation,
which speaketh to you, as unto children, saying: My son, neglect not the
discipline of the Lord; neither be thou wearied whilst thou art rebuked
by him.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> For whom the Lord loveth, he chastiseth;
and he scourgeth every son whom he receiveth.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Persevere under discipline. God dealeth
with you as with his sons; for what son is there, whom the father doth
not correct?

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> But if you be without chastisement,
whereof all are made partakers, then are you bastards, and not sons.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Moreover we have had fathers of our
flesh, for instructors, and we reverenced them: shall we not much more
obey the Father of spirits, and live?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And they indeed for a few days,
according to their own pleasure, instructed us: but he, for our profit,
that we might receive his sanctification.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Now all chastisement for the present
indeed seemeth not to bring with it joy, but sorrow: but afterwards it
will yield, to them that are exercised by it, the most peaceable fruit
of justice.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Wherefore lift up the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And make straight steps with your feet:
that no one, halting, may go out of the way; but rather be healed.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Follow peace with all men, and
holiness: without which no man shall see God.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Looking diligently, lest any man be
wanting to the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up do
hinder, and by it many be defiled.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Lest there be any fornicator, or
profane person, as Esau; who for one mess, sold his first birthright.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> For know ye that afterwards, when he
desired to inherit the benediction, he was rejected; for he found no
place of repentance, although with tears he had sought it.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> For you are not come to a mountain that
might be touched, and a burning fire, and a whirlwind, and darkness, and
storm,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> And the sound of a trumpet, and the
voice of words, which they that heard excused themselves, that the word
might not be spoken to them:

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> For they did not endure that which was
said: And if so much as a beast shall touch the mount, it shall be
stoned.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And so terrible was that which was
seen, Moses said: I am frighted, and tremble.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> But you are come to mount Sion, and to
the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the company
of many thousands of angels,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And to the church of the firstborn, who
are written in the heavens, and to God the judge of all, and to the
spirits of the just made perfect,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> And to Jesus the mediator of the new
testament, and to the sprinkling of blood which speaketh better than
that of Abel.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> See that you refuse him not that
speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spoke upon the
earth, much more shall not we, that turn away from him that speaketh to
us from heaven.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> Whose voice then moved the earth; but
now he promiseth, saying: Yet once more, and I will move not only the
earth, but heaven also.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And in that he saith, Yet once more, he
signifieth the translation of the moveable things as made, that those
things may remain which are immoveable.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> Therefore receiving an immoveable
kingdom, we have grace; whereby let us serve, pleasing God, with fear
and reverence.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> For our God is a consuming fire.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Let the charity of the brotherhood abide
in you.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And hospitality do not forget; for by
this some, being not aware of it, have entertained angels.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Remember them that are in bands, as if
you were bound with them; and them that labour, as being yourselves also
in the body.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Marriage honourable in all, and the bed
undefiled. For fornicators and adulterers God will judge.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Let your manners be without covetousness,
contented with such things as you have; for he hath said: I will not
leave thee, neither will I forsake thee.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> So that we may confidently say: The Lord
is my helper: I will not fear what man shall do to me.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Remember your prelates who have spoken
the word of God to you; whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation,

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day; and
the same for ever.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Be not led away with various and strange
doctrines. For it is best that the heart be established with grace, not
with meats; which have not profited those that walk in them.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> We have an altar, whereof they have no
power to eat who serve the tabernacle.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> For the bodies of those beasts, whose
blood is brought into the holies by the high priest for sin, are burned
without the camp.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Wherefore Jesus also, that he might
sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Let us go forth therefore to him
without the camp, bearing his reproach.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> For we have not here a lasting city,
but we seek one that is to come.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> By him therefore let us offer the
sacrifice of praise always to God, that is to say, the fruit of lips
confessing to his name.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And do not forget to do good, and to
impart; for by such sacrifices God's favour is obtained.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Obey your prelates, and be subject to
them. For they watch as being to render an account of your souls; that
they may do this with joy, and not with grief. For this is not expedient
for you.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Pray for us. For we trust we have a
good conscience, being willing to behave ourselves well in all things.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And I beseech you the more to do this,
that I may be restored to you the sooner.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And may the God of peace, who brought
again from the dead the great pastor of the sheep, our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the blood of the everlasting testament,

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Fit you in all goodness, that you may
do his will; doing in you that which is well pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ, to whom is glory for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And I beseech you, brethren, that you
suffer this word of consolation. For I have written to you in a few
words.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Know ye that our brother Timothy is set
at liberty: with whom (if he come shortly) I will see you.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Salute all your prelates, and all the
saints. The brethren from Italy salute you.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Grace be with you all. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James](jam)
