[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sol)  [Next](jer) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Isaiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> THE vision of Isaias the son of Amos I
which he saw concerning Juda and Jerusalem in the days of Ozias,
Joathan, Achaz, and Ezechias, kings of Juda

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth,
for the Lord hath spoken. I have brought up children, and exalted them:
but they have despised me.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his
master's crib: but Israel hath not known me, and my people hath not
understood.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Woe to the sinful nation, a people laden
with iniquity, a wicked seed, ungracious children: they have forsaken
the Lord, they have blasphemed the Holy One of Israel, they are gone
away backwards.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For what shall I strike you any more, you
that increase transgression? the whole head is sick, and the whole heart
is sad.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From the sole of the foot unto the top of
the head, there is no soundness therein: wounds and bruises and swelling
sores: they are not bound up, nor dressed, nor fomented with oil.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Your land is desolate, your cities are
burnt with fire: your country strangers devour before your face, and it
shall be desolate as when wasted by enemies.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the daughter of Sion shall be left as a
covert in a vineyard, and as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers, and as a
city that is laid waste.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Except the Lord of hosts had left us seed,
we had been as Sodom, and we should have been like to Gomorrha.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hear the word of the Lord, ye rulers of
Sodom, give ear to the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrha.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> To what purpose do you offer me the
multitude of your victims, saith the Lord? I am full, I desire not
holocausts of rams, and fat of fatlings, and blood of calves, and lambs,
and buck goats.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> When you came to appear before me, who
required these things at your hands, that you should walk in my courts?

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Offer sacrifice no more in vain: incense
is an abomination tome. The new moons, and the sabbaths, and other
festivals I will not abide, your assemblies are wicked.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> My soul hateth your new moons, and your
solemnities: they are become troublesome to me, I am weary of bearing
them.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And when you stretch forth your hands, I
will turn away my eyes from you: and when you multiply prayer, I will
not hear: for your hands are full of blood.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Wash yourselves, be clean, take away the
evil of your devices from my eyes: cease to do perversely,

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Learn to do well: seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge for the fatherless, defend the widow.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And then come, and accuse me, saith the
Lord: if your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow:
and if they be red as crimson, they shall be white as wool.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> if you be willing, and will hearken to
me, you shall eat the good things of the land.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But if you will not, and will provoke me
to wrath: the sword shall devour you because the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> How is the faithful city, that was full
of judgment, become a harlot? justice dwelt in it, but now murderers.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Thy silver is turned into dress: thy wine
is mingled with water.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Thy princes are faithless, companions of
thieves: they all love bribes, the run after rewards. They judge not for
the fatherless: and the widow's cometh not in to them.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Therefore saith the Lord the God of
hosts, the mighty one of Israel: Ah! I will comfort myself over my
adversaries: and I will be revenged of my enemies.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And I will turn my hand to thee, and I
will clean purge away thy dress, and I will take away all thy tin.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> And I will restore thy judges se they
were before, and thy counsellors as of old. After this thou shalt be
called the city of the just, a faithful city.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Sion shall be redeemed in judgment, and
they shall bring her back in justice.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And he shall destroy the wicked, and the
sinners together: and they that have forsaken the Lord, shall be
consumed.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> For they shall be confounded for the
idols, to which they have sacrificed: and you shall be ashamed of the
gardens which you have chosen.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> When you shall be as an oak with the
leaves falling off, and as a garden without water.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> And your strength shall be as the ashes
of tow, and your work as a spark: and both shall burn together, and
there shall be none to quench it.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> THE word that Isaias the son of Amos saw,
concerning Juda and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And in the last days the mountain of the
house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And many people shall go, and say: Come and
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for
the law shall come forth from Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And he shall judge the Gentiles, and rebuke
many people: and they shall turn their swords into ploughshares, and
their spears into sickles: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they be exercised any more to war.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk
in the light of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> For thou hast cast off thy people, the
house of Jacob: because they are filled as in times past, and have had
soothsayers as the Philistines, and have adhered to strange children.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Their land is filled with silver and gold:
and there is no end of their treasures.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And their land is filled with horses: and
their chariots are innumerable. Their land also is full of idols: they
have adored the work of their own hands, which their own fingers have
made.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And man hath bowed himself down, and man
hath been debased: therefore forgive them not.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Enter thou into the rock, and hide thee
in the pit from the face of the fear of the Lord, and from the glory of
his majesty.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> The lofty eyes of man are humbled, and
the haughtiness of men shall be made to stoop: and the Lord alone shall
be exalted in that day.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Because the day of the Lord of hosts
shall be upon every one that is proud and highminded, and upon every one
that is arrogant, and he shall be humbled.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And upon all the tall and lofty cedars of
Libanus, and upon all the oaks of Basan.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And upon all the high mountains, and upon
all the elevated hills.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And upon every high tower, and every
fenced wall.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And upon all the ships of Tharsis, and
upon all that is fair to behold.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the loftiness of men shall be bowed
down, and the haughtiness of men shall be humbled, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And idols shall be utterly destroyed.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And they shall go into the holes of
rocks, and into the caves of the earth from the face of the fear of the
Lord, and from the glory of his majesty, when he shall rise up to strike
the earth.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> In that day a man shall cast away his
idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which he had made for himself to
adore, moles and bats.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And he shall go into the clefts of rocks,
and into the holes of stones from the face of the fear of the Lord, and
from the glory of his majesty, when he shall rise up to strike the
earth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Cease ye therefore from the man, whose
breath is in his nostrils, for he is reputed high.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> FOR behold the sovereign the Lord of hosts
shall take away from Jerusalem, and from Juda the valiant and the
strong, the whole strength of bread, and the whole strength of water.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> The strong man, and the man of war, the
judge, and the prophet, and the cunning man, and the ancient.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The captain over fifty, and the honourable
in countenance, and the counsellor, and the architect, and the skilful
in eloquent speech.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And I will give children to be their
princes, and the effeminate shall rule over them.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And the people shall rush one upon another,
and every man against his neighbour: the child shall make it tumult
against the ancient, and the base against the honourable.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For a man shall take hold or his brother,
one of the house of his father, saying: Thou hast a garment, be thou our
ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> In that day he shall answer, saying: I am
no healer, and in my house there is no bread, nor clothing: make me not
ruler of the people.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For Jerusalem is ruined, and Juda is
fallen: because their tongue, and their devices are against the Lord, to
provoke the eyes of his majesty.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The shew of their countenance hath answered
them: and they have proclaimed abroad their sin as Sodom, and they have
not hid it: woe to their souls, for evils are rendered to them.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Say to the just man that it is well, for
he shall eat the fruit of his doings.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Woe to the wicked unto evil: for the
reward of his hands shall be given him.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> As for my people, their oppressors have
stripped them, and women have ruled over them. O my people, they that
call thee blessed, the same deceive thee, and destroy the way of thy
steps.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> The Lord standeth up to judge, and he
standeth to judge the people.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> The Lord will enter into judgment with
the ancients of his people, and its princes: for you have devoured the
vineyard, and the spoil of the poor is in your house.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Why do you consume my people, and grind
the faces of the poor? saith the Lord the God of hosts.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And the Lord said: Because the daughters
of Sion are haughty, and have walked with stretched out necks, and
wanton glances of their eyes, and made a noise as they walked with their
feet and moved in a set pace:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> The Lord will make bald the crown of the
head of the daughters of Sion, and the Lord will discover their hair.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> In that day the Lord will take away the
ornaments of shoes, end little moons,

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And chains and necklaces, and bracelets,
and bonnets,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> And bodkins, and ornaments of the legs,
and tablets, and sweet balls, and earrings,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And rings, and jewels hanging on the
forehead,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And changes of apparel, and short cloaks,
and fine linen, and crisping pins,

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And looking-glasses, and lawns, and
headbands, and fine veils.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And instead of a sweet smell there shall
be stench, and instead of a girdle, a cord, and instead of curled hair,
baldness, and instead of a stomacher, haircloth.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Thy fairest men also shall fall by the
sword, and thy valiant ones in battle.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> And her gates shall lament and mourn, and
she shall sit desolate on the ground.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> AND in that day seven women shall take hold
of one man, saying: We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel:
only let us be called by thy name, take away our reproach.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> In that day the bud of the Lord shall be in
magnificence and glory, and the fruit of the earth shall be high, and a
great joy to them that shall have escaped of Israel.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And it shall come to pass, that every one
that shall be left in Sion, and that shall remain in Jerusalem, shall be
called holy, every one that is written in life in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> If the Lord shall wash away the filth of
the daughters of Sion, and shall wash away the blood of Jerusalem out of
the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of
burning.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And the Lord will create upon every place
of mount Sion, and where he is called upon, a cloud by day, and a smoke
and the brightness of a flaming fire in the night: for over all the
glory shall be a protection.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And there shall be a tabernacle for a shade
in the daytime from the heat, and for a security and covert from the
whirlwind, and from rain.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> I WILL sing to my beloved the canticle of
my cousin concerning his vineyard. My beloved had a vineyard on a hill
in a fruitful place.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And he fenced it in, and picked the stones
out of it, and planted it with the choicest vines, and built a tower in
the midst thereof, and set up a winepress therein: and he looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And now, O ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
ye men of Juda, judge between me and my vineyard.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> What is there that I ought to do more to my
vineyard, that I have not done to it? was it that I looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it hath brought forth wild grapes?

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And now I will shew you what I will do to
my vineyard. I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be wasted:
I will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And I will make it desolate: it shall not
be pruned, and it shall not be digged: but briers and thorns shall come
up: and I will command the clouds to rain no rain upon it.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is
the house of Israel: and the man of Juda, his pleasant plant: and I
looked that he should do judgment, and behold iniquity: and do justice,
and behold a cry.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Woe to you that join house to house and lay
field to field, even to the end of the place: shall you alone dwell in
the midst of the earth?

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> These things are in my ears, saith the Lord
of hosts: Unless many great and fair houses shall become desolate,
without an inhabitant.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For ten acres of vineyard shall yield one
little measure, and thirty bushels of seed shall yield three bushels.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Woe to you that rise up early in the
morning to follow drunkenness, and to drink till the evening, to be
inflamed with wine.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> The harp, and the lyre, and the timbrel,
and the pipe, and wine are in your feasts: and the work of the Lord you
regard not, nor do you consider the works of his hands.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Therefore is my people led away captive,
because they had not knowledge, and their nobles have perished with
famine, and their multitude were dried up with thirst.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Therefore hath hell enlarged her soul,
and opened her mouth without any bounds, and their strong ones, and
their people, and their high and glorious ones shall go down into it.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And man shall be brought down, and man
shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be brought low.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in
judgment, and the holy God shall be sanctified in justice.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And the lambs shall feed according to
their order, and strangers shall eat the deserts turned into
fruitfulness.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Woe to you that draw iniquity with cords
of vanity, and sin as the rope of a cart.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> That say: Let him make haste, and let his
work come quickly, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy
One of Israel come, that we may know it.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Woe to you that call evil good, and good
evil: that put darkness for light, and light for darkness: that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Woe to you that rue wise in your own
eyes, and prudent in your own conceits.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Woe to you that are mighty to drink wine,
and stout men at drunkenness.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> That justify the wicked for gifts, and
take away the justice of the just from him.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Therefore as the tongue of the fire
devoureth the stubble, and the heat of the dame consumeth it: so shall
their root be as ashes, and their bud shall go up se dust: for they have
cast away the law of the Lord of hosts, and have blasphemed the word of
the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Therefore is the wrath of the Lord
kindled against his people, and he hath stretched out his hand upon
them, and struck them: and the mountains were troubled, and their
carcasses became as dung in the midst of the streets. For all this his
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And he will lift up a sign to the nations
afar off, and will whistle to them from the ends of the earth: and
behold they shall come with speed swiftly.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> There is none that shall faint, nor
labour among them: they shall not slumber nor sleep, neither shall the
girdle of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be
broken.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> Their arrows are sharp, and all their
bows are bent. The hoofs of their horses shall be like the hint, and
their wheels like the violence of a tempest.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> Their roaring like that of a lion, they
shall roar like young lions: yea they shall roar, and take hold of the
prey, and they shall keep fast hold of it, and there shall be none to
deliver it.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And they shall make a noise against them
that day, like the roaring of the sea; we shall look towards the land,
and behold darkness of tribulation, and the light is darkened with the
mist thereof.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> IN the year that king Ozias died, I saw the
Lord sitting upon a throne high and elevated: and his train filled the
temple.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Upon it stood the seraphims: the one had
six wings, and the other had six wings: with two they covered his face,
and with two they covered his feet, and with two they hew.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And they cried one to another, and said:
Holy, holy, holy, the Lord God of hosts, all the earth is full of his
glory.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And the lintels of the doors were moved at
the voice of him that cried, and the house was filled with smoke.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And I said: Woe is me, because I have held
my peace; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst
of a people that hath unclean lips, and I have seen with my eyes the
King the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And one of the seraphims flew to me, and in
his hand was a live coal, which he had taken with the tongs off the
altar.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he touched my mouth, and said: Behold
this hath touched thy lips, and thy iniquities shall be taken away, and
thy sin shall be cleansed.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying:
Whom shall I send? and who shall go for us? And I said: Lo, here am I,
send me.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And he said: Go, and thou shalt say to this
people: Hearing, hear, and understand not: and see the vision, and know
it not.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Blind the heart of this people, and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be
converted and I heal them.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And I said: How long, O Lord? And he
said: Until the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses
without man, and the land shall be left desolate.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And the Lord shall remove men far away,
and she shall be multiplied that was left in the midst of the earth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And there shall be still a tithing
therein, and she shall turn, and shall be made a show as a turpentine
tree, and as an oak that spreadeth its branches: that which shall stand
therein, shall be a holy seed.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> AND it came to pass in the days of Achaz
the son of Joathan, the son of Ozias, king of Juda, that Basin king of
Syria, and Phacee the son of Romelia king of Israel, came up to
Jerusalem, to fight against it: but they could not prevail over it.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And they told the house of David, saying:
Syria hath rested upon Ephraim, and his heart was moved, and the heart
of his people, as the trees of the woods are moved with the wind.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And the Lord said to Isaias: Go forth to
meet Achaz, thou and Jasub thy son that is left, to the conduit of the
upper pool, in the way of the fuller's field.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And thou shalt say to him: See thou be
quiet: fear not, and let not thy heart be afraid of the two tails of
these fire brands, smoking with the wrath of the fury of Rasin king of
Syria, end of the son of Romelia.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Because Syria hath taken counsel against
thee, unto the evil of Ephraim and the son of Romelia, saying:

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Let us go up to Juda, and rouse it up, and
draw it away to us, and make the son of Tabeel king in the midst
thereof.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Thus saith the Lord God: It shall not
stand, and this shall not be.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But the head of Syria is Damascus, and the
head of Damascus is Basin: and within threescore and five years, Ephraim
shall cease to be a people:

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And the head of Ephraim is Samaria and the
head of Samaria the son of Romelia. If you will not believe, you shall
not continue.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the Lord spoke again to Achaz,
saying:

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God
either unto the depth of hell, or unto the height above.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> And Achaz said: I will not ask, and I
will not tempt the Lord.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And he said: Hear ye therefore, O house
of David: Is it a small thing for you to be grievous to men, that you
are grievous to my God also?

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Therefore the Lord himself shall give you
a sign. Behold a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and his name
shall be called Emmanuel.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> He shall eat butter and honey, that he
may know to refuse the evil, and to choose the good.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> For before the child know to refuse the
evil, and to choose the good, the land which thou abhorrest shall be
forsaken of the face of her two kings.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> The Lord shall bring upon thee, and upon
thy people, and upon the house of thy father, days that have not come
since the time of the separation of Ephraim from Juda with the king of
the Assyrians.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the Lord shall hiss for the fly, that is in the uttermost parts of
the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And they shall come, and shall all of
them rest in the torrents of the valleys, and in the holes of the rocks,
and upon all places set with shrubs, and in all hollow places.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> In that day the Lord shall shave with a
razor that is hired by them that are beyond the river, by the king of
the Assyrians, the head and the hairs of the feet, and the whole beard.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And for the abundance of milk he shall
eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that shall be left
in the midst of the land.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that every place where there were a thousand vines, at a thousand pieces
of silver, shall become thorns and briers.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> With arrows and with bows they shall go
in thither: for briars and thorns shall be in all the land.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And as for all the hills that shall be
raked with a rake, the fear of thorns and briers shall not come thither,
but they shall be for the ox to feed on, and the lesser cattle to tread
upon.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> AND the Lord said to me: Take thee a great
book, and write in it with a man's pen. Take sway the spoils with speed,
quickly take the prey.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And I took unto me faithful witnesses,
Urias the priest, and Zacharias the son of Barachias.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And I went to the prophetess, and she
conceived, and bore a son. And the Lord said to me: Call his name,
Hasten to take away the spoils: Make haste to take away the prey.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> For before the child know to call his
father and his mother, the strength of Damascus, and the spoils of
Samaria shall be taken away before the king of the Assyrians.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And the Lord spoke to me again, saying:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Forasmuch as this people hath cast away the
waters of Siloe, that go with silence, and hath rather taken Basin, and
the son of Romelia:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Therefore behold the Lord will bring upon
them the waters of the river strong and many, the king of the Assyrians,
and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his channels, and shall
overflow all his banks,

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And shall pass through Juda, overflowing,
and going over shall reach even to the neck. And the stretching out of
his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Emmanuel.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> Gather yourselves together, O ye people,
and be overcome, and give ear, all ye lands afar off: strengthen
yourselves, end be overcome, gird yourselves, and be overcome.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Take counsel together, and it shall be
defeated: speak a word, and it shall not be done: because God is with
us.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> For thus saith the Lord to me: As he hath
taught me, with a strong arm, that I should not walk in the way of this
people, saying:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Say ye not: A conspiracy: for all that
this people speaketh, is a conspiracy: neither fear ye their fear, nor
be afraid.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself: and
let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And he shall be a sanctification to you.
But for a stone or stumbling, and for a rock of offence to the two
houses of Israel, for a snare and a ruin to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And very many of them shall stumble and
fall, and shall be broken in pieces, and shall be snared, and taken.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> Bind up the testimony, seal the law among
my disciples.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And I will wait for the Lord, who hath
hid his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> Behold I and my children, whom the Lord
hath given me for a sign, and for a wonder in Israel from the Lord of
hosts, who dwelleth in mount Sion.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And when they shall say to you: Seek of
pythons, and of diviners, who mutter in their enchantments: should not
the people seek of their God, for the living of the dead?

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> To the law rather, and to the testimony.
And if they speak not according to this word, they shall not have the
morning light.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And they shall pass by it, they shall
fall, and be hungry: and when they shall be hungry, they will be angry,
and curse their king, and their God, and look upwards.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And they shall look to the earth, and
behold trouble and darkness, weakness and distress, and a mist following
them, and they cannot fly away from their distress.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> AT the first time the land of Zabulon, and
the land of Nephtali was lightly touched: and at the last the way of the
sea beyond the Jordan of the Galilee of the Gentiles was heavily loaded.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> The people that walked in darkness, have
seen a great light: to them that dwelt in the region of the shadow of
death, light is risen.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> Thou hast multiplied the nation, and hast
not increased the joy. They shall rejoice before thee, as they that
rejoice in the harvest, as conquerors rejoice after taking a prey, when
they divide the spoils.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For the yoke of their burden, and the rod
of their shoulder, and the sceptre of their oppressor thou best
overcome, as in the day of Median.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> For every violent taking of spoils, with
tumult, and garment mingled with blood, shall be burnt, and be fuel for
the fire.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> For a CHILD IS BORN to us, and a son is
given to us, and the government is upon his shoulder: and his name shall
be called, Wonderful, Counsellor, God the Mighty, the Father of the
world to come, the Prince of Peace.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> His empire shall be multiplied, and there
shall be no end of peace: he shall sit upon the throne of David, and
upon his kingdom; to establish it and strengthen it with judgment and
with justice, from henceforth and for ever: the zeal of the Lord of
hosts will perform this.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it
hath lighted upon Israel.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And all the people of Ephraim shall know,
and the inhabitants of Samaria that say in the pride and haughtiness of
their heart:

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The bricks are fallen down, but we will
build with square stones: they have cut down the sycamores, but we will
change them for cedars.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the Lord shall set up the enemies of
Rasin over him, and shall bring on his enemies in a crowd:

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> The Syrians from the east, and the
Philistines from the west: and they shall devour Israel with open mouth,
For all this his indignation is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And the people are not returned to him
who hath struck them, and have not sought after the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And the Lord shall destroy out of Israel
the head and the tail, him that bendeth down, and him that holdeth back,
in one day.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> The aged and honourable, he is the head:
and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And they that call this people blessed,
shall cause them to err: and they that are called blessed, shall be
thrown down headlong.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Therefore the Lord shell have no joy in
their young men: neither shall he have mercy on their fatherless, and
widows: for every one is a hypocrite and wicked, and every mouth hath
spoken folly. For all this his indignation is not turned away, but his
bend is stretched out still.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> For wickedness is kindled as a fire, it
shall devour the brier and the thorn: and shall kindle in the thicket of
the forest, and it shall be wrapped up in smoke ascending on high.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> By the wrath of the Lord of hosts the
land is troubled, and the people shall be as fuel for the fire: no man
shall spare his brother.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And he shall turn to the right hand, and
shall be hungry: and shall eat on the left hand, and shall not be
filled: every one shell eat the flesh of his own arm: Manasses Ephraim,
and Ephraim Manasses, and they together shall be against Juda.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> After all these things his indignation is
not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> WOE to them that make wicked laws: and
when they write, write injustice:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> To oppress the poor in judgment, and do
violence to the cause of the humble of my people: that widows might be
their prey, and that they might rob the fatherless.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> What will you do in the day of
visitation, and of the calamity which cometh from afar? to whom will ye
flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> That you be not bowed down under the
bond, and fall with the slain? In all these things his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Woe to the Assyrian, he is the rod and
the staff of my anger, and my indignation is in their hands.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> I will send him to a deceitful nation,
and I will give him a charge against the people of my wrath, to take
away the spoils, and to lay hold on the prey, and to tread them down
like the mire of the streets.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But he shall not take it so, and his
heart shall not think so: but his heart shall be set to destroy, and to
cut off nations not a few.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> For he shall say:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Are not my princes as so many kings ? is
not Calano as Charcamis: and Emath as Arphad? is not Samaria as
Damascus?

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> As my hand hath found the king- dome of
the idol, so also their idols of Jerusalem, and of Samaria.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Shall I not, as I have done to Samaria
and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And it shall come to pass, that when
the Lord shall have performed all his works in mount Sion, and in
Jerusalem, I will visit the fruit of the proud heart of the king of
Assyria, and the glory of the haughtiness of his eyes.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For he hath said: By the strength of my
own hand I have done it, and by my own wisdom I have understood: and I
have removed the bounds of the people, and have taken the spoils of the
princes, and as a mighty man hath pulled down them that sat on high.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And my hand hath found the strength of
the people as a nest; and as eggs are gathered, that are left, so have I
gathered all the earth: and there was none that moved the wing, or
opened the mouth, or made the least noise.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Shall the axe boast itself against him
that cutteth with it? or shall the saw exalt itself against him by whom
it is drawn? as if a rod should lift itself up against him that lifteth
it up, and a staff exalt itself, which is but wood.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Therefore the sovereign Lord, the Lord
of hosts, shall send leanness among his fat ones: and under his glory
shall be kindled a burning, as it were the burning of a fire.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And the light of Israel shall be as a
fire, and the Holy One thereof as a flame: and his thorns and his briers
shall be set on fire, and shall be devoured in one day.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the glory of his forest, and of his
beautiful hill, shall be consumed from the soul even to the flesh, and
he shall run away through fear.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And they that remain of the trees of
his forest shall be so few, that they shall easily be numbered, and a
child shall write them down.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the remnant of Israel, and they that shall escape of the house of
Jacob, shall lean no more upon him that striketh them: but they shall
lean upon the Lord the Holy One of Israel, in truth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The remnant shall be converted, the
remnant, I say, of Jacob, to the mighty God.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> For if thy people, O Israel, shall be
as the sand of the sea, a remnant of them shall be converted, the
consumption abridged shall overflow with justice.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> For the Lord God of hosts shall make a
consumption, and an abridgment in the midst of all the land.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> Therefore, thus saith the Lord the God
of hosts: O my people that dwellest in Sion, be not afraid of the
Assyrian: he shall strike thee with his rod, and he shall lift up his
staff over thee in the way of Egypt.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> For yet a little and a very little
while, and my indignation shall cease, and my wrath shall be upon their
wickedness.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And the Lord of hosts shall raise up a
scourge against him, according to the slaughter of Madian in the rock of
Oreb, and his rod over the sea, and he shall lift it up in the way of
Egypt.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke
from off thy neck, and the yoke shall putrify at the presence of the
oil.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> He shall come into Aiath, he shall pass
into Magron: at Machmas he shall lay up his carriages.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> They have passed in haste, Gaba is our
lodging: Rama was astonished, Gabaath of Saul fled away.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> Lift up thy voice, O daughter of
Gallim, attend, O Laisa, poor Anathoth.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Medemena is removed: ye inhabitants of
Gabim, take courage.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> It is yet day enough, to remain in
Nobe: he shall shake his hand against the mountain of the daughter of
Sion, the hill of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> Behold the sovereign Lord of hosts
shall break the earthen vessel with terror, and the tall of stature
shall be cut down, and the lofty shall be humbled.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And the thickets of the forest shall be
cut down with iron, and Libanus with its high ones shall fall.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> AND there shall come forth a rod out of
the root of Jesse, and a flower shall rise up out of his root.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And the spirit of the Lord shall rest
upon him: the spirit of wisdom, and of understanding, the spirit of
counsel, and of fortitude, the spirit of knowledge, and of godliness.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> And he shall be filled with the spirit of
the fear of the Lord. He shall not judge according to the sight of the
eyes, nor reprove according to the hearing of the ears.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But he shall judge the poor with justice,
and shall reprove with equity for the meek of the earth: and he shall
strike the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips he shall slay the wicked.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And justice shall be the girdle of his
loins: and faith the girdle of his reins.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The wolf shall dwell with the lamb: and
the leopard shall lie down with the kid: the calf and the lion, and the
sheep shall abide together, and a little child shall lead them.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> The calf and the bear shall feed: their
young ones shall rest together: and the lion shall eat straw like the
ox.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the sucking child shall play on the
hole of the asp: and the weaned child shall thrust his hand into the den
of the basilisk.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> They shall not hurt, nor shall they kill
in all my holy mountain, for the earth is filled with the knowledge of
the Lord, as the covering waters of the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> In that day the root of Jesse, who
standeth for an ensign of the people, him the Gentiles shall beseech,
and his sepulchre shall be glorious.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the Lord shall set his hand the second time to possess the remnant
of his people, which shall be left from the Assyrians, and from Egypt,
and from Phetros, and from Ethiopia, and from Elam, and from Sennaar,
and from Emath, and from the islands of the sea.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he shall set up a standard unto the
nations, and shall assemble the fugitives of Israel, and shall gather
together the dispersed of Juda from the four quarters of the earth.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And the envy of Ephraim shall be taken
away, and the enemies of Juda shall perish: Ephraim shall not envy Juda,
and Juda shall not fight against Ephraim.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> But they shall fly upon the shoulders
of the Philistines by the sea, they together shall spoil the children of
the east: Edom, and Moab shall be under the rule of their hand, and the
children of Ammon shall be obedient.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And the Lord shall lay waste the tongue
of the sea of Egypt, and shall lift up his hand over the river in the
strength of his spirit: and he shall strike it in the seven streams, so
that men may pass through it in their shoes.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And there shall be a highway for the
remnant of my people, which shall be left from the Assyrians: as there
was for Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> AND thou shalt say in that day: I will
give thanks to thee, O Lord, for thou wast angry with me: thy wrath is
turned away, and thou hast comforted me.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Behold, God is my saviour, I will deal
confidently, and will not fear: because the Lord is my strength, and my
praise, and he is become my salvation.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> You shall draw waters with joy out of the
saviour's fountains:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> And you shall say in that day: Praise ye
the Lord, and call upon his name: make his works known among the people:
remember that his name is high.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath done
great things: shew this forth in all the earth.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Rejoice, and praise, O thou habitation of
Sion: for great is he that is in the midst of thee, the Holy One of
Israel.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> THE burden of Babylon, which Isaias the
son of Amos saw.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Upon the dark mountain lift ye up a
banner, exalt the voice, lift up the hand, and let the rulers go into
the gates.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> I have commanded my sanctified ones, and
have called my strong ones in my wrath, them that rejoice in my glory.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The noise of a multitude in the
mountains, as it were of many people, the noise of the sound of kings,
of nations gathered together: the Lord of hosts hath given charge to the
troops of war.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> To them that come from a country afar
off, from the end of heaven: tile Lord and the instruments of his wrath,
to destroy the whole land.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is near:
it shall come as a destruction from the Lord.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Therefore shall all hands be faint, and
every heart of man shall melt,

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And shall be broken. Gripings and pains
shall take hold of them, they shall be in pain as a woman in labour.
Every one shall be amazed at his neighbour, their countenances shall be
as faces burnt.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Behold, the day of the Lord shall come, a
cruel day, and full of indignation, and of wrath, and fury, to lay the
land desolate, and to destroy the sinners thereof out of it.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> For the stars of heaven, and their
brightness shall not display their light: the sun shall be darkened in
his rising, and the moon shall not shine with her light.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And I will visit the evils of the
world, and against the wicked for their iniquity: and I will make the
pride of infidels to cease, and will bring down the arrogancy of the
mighty.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> A man shall be more precious than gold,
yea a man than the finest of gold.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> For this I will trouble the heaven: and
the earth shall be moved out of her place, for the indignation of the
Lord of hosts, and for the day of his tierce wrath.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And they shall be as a doe fleeing
away, and as a sheep: and there shall be none to gather them together:
every man shall turn to his own people, and every one shall flee to his
own land.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Every one that shall be found, shall be
slain: and every one that shall come to their aid, shall fall by the
sword.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> Their infants shall be dashed in pieces
before their eyes: their houses shall be pillaged, and their wives shall
be ravished.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Behold I will stir up the Medes against
them, who shall not seek silver, nor desire gold:

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> But with their arrows they shall kill
the children, and shall have no pity upon the sucklings of the womb, and
their eye shall not spare their sons.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And that Babylon, glorious among
kingdoms, the famous pride of the Chaldeans, shall be even as the Lord
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> It shall no more be inhabited for ever,
and it shall not be founded unto generation and generation: neither
shall the Arabian pitch his tents there, nor shall shepherds rest there.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> But wild beasts shall rest there, and
their houses shall be filled with serpents, and ostriches shall dwell
there, and the hairy ones shall dance there:

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And owls shall answer one another
there, in the houses thereof, and sirens in the temples of pleasure.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> HER time is near at hand, and her days
shall not be prolonged. For the Lord will have mercy on Jacob, and will
yet choose out of Israel, and will make them rest upon their own ground:
and the stranger shall be joined with them, and shall adhere to the
house of Jacob.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And the people shall take them, and bring
them into their place: and the house of Israel shall possess them in the
land of the Lord for servants and handmaids: and they shall make them
captives that had taken them, and shall subdue their oppressors.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that when God shall give thee rest from thy labour, and from thy
vexation, and from the hard bondage, wherewith thou didst serve before,

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Thou shalt take up this parable against
the king of Babylon, and shalt say: How is the oppressor come to
nothing, the tribute hath ceased?

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The Lord hath broken the staff of the
wicked, the rod of the rulers,

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> That struck the people in wrath with an
incurable wound, that brought nations under in fury, that persecuted in
a cruel manner.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> The whole earth is quiet and still, it is
glad and hath rejoiced.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The fir trees also have rejoiced over
thee, and the cedars of Libanus, saying: Since thou hast slept, there
hath none come up to cut us down.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> Hell below was in an uproar to meet thee
at thy coming, it stirred up the giants for thee. All the princes of the
earth are risen up from their thrones, all the princes of nations.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> All shall answer, and say to thee: Thou
also art wounded as well as we, thou art become like unto us.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> 11Thy pride is brought down to hell,
thy carcass is fallen down: under thee shall the moth be strewed, and
worms shall be thy covering.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> How art thou fallen from heaven, O
Lucifer, who didst rise in the morning? how art thou fallen to the
earth, that didst wound the nations?

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And thou saidst in thy heart: I will
ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, I
will sit in the mountain of the covenant, in the sides of the north.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I will ascend above the height of the
clouds, I will be like the most High.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> But yet thou shalt be brought down to
hell, into the depth of the pit.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> They that shall see thee, shall turn
toward thee, and behold thee. Is this the man that troubled the earth,
that shook kingdoms,

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> That made the world a wilderness, and
destroyed the cities thereof, that opened not the prison to his
prisoners?

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> All the kings of the nations have all
of them slept in glory, every one in his own house.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> But thou art cast out of thy grave, as
an unprofitable branch defiled, and wrapped up among them that were
slain by the sword, and art gone down to the bottom of the pit, as a
rotten carcass.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Thou shalt not keep company with them,
even in burial: for thou hast destroyed thy land, thou hast slain thy
people: the seed of the wicked shall not be named for ever.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Prepare his children for slaughter for
the iniquity of their fathers: they shall not rise up, nor inherit the
land, nor fill the face of the world with cities.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And I will rise up against them, saith
the Lord of hosts: and I will destroy the name of Babylon, and the
remains, and the bud, and the offspring, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And I will make it a possession for the
ericius and pools of waters, and I will sweep it and wear it out with a
besom, saith the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The Lord of hosts hath sworn, saying:
Surely as I have thought, so shall it be: and as I have purposed,

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> So shall it fall out: That I will
destroy the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains tread him under
foot: and his yoke shall be taken away from them, and his burden shall
be taken off their shoulder.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> This is the counsel, that I have
purposed upon all the earth, and this is the hand that is stretched out
upon all nations.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> For the Lord of hosts hath decreed, and
who can disannul it? and his hand is stretched out: and who shall turn
it away?

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the year that king Achaz died, was
this burden:

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> Rejoice not thou, whole Philistia, that
the rod of him that struck thee is broken in pieces: for out of the root
of the serpent shall come forth a basilisk, and his seed shall swallow
the bird.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> And the firstborn of the poor shall be
fed, and the poor shall rest with confidence: and I will make thy root
perish with famine, and I will kill thy remnant.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> Howl, O gate; cry, O city: all
Philistia is thrown down: for a smoke shall come from the north, and
there is none that shall escape his troop.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And what shall be answered to the
messengers of the nations? That the Lord hath founded Sion, and the poor
of his people shall hope in him.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> THE burden of Moab. Because in the night
Ar of Moab is laid waste, it is silent: because the wall of Moab is
destroyed in the night, it is silent.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The house is gone up, and Dibon to the
high places to mourn over Nabo, and over Medaba, Moab hath howled: on
all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard shall be shaven.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> In their streets they are girded with
sackcloth: on the tops of their houses, and in their streets all shall
howl and come down weeping.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Hesebon shall cry, and Eleale, their
voice is heard even to Jasa. For this shall the well appointed men of
Moab howl, his soul shall howl to itself.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> My heart shall cry to Moab, the bars
thereof shall flee unto Segor a heifer of three years old: for by the
ascent of Luith they shall go up weeping: and in the way of Oronaim they
shall lift up a cry of destruction.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> For the waters of Nemrim shall be
desolate, for the grass is withered away, the spring is faded, all the
greenness is perished.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> According to the greatness of their work,
is their visitation also: they shall lead them to the torrent of the
willows.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For the cry is gone round about the
border of Moab: the howling thereof unto Gallim, and unto the well of
Elim the cry thereof.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> For the waters of Dibon are filled with
blood: for I will bring more upon Dibon: the lion upon them that shall
flee of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> SEND forth, O Lord, the lamb, the ruler
of the earth, from Petra of the desert, to the mount of the daughter of
Sion.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And it shall come to pass, that as a bird
fleeing away, and as young ones flying out of the nest, so shall the
daughters of Moab be in the passage of Arnon.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Take counsel, gather a council: make thy
shadow as the night in the midday: hide them that flee, and betray not
them that wander about.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> My fugitives shall dwell with thee: O
Moab, be thou a covert to them from the face of the destroyer: for the
dust is at an end, the wretch is consumed: he hath failed, that trod the
earth under foot.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And a throne shall be prepared in mercy,
and one shall sit upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging
and seeking judgment and quickly rendering that which is just.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> We have heard of the pride of Moab, he is
exceeding proud: his pride and his arrogancy, and his indignation is
more than his strength.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Therefore shall Moab howl to Moab, every
one shall howl: to them that rejoice upon the brick walls, tell ye their
stripes.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> For the suburbs of Hesebon are desolate,
and the lords of the nations have destroyed the vineyard of Sabama: the
branches thereof have reached even to Jazer: they have wandered in the
wilderness, the branches thereof are left, they are gone over the sea.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Therefore I will lament with the weeping
of Jazer the vineyard of Sabama: I will water thee with my tears, O
Hesebon, and Eleale: for the voice of the treaders hath rushed in upon
thy vintage, and upon thy harvest.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And gladness and joy shall be taken
away from Carmel, and there shall be no rejoicing nor shouting in the
vineyards. He shall not tread out wine in the press that was wont to
tread it out: the voice of the treaders I have taken away.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Wherefore my bowels shall sound like a
harp for Moab, and my inward parts for the brick wall.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> And it shall come to pass, when it is
seen that Moab is wearied on his high places, that he shall go in to his
sanctuaries to pray, and shall not prevail.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> This is the word, that the Lord spoke
to Moab from that time:

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And now the Lord hath spoken, saying:
In three years, as the years of a hireling, the glory of Moab shall be
taken away for all the multitude of the people, and it shall be left
small and feeble, not many.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> THE burden of Damascus. Behold Damascus
shall cease to be a city, and shall be as a ruinous heap of stones.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> The cities of Aroer shall be left for
flocks, and they shall rest there, and there shall be none to make them
afraid.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And aid shall cease from Ephraim, and the
kingdom from Damascus: and the remnant of Syria shall be as the glory of
the children of Israel: saith the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh
shall grow lean.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And it shall be as when one gathereth in
the harvest that which remaineth, and his arm shall gather the ears of
corn: and it shall be as he that seeketh ears in the vale of Raphaim.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the fruit thereof that shall be left
upon it, shall be as one cluster of grapes, and as the shaking of the
olive tree, two or three berries in the top of a bough, or four or five
upon the top of the tree, saith the Lord the God of Israel.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> In that day man shall bow down himself to
his Maker, and his eyes shall look to the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And he shall not look to the altars which
his hands made: and he shall not have respect to the things that his
fingers wrought, such as groves and temples.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> In that day his strong cities shall be
forsaken, as the ploughs, and the corn that were left before the face of
the children of Israel, and thou shalt be desolate.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Because thou hast forgotten God thy
saviour, and hast not remembered thy strong helper: therefore shalt thou
plant good plants, and shalt sow strange seed.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> In the day of thy planting shall be the
wild grape, and in the morning thy seed shall flourish: the harvest is
taken away in the day of inheritance, and shall grieve thee much.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Woe to the multitude of many people,
like the multitude of the roaring sea: and the tumult of crowds, like
the noise of many waters.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Nations shall make a noise like the
noise of waters overflowing, but he shall rebuke him, and he shall flee
far off: and he shall be carried away as the dust of the mountains
before the wind, and as a whirlwind before a tempest.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> In the time of the evening, behold
there shall be trouble: the morning shall come, and he shall not be:
this is the portion of them that have wasted us, and the lot of them
that spoiled us.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> WOE to the land, the winged cymbal, which
is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia,

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, and
in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters. Go, ye swift angels, to a
nation rent and torn in pieces: to a terrible people, after which there
is no other: to a nation expecting and trodden under foot, whose land
the rivers have spoiled.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> All ye inhabitants of the world, who
dwell on the earth, when the sign shall be lifted up on the mountains,
you shall see, and you shall hear the sound of the trumpet.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> For thus saith the Lord to me: I will
take my rest, and consider in my place, as the noon light is clear, and
as a cloud of dew in the day of harvest.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> For before the harvest it was all
flourishing, and it shall bud without perfect ripeness, and the sprigs
thereof shall be cut off with pruning hooks: and what is left shall be
cut away and shaken out.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> And they shall be left together to the
birds of the mountains, and the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall
be upon them all the summer, and all the beasts of the earth shall
winter upon them.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> At that time shall a present be brought
to the Lord of hosts, from a people rent and torn in pieces: from a
terrible people, after which there hath been no other: from a nation
expecting, expecting and trodden under foot, whose land the rivers have
spoiled, to the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, to mount Sion.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> THE burden of Egypt. Behold the Lord will
ascend upon a swift cloud, and will enter into Egypt, and the idols of
Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt
in the midst thereof.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And I will set the Egyptians to fight
against the Egyptians: and they shall fight brother against brother, and
friend against friend, city against city, kingdom against kingdom.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And the spirit of Egypt shall be broken
in the bowels thereof, and I will cast down their counsel: and they
shall consult their idols, and their diviners, and their wizards, and
soothsayers.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And I will deliver Egypt into the hand of
cruel masters, and a strong king shall rule over them, saith the Lord
the God of hosts.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And the water of the sea shall be dried
up, and the river shall be wasted and dry.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And the rivers shall fail: the streams of
the banks shall be diminished, and be dried up. The reed and the bulrush
shall wither away.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The channel of the river shall be laid
bare from its fountain, and every thing sown by the water shall be dried
up, it shall wither away, and shall be no more.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> The fishers also shall mourn, and all
that cast a hook into the river shall lament, and they that spread nets
upon the waters shall languish away.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> They shall be confounded that wrought in
flax, combing and weaving fine linen.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And its watery places shall be dry, all
they shall mourn that made pools to take fishes.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> The princes of Tanis are become fools,
the wise counsellors of Pharao have given foolish counsel: how will you
say to Pharao: I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> Where are now thy wise men? let them
tell thee, and shew what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> The princes of Tanis are become fools,
the princes of Memphis are gone astray, they have deceived Egypt, the
stay of the people thereof.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> The Lord hath mingled in the midst
thereof the spirit of giddiness: and they have caused Egypt to err in
all its works, as a drunken man staggereth and vomiteth.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And there shall be no work for Egypt,
to make head or tail, him that bendeth down, or that holdeth back.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> In that day Egypt shall be like unto
women, and they shall be amazed, and afraid, because of the moving of
the hand of the Lord of hosts, which he shall move over it.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And the land of Juda shall be a terror
to Egypt: every one that shall remember it shall tremble because of the
counsel of the Lord of hosts, which he hath determined concerning it.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> In that day there shall be five cities
in the land of Egypt, speaking the language of Chanaan, and swearing by
the Lord of hosts: one shall be called the city of the sun.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> In that day there shall be an altar of
the Lord in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a monument of the Lord
at the borders thereof:

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> It shall be for a sign, and for a
testimony to the Lord of hosts in the land of Egypt. For they shall cry
to the Lord because of the oppressor, and he shall send them a Saviour
and a defender to deliver them.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And the Lord shall be known by Egypt,
and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall worship him
with sacrifices and offerings: and they shall make vows to the Lord, and
per- form them.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And the Lord shall strike Egypt with a
scourge, and shall heal it, and they shall return to the Lord, and he
shall be pacified towards them, and heal them.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> In that day there shall be a way from
Egypt to the Assyrians, and the Assyrian shall enter into Egypt, and the
Egyptian to the Assyrians, and the Egyptians shall serve the Assyrian.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> In that day shall Israel be the third
to the Egyptian and the Assyrian: a blessing in the midst of the land,

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> Which the Lord of hosts hath blessed,
saying: Blessed be my people of Egypt, and the work of my hands to the
Assyrian: but Israel is my inheritance.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> IN the year that Tharthan entered into
Azotus, when Sargon the king of the Assyrians had sent him, and he had
fought against Azotus, and had taken it:

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> At that same time the Lord spoke by the
hand of Isaias the son of Amos, saying: Go, and loose the sackcloth from
off thy loins, and take off thy shoes from thy feet. And he did so, and
went naked, and barefoot.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And the Lord said: As my servant Isaias
hath walked, naked and barefoot, it shall be a sign and a wonder of
three years upon Egypt, and upon Ethiopia,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> So shall the king of the Assyrians lead
away the prisoners of Egypt, and the captivity of Ethiopia, young and
old. naked and barefoot, with their buttocks uncovered to the shame of
Egypt.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And they shall be afraid, and ashamed of
Ethiopia their hope, and of Egypt their glory.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And the inhabitants of this isle shall
say in that day: Lo this was our hope, to whom we fled for help, to
deliver up from the face of the king of the Assyrians: and how shall we
be able to escape?

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> THE burden of the desert of the sea. As
whirlwinds come from the south, it cometh from the desert from a
terrible land.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> A grievous vision is told me: he that is
unfaithful dealeth unfaithfully : and he that is a spoiler, spoileth. Go
up, O Elam, besiege, O Mede: I have made all the mourning thereof to
cease.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Therefore are my loins filled with pain,
anguish hath taken hold of me, as the anguish of a woman in labour: I
fell down at the hearing of it, I was troubled at the seeing of it.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> My heart failed, darkness amazed me:
Babylon my beloved is become a wonder to me.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Prepare the table, behold in the
watchtower them that eat and drink: arise, ye princes, take up the
shield.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> For thus hath the Lord said to me: Go,
and set a watchman: and whatsoever he shall see, let him tell.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And he saw a chariot with two horsemen, a
rider upon an ass, and a rider upon a camel: and he beheld them
diligently with much heed.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And a lion cried out: I am upon the
watchtower of the Lord, standing continually by day: and I am upon my
ward, standing whole nights.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Behold this man cometh, the rider upon
the chariot with two horsemen, and he answered, and said: Babylon is
fallen, she is fallen, and all the graven gods thereof are broken unto
the ground.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> O my thrashing and the children of my
door, that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I
have declared unto you.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The burden of Duma calleth to me out of
Seir: Watchman, what of the eight? watchman, what of the night?

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The watchman said: The morning cometh,
also the night: if you seek, seek: return, come.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> The burden in Arabia. In the forest at
evening you shall sleep, in the paths of Dedanim.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Meeting the thirsty bring him water,
you that inhabit the land of the south, meet with bread him that fleeth.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> For they are fled from before the
swords, from the sword that hung over them, from the bent bow, from the
face of a grievous battle.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> For thus saith the Lord to me: Within a
year, according to the years of a hireling, all the glory of Cedar shall
be taken away.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And the residue of the number of strong
archers of the children of Cedar shall be diminished: for the Lord the
God of Israel hath spoken it.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> THE burden of the valley of vision. What
aileth thee also, that thou too art wholly gone up to the housetops?

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Full of clamour, a populous city, a
joyous city: thy slain are not slain by the sword, nor dead in battle.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> All the princes are fled together, and
are bound hard: all that were found, are bound together, they are fled
far off.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Therefore have I said: Depart from me, I
will weep bitterly: labour not to comfort me, for the devastation of the
daughter of my people.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> For it is a day of slaughter and of
treading down, and of weeping to the Lord the God of hosts in the valley
of vision, searching the wall, and magnificent upon the mountain.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And Elam took the quiver, the chariot of
the horseman, and the shield was taken down from the wall.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> And thy choice valleys shall be full of
chariots, and the horseman shall place themselves in the gate.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> And the covering of Juda shall be
discovered, and thou shalt see in that day the armoury of the house of
the forest.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> And you shall see the breaches of the
city of David, that they are many: and you have gathered together the
waters of the lower pool,

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And have numbered the houses of
Jerusalem, and broken down houses to fortify the wall.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And you made a ditch between the two
walls for the water of the old pool: and you have not looked up to the
maker thereof, nor regarded him even at a distance, that wrought it long
ago.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And the Lord, the God of hosts, in that
day shall call to weeping, and to mourning, to baldness, and to girding
with sackcloth:

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And behold joy and gladness, killing
calves, and slaying rams, eating flesh, and drinking wine: Let us eat
and drink; for to morrow we shall die.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And the voice of the Lord of hosts was
revealed in my ears: Surely this iniquity shall not be forgiven you till
you die, saith the Lord God of hosts.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Thus saith the Lord God of hosts: Go,
get thee in to him that dwelleth in the tabernacle, to Sobna who is over
the temple: and thou shalt say to him:

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> What dost thou here, or as if thou wert
somebody here? for thou hast hewed thee out a sepulchre here, thou hast
hewed out a monument carefully in a high place, a dwelling for thyself
in a rock.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Behold the Lord will cause thee to be
carried away, as a cock is carried away, and he will lift thee up as a
garment.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> He will crown thee with a crown of
tribulation, he will toss thee like a ball into a large and spacious
country: there shalt thou die, and there shall the chariot of thy glory
be, the shame of the house of thy Lord.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> And I will drive thee out From thy
station, and depose thee from thy ministry.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
that I will call my servant Eliacim the son of Helcias,

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And I will clothe him with thy robe,
and will strengthen him with thy girdle, and will give thy power into
his hand: and he shall be as a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and to the house of Juda.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And I will lay the key of the house of
David upon his shoulder: and he shall open, and none shall shut: and he
shall shut, and none shall open.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And I will fasten him as a peg in a
sure place, and he shall be for a throne of glory to the house of his
father.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And they shall hang upon him all the
glory of his father's house, divers kinds of vessels, every little
vessel, from the vessels of cups even to every instrument of music.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> In that day, saith the Lord of hosts,
shall the peg be removed, that was fastened in the sure place: and it
shall be broken and shall fall: and that which hung thereon, shall
perish, because the Lord hath spoken it.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> THE burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of the
sea, for the house is destroyed, from whence they were wont to come:
from the land of Cethim it is revealed to them.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Be silent, you that dwell in the island:
the merchants of Sidon passing over the sea, have filled thee.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> The seed of the Nile in many waters, the
harvest of the river is her revenue: and she is become the mart of the
nations.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Be thou ashamed, O Sidon: for the sea
speaketh, even the strength of the sea, saying: I have not been in
labour, nor have I brought forth, nor have I nourished up young men, nor
brought up virgins.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> When it shall be heard in Egypt, they
will be sorry when they shall hear of Tyre:

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Pass over the seas, howl, ye inhabitants
of the island.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Is not this your city, which gloried from
of old in her antiquity? her feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre,
that was formerly crowned, whose merchants were princes, and her traders
the nobles of the earth?

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> The Lord of hosts hath designed it, to
pull down the pride of all glory, and bring to disgrace all the glorious
ones of the earth.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Pass thy land as a river, O daughter of
the sea, thou hast a girdle no more.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> He stretched out his hand over the sea,
he troubled kingdoms: the Lord hath given a charge against Chanaan, to
destroy the strong ones thereof.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And he said: Thou shalt glory no more,
O virgin daughter of Sidon, who art oppressed: arise and sail over to
Cethim, there also thou shalt have no, rest.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Behold the land of the Chaldeans, there
was not such a people, the Assyrian founded it: they have led away the
strong ones thereof into captivity, they have destroyed the houses
thereof, they have brought it to ruin.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Howl, O ye ships of the sea, for your
strength is laid waste.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And it shall come to pass in that day
that thou, O Tyre, shalt be forgotten, seventy years, according to the
days of one king: but after seventy years, there shall be unto Tyre as
the song of a harlot.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Take a harp, go about the city, thou
harlot that hast been forgotten: sing well, sing many a song, that thou
mayst be remembered.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> And it shall come to pass after seventy
years, that the Lord will visit Tyre, and will bring her back again to
her traffic: and she shall commit fornication again with all the
kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And her merchandise and her hire shall
be sanctified to the Lord: they shall not be kept in store, nor laid up:
for her merchandise shall be for them that shall dwell before the Lord,
that they may eat unto fulness, and be clothed for a continuance.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> BEHOLD the Lord shall lay waste the
earth, and shall strip it, and shall afflict the face thereof, and
scatter abroad the inhabitants thereof.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And it shall be as with the people, so
with the priest: and as with the servant, so with his master: as with
the handmaid, so with her mistress: as with the buyer, so with the
seller: as with the lender, so with the borrower: as with him that
calleth for his money, so with him that oweth.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> With desolation shall the earth be laid
waste, and it shall be utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath spoken this
word.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> The earth mourned, and faded away, and is
weakened: the world faded away, the height of the people of the earth is
weakened.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And the earth is infected by the in-
habitants thereof: because they have transgressed the laws, they have
changed the ordinance, they have broken the everlasting covenant.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Therefore shall a curse devour the earth,
and the inhabitants thereof shall sin: and therefore they that dwell
therein shall be mad, and few men shall be left.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> The vintage hath mourned, the vine hath
languished away, all the merryhearted have sighed.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> The mirth of timbrels hath ceased, the
noise of them that rejoice is ended, the melody of the harp is silent.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They shall not drink wine with a song:
the drink shall be bitter to them that drink it.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> The city of vanity is broken down,
every house is shut up, no man cometh in.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> There shall be a crying for wine in the
streets: all mirth is forsaken: the joy of the earth is gone away.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Desolation is left in the city, and
calamity shall oppress the gates.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> For it shall be thus in the midst of
the earth, in the midst of the people, as if a few olives, that remain,
should be shaken out of the olive tree: or grapes, when the vintage is
ended.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> These shall lift up their voice, and
shall give praise: when the Lord shall be glorified, they shall make a
joyful noise from the sea.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Therefore glorify ye the Lord in
instruction: the name of the Lord God of Israel in the islands of the
sea.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> From the ends of the earth we have
heard praises, the glory of the just one. And I said: My secret to
myself, my secret to myself, woe is me: the prevaricators have
prevaricated, and with the prevarication of transgressors they have
prevaricated.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> Fear, and the pit, and the snare are
upon thee, O thou inhabitant of the earth.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And it shall come to pass, that he that
shall flee from the noise of the fear, shall fall into the pit: and he
that shall rid himself out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare: for
the flood-gates from on high are opened, and the foundations of the
earth shall be shaken.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> With breaking shall the earth be
broken, with crushing shall the earth be crushed, with trembling shall
the earth be moved.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> With shaking shall the earth be shaken
as a drunken man, and shall be removed as the tent of one night: and the
iniquity thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fell, and not rise
again.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And it shall come to pass, that in that
day the Lord shall visit upon the host of heaven on high, and upon the
kings of the earth, on the earth.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And they shall be gathered together as
in the gathering of one bundle into the pit, and they shall be shut up
there in prison: and after many days they shall be visited.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> fend the moon shall blush, and the sun
shall be ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion, and
in Jerusalem, and shall be glorified in the sight of his ancients.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> O LORD, thou art my God, I will exalt
thee, and give glory to thy name: for thou hast done wonderful things,
thy designs of old faithful, amen.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> For thou hast reduced the city to a heap,
the strong city to ruin, the house of strangers, to be no city, and to
be no more built up for ever.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Therefore shall a strong people praise
thee, the city of mighty nations shall fear thee.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Because thou hast been a strength to the
poor, a strength to the needy in his distress: a refuge from the
whirlwind, a shadow from the heat. For the blast of the mighty is like a
whirlwind beating against a wall.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Thou shalt bring down the tumult of
strangers, as heat in thirst: and as with heat under a burning cloud,
thou shalt make the branch of the mighty to wither away.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And the Lord of hosts shall make unto all
people in this mountain, a feast of fat things, a feast of wine, of fat
things full of marrow, of wine purified from the lees.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> And he shall destroy in this mountain the
face of the bond with which all pie were tied, and the web that he over
all nations.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> He shall cast death down headlong
forever: and the Lord God shall wipe away tears from every face, and the
reproach of his people he shall take away from off the whole earth: for
the Lord hath spoken it.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> And they shall say in that day: Lo, this
is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is the
Lord, we have patiently waited for him, we shall rejoice and be joyful
in his salvation.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> For the hand of the Lord shall rest in
this mountain: and Moab shall be trodden down under him, as straw is
broken in pieces with the wain.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> And he shall stretch forth his hands
under him, as he that swimmeth stretcheth forth his hands to swim: and
he shall bring down his glory with the dashing of his hands.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> And the bulwarks of thy high walls
shall fall, and be brought low, and shall be pulled down to the ground,
even to the dust.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> IN that day shall this canticle be sung
the land of Juda. Sion the city of our strength a saviour, a wall and a
bulwark shall be set therein.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Open ye the gates, and let the just
nation, that keepeth the truth, enter in.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> The old error is passed away: thou wilt
keep peace: peace, because we have hoped in thee.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> You have hoped in the Lord for evermore,
in the Lord God mighty for ever.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> For he shall bring down them that dwell
on high, the high city he shall lay low. He shall bring it down even to
the ground, he shall pull it down even to the dust.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> The foot shall tread it down, the feet of
the poor, the steps of the needy.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> The way of the just is right, the path of
the just is right to walk in.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And in the way of thy judgments, O Lord,
we have patiently waited for thee: thy name, and thy remembrance are the
desire of the soul.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> My soul hath desired thee in the night:
yea, and with my spirit within me in the morning early I will watch to
thee. When thou shalt do thy judgments on the earth, the inhabitants of
the world shall learn justice.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Let us have pity on the wicked, but he
will not learn justice: in the land of the saints he hath done wicked
things, and he shall not see the glory of the Lord.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> Lord, let thy hand be exalted, and let
them not see: let the envious people see, and be confounded: and let
fire devour thy enemies.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Lord, thou wilt give us peace: for thou
hast wrought all our works for us.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> O Lord our God, other lords besides
thee have had dominion over us, only in thee let us remember thy name.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Let not the dead live, let not the
giants rise again: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and
best destroyed all their memory.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> Thou hast been favourable to the
nation, O Lord, thou hast been favourable to the nation: art thou
glorified? thou hast removed all the ends of the earth far off.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> Lord, they have sought after thee in
distress, in the tribulation of murmuring thy instruction was with them.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> As a woman with child, when she draweth
near the time of her delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs:
so are we become in thy presence, O Lord.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> We have conceived, and been as it were
in labour, and have brought forth wind: we have not wrought salvation on
the earth, therefore the inhabitants of the earth have not fallen.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> Thy dead men shall live, my slain shall
rise again: awake, and give praise, ye that dwell in the dust: for thy
dew is the dew of the light: and the land of the giants thou shalt pull
down into ruin.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> Go, my people, enter into thy chambers,
shut thy doors upon thee, hide thyself a little for a moment, until the
indignation pass away.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> For behold the Lord will come out of
his place, to visit the iniquity of the inhabitant of the earth against
him: and the earth shall disclose her blood, and shall cover her slain
no more.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> IN that day the Lord with his hard, and
great, and strong sword shall visit leviathan the bar serpent, and
leviathan the crooked serpent, and shall slay the whale that is in the
see.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> In that day there shall be singing to the
vineyard of pure wine.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> I am the Lord that keep it, I will
suddenly give it drink: lest any hurt come to it, I keep it night and
day.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> There is no indignation in m: who shall
make me a thorn and a brier in battle: shall march against it, shall I
set it on fire together?

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Or rather shall it take hold of my
strength, shall it make peace with me, shall it make peace with me?

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> When they shall rush in unto Jacob,
Israel shall blossom and bud, and they shall fill the face of the world
with seed.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Hath he struck him according to the
stroke of him that struck him? or is he slain, as he killed them that
were slain by him?

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> In measure against measure, when it shall
be cast off, thou shalt judge it. He hath meditated with his severe
spirit in the day of heat.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Therefore upon this shall the iniquity of
the house of Jacob be forgiven: and this is all the fruit, that the sin
thereof should be taken away, when he shall have made all the stones of
the altar, as burnt stones broken in pieces, the groves and temples
shall not stand.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> For the strong city shall be desolate,
the beautiful city shall be forsaken, and shall be left as a wilderness
: there the calf shall feed, and there shall he lie down, and shall
consume its branches.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Its harvest shall be destroyed with
drought, women shall come and teach it: for it is not a wise people,
therefore he that made it, shall not have mercy on it: and he that
formed it, shall not spare it.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And it shall come to pass, that in that
day the Lord will strike from the channel of the river even to the
torrent of Egypt, and you shall be gathered together one by one, O ye
children of Israel.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> And it shall come to pass, that in that
day a noise shall be made with a great trumpet, and they that were lost,
shall come from the land of the Assyrians, and they that were outcasts
in the land of Egypt, and they shall adore the Lord in the holy mount in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> WOE to the crown of pride, to the
drunkards of Ephraim, and to the fading flower the glory of his joy, who
were on the head of the fat valley, staggering with wine.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Behold the Lord is mighty and strong, as
a storm of hail: a destroying whirlwind, as the violence of many waters
overflowing, and sent forth upon a spacious land.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> The crown of pride of the drunkards of
Ephraim shall be trodden under feet.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And the fading flower the glory of his
joy, who is on the head of the fat valley, shall be as a hasty fruit
before the ripeness of autumn: which when he that seeth it shall behold,
as soon as he taketh it in his hand, he will eat it up.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> In that day the Lord of hosts shall be a
crown of glory, and a garland of joy to the residue of his people:

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> And a spirit of judgment to him that
sitteth in judgment, and strength to them that return out of the battle
to the gate.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> But these also have been ignorant through
wine, and through drunkenness have erred: the priest and the prophet
have been ignorant through drunkenness, they are swallowed up with wine,
they have gone astray in drunkenness, they have not known him that
seeth, they have been ignorant of judgment.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> For all tables were full of vomit and
filth, so that there was no more place.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom
shall he make to understand the hearing? them that are weaned from the
milk, that are drawn away from the breasts.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> For command, command again; command,
command again; expect, expect again; expect, expect again: a little
there, a little there.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> For with the speech of lips, and with
another tongue he will speak to this people.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> To whom he said: This is my rest,
refresh the weary, and this is my refreshing: and they would not hear.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> And the word of the Lord shall be to
them: Command, command again; command, command again: expect, expect
again; expect, expect again: a little there, a little there: that they
may go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye
scornful men, who rule over my people that is in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> For you have said : We have entered
into a league with death, and we have made a covenant with hell. When
the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come upon us:
for we have placed our hope in lies, and by falsehood we are protected.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord God:
Behold I will lay a stone in the foundations of Sion, a tried stone, a
corner stone, a precious stone, founded in the foundation. He that
believeth, let him not hasten.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And I will set judgment in weight, and
justice in measure: and hail shall overturn the hope of falsehood: and
waters shall overflow its protection.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And Sour league with death shall be
abolished, and your covenant with hell shall not stand: when the
overflowing scourge shall pass, you shall be trodden down by it.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Whensoever it shall pass through, it
shall take you away: because in the morning early it shall pass through,
in the day and in the night, and vexation alone shall make you
understand what you hear.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> For the bed is straitened, so that one
must fall out, and a short covering can- not cover both.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> For the Lord shall stand up as in the
mountain of divisions: he shall be angry as in the valley which is in
Gabaon: that he may do his work, his strange work: that he may perform
his work, his work is strange to him.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> And now do not mock, lest your bonds be
tied strait. For I have heard of the Lord the God of hosts a consumption
and a cutting short upon all the earth.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> Give ear, and hear my voice, hearken,
and hear my speech.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> Shall the ploughman plough all the day
to sow, shall he open and harrow his ground?

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Will he not, when he hath made plain
the surface thereof, sow gith, and scatter cummin, and put wheat in
order, and barley, and millet, and vetches in their bounds?

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> For he will instruct him in judgment :
his God will teach him.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> For gith shall not be thrashed with
saws, neither shall the cart wheel turn about upon cummin: but gith
shall be beaten out with a rod, and cummin with a staff.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> But bread corn shall be broken small:
but the thrasher shall not thrash it for ever, neither shall the cart
wheel hurt it, nor break it with its teeth.

<span id="an_28:29">28:29</span> This also is come forth from the Lord
God of hosts, to make his counsel wonderful, and magnify justice.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> WOE to Ariel, to Ariel the city which
David took: year is added to year: the solemnities are at an end.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> And I will make a trench about Ariel, and
it shall be in sorrow and mourning, and it shall be to me as Ariel.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> And I will make a circle round about
thee, and will cast up a rampart against thee, and raise up bulwarks to
besiege thee.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> Thou shalt be brought down, thou shalt
speak out of the earth, and thy speech shall be heard out of the ground:
and thy voice shall be from the earth like that of the python, and out
of the ground thy speech shall mutter.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> And the multitude of them that fan thee,
shall be like small dust: and as ashes passing away, the multitude of
them that have prevailed against thee.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> And it shall be at an instant suddenly. A
visitation shall come from the Lord of hosts in thunder, and with
earthquake, and with a great noise of whirlwind and tempest, and with
the flame of devouring fire.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> And the multitude of all nations that
have fought against Ariel, shall be as the dream of a vision by night,
and all that have fought, and besieged and prevailed against it.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> And as he that is hungry dreameth, and
eateth, but when he is awake, his soul is empty: and as he that is
thirsty dreameth, and drinketh, and after he is awake, is yet faint with
thirst, and his soul is empty: so shall be the multitude of all the
Gentiles, that have fought against mount Sion.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> Be astonished, and wander, waver, and
stagger: be drunk, and not with wine: stagger, and not with drunkenness.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> For the Lord hath mingled for you the
spirit of a deep sleep, he will shut up your eyes, he will cover your
prophets and princes, that see visions.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> And the vision of all shall be unto you
as the words of a book that is sealed, which when they shall deliver to
one that is learned, they shall say: Read this: and he shall answer: I
cannot, for it is sealed.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> And the book shall be given to one that
knoweth no letters, and it shall be said to him: Read: and he shall
answer: I know no letters.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> And the Lord said: Forasmuch as this
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips glorify me,
but their heart is far from me, and they have feared me with the
commandment and doctrines of men:

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> Therefore behold I will proceed to
cause an admiration in this people, by a great and wonderful miracle:
for wisdom shall perish from their wise men, and the understanding of
their prudent men shall be hid.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> Woe to you that are deep of heart, to
hide your counsel from the Lord: and their works are in the dark, and
they say: Who seeth us, and who knoweth us?

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> This thought of yours is perverse: as
if the clay should think against the potter, and the work should say to
the maker thereof: Thou madest me not: or the thing framed should say to
him that fashioned it: Thou understandest not.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Is it not yet a very little while, and
Libanus shall be turned into charmel, and charmel shall be esteemed as a
forest?

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And in that day the deaf shall hear the
words of the book, and out of darkness and obscurity the eyes of the
blind shall see.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> And the meek shall increase their joy
in the Lord, and the poor men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> For he that did prevail hath failed,
the scorner is consumed, and they are all cut off that watched for
iniquity:

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> That made men sin by word, and
supplanted him that reproved them in the gate, and declined in vain from
the just.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord to the
house of Jacob, he that redeemed Abraham: Jacob shall not now be
confounded, neither shall his countenance now be ashamed:

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> But when he shall see his children, the
work of my hands in the midst of him sanctifying my name, and they shall
sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall glorify the God of Israel:

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> And they that erred in spirit, shall
know understanding, and they that murmured, shall learn the law.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> WOE to you, apostate children, saith the
Lord, that you would take counsel, and not of me: and would begin a web,
and not by my spirit, that you might add sin upon sill:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> Who walk to go down into Egypt, and have
not asked at my mouth, hoping for help in the strength of Pharao, and
trusting in the shadow of Egypt.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> And the- strength of Pharao shall be to
your confusion, and the confidence of the shadow of Egypt to your shame.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> For thy princes were in Tanis, and thy
messengers came even to Hanes.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> They were all confounded at a people that
could not profit them: they were no help, nor to any profit, but to
confusion and to reproach.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> The burden of the beasts of the south. In
a land of trouble and distress, from whence come the lioness, and the
lion, the viper and the flying basilisk, they carry their riches upon
the shoulders of beasts, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels
to a people that shall not be able to profit them.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> For Egypt shall help in vain, and to no
purpose: therefore have I cried concerning this: It is pride only, sit
still.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Now therefore go in and write for them
upon box, and note it diligently in a book, and it shall be in the
latter days for a testimony for ever.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> For it is a people that provoketh to
wrath, and lying children, children that will not hear the law of God.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Who say to the seers: See not: and to
them that behold: Behold not for us those things that are right: speak
unto us pleasant things, see errors for us.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> Take away from me the way, turn away
the path from me, let the Holy One of Israel cease from before us.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> Therefore thus saith the Holy One of
Israel: Because you have rejected this word, and have trusted in
oppression and tumult, and have leaned upon it:

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> Therefore shall this iniquity be to you
as a breach that falleth, and is found wanting in a high wall, for the
destruction thereof shall come on a sudden, when it is not looked for.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> And it shall be broken small, as the
potter's vessel is broken all to pieces with mighty breaking, and there
shall not a sherd be found of the pieces thereof, wherein a little fire
may be carried from the hearth, or a, little water be drawn out of the
pit.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> For thus saith the Lord God the Holy
One of Israel: If you return and be quiet, you shall be saved: in
silence and in hope shall your strength be. And you would not:

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> But have said: No, but we will flee to
horses: therefore shall you flee. And we will mount upon swift ones:
therefore shall they be swifter that shall pursue after you.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> A thousand men shall flee for fear of
one: and for fear of five shall you flee, till you be left as the mast
of a ship on the top of a mountain, and as an ensign upon a hill.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Therefore the Lord waiteth that be may
have mercy on you: and therefore shall he be exalted sparing you:
because the Lord is the God of judgment: blessed are all they that wait
for him.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> For the people of Sion shall dwell in
Jerusalem: weeping thou shalt not weep, he will surely have pity on
thee: at the voice of thy cry, se soon as he shell hear, he will answer
thee.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> And the Lord will give you spare bread,
and short water: and will not cause thy teacher to flee away from thee
any more, and thy eyes shall see thy teacher.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> And thy ears shall hear the word of one
admonishing thee behind thy back: This is the way, walk ye in it: and go
not aside neither to the right hand, nor to the left.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> And thou shalt defile the plates of thy
graven things of silver, and the garment of thy molten things of gold,
and shalt cast them away as the uncleanness of a menstruous woman. Thou
shalt say to it: Get thee hence.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> And rain shall be given to thy seed,
wheresoever thou shalt sow in the land: and the bread of the corn of the
land shall be most plentiful, and fat. The lamb in that day shall feed
at large in thy possession:

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> And thy oxen, and the ass colts that
till the ground, shall eat mingled pro vender as it was winnowed in the
floor.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> And there shall be upon every high
mountain, and upon every elevated hill rivers of running waters in the
day of the slaughter of many, when the tower shall fall.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> And the light of the moon shall be se
the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as
the light of seven days: in the day when the Lord shall bind up the
wound of his people, and shall heal the stroke of their wound.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> Behold the name of the Lord cometh from
afar, his wrath burneth, and is heavy to bear: his lips are filled with
indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> His breath as a torrent overflowing
even to the midst of the neck, to destroy the nations unto nothing, and
the bridle of error that was in the jaws of the people.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> You shall have a song as in the night
of the sanctified solemnity, and joy of heart, as when one goeth with a
pipe, to come into the mountain of the Lord, to the Mighty One of
Israel.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> And the Lord shall make the glory of
his voice to be heard, and shall shew the terror of his arm, in the
threatening of wrath, and the dame of devouring fire: he shall crush to
pieces with whirlwind, and hailstones.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> For at the voice of the Lord the
Assyrian shall fear being struck with the rod.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> And the passage of the rod shall be
strongly grounded, which the Lord shall make to rest upon him with
timbrels and harps, and in great battles he shall over throw them.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> For Topheth is prepared from yesterday,
prepared by the king, deep, and wide. The nourishment thereof is fire
and much wood: the breath of the Lord as a torrent of brimstone kindling
it.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> WOE to them that go down to Egypt for
help, trusting in horses, and putting their confidence in chariots,
because they me many: and in horsemen, because they me very strong: and
have not trusted in the Holy One of Israel, and have not sought after
the Lord.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> But he that is the wise one hath brought
evil, and hath not removed his words: and he will rise up against the
house of the wicked, and against the aid of them that work iniquity.

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Egypt is man, and not God: and their
horses, flesh, and not spirit: and the Lord shall put down his hand, and
the helper shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall, and they shall
al be confounded together.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> For thus saith the Lord to me: Like as
the lion roareth, and the lion's whelp upon his prey, and when a
multitude of shepherds shall come against him, he will not fear at their
voice, nor be afraid of their multitude: so shall the Lord of hosts come
down to fight upon mount Sion, and upon the hill thereof.

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> As birds dying, so will the Lord of hosts
protect Jerusalem, protecting and delivering, passing over and saving.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Return as you had deeply revolted, O
children of Israel.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> For in that day a man shall cast away his
idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your hands have made for
you to sin.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> And the Assyrian shall fall by the sword
not of a man, and the sword not of a man shall devour him, and he shall
flee not at the face of the sword: and his young men shall be
tributaries.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> And his strength shall pass away with
dread, and his princes fleeing shall be afraid: the Lord hath said it,
whose die is in Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> BEHOLD a king shall reign in justice, and
princes shell rule in judgment.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And a man shall be as when one is hid
from the wind, and hideth himself from a storm, as rivers of waters in
drought, and the shadow of a rock that standeth out in a desert land.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> The eyes of them that see shall not be
dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken diligently.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> And the heart of fools shall understand
knowledge, and the tongue of stammerers shall speak readily and plain.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> The fool shall no more be called prince:
neither shall the deceitful be called great:

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> For the fool will speak foolish things,
and his heart will work iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and speak to
the Lord deceitfully, and to make empty the soul of the hungry, and take
away drink from the thirsty.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> The vessels of the deceitful are most
wicked: for he hath framed devices to destroy the meek, with lying
words, when the poor man speaketh judgment.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But the prince will devise such things as
are worthy of a prince, and he shah stand above the rulers.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> Rise up, ye rich women, and hear my
voice: ye confident daughters, give ear to my speech.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> For after days and a year, you that are
confident shall be troubled: for the vintage is at an end, the gathering
shall come no more.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> Be astonished, ye rich women, be
troubled, ye confident ones: strip yen, and be confounded, gird your
loins.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> Mourn for your breasts, for the
delightful country, for the fruitful vineyard.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Upon the land of my people shall thorns
and briers come up: how much more upon all the houses of joy, of the
city that rejoiced?

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> For the house is forsaken, the
multitude of the city is left, darkness and obscurity are come upon its
dens for ever. A joy of wild asses, the pastures of docks,

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> Until the spirit be poured upon us from
on high: and the desert shall be se a charmel, and charmel shall be
counted for a forest.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> And judgment shall dwell in the
wilderness, and justice shall sit in charmel.

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> And the work of justice shall be peace,
and the service of justice quietness, and security for ever.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> And my people shall sit in the beauty
of peace, and in the tabernacles of confidence, and in wealthy rest.

<span id="an_32:19">32:19</span> But hail shall be in the descent of the
forest, and the city shall be made very low.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> Blessed are ye that sow upon all
waters, sending thither the foot of the ox and the ass.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> WOE to thee that spoilest, shalt not thou
thyself also be spoiled? and thou that despisest, shalt not thyself also
be despised? when thou shalt have made an end of spoiling, thou shalt be
spoiled: when being wearied thou shalt cease to despise, thou shalt be
despised.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> O Lord, have mercy on us: for we have
waited for thee: be thou our arm in the morning, and our salvation in
the time of trouble.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> At the voice of the angel the people
fled, and at the lifting up thyself the nations are scattered.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> And your spoils shall be gathered
together as the locusts are gathered, as when the ditches are full of
them.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> The Lord is magnified, for he hath dwelt
on high: he hath filled Sion with judgment and justice.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> And there shall be faith in thy times:
riches of salvation, wisdom and knowledge: the fear of the Lord is his
treasure.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> Behold they that see shall cry without,
the angels of peace shall weep bitterly.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> The ways are made desolate, no one
passeth by the road, the covenant is made void, he hath rejected the
cities, he hath not regarded the men.

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> The land hath mourned, and languished:
Libanus is confounded and become foul, and Saron is become as a desert:
and Basan and Carmel are shaken.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Now will I rise up, saith the Lord: now
will I be exalted, now will I lift up myself.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> You shall conceive heat, you shall
bring forth stubble: your breath as fire shall devour you.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> And the people shall be as ashes after
a fire, as a bundle of thorns they shall be burnt with fire.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Hear, you that are far off, what I have
done, and you that are near know my strength.

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> The sinners in Sion are afraid,
trembling hath seized upon the hypocrites. Which of you can dwell with
devouring fire? which of you shall dwell with everlasting burnings?

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> He that walketh in justices, and
speaketh truth, that casteth away avarice by oppression, and shaketh his
hands from all bribes, that stoppeth his ears lest he hear blood, and
shutteth his eyes that he may see no evil.

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> He shall dwell on high, the
fortifications of rocks shall be his highness: bread is given him, his
waters are sure.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> His eyes shall see the king in his
beauty, they shall see the land far off.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Thy heart shall meditate fear: where is
the learned? where is he that pondereth the words of the law? where is
the teacher of little ones?

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> The shameless people thou shalt not
see, the people of profound speech: so that thou canst not understand
the eloquence of his tongue, in whom there is no wisdom.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Look upon Sion the city of our
solemnity: thy eyes shall see Jerusalem, a rich habitation, a tabernacle
that cannot be removed: neither shall the nails thereof be taken away
for ever, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken:

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> Because only there our Lord is
magnificent: it place of rivers, very broad and spacious streams: no
ship with oars shall pass by it, neither shall the great galley pass
through it.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is
our lawgiver, the Lord is our king: he will save us.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> Thy tacklings are loosed, and they
shall be of no strength: thy mast shall be in such condition, that thou
shalt not be able to spread the flag. Then shall the spoils of much prey
be divided: the lame shall take the spoil.

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> Neither shall he that is near, say: I
am feeble. The people that dwell therein, shall have their iniquity
taken away from them.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> COME near, ye Gentiles, and hear, and
hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is therein, the
world, and every thing that cometh forth of it.

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> For the indignation of the Lord if upon
all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath killed them,
and delivered them to slaughter.

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> Their slain shall be cast forth, and out
of their carcasses shall rise a slink: the mountains shall be melted
with their blood.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> And all the host of the heavens shall
pine away, and the heavens shall be folded together as a book: and all
their host shall fall down as the leaf falleth from the vine, and from
the fig tree.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For my sword is inebriated in heaven:
behold it shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my
slaughter unto judgment.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> The sword of the Lord is filled with
blood, it is made thick with the blood of lambs and buck goats, with the
blood of rams full of marrow: for there is a victim of the Lord in Bosra
and a great slaughter in the land of Edom.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> And the unicorns shall go down with them,
and the bulls with the mighty: their land shall be soaked with blood,
and their ground with the fat of fat ones.

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> For it is the day of the vengeance of the
Lord, the year of recompenses of the judgment of Sion.

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> And the streams thereof shall be turned
into pitch, and the ground thereof into brimstone: and the land thereof
shall become burning pitch.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Night and day it shall not be quenched,
the smoke thereof shall go up for ever: from generation to generation it
shall lie waste, none shall pass through it for ever and ever.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> The bittern and ericius shall possess
it: and the ibis and the raven shall dwell in it: and a line shall be
stretched out upon it, to bring it to nothing, and a plummet, unto
desolation.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> The nobles thereof shall not be there:
they shall call rather upon the king, and all the princes thereof shall
be nothing.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> And thorns and nettles shall grow up in
its houses, and the thistle in the fortresses thereof: and it shall be
the habitation of dragons, and the pasture of ostriches.

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> And demons and monsters shall meet, and
the hairy ones shall cry out one to another, there hath the lamia lain
down, and found rest for herself.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> There hath the ericius had its hole,
and brought up its young ones, and hath dug round about, and cherished
them in the shadow thereof: thither are the kites gathered together one
to another.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> Search ye diligently in the book of the
Lord, and read: not one of them was wanting, one hath not sought for the
other: for that which proceedeth out of my mouth, he hath commanded, and
his spirit it hath gathered them.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> And he hath cast the lot for them, and
his hand hath divided it to them by line: they shall possess it for
ever, from generation to generation they shall dwell therein.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> THE land that was desolate and impassable
shall be glad, and the wilderness shall rejoice, and shall flourish like
the lily.

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> It shall bud forth and blossom, and shall
rejoice with joy and praise: the glory of Libanus is given to it: the
beauty of Carmel, and Saron, they shall see the glory of the Lord, and
the beauty of our God.

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> Strengthen ye the feeble hands, and
confirm the weak knees.

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Say to the fainthearted: Take courage,
and fear not: behold your God will bring the revenge of recompense: God
himself will come and will save you.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> Then shall the lame man leap as a hart,
and the tongue of the dumb shall be free: for waters are broken out in
the desert, and streams in the wilderness.

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And that which was dry land, shall become
a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water. In the dens where dragons
dwell before, shall rise up the verdure of the reed and the bulrush.

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> And a path and a way shall be there, and
it shall be called the holy way: the unclean shall not pass over it, and
this shall be unto you a straight way, so that fools shall not err
therein.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> No lion shall be there, nor shall any
mischievous beast go up by it, nor be found there: but they shall walk
there that shall be delivered.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And the redeemed of the Lord shall
return, and shall come into Sion with praise, and everlasting joy shall
be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and
mourning shall flee away.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> AND it came to pass in the fourteenth
year of king Ezechias, that Sennacherib king of the Assyrians came up
against all the fenced cities of Juda, and took them.

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> And the king of the Assyrians sent
Rabsaces from Lachis to Jerusalem, to king Ezechias with a great army,
and he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the way of the fuller's
held.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> And there went out to him Eliacim the son
of Helcias, who was over the house, and Sobna the scribe, and Joahe the
son of Asaph the recorder.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> And Rabsaces said to them: Tell Ezechias:
Thus saith the great king, the king of the Assyrians: What is this
confidence wherein thou trustest?

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> Or with what counsel or strength dost
thou prepare for war? on whom dost thou trust, that thou art revolted
from me?

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> Lo thou trustest upon this broken staff
of a reed, upon Egypt: upon which if a man lean, it will go into his
hand, and pierce it: so is Pharao king or Egypt to all that trust in
him.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> But if thou wilt answer me: We trust in
the Lord our God: is it not he whose high places and altars Ezechias
hath taken away, and hath said to Juda and Jerusalem: You shall worship
before this altar?

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And now deliver thyself up to my lord the
king of the Assyrians, and I will give thee two thousand horses, and
thou wilt not be able on thy part to find riders for them.

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> And how wilt thou stand against the face
of the judge of one place, of the least of my master's servants? But if
thou trust in Egypt, in chariots and in horsemen:

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> And am I now come up without the Lord
against this land to destroy it? The Lord said to me: Go up against this
land, and destroy it.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> And Eliacim, and Sobna, and Joahe said
to Rabsaces: Speak to thy servants in the Syrian tongue: for we
understand it: speak not to us in the Jews' language in the hearing of
the people, that are upon the wall.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> And Rabsaces said to them: Hath my
master sent me to thy master and to thee, to speak all these words; and
not rather to the men that sit on the wall; that they may eat their own
dung, and drink their urine with you?

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Then Rabsaces stood, and cried out with
a loud voice in the Jews' language, and said: Hear the words of the
great king, the king of the Assyrians.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Thus saith the king: Let not Ezechias
deceive you, for he shall not be able to deliver you.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> And let not Ezechias make you trust in
the Lord, saying: The Lord will surely deliver us, and this city shall
not be given into the hands of the king of the Assyrians.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Do not hearken to Ezechias: for thus
said the king of the Assyrians: Do with me that which is for your
advantage, and come out to me, and eat ye every one of his vine, and
every one of his dg tree, and drink ye every one the water of his
cistern,

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Till I come and take you away to a
land, like to your own, a land of corn and of wine, a land of bread and
vineyards.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Neither let Ezechias trouble you,
saying: The Lord will deliver us. Have any of the gods of the nations
delivered their land out of the hand of the king of the Assyrians?

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Where is the god of Emath and of
Arphad? where is the god of Sepharvaim? have they delivered Samaria out
of my hand?

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Who is there among all the gods of
these lands, that hath delivered his country out of my hand, that the
Lord may deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> And they held their peace, and answered
him not a word. For the king had commanded, saying: answer him not.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> And Eliacim the son of Helcias, that
was over the house, and Sobna the scribe, and Joahe the son of Asaph the
recorder, went in to Ezechias with their garments rent, and told him the
words of Rabsaces.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> AND it came to pass, when king Ezechias
had heard it, that he rent his garments and covered himself with
sackcloth, and went into the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> And he sent Eliacim who was over the
house, and Sobna the scribe, and the ancients of the priests covered
with sackcloth, to Isaias the son of Amos the prophet.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> And they said to him: Thus saith
Ezechias: This day is a day of tribulation, and of rebuke, and of
blasphemy: for the children are come to the birth, and there is not
strength to bring forth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> It may be the Lord thy God will hear the
words of Rabsaces, whom the king of the Assyrians his master hath sent
to blaspheme the living God, and to reproach with words which the Lord
thy God hath heard: wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is
left.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> And the servants of Ezechias came to
Isaias.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> And Isaias said to them: Thus shall you
say to your master: Thus saith the Lord: Be not afraid of the words that
thou hast heard, with which the servants of the king of the Assyrians
have blasphemed me.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> Behold, I will send a spirit upon him,
and he shall hear a message, and shall return to his own country, and I
will cause him to fall by the sword in his own country.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> And Rabsaces returned, end found the king
of the Assyrians besieging Lobna. W For he had heard that he was
departed from Lachis.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> And he heard say about Tharaca the king
of Ethiopia: He is come forth to fight against thee. And when he heard
it, he sent messengers to Ezechias, saying:

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> Thus shall you speak to Ezechias the
king of Juda, saying: Let not thy God deceive thee, in whom thou
trustest, saying: Jerusalem shall not be given into the hands of the
king of the Assyrians.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Behold thou hast heard all that the
kings of the Assyrians hare done to all countries which they have
destroyed, and canst thou be delivered?

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Have the gods of the nations delivered
them whom my fathers have destroyed, Gozam, and Haram, and Reseph, and
the children of Eden, that were in Thalassar?

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Where is the king of Emath, and the
king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Ana, and of
Ava?

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> And Ezechias took the letter from the
hand of the messengers, and read it, and went up to the house of the
Lord, and Ezechias spread it before the Lord.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> And Ezechias prayed to the Lord,
saying:

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, who
sittest upon the cherubims, thou alone art the God of all the kingdoms
of the earth, thou hast made heaven and earth.

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Incline, O Lord, thy ear, and hear:
open, O Lord, thy eyes, and see, and hear all the words of Sennacherib,
which he hath sent to blaspheme the living God.

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> For of a truth, O Lord, the kings of
the Assyrians have laid waste lands, and their countries.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> And they have cast their gods into the
fire, for they were not gods, but the works of men's hands, of wood and
stone: and they broke them in pieces.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> And now, O Lord our God, save us out of
his hand: and let all the kingdoms of the earth know, that thou only art
the Lord.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> And Isaias the son of Amos sent to
Ezechias, saying: Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel: For the prayer
thou hast made to me concerning Sennacherib the king of the Assyrians:

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> This is the word which the Lord hath
spoken of him: The virgin the daughter of Sion hath despised thee, and
laughed thee to scorn: the daughter of Jerusalem hath wagged the head
after thee.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> Whom hast thou reproached, and whom
hast thou blasphemed, and against whom hast thou exalted thy voice, and
lifted up thy eyes on high? Against the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> By the hand of thy servants thou hast
reproached the Lord: and hast said: With the multitude of my chariots I
have gone up to the height of the mountains, to the top of Libanus: and
I will out down its tall cedars, and its choice fir trees, end will
enter to the top of its height, to the forest of its Carmel.

<span id="an_37:25">37:25</span> I have digged, and drunk water, and
have dried up with the sole of my foot, all the rivers shut up in banks.

<span id="an_37:26">37:26</span> Hast thou not heard what I have done to
him of old? from the days of old I have formed it: and now I have
brought it to effect: and it hath come to pass that hills fighting
together, and fenced cities should be destroyed.

<span id="an_37:27">37:27</span> The inhabitants of them were weak of
hand, they trembled, and were confounded: they became like the grass of
the field, and the herb of the pasture, and like the grass of the
housetops, which withered before it was ripe.

<span id="an_37:28">37:28</span> I know thy dwelling, and thy going out,
and thy coming in, and thy rage against me.

<span id="an_37:29">37:29</span> When thou wast mad against me, thy
pride came up to my ears: therefore I will put a ring in thy nose, and a
bit between thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou
camest.

<span id="an_37:30">37:30</span> But to thee this shall be a sign: Eat
this year the things that spring of themselves, and in the second year
eat fruits: but in the third year sow and reap, and giant vineyards, and
eat the fruit of them.

<span id="an_37:31">37:31</span> And that which shall be saved of the
house of Juda, and which is left, shall take root downward, and shall
bear fruit upward :

<span id="an_37:32">37:32</span> For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a,
remnant, and salvation from mount Sion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts
shall do this.

<span id="an_37:33">37:33</span> Wherefore thus saith the Lord
concerning the king of the Assyrians: He shall not come into this city,
nor shoot an arrow into it, nor come before it with shield, nor cast a
trench about it.

<span id="an_37:34">37:34</span> By the way that he came, he shall
return, and into this city he shall not come, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_37:35">37:35</span> And I will protect this city, and will
save it for my own sake, and for the sake of David my servant.

<span id="an_37:36">37:36</span> And the angel of the Lord went out, and
slew in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand.
And they arose in the morning, and behold they were all dead corpses.

<span id="an_37:37">37:37</span> And Sennacherib the king of the
Assyrians went out and departed, and returned, and dwelt in Ninive.

<span id="an_37:38">37:38</span> And it came to pass, as he was
worshipping in the temple of Nesroch his god, that Adramelech and
Sarasar his sons slew him with the sword: and they fled into the land of
Ararat, and Asarhaddon his son reigned in his stead.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> IN those days Ezechias was sick even to
death, and Isaias the son of Amos the prophet came unto him, and said to
him: Thus saith the Lord: Take order with thy house, for thou shalt die,
and not live.

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> And Ezechias turned his face toward the
wall, and prayed to the Lord,

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> And said: I beseech thee, O Lord,
remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Ezechias wept
with great weeping.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> And the word of the Lord came to Isaias,
saying:

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Go and say to Ezechias: Thus saith the
Lord the God of David thy father: I have heard thy prayer, and I have
seen thy tears: behold I will add to thy days fifteen years:

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> And I will deliver thee and this city out
of the hand of the king of the Assyrians, and I will protect it.

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> And this shall be a sign to thee from the
Lord, that the Lord will do this word which he hath spoken:

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Behold I will bring again the shadow of
the lines, by which it is now gone down in the sun dial of Achaz with
the sun, ten lines backward. And the sun returned ten lines by the
degrees by which it was gone down.

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> The writing of Ezechias king of Juda,
when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness.

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> I said: In the midst of my days I shall
go to the gates of hell: I sought for the residue of my years.

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> I said: I shall not see the Lord God in
the land of the living. I shall behold man no more, nor the inhabitant
of rest.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> My generation is at an end, and it is
rolled away from me, as a shepherd's tent. My life is cut off, as by a
weaver: whilst I was yet but beginning, he out me off: from morning even
to night thou wilt make an end of me.

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> I hoped till morning, as a lion so hath
he broken all my bones: from morning even to night thou wilt make an end
of me.

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> I will cry like a young swallow, I will
meditate like a dove: my eyes are weakened looking upward: Lord, I
suffer violence, answer thou for me.

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> What shall I say, or what shall he
answer for me, whereas he himself hath done it? I will recount to thee
all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> O Lord, if man's life be such, and the
life of my spirit be in such things as these, thou shalt correct me, and
make me to live.

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Behold in peace is my bitterness most
bitter: but thou best delivered my soul that it should not perish, thou
hast cast all my sins behind thy back.

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> For hell shall not confess to thee,
neither shall death praise thee: nor shall they that go down into the
pit, look for thy truth.

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> The living, the living, he shall give
praise to thee, as I do this day: the father shall make thy truth known
to the children.

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> O Lord, save me, and we will sing our
psalms all the days of our life in the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Now Isaias had ordered that they should
take a lump of figs, and lay it as it plaster upon the wound, and that
he should be healed.

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> And Ezechias bed said: What shah be the
sign that I shah go up to the house of the Lord?

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> AT that time Merodach Baladan, the son of
Baladan king of Babylon, sent letters and presents to Ezechias: for he
had heard that he had been sick and was recovered.

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> And Ezechias rejoiced at their coming,
and he shewed them the storehouses of his aromatical spices, and of the
silver, and of the gold, and of the sweet odours, and of the precious
ointment, and all the storehouses of his furniture, and all things that
were found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all
his dominion that Ezechias shewed them not.

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> Then Isaias the prophet came to king
Ezechias, and said to him: What said these men, and from whence came
they to thee? And Ezechias said: From a far country they came to me,
from Babylon

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> And he said: What saw they in thy house?
And Ezechias said: All things that are in my house have they seen, there
was not any thing which I have not shewn them in my treasures.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> And Isaias said to Ezechias: Rear the
word of the Lord of hosts.

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> Behold the days shall come, that all that
is in thy house, and that thy fathers have laid up in store until this
day, shall be carried away into Babylon: there shall not any thing be
left, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> And of thy children, that shall issue
from thee, whom thou shalt beget, they shall take away, and they shall
be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> And Ezechias said to Isaias: The word of
the Lord, which he hath spoken, is good. And he said: Only let peace and
truth be in my days.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> BE comforted, be comforted, my people,
saith your God.

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and
call to her: for her evil is come to an end, her iniquity is forgiven:
she hath received of the hand of the Lord double for all her sins.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> The voice of one crying in the desert:
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the wilderness the
paths of our God.

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> Every valley shall be exalted, and every
mountain and hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall become
straight, and the rough ways plain.

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> And the glory of the Lord shall be
revealed, and all flesh together shall see, that the mouth of the Lord
hath spoken.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> The voice of one, saying: Cry. And I
said: What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as
the flower of the held.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> The grass is withered, and the dower is
fallen, because the spirit of the Lord hath blown upon it. Indeed the
people is grass:

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> The grass is withered, and the flower is
fallen: but the word of our Lord endureth for ever.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Get thee up upon a high mountain, thou
that bringest good tidings to Sion: lift up thy voice with strength,
thou that bringest good tidings to Jerusalem: lift it up, fear not. Say
to the cities of Juda: Behold your God:

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Behold the Lord God shall come with
strength, and his arm shall rule: Behold his reward is with him and his
work is before him.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd: he shall gather together the lambs with his arm, and shall
take them up in his bosom, and he himself shall carry them that are with
young.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand, and weighed the heavens with his palm? who hath
poised with three fingers the bulk of the earth, and weighed the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> Who hath forwarded the spirit of the
Lord? or who hath been his counsellor, and hath taught him?

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> With whom hath he consulted, and who
hath instructed him, and taught him the path of justice, and taught him
knowledge, and shewed him the way of understanding?

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> Behold the Gentiles are as a drop of a
bucket, and are counted as the smallest grain of a balance: behold the
islands are as a little dust.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> And Libanus shall not be enough to
burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt offering.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> All nations are before him as if they
had no being at all, and are counted to him as nothing, and vanity.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> To whom then have you likened God? or
what image will you make for him?

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> Hath the workman cast a graven statue?
or hath the goldsmith formed it with gold, or the silversmith with
plates of silver?

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> He hath chosen strong wood, and that
will not rot: the skilful workman seeketh how he may set up an idol that
may not be moved.

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> Do you not know? hath it not been
heard? hath it not been told you from the beginning? have you not
understood the foundations of the earth ?

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> It is he that sitteth upon the globe of
the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as locusts: he that
stretcheth out the heavens as nothing, and spreadeth them out as a tent
to dwell in.

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> He that bringeth the searchers of
secrets to nothing, that hath made the judges of the earth as vanity.

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> And surely their stock was neither
planted, nor sown, nor rooted in the earth: suddenly he hath blown upon
them, and they are withered, and a whirlwind shall take them away as
stubble.

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> And to whom have ye likened me, or made
me equal, saith the Holy One?

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> Lift up your eyes on high, and see who
hath created these things: who bringeth out their host by number, and
calleth them all by their names: by the greatness of his might, and
strength, and power, not one of them was missing.

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest,
O Israel: My way is hid from the Lord, and my judgment is passed over
from my God?

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Knowest thou not, or hast thou not
heard? the Lord is the everlasting God, who hath created the ends of the
earth: he shall not faint, nor labour, neither is there any searching
out of his wisdom.

<span id="an_40:29">40:29</span> It is he that giveth strength to the
weary, and increaseth force and might to them that are not.

<span id="an_40:30">40:30</span> Youths shall faint, and labour, and
young men shall fall by infirmity.

<span id="an_40:31">40:31</span> But they that hope in the Lord shall
renew their strength, they shall take wings as eagles, they shall run
and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> LET the islands keep silence before me,
and the nations take new strength: let them come near, and then speak,
let us come near to judgment together.

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Who hath raised up the just one from the
east, hath called him to follow him? he shall give the nations in his
sight, and he shall rule over kings: he shall give them as the dust to
his sword, as stubble driven by the wind, to his bow.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> He shall pursue them, he shall pass in
peace, no path shall appear after his feet.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Who hath wrought and done these things,
calling the generations from the beginning? I the Lord, I am the first
and the last.

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> The islands saw it, and feared, the ends
of the earth were astonished, they drew near, and came.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> Every one shall help his neighbour, and
shall say to his brother: Be of good courage.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> The coppersmith striking with the hammer
encouraged him that forged at that time, saying: It is ready for
soldering: and he strengthened it with nails, that it should not be
moved.

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> But thou Israel, art my servant, Jacob
whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend:

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> In whom I have taken thee from the ends
of the earth, and from the remote parts thereof have called thee, and
said to thee: Thou art my servant, I have chosen thee, and have not cast
thee away.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Fear not, for I am with thee: turn not
aside, for I am thy God: I have strengthened thee, and have helped thee,
and the right hand of my just one hath upheld thee.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Behold all that fight against thee
shall be confounded and ashamed, they shall be as nothing, and the men
shall perish that strive against thee.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not
find the men that resist thee: they shall be as nothing: and as a thing
consumed the men that war against thee.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> For I am the Lord thy God, who take
thee by the hand, and say to thee: Fear not, I have helped thee.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> Fear not, thou worm of Jacob, you that
are dead of Israel: I have helped thee, saith the Lord: and thy Redeemer
the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> I have made thee as a new thrashing
wain, with teeth like a saw: thou shall thrash the mountains, and break
them in pieces: and shalt make the hills as chaff.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall
carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt
rejoice in the Lord, in the Holy One of Israel thou shalt be joyful.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> The needy and the poor seek for waters,
and there are none: their tongue hath been dry with thirst. I the Lord
will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> I will open rivers in the high bills,
and fountains in the midst of the plains: I will turn the desert into
pools of waters, and the impassable land into streams of waters.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> I will plant in the wilderness the
cedar, and the thorn, and the myrtle, and the olive tree: I will set in
the desert the fir tree, the elm, and the box tree together:

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> That they may see and know, and
consider, and understand together that the hand of the Lord hath done
this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> Bring your cause near, saith the Lord:
bring hither, if you have any thing to allege, saith the King of Jacob.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> Let them come, and tell us all things
that are to come: tell us the former things what they were: and we will
set our heart upon them, and shall know the latter end of them, and tell
us the things that are to come.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> Shew the things that are to come
hereafter, and we shall know that ye are gods. Do ye also good or evil,
if you can: and let us speak, and see together.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> Behold, you are of nothing, and your
work of that which hath no being: he that hath chosen you is an
abomination.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> I have raised up one from the north,
and he shall come from the rising of the sun: he shall call upon my
name, and he shall make princes to be as dirt, and as the potter
treading clay.

<span id="an_41:26">41:26</span> Who bath declared from the beginning,
that we may know: and from time of old, that we may say: Thou art just.
There is none that sheweth, nor that foretelleth, nor that heareth your
words.

<span id="an_41:27">41:27</span> The first shall say to Sion: Behold
they are here, and to Jerusalem I will give an evangelist.

<span id="an_41:28">41:28</span> And I saw, and there was no one even
among them to consult, or who, when I asked, could answer a word.

<span id="an_41:29">41:29</span> Behold they are all in the wrong, and
their works are vain: their idols are wind and vanity.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> BEHOLD my servant, I will uphold him: my
elect, my soul delighteth in him: I have given my spirit upon him, he
shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> He shall not cry, nor have respect to
person, neither shall his voice be heard abroad.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> The bruised reed he shall not break, and
smoking flax he shall not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto
truth.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> He shall not be sad, nor troublesome,
till he set judgment in the earth: and the islands shall wait for his
law.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> Thus saith the Lord God that created the
heavens, and stretched them out: that established the earth, and the
things that spring out of it: that giveth breath to the people upon it,
and spirit to them that tread thereon.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> I the Lord have called thee in justice,
and taken thee by the hand, and preserved thee. And I have given thee
for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles:

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> That thou mightest open the eyes of the
blind, and bring forth the prisoner out of prison, and them that sit in
darkness out of the prison house.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> I the Lord, this is my name: I will not
give my glory to another, nor my praise to graven things.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> The things that were first, behold they
are come: and new things do I declare: before they spring forth, I will
make you head them.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> Sing ye to the Lora a new song, his
praise is from the ends of the earth: you that go down to the sea, and
all that are therein: ye islands, and ye inhabitants of them.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> Let the desert and the cities thereof
be exalted: Cedar shall dwell in houses: ye inhabitants of Petra, give
praise, they shall cry from the top of the mountains.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> They shall give glory to the Lord, and
shall declare his praise in the islands.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> The Lord shall go forth as a mighty
man, as a man of war shall he stir up zeal: he shall shout and cry: he
shall prevail against his enemies.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> I have always held my peace, I have I
kept silence, I have been patient, I will speak now as a woman in
labour: I will destroy, and swallow up at once.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> I will lay waste the mountains and
hills, and will make all their grass to wither: and I will turn rivers
into islands, and will dry up the standing pools.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And I will lead the blind into the way
which they know not: and in the paths which they were ignorant of I will
make them walk: I will make darkness light before them, and crooked
things straight: these things have I done to them, and have not forsaken
them.

<span id="an_42:17">42:17</span> They are turned back: let them be
greatly confounded, that trust in a graven thing, that say to a molten
thing: You are our god.

<span id="an_42:18">42:18</span> Hear, ye deaf, and, ye blind, behold
that you may see.

<span id="an_42:19">42:19</span> Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf,
but he to whom I have sent my messengers? Who is blind, but he that is
sold? or who is blind, but the servant of the Lord?

<span id="an_42:20">42:20</span> 20. Thou that seest many things, wilt
thou not observe them? thou that hast ears open, wilt thou not hear?

<span id="an_42:21">42:21</span> And the Lord was willing to sanctify
him, and to magnify the law, and exalt it.

<span id="an_42:22">42:22</span> But this is a people that is robbed and
wasted: they are all the snare of young men, and they are hid in the
houses of prisons: they are made a prey, and there is none to deliver
them: a spoil, and there is none that saith: Restore.

<span id="an_42:23">42:23</span> Who is there among you that will give
ear to this, that will attend and hearken for times to come?

<span id="an_42:24">42:24</span> Who hath given Jacob for a spoil, and
Israel to robbers? hath not the Lord himself, against whom we have
sinned? And they would not walk in his ways, and they have not hearkened
to his law.

<span id="an_42:25">42:25</span> And he hath poured out upon him the
indignation of his fury, and a strong battle, and hath burnt him round
about, and he knew not: and set him on fire, and he understood not.

<span id="an_43:1">43:1</span> AND now thus saith the Lord that created
thee, O Jacob, and formed thee, O Israel: Fear not, for I have redeemed
thee, and called thee by thy name: thou art mine.

<span id="an_43:2">43:2</span> When thou shalt pass through the waters,
I will be with thee, and the rivers shall not cover thee: when thou
shalt walk in the fire, thou shalt not be burnt, and the flames shall
not burn in thee:

<span id="an_43:3">43:3</span> For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One
of Israel, thy Saviour: I have given Egypt for thy atonement, Ethiopia
and Saba for thee.

<span id="an_43:4">43:4</span> Since thou becamest honourable in my
eyes, thou art glorious: I have loved thee, and I will give men for
thee, and people for thy life.

<span id="an_43:5">43:5</span> Fear not, for I am with thee: I will.
bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west.

<span id="an_43:6">43:6</span> I will say to the north: Give up: and to
the south: Keep not back: bring my sons from afar, and my daughters from
the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_43:7">43:7</span> And every one that calleth upon my name,
I have created him for my glory, I have formed him, and made him.

<span id="an_43:8">43:8</span> Bring forth the people that are blind,
and have eyes: that are deaf, and have ears.

<span id="an_43:9">43:9</span> All the nations are assembled together,
and the tribes are gathered: who among you can declare this, and shall
make us hear the former things? let them bring forth their witnesses,
let them be justified, and hear, and say: It is truth.

<span id="an_43:10">43:10</span> You are my witnesses, saith the Lord,
and my servant whom I have chosen: that you may know, and believe me,
and understand that I myself am. Before me there was no God formed, and
after me there shall be none.

<span id="an_43:11">43:11</span> I am, I am the Lord: and there is no
saviour besides me.

<span id="an_43:12">43:12</span> I have declared, and have saved. I have
made it heard, and there was no strange one among you. You are my
witnesses, saith the Lord, and I am God.

<span id="an_43:13">43:13</span> And from the beginning I am the same,
and there is none that can deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who
shall turn it away?

<span id="an_43:14">43:14</span> Thus saith the Lord your redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel: For your sake I sent to Babylon, and have brought
down all their bars, and the Chaldeans glorying in their ships.

<span id="an_43:15">43:15</span> I am the Lord your Holy One, the
Creator of Israel, your King.

<span id="an_43:16">43:16</span> Thus saith the Lord, who made a way in
the sea, and a path in the mighty waters.

<span id="an_43:17">43:17</span> Who brought forth the chariot and the
horse, the army and the strong: they lay down to sleep together, and
they shall not rise again: they are broken as flax, and are extinct.

<span id="an_43:18">43:18</span> Remember not former things, and look
not on things of old.

<span id="an_43:19">43:19</span> Behold I do new things, and now they
shall spring forth, verily you shall know them: I will make a way in the
wilderness, and rivers in the desert.

<span id="an_43:20">43:20</span> The beast of the field shall glorify
me, the dragons and the ostriches: because I have given waters in the
wilderness, rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, to my
chosen.

<span id="an_43:21">43:21</span> This people have I formed for my- self,
they shall shew forth my praise.

<span id="an_43:22">43:22</span> But thou hast not called upon me, O
Jacob, neither hast thou laboured about me, O Israel.

<span id="an_43:23">43:23</span> Thou hast not offered me the ram of thy
holocaust, nor hast thou glorified me with thy victims: I have not
caused thee to serve with oblations, nor wearied thee with incense.

<span id="an_43:24">43:24</span> Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with
money, neither hast thou filled me with the fat of thy victims. But thou
hast made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thy
iniquities.

<span id="an_43:25">43:25</span> I am, I am he that blot out thy
iniquities for my own sake, and I will not remember thy sins.

<span id="an_43:26">43:26</span> Put me in remembrance, and let us plead
together: tell if thou hast any thing to justify thyself.

<span id="an_43:27">43:27</span> Thy first father sinned, and thy
teachers have transgressed against me.

<span id="an_43:28">43:28</span> And I have profaned the holy princes, I
have given Jacob to slaughter, and Israel to reproach.

<span id="an_44:1">44:1</span> AND now hear, O Jacob, my servant, and
Israel whom I have chosen.

<span id="an_44:2">44:2</span> Thus saith the Lord that made and formed
thee, thy helper from the womb: Fear not, O my servant Jacob, and thou
most righteous whom I have chosen.

<span id="an_44:3">44:3</span> For I will pour out waters upon the
thirsty ground, and streams upon the dry land: I will pour out my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy stock.

<span id="an_44:4">44:4</span> And they shall spring up among the herbs,
as willows beside the running waters.

<span id="an_44:5">44:5</span> One shall say: I am the Lord's, and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall
subscribe with his hand, To the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel.

<span id="an_44:6">44:6</span> Thus saith the Lord the king of Israel,
and his redeemer the Lord of hosts: I am the first, and I am the last,
and besides me there is no God.

<span id="an_44:7">44:7</span> Who is like to me? let him call and
declare: and let him set before me the order, since I appointed the
ancient people: and the things to come, and that shall be hereafter, let
them shew unto them.

<span id="an_44:8">44:8</span> Fear ye not, neither be ye troubled, from
that time I have made thee to hear, and have declared: you are my
witnesses. Is there a God besides me, a maker, whom I have not known?

<span id="an_44:9">44:9</span> The makers of idols are all of them
nothing, and their best beloved things shall not profit them. They are
their witnesses, that they do not see, nor understand, that they may be
ashamed.

<span id="an_44:10">44:10</span> Who hath formed a god, and made a
graven thing that is profitable for nothing?

<span id="an_44:11">44:11</span> Behold, all the partakers thereof shall
be confounded: for the makers are men: they shall all assemble together,
they shall stand and fear, and shall be confounded together.

<span id="an_44:12">44:12</span> The smith hath wrought with his file,
with coals, and with hammers he hath formed it, and hath wrought with
the strength of his arm: he shall hunger and faint, he shall drink no
water, and shall be weary.

<span id="an_44:13">44:13</span> The carpenter hath stretched out his
rule, he hath formed it with a plane: he hath made it with corners, and
hath fashioned it round with the compass: and he hath made the image of
a man as it were a beautiful man dwelling in a house.

<span id="an_44:14">44:14</span> He hath cut down cedars, taken the
holm, and the oak that stood among the trees of the forest: he hath
planted the pine tree, which the rain hath nourished.

<span id="an_44:15">44:15</span> And it hath served men for fuel: he
took thereof, and warmed himself: and he kindled it, and baked bread:
but of the rest he made a god, and adored it: he made a graven thing,
and bowed down before it.

<span id="an_44:16">44:16</span> Part of it he burnt with fire, and with
part of it he dressed his meat: he boiled pottage, and was filled, and
was warmed, and said: Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire.

<span id="an_44:17">44:17</span> But the residue thereof he made a god,
and a graven thing for himself: he boweth down before it, and adoreth
it, and prayeth unto it, saying: Deliver me, for thou art my God.

<span id="an_44:18">44:18</span> They have not known, nor understood:
for their eyes are covered that they may not see, and that they may not
understand with their heart.

<span id="an_44:19">44:19</span> They do not consider in their mind, nor
know, nor have the thought to say: I have burnt part of it in the fire,
and I have baked bread upon the coals thereof: I have broiled flesh and
have eaten, and of the residue thereof shall I make an idol? shall I
fall down before the stock of a tree?

<span id="an_44:20">44:20</span> Part thereof is ashes: his foolish
heart adoreth it, and he will not save his soul, nor say: Perhaps there
is a lie in my right hand.

<span id="an_44:21">44:21</span> Remember these things, O Jacob, and
Israel, for thou art my servant. I have formed thee, thou art my
servant, O Israel, forget me not.

<span id="an_44:22">44:22</span> I have blotted out thy iniquities as a
cloud, and thy sins as a mist: return to me, for I have redeemed thee.

<span id="an_44:23">44:23</span> Give praise, O ye heavens, for the Lord
hath shewn mercy: shout with joy, ye ends of the earth: ye mountains,
resound with praise, thou, O forest, and every tree therein: for the
Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and Israel shall be glorified.

<span id="an_44:24">44:24</span> Thus saith the Lord thy redeemer, and
thy maker, from the womb: I am the Lord, that make all things, that
alone stretch out the heavens, that establish the earth, and there is
none with me.

<span id="an_44:25">44:25</span> That make void the tokens of diviners,
and make the soothsayers mad. That turn the wise backward, and that,
make their knowledge foolish.

<span id="an_44:26">44:26</span> That raise up the word of my servant
and perform the counsel of my messengers, who say to Jerusalem: Thou
shalt be inhabited: and to the cities of Juda: You shall be built, and I
will raise up the wastes thereof.

<span id="an_44:27">44:27</span> Who say to the deep: Be thou desolate,
and I will dry up thy rivers.

<span id="an_44:28">44:28</span> Who say to Cyrus: Thou art my shepherd,
and thou shalt perform all my pleasure. Who say to Jerusalem: Thou shalt
be built: and to the temple: Thy foundations shall be laid.

<span id="an_45:1">45:1</span> THUS saith the Lord to my anointed Cyrus,
whose right hand I have taken hold of, to subdue nations before his
face, and to turn the backs of kings, and to open the doors before him,
and the gates shall not be shut.

<span id="an_45:2">45:2</span> I will go before thee, and will humble
the great ones of the earth: I will break in pieces the gates of brass,
and will burst the bars of iron.

<span id="an_45:3">45:3</span> And I will give thee hidden treasures,
and the concealed riches of secret places: that thou mayest know that I
am the Lord who call thee by thy name, the God of Israel.

<span id="an_45:4">45:4</span> For the sake of my servant Jacob, and
Israel my elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I have made a
likeness of thee, and thou hast not known me.

<span id="an_45:5">45:5</span> I am the Lord, and there is none else:
there is no God, besides me: I girded thee, and thou hast not known me:

<span id="an_45:6">45:6</span> That they may know who are from the
rising of the sun, and they who are from the west, that there is none
besides me. I am the Lord, and there is none else:

<span id="an_45:7">45:7</span> I form the light, and create darkness, I
make peace, and create evil: I the Lord that do all these things.

<span id="an_45:8">45:8</span> Drop down dew, ye heavens, from above,
and let the clouds rain the just: let the earth be opened, and bud forth
a saviour: and let justice spring up together: I the Lord have created
him.

<span id="an_45:9">45:9</span> Woe to him that gainsayeth his maker, a
sherd of the earthen pots: shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it:
What art thou making, and thy work is without hands?

<span id="an_45:10">45:10</span> Woe to him that saith to his father:
Why begettest thou? and to the woman: Why dost thou bring forth?

<span id="an_45:11">45:11</span> Thus saith the Lord the Holy One of
Israel, his maker: Ask me of things to come, concerning my children, and
concerning the work of my hands give ye charge to me.

<span id="an_45:12">45:12</span> I made the earth: and I created man
upon it: my hand stretched forth the heavens, and I have commanded all
their host.

<span id="an_45:13">45:13</span> I have raised him up to justice, and I
will direct all his ways: he shall build my city, and let go my
captives, not for ransom, nor for presents, saith the Lord the God of
hosts.

<span id="an_45:14">45:14</span> Thus saith the Lord: The labour of
Egypt, and the merchandise of Ethiopia, and of Sabaim, men of stature
shall come over to thee, and shall be thins: they shall walk after thee,
they shall go bound with manacles: and they shall worship thee, and
shall make supplication to thee: only in thee is God, and there is no
God besides thee.

<span id="an_45:15">45:15</span> Verily thou art a hidden God, the God
of Israel the saviour.

<span id="an_45:16">45:16</span> They are all confounded and ashamed:
the forgers of errors are gone together into confusion.

<span id="an_45:17">45:17</span> Israel is saved in the Lord with as
eternal salvation: you shall not be con- founded, and you shall not be
ashamed for ever and ever.

<span id="an_45:18">45:18</span> For thus saith the Lord that created
the heavens, God himself that formed the earth, and made it, the very
maker thereof: he did not create it in vain: he formed it to be
inhabited. I am the Lord, and there is no other.

<span id="an_45:19">45:19</span> I have not spoken in secret, in a dark
place of the earth: I have not said to the seed of Jacob: Seek me in
vain. I am the Lord that speak justice, that declare right things.

<span id="an_45:20">45:20</span> Assemble yourselves, and come, and draw
near together, ye that are saved of the Gentiles: they have no knowledge
that set up the wood of their graven work, and pray to a god that cannot
save.

<span id="an_45:21">45:21</span> Tell ye, and come, and consult
together: who hath declared this from the beginning, who hath foretold
this from that time? Have not I the Lord, and there is no God else
besides me? A just God and a saviour, there is none besides me.

<span id="an_45:22">45:22</span> Be converted to me, and you shall be
saved, all ye ends of the earth: for I am God, and there is no other.

<span id="an_45:23">45:23</span> I have sworn by myself, the word of
justice shall go out of my mouth, and shall not return:

<span id="an_45:24">45:24</span> For every knee shall be bowed to me,
and every tongue shall swear.

<span id="an_45:25">45:25</span> Therefore shall he say: In the Lord are
my justices and empire: they shall come to him, and all that resist him
shall be confounded.

<span id="an_45:26">45:26</span> In the Lord shall all the seed of
Israel be justified and praised.

<span id="an_46:1">46:1</span> BEL is broken, Nebo is destroyed: their
idols are put upon beasts and cattle, your burdens of heavy weight even
unto weariness.

<span id="an_46:2">46:2</span> They are consumed, and are broken
together: they could not save him that carried them, and they themselves
shall go into captivity.

<span id="an_46:3">46:3</span> Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, all
the remnant of the house of Israel, who are carried by my bowels, are
borne up by my womb.

<span id="an_46:4">46:4</span> Even to your old age I am the same, and
to your grey hairs I will carry you: I have made you, and I will bear: I
will carry and will save.

<span id="an_46:5">46:5</span> To whom have you likened me, and made me
equal, and compared me, and made me like?

<span id="an_46:6">46:6</span> You that contribute gold out of the bag,
and weigh out silver in the scales: and hire a goldsmith to make a god:
and they fall down and worship.

<span id="an_46:7">46:7</span> They bear him on their shoulders and
carry him, and set him in his piece, and he shall stand, and shall not
stir out of his place. Yea, when they shall cry also unto him, he shall
not hear: he shall not save them from tribulation.

<span id="an_46:8">46:8</span> Remember this, and be ashamed: return, ye
transgressors, to the heart.

<span id="an_46:9">46:9</span> Remember the former age, for I am God,
and there is no God beside, neither is there the like to me:

<span id="an_46:10">46:10</span> Who shew from the beginning the things
that shall be at last, and from ancient times the things that as yet are
not done, saying: My counsel shall stand, and all my will shall be done:

<span id="an_46:11">46:11</span> Who call a bird from the east, and from
a far country the man of my own will, and I have spoken, and will bring
it to pass: I have created, and I will do it. Hear me, O ye hardhearted,
who are far from justice.

<span id="an_46:12">46:12</span> I have brought my justice near, it
shall not be afar off: and my salvation shall not tarry. I will give
salvation in Sion, and my glory in Israel.

<span id="an_47:1">47:1</span> COME down, sit in the dust, O virgin
daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne for the
daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou shalt no more be called delicate and
tender.

<span id="an_47:2">47:2</span> Take a millstone and grind meal: uncover
thy shame, strip thy shoulder, make bare thy legs, pass over the rivers.

<span id="an_47:3">47:3</span> Thy nakedness shall be discovered, and
thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and no man shall resist
me.

<span id="an_47:4">47:4</span> Our redeemer, the Lord of hosts is his
name, the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_47:5">47:5</span> Sit thou silent, and get thee into
darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called
the lady of kingdoms.

<span id="an_47:6">47:6</span> I was angry with my people, I have
polluted my inheritance, and have given them into thy bend: thou hast
shewn no mercy to them: upon the ancient thou hast laid thy yoke
exceeding heavy.

<span id="an_47:7">47:7</span> And thou hast said: I shall be a lady for
ever: thou hast not laid these things to thy heart, neither hast thou
remembered thy latter end.

<span id="an_47:8">47:8</span> And now hear these things, thou that art
delicate, and dwellest confidently, that sayest in thy heart: I am, and
there is none else besides me: I shall not sit as a widow, and I shall
not know barrenness.

<span id="an_47:9">47:9</span> These two things shall come upon thee
suddenly in one day, barrenness and widowhood. All things are come upon
thee, because of the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great
hardness of thy enchanters.

<span id="an_47:10">47:10</span> And thou best trusted in thy
wickedness, and hast said: There is none that seeth me. Thy wisdom, and
thy knowledge, this hath deceived thee. And thou best said in thy heart:
I am, and besides me there is no other.

<span id="an_47:11">47:11</span> Evil shall come upon thee, and then
shalt not know the rising thereof: and calamity shall fall violently
upon thee, which thou canst not keep off: misery shall come upon thee
suddenly, which thou shalt not know.

<span id="an_47:12">47:12</span> Stand now with thy enchanters, and with
the multitude of thy sorceries, in which thou hast laboured from thy
youth, if so be it may profit thee any thing, or if thou mayst become
stronger.

<span id="an_47:13">47:13</span> Thou hast failed in the multitude or
thy counsels: let now the astrologers stand and save thee, they that
gazed at the stars, and counted the months, that from them they might
tell the things that shall come to thee.

<span id="an_47:14">47:14</span> Behold they are as stubble, fire hath
burnt them, they shall not deliver them- selves from the power of the
dames: there are no coals wherewith they may be warmed, nor fire, that
they may sit thereat.

<span id="an_47:15">47:15</span> Such are all the things become to thee,
in which thou best laboured: thy merchants from thy youth, every one
hath erred in his own way, there is none that can save thee.

<span id="an_48:1">48:1</span> HEAR ye these things, O house of Jacob,
you that are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out of the
waters of Juda, you who swear by the name of the Lord, and make mention
of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in justice.

<span id="an_48:2">48:2</span> For they are called of the holy city, and
are established upon the God of Israel: the Lord of hosts is his name.

<span id="an_48:3">48:3</span> The former things of old I have declared,
and they went forth out of my mouth, and I have made them to be heard: I
did them suddenly and they came to pass.

<span id="an_48:4">48:4</span> For I knew that thou art stubborn, and
thy neck is as an iron sinew, and thy forehead as brass.

<span id="an_48:5">48:5</span> I foretold thee of old, before they came
to pass I told thee, lest thou shouldst say: My idols have done these
things, and my graven and molten things have commanded them.

<span id="an_48:6">48:6</span> See now all the things which thou hast
heard: but have you declared them? I have shewn thee new things from
that time, and things are kept which thou knowest not:

<span id="an_48:7">48:7</span> They are created now, and not of old: and
before the day, when thou heardest them not, lest thou shouldst say:
Behold I knew them.

<span id="an_48:8">48:8</span> Thou hast neither heard, nor known,
neither was thy ear opened of old. For I know that transgressing thou
wilt transgress, and I have called thee a transgressor from the womb.

<span id="an_48:9">48:9</span> For my name's sake I will remove my wrath
far off: and for my praise I will bridle thee, lest thou shouldst
perish.

<span id="an_48:10">48:10</span> Behold I have refined thee, but not as
silver, I have chosen thee in the furnace of poverty.

<span id="an_48:11">48:11</span> For my own sake, for my own sake will I
do it, that I may not be blasphemed: and I will not give my glory to
another.

<span id="an_48:12">48:12</span> Hearken to me, O Jacob, and thou Israel
whom I call: I am he, I am the first, and I am the last.

<span id="an_48:13">48:13</span> My hand also hath founded the earth,
and my right hand hath measured the heavens: I shall call them, and they
shall stand together.

<span id="an_48:14">48:14</span> Assemble yourselves together, all you,
and hear: who among them hath declared these things? the Lord hath loved
him, he will do his pleasure in Babylon, and his arm shall be on the
Chaldeans.

<span id="an_48:15">48:15</span> I, even I have spoken and called him: I
have brought him, and his way is made prosperous.

<span id="an_48:16">48:16</span> Come ye near unto me, and hear this: I
have not spoken in secret from the beginning: from the time before it
was done, I was there, and now the Lord God hath sent me, and his
spirit.

<span id="an_48:17">48:17</span> Thus saith the Lord thy redeemer, the
Holy One of Israel: I am the Lord thy God that teach thee profitable
things, that govern thee in the way that thou walkest.

<span id="an_48:18">48:18</span> O that thou hadst hearkened to my
commandments: thy peace had been as a river, and thy justice as the
waves of the sea,

<span id="an_48:19">48:19</span> And thy seed had been as the sand, and
the offspring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof: his name should not
have perished, nor have been destroyed from before my face.

<span id="an_48:20">48:20</span> Come forth out of Babylon, flee ye from
the Chaldeans, declare it with the voice of joy: make this to be heard,
and speak it out even to the ends of the earth. Say: The Lord hath
redeemed his servant Jacob.

<span id="an_48:21">48:21</span> They thirsted not in the desert, when
he led them out: he brought forth water out of the rock for them, and he
clove the rock, and the waters gushed out.

<span id="an_48:22">48:22</span> There is no peace to the wicked, saith
the Lord.

<span id="an_49:1">49:1</span> GIVE ear, ye islands, and hearken, ye
people from afar. The Lord hath called me from the womb, from the bowels
of my mother he hath been mindful of my name.

<span id="an_49:2">49:2</span> And he hath made my mouth like a sharp
sword: in the shadow of his hand he hath protected me, and hath made me
as a chosen arrow: in his quiver he hath hidden me.

<span id="an_49:3">49:3</span> And he said to me: Thou art my servant
Israel, for in thee will I glory.

<span id="an_49:4">49:4</span> And I said: I have laboured in vain, I
have spent my strength without cause and in vain: therefore my judgment
is with the Lord, and my work with my God.

<span id="an_49:5">49:5</span> And now saith the Lord, that formed me
from the womb to be his servant, that I may bring back Jacob unto him,
and Israel will not be gathered together: and I am glorified in the eyes
of the Lord, and my God is made my strength.

<span id="an_49:6">49:6</span> And he said: It is a small thing that
thou shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
convert the dregs of Israel. Behold, I have given thee to be the light
of the Gentiles, that thou mayst be my salvation even to the farthest
part of the earth.

<span id="an_49:7">49:7</span> Thus saith the Lord the redeemer of
Israel, his Holy One, to the soul that is despised, to the nation that
is abhorred, to the servant of rulers: Kings shall see, end princes
shall rise up, and adore for the Lord's sake, because he is faithful,
and for the Holy One of Israel, who hath chosen thee.

<span id="an_49:8">49:8</span> Thus saith the Lord: In an acceptable
time I have heard thee, and in the day of salvation I have helped thee:
and I have preserved thee, and given thee to be a covenant of the
people, that thou mightest raise up the earth, and possess the
inheritances that were destroyed:

<span id="an_49:9">49:9</span> That thou mightest say to them that are
bound: Come forth: and to them that are in darkness: Shew yourselves.
They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in every plain.

<span id="an_49:10">49:10</span> They shall not hunger, nor thirst,
neither shall the heat nor the sun strike them: for he that is merciful
to them, shall be their shepherd, and at the fountains of waters he
shall give them drink.

<span id="an_49:11">49:11</span> And I will make all my mountains a way,
and my paths shall be exalted.

<span id="an_49:12">49:12</span> Behold these shall come from afar, and
behold these from the north and from the sea, and these from the south
country.

<span id="an_49:13">49:13</span> Give praise, O ye heavens, and rejoice,
O earth, ye mountains, give praise with jubilation: because the Lord
hath comforted his people, and will have mercy on his poor ones.

<span id="an_49:14">49:14</span> And Sion said: The Lord hath forsaken
me, and the Lord hath forgotten me.

<span id="an_49:15">49:15</span> Can a woman forget her infant, so as
not to have pity on the son of her womb? and if she should forget, yet
will not I forget thee.

<span id="an_49:16">49:16</span> Behold, I have graven thee in my hands:
thy walls are always before my eyes.

<span id="an_49:17">49:17</span> Thy builders are come: they that
destroy thee and make thee waste shall go out of thee.

<span id="an_49:18">49:18</span> Lift up thy eyes round about, and see
all these are gathered together, they are come to thee: I live, saith
the Lord, thou shalt be clothed with all these se with an ornament, and
as a bride thou shalt put them about thee.

<span id="an_49:19">49:19</span> For thy deserts, and thy desolate
places, and the land of thy destruction shall now be too narrow by
reason of the inhabitants, end they that swallowed thee up shall be
chased far away.

<span id="an_49:20">49:20</span> The children of thy barrenness shall
still say in thy ears: The place is too strait for me, make me room to
dwell in.

<span id="an_49:21">49:21</span> And thou shalt say in thy heart: Who
hath begotten these? I was barren and brought not forth, led away, and
captive: and who hath brought up these? I was destitute and alone: and
these, where were they?

<span id="an_49:22">49:22</span> Thus saith the Lord God: Behold I will
lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and will set up my standard to the
people. And they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and carry thy
daughters upon their shoulders.

<span id="an_49:23">49:23</span> And kings shall be thy nursing fathers,
and queens thy nurses: they shall worship thee with their face toward
the earth, and they shall lick up the dust of thy feet. And thou shalt
know that I am the Lord, for they shall not be confounded that wait for
him.

<span id="an_49:24">49:24</span> Shall the prey be taken from the
strong? or can that which was taken by the mighty be delivered?

<span id="an_49:25">49:25</span> For thus saith the Lord: Yea verily,
even the captivity shall be taken away from the strong: and that which
was taken by the mighty, shall be delivered. But I will judge those that
have judged thee, and thy children I will save.

<span id="an_49:26">49:26</span> And I will feed thy enemies with their
own flesh: and they shall be made drunk with their own blood, as with
new wine: and all flesh shall know, that I am the Lord that save thee,
and thy Redeemer the Mighty One of Jacob.

<span id="an_50:1">50:1</span> THUS saith the Lord: What is this bill of
the divorce of your mother, with which I have put her away? or who is my
creditor, to whom I sold you: behold you are sold for your iniquities,
and for your wicked deeds have I put your mother away.

<span id="an_50:2">50:2</span> Because I came, and there was not a man:
I called, and there was none that would hear. Is my hand shortened and
become little, that I cannot redeem? or is there no strength in me to
deliver? Behold at my rebuke I will make the sea a desert, I will turn
the rivers into dry land: the fishes shall rot for want of water, and
shall die for thirst.

<span id="an_50:3">50:3</span> I will clothe the heavens with darkness,
and will make sackcloth their covering.

<span id="an_50:4">50:4</span> The Lord hath given me a learned tongue,
that I should know how to uphold by word him that is weary: he wakeneth
in the morning, in the morning he wakeneth my ear, that I may hear him
as a master.

<span id="an_50:5">50:5</span> The Lord God hath opened my ear, and I do
not resist: I have not gone back.

<span id="an_50:6">50:6</span> I have given my body to the strikers, and
my cheeks to them that plucked them: I have not turned away my face from
them that rebuked me, and spit upon me.

<span id="an_50:7">50:7</span> The Lord God is my helper, therefore am I
not confounded: therefore have I set my face as a most hard rock, and I
know that I shall not be confounded.

<span id="an_50:8">50:8</span> He is near that justifieth me, who will
contend with me? let us stand together, who is my adversary? let him
come near to me.

<span id="an_50:9">50:9</span> Behold the Lord God is my helper: who is
he that shall condemn me? Lo, they shall all be destroyed as a garment,
the moth shall eat them up.

<span id="an_50:10">50:10</span> Who is there among you that feareth the
Lord, that heareth the voice of his servant, that hath walked in
darkness, and hath no light? let him hope in the name of the Lord, and
lean upon his God.

<span id="an_50:11">50:11</span> Behold all you that kindle a fire,
encompassed with dames, walk in the light of your fire, and in the dames
which you have kindled: this is done to you by my hand, you shall sleep
in sorrows.

<span id="an_51:1">51:1</span> GIVE ear to me, you that follow that
which is just, and you that seek the Lord: look unto the rock whence you
are hewn, and to the hole of the pit from which you are dug out.

<span id="an_51:2">51:2</span> Look unto Abraham your father, and to
Sara that bore you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and
multiplied him.

<span id="an_51:3">51:3</span> The Lord therefore will comfort Sion, and
will comfort all the ruins thereof: and he will make her desert as a
place of pleasure, and her wilderness as the garden of the Lord. Joy and
gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of praise.

<span id="an_51:4">51:4</span> Hearken unto me, O my people, and give
ear to me, O my tribes: for a law shall go forth from me, and my
judgment shall rest to be a light of the nations.

<span id="an_51:5">51:5</span> My just one is near at hand, my saviour
is gone forth, and my arms shall judge the people: the islands shall
look for me, and shall patiently wait for my arm.

<span id="an_51:6">51:6</span> Lift up your eyes to heaven, and look
down to the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish like smoke, and
the earth shall be worn away like a garment, and the inhabitants thereof
shall perish in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my
justice shall not fail.

<span id="an_51:7">51:7</span> Hearken to me, you that know what is
just, my people who have my law in your heart: fear ye not the reproach
of men, and be not afraid of their blasphemies.

<span id="an_51:8">51:8</span> For the worm shall eat them up as a
garment: and the moth shall consume them as wool: but my salvation shall
be for ever, and my justice from generation to generation,

<span id="an_51:9">51:9</span> Arise, arise, put on strength, O thou arm
of the Lord, arise as in the days of old, in the ancient generations.
Hast not thou struck the proud one, and wounded the dragon?

<span id="an_51:10">51:10</span> Hast not thou dried up the sea, the
water of the mighty deep, who madest the depth of the sea a way, that
the delivered might pass over?

<span id="an_51:11">51:11</span> And now they that are redeemed by the
Lord, shall return, and shall come into Sion singing praises, and joy
everlasting shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain joy and
gladness, sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

<span id="an_51:12">51:12</span> I, I myself will comfort you: who art
thou, that thou shouldst be afraid of a mortal man, and of the son of
man, who shall wither away like grass?

<span id="an_51:13">51:13</span> And thou hast forgotten the Lord thy
maker, who stretched out the heavens, and founded the earth: and thee
hast been afraid continually all the day at the presence of his fury who
afflicted thee, and had prepared himself to destroy thee: where is now
the fury of the oppressor?

<span id="an_51:14">51:14</span> He shall quickly come that is going to
open unto you, and he shall not kill unto utter destruction, neither
shall his bread fail.

<span id="an_51:15">51:15</span> But I am the Lord thy God, who trouble
the sea, and the waves thereof swell: the Lord of hosts is my name.

<span id="an_51:16">51:16</span> I have put my words in thy mouth, and
have protected thee in the shadow of my hand, that thou mightest plant
the heavens, and found the earth: and mightest say to Sion: Thou art my
people.

<span id="an_51:17">51:17</span> Arise, arise, stand up, O Jerusalem,
which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his wrath; thou hast
drunk even to the bottom of the cup of dead sleep, and thou hast drunk
even to the dregs.

<span id="an_51:18">51:18</span> There is none that can uphold her among
all the children that she hath brought forth: and there is none that
taketh her by the hand among all the children that she hath brought up.

<span id="an_51:19">51:19</span> There are two things that have happened
to thee: who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and
the famine, and the sword, who shall comfort thee?

<span id="an_51:20">51:20</span> Thy children are cast forth, they have
slept at the head of all the ways, as the wild ox that is snared: full
of the indignation of the Lord, of the rebuke of thy God.

<span id="an_51:21">51:21</span> Therefore hear this, thou poor little
one, and thou that art drunk but no with wine.

<span id="an_51:22">51:22</span> Thus saith thy Sovereign the Lord and
thy God, who will fight for his people: Behold I have taken out of thy
hand the cup of dead sleep, the dregs of the cup of my indignation, thou
shalt not drink it again any more.

<span id="an_51:23">51:23</span> And I will put it in the hand of them
that have oppressed thee, and have said to thy soul: Bow down, that we
may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as a way to
them that went over.

<span id="an_52:1">52:1</span> ARISE, arise, put on thy strength, O
Sion, put on the garments of thy glory, O Jerusalem, the city of the
Holy One: for henceforth the uncircumcised, and unclean shall no more
pass through thee.

<span id="an_52:2">52:2</span> Shake thyself from the dust, arise, sit
up, O Jerusalem: loose the bonds from off thy neck, O captive daughter
of Sion.

<span id="an_52:3">52:3</span> For thus saith the Lord: You were sold
gratis, and you shall be redeemed without money.

<span id="an_52:4">52:4</span> For thus saith the Lord God: My people
went down into Egypt at the beginning to sojourn there: and the Assyrian
hath oppressed them without any cause at all.

<span id="an_52:5">52:5</span> And now what have I here, saith the Lord:
for my people is taken away gratis. They that rule over them treat them
unjustly, saith the Lord, and my name is continually blasphemed all the
day long.

<span id="an_52:6">52:6</span> Therefore my people shall know my name in
that day: for I myself that spoke, behold I am here.

<span id="an_52:7">52:7</span> How beautiful upon the mountains are the
feet of him that bringeth good tidings, and that preacheth peace: of him
that sheweth forth good, that preacheth salvation, that saith to Sion:
Thy God shall reign!

<span id="an_52:8">52:8</span> The voice of thy watchmen: they have
lifted up their voice, they shah praise together: for they shall see eye
to eye when the Lord shall convert Sion

<span id="an_52:9">52:9</span> Rejoice, and give praise together, O ye
deserts of Jerusalem: for the Lord hath comforted his people: he hath
redeemed Jerusalem.

<span id="an_52:10">52:10</span> The Lord hath prepared his holy arm in
the sight of all the Gentiles: and all the ends of the earth shall see
the salvation of our God.

<span id="an_52:11">52:11</span> Depart, depart, go ye out from thence,
touch no unclean thing: go out of the midst of her, be ye clean, you
that carry the vessels of the Lord.

<span id="an_52:12">52:12</span> For you shall not go out in a tumult,
neither shall you make haste by flight: For the Lord will go before you,
and the God of Israel will gather you together.

<span id="an_52:13">52:13</span> Behold my servant shall understand, he
shall be exalted, and extolled, and shall be exceeding high.

<span id="an_52:14">52:14</span> As many have been astonished at thee,
so shall his visage be inglorious among men, and his form among the sons
of men.

<span id="an_52:15">52:15</span> He shall sprinkle many nations, kings
shall shut their mouth at him: for they to whom it was not told of him,
have seen: and they that heard not, have beheld.

<span id="an_53:1">53:1</span> WHO hath believed our report? and to whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed?

<span id="an_53:2">53:2</span> And he shall grow up as a tender plant
before him, and as a root out of a thirsty ground: there is no beauty in
him, nor comeliness: and we have seen him, and there was no sightliness,
that we should be desirous of him:

<span id="an_53:3">53:3</span> Despised, and the most abject of men, a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with infirmity: and his look was as it
were hidden and despised, whereupon we esteemed him not.

<span id="an_53:4">53:4</span> Surely he hath borne our infirmities and
carried our sorrows: and we have thought him as it were a leper, and as
one struck by God and afflicted.

<span id="an_53:5">53:5</span> But he was wounded for our iniquities, he
was bruised for our sins: the chastisement of our peace was upon him,
and by his bruises we are healed.

<span id="an_53:6">53:6</span> All we like sheep have gone astray, every
one hath turned aside into his own way: and the Lord hath laid on him
the iniquity of us all.

<span id="an_53:7">53:7</span> He was offered because it was his own
will, and he opened not his mouth: he shall be led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and shall be dumb as a lamb before his shearer, and he shall
not open his mouth.

<span id="an_53:8">53:8</span> He was taken away from distress, and from
judgment: who shall declare his generation? because he is cut oh out of
the land of the living: for the wickedness of my people have I struck
him.

<span id="an_53:9">53:9</span> And he shall give the ungodly for his
burial, and the rich for his death: because he hath done no iniquity,
neither was there deceit in his mouth.

<span id="an_53:10">53:10</span> And the Lord was pleased to bruise him
in infirmity: if he shall lay down his life for sin, he shall see a
long-lived seed, and the will of the Lord shall be prosperous in his
hand.

<span id="an_53:11">53:11</span> Because his soul hath laboured, he
shall see and be filled: by his knowledge shall this my just servant
justify many, and he shall bear their iniquities.

<span id="an_53:12">53:12</span> Therefore will I distribute to him very
many, and he shall divide the spoils of the strong, because he hath
delivered his soul unto death, and was reputed with the wicked: and he
hath borne the sins of many, and hath prayed for the transgressors.

<span id="an_54:1">54:1</span> GIVE praise, O thou barren, that bearest
not: sing forth praise, and make a joyful noise, thou that didst not
travail with child: for many are the children of the desolate, more than
of her that hath a husband, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_54:2">54:2</span> Enlarge the place of thy tent, and
stretch out the skins of thy tabernacles, spare not: lengthen thy cords,
and strengthen thy stakes.

<span id="an_54:3">54:3</span> For thou shalt pass on to the right hand,
and to the left: and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and shall
inhabit the desolate cities.

<span id="an_54:4">54:4</span> Fear not, for thou shalt not be
confounded, nor blush: for thou shalt not be put to shame, because thou
shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt remember no more the
reproach of thy widowhood.

<span id="an_54:5">54:5</span> For he that made thee shall rule over
thee, the Lord of hosts is his name: and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel, shall be called the God of all the earth.

<span id="an_54:6">54:6</span> For the Lord hath called thee as woman
forsaken and mourning in spirit, end se a wife cast off from her youth,
said thy God.

<span id="an_54:7">54:7</span> For a, small moment have I forsaken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee.

<span id="an_54:8">54:8</span> In a moment of indignation have I hid my
face a little while from thee, but with everlasting kindness have I had
mercy on thee, said the Lord thy Redeemer.

<span id="an_54:9">54:9</span> This thing is to me as in the days of
Noe, to whom I swore, that I would no more bring in the waters of Noe
upon the earth: so have I sworn not to be angry with thee, and not to
rebuke thee.

<span id="an_54:10">54:10</span> For the mountains shall be moved, and
the hills shall tremble; but my mercy shall not depart from thee, and
the covenant of my peace shall not be moved: said the Lord that hath
mercy on thee.

<span id="an_54:11">54:11</span> O poor little one, tossed with tempest,
without all comfort, behold I will lay thy stones in order, and will lay
thy foundations with sapphires,

<span id="an_54:12">54:12</span> And I will make thy bulwarks of jasper:
and thy gates of graven stones, and all thy borders of desirable stones.

<span id="an_54:13">54:13</span> All thy children shall be taught of the
Lord: and great shall be the peace of thy children.

<span id="an_54:14">54:14</span> And thou shalt be founded in justice:
depart far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear; and from terror,
for it shall not come near thee.

<span id="an_54:15">54:15</span> Behold, an inhabitant shall come, who
was not with me, he that was a stranger to thee before, shall be joined
to thee.

<span id="an_54:16">54:16</span> Behold, I have created the smith that
bloweth the coals in the fire, and bringeth forth an instrument for his
work, and I have created the killer to destroy.

<span id="an_54:17">54:17</span> No weapon that is formed against thee
shall prosper: and every tongue that resisteth thee in judgment, thou
shalt condemn. This is the inheritance of the servants of the Lord, and
their justice with me, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_55:1">55:1</span> ALL you that thirst, come to the waters:
and you that have no money make haste, buy, and eat: come ye, buy wine
and milk without money, and without any price.

<span id="an_55:2">55:2</span> Why do you spend money for that which is
not breed, and your labour for that which doth not satisfy you? Hearken
diligently to me, and eat that which is good, and your soul shall be
delighted in fatness.

<span id="an_55:3">55:3</span> Incline your ear and come to me: hear and
your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you,
the faithful mercies of David.

<span id="an_55:4">55:4</span> Behold I have given him for a witness to
the people, for a leader and a master to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_55:5">55:5</span> Behold thou shalt call a nation, which
thou knewest not: and the nations that knew not thee shall run to thee,
because of the Lord thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, for he hath
glorified thee.

<span id="an_55:6">55:6</span> Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found:
call upon him, while he is near.

<span id="an_55:7">55:7</span> Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unjust man his thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will
have mercy on him, and to our God: for he is bountiful to forgive.

<span id="an_55:8">55:8</span> For my thoughts are not your thoughts:
nor your ways my ways, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_55:9">55:9</span> For as the heavens are exalted above the
earth, so are my ways exalted above your ways, and my thoughts above
your thoughts.

<span id="an_55:10">55:10</span> And as the rain and the snow come down
from heaven, and return no more thither, but soak the earth, and water
it, and make it to spring, and give seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater:

<span id="an_55:11">55:11</span> So shall my word be, which shall go
forth from my mouth: it shall not return to me void, but it shall do
whatsoever I please, and shall prosper in the things for which I sent
it.

<span id="an_55:12">55:12</span> For you shall go out with joy, and be
led forth with peace: the mountains and the hills shall sing praise
before yen, and all the trees of the country shah clap their hands.

<span id="an_55:13">55:13</span> Instead of the shrub, shall come up the
fir tree, and instead of the nettle, shall come up the myrtle tree: and
the Lord shall be named for an everlasting sign, that shall not be taken
away.

<span id="an_56:1">56:1</span> THUS saith the Lord : Keep ye judgment,
and do justice: for my salvation is near to come, and my justice to be
revealed.

<span id="an_56:2">56:2</span> Blessed is the man that doth this, and
the son of man that shall lay hold on this: that keepeth the sabbath
from profaning it, that keepeth his hands from doing any evil.

<span id="an_56:3">56:3</span> And let not the son of the stranger, that
adhereth to the Lord, speak, saying: The Lord will divide and separate
me from his people. And let not the eunuch say: Behold I am a dry tree.

<span id="an_56:4">56:4</span> For thus saith the Lord to the eunuchs,
They that shall keep my sabbaths, and shall choose the things that
please me, and shall hold fast my covenant:

<span id="an_56:5">56:5</span> I will give to them in my house, and
within my walls, a place, and a name better than sons and daughters: I
will give them an everlasting name which shall never perish.

<span id="an_56:6">56:6</span> And the children of the stranger that
adhere to the Lord, to worship him, and to love his name, to be his
servants: every one that keepeth the sabbath from profaning it, and that
holdeth fast my covenant:

<span id="an_56:7">56:7</span> I will bring them into my holy mount, and
will make them joyful in my house of prayer: their holocausts, and their
victims shall please me upon my altar: for my house shall be called the
house of prayer, for all nations.

<span id="an_56:8">56:8</span> The Lord God, who gathereth the scattered
of Israel, saith: I will still gather unto him his congregation.

<span id="an_56:9">56:9</span> All ye beasts of the field come to
devour, all ye beasts of the forest.

<span id="an_56:10">56:10</span> His watchmen are all blind, they are
all ignorant: dumb dogs not able to bark, seeing vain things, sleeping
and loving dreams.

<span id="an_56:11">56:11</span> And meet impudent dogs, they never had
enough: the shepherds themselves knew no understanding: all have turned
aside into their own way, every one after his own gain, from the first
even to the last.

<span id="an_56:12">56:12</span> Come, let us take wine, and be filled
with drunkenness: and it shall be as to day, so also to morrow, and much
more.

<span id="an_57:1">57:1</span> THE just perisheth, and no man layeth it
to heart, and men of mercy are taken away, because there is none that
understandeth; for the just man is taken away from before the face of
evil.

<span id="an_57:2">57:2</span> Let peace come, let him rest in his bed
that hath walked in his uprightness.

<span id="an_57:3">57:3</span> But draw near hither, you sons of the
sorceress, the seed of the adulterer, and of the harlot.

<span id="an_57:4">57:4</span> Upon whom have you jested? upon whom have
you opened your mouth wide, and put out your tongue? are not you wicked
children, a false seed,

<span id="an_57:5">57:5</span> Who seek your comfort in idols under
every green tree, sacrificing children in the torrents, under the high
rocks?

<span id="an_57:6">57:6</span> In the parts of the torrent is thy
portion, this is thy lot: and thou hast poured out libations to them,
thou hast offered sacrifice. Shall I not be angry at these things?

<span id="an_57:7">57:7</span> Upon a high and lofty mountain thou hast
laid thy bed, and hast gone up thither to offer victims.

<span id="an_57:8">57:8</span> And behind the door, and behind the post
thou best set up thy remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself near
me, and hast received an adulterer: thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made
a covenant with them: thou hast loved their bed with open hand.

<span id="an_57:9">57:9</span> And thou hast adorned thyself for the
king with ointment, and hast multiplied thy perfumes. Thou hast sent thy
messengers far off, and wast debased even to hell.

<span id="an_57:10">57:10</span> Thou hast been wearied in the multitude
of thy ways: yet thou saidst not: I will rest: thou hast found life of
thy hand, therefore thou hast not asked.

<span id="an_57:11">57:11</span> For whom hast thou been solicitous and
afraid, that thou hast lied, and hast not been mindful of me, nor
thought on me in thy heart? for I am silent, and as one that seeth not,
and thou hast forgotten me.

<span id="an_57:12">57:12</span> I will declare thy justice, and thy
works shall not profit thee.

<span id="an_57:13">57:13</span> When thou shalt cry, let thy companies
deliver thee, but the wind shall carry them all off, a breeze shall take
them away, but he that putteth his trust in me, shall inherit the land,
and shall possess my holy mount.

<span id="an_57:14">57:14</span> And I will say: Make a way: give free
passage, turn out of the path, take away the stumblingblocks out of the
way of my people.

<span id="an_57:15">57:15</span> For thus saith the High and the Eminent
that inhabiteth eternity: and his name is Holy, who dwelleth in the high
and holy place, and with a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite.

<span id="an_57:16">57:16</span> For I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be angry unto the end: because the spirit shall go forth
from my face, end breathings I will make.

<span id="an_57:17">57:17</span> For the iniquity of his covetousness I
was angry, and I struck him: I hid my face from thee, and was angry: and
he went away wandering in his own heart.

<span id="an_57:18">57:18</span> I saw his ways, and I healed him, and
brought him back, and restored comforts to him, and to them that mourn
for him.

<span id="an_57:19">57:19</span> I created the fruit of the lips, peace,
peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, said the Lord,
and I healed him.

<span id="an_57:20">57:20</span> But the wicked are like the raging sea,
which cannot rest, and the waves thereof cast up dirt and mire.

<span id="an_57:21">57:21</span> There is no peace to the wicked, saith
the Lord God.

<span id="an_58:1">58:1</span> CRY, cease not, lift up thy voice like a
trumpet, and shew my people their wicked doings, and the house of Jacob
their sins.

<span id="an_58:2">58:2</span> For they seek me from day to day, sad
desire to know my ways, as a nation that hath done justice, and hath not
forsaken the judgment of their God: they ask of me the judgments of
justice: they are willing to approach to God.

<span id="an_58:3">58:3</span> Why have we fasted, and thou hast not
regarded: have we humbled our souls, and thou hast not taken notice?
Behold in the day of your fast your own will is found, and you exact of
all your debtors.

<span id="an_58:4">58:4</span> Behold you fast for debates and strife.
and strike with the fist wickedly. Do not fast as you have done until
this day, to make your cry to be heard on high.

<span id="an_58:5">58:5</span> Is this such a fast as I have chosen: for
a man to afflict his soul for a day? is this it, to wind his head about
like a circle, and to spread sackcloth and ashes? wilt thou call this a
fast, and a day acceptable to the Lord?

<span id="an_58:6">58:6</span> Is not this rather the fast that I have
chosen? loose the bands of wickedness, undo the bundles that oppress,
let them that are broken go free, and break asunder every burden.

<span id="an_58:7">58:7</span> Deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring
the needy and the harbourless into thy house: when thou shalt see one
naked, cover him, and despise not thy own flesh.

<span id="an_58:8">58:8</span> Then shall thy light break forth as the
morning, and thy health shall speedily arise, and thy justice shall go
before thy face, end the glory of the Lord shall gather thee up.

<span id="an_58:9">58:9</span> Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall
hear: thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou wilt take
away the chain out of the midst of thee, and cease to stretch out the
finger, and to speak that which profiteth not.

<span id="an_58:10">58:10</span> When thou shalt pour out thy soul to
the hungry, and shalt satisfy the afflicted soul then shall thy light
rise up in darkness, and thy darkness shall be as the noonday.

<span id="an_58:11">58:11</span> And the Lord will give thee rest
continually, and will fill thy soul with brightness, and deliver thy
bones, and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a fountain of
water whose waters shall not fail

<span id="an_58:12">58:12</span> And the places that have been desolate
for ages shall be built in thee: thou shalt raise up the foundations of
generation and generation: and thou shalt be called the repairer of the
fences, turning the paths into rest.

<span id="an_58:13">58:13</span> If thou turn away thy foot from the
sabbath, from doing thy own will in my holy day, and call the sabbath
delightful, and the holy of the Lord glorious, and glorify him, while
thou dost not thy own ways, and thy own will is not found: to speak a
word:

<span id="an_58:14">58:14</span> Then shalt thou be delighted in the
Lord, and I will lift thee up above the high places of the earth, and
will feed thee with the inheritance of Jacob thy father. For the mouth
of the Lord hath spoken it.

<span id="an_59:1">59:1</span> BEHOLD the hand of the Lord is not
shortened that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot
hear.

<span id="an_59:2">59:2</span> But your iniquities have divided between
you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he
should not hear.

<span id="an_59:3">59:3</span> For your hands are defiled with blood,
and your fingers with iniquity: your lips have spoken lies, and your
tongue uttereth iniquity.

<span id="an_59:4">59:4</span> There is none that calleth upon justice,
neither is there any one that judgeth truly: but they trust in a mere
nothing, and speak vanities: they have conceived labour, and brought
forth iniquity.

<span id="an_59:5">59:5</span> They have broken the eggs of asps, and
have woven the webs of spiders: he that shall eat of their eggs, shall
die: and that which is brought out, shall be hatched into a basilisk.

<span id="an_59:6">59:6</span> Their webs shall not be for clothing,
neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works are
unprofitable works, and the work of iniquity is in their hands.

<span id="an_59:7">59:7</span> Their feet run to evil, and make haste to
shed innocent blood: their thoughts are unprofitable thoughts: wasting
and destruction are in their ways.

<span id="an_59:8">59:8</span> They have not known the way of peace, and
there is no judgment in their steps: their paths are become crooked to
them, every one that treadeth in them, knoweth no peace.

<span id="an_59:9">59:9</span> Therefore is judgment far from us, and
justice shall not overtake us. We looked for light, and behold darkness:
brightness, and we have walked in the dark.

<span id="an_59:10">59:10</span> We have groped for the wall, and like
the blind we have groped as if we had no eyes: we have stumbled at
noonday as in darkness, we are in dark places as dead men.

<span id="an_59:11">59:11</span> We shall roar all of us like bears, and
shall lament as mournful doves. We have looked for judgment, and there
is none: for salvation, and it is far from us.

<span id="an_59:12">59:12</span> For our iniquities are multiplied
before thee, and our sins have testified against us: for our wicked
doings are with us, and we have known our iniquities:

<span id="an_59:13">59:13</span> In sinning and lying against the Lord:
and we have turned away so that we went not after our God, but spoke
calumny and transgression : we have conceived, and uttered from the
heart, words of falsehood.

<span id="an_59:14">59:14</span> And judgment is turned away backward,
and justice hath stood far off: because truth bath fallen down in the
street, and equity could not come in.

<span id="an_59:15">59:15</span> And truth hath been forgotten: and he
that departed from evil, lay open to be a prey: and the Lord saw, and it
appeared evil in his eyes, because there is no judgment.

<span id="an_59:16">59:16</span> And he saw that there is not a man: and
he stood astonished, because there is none to oppose himself: and his
own arm brought salvation to him, and his own justice supported him.

<span id="an_59:17">59:17</span> He put on justice as a breastplate, and
a helmet of salvation upon his head: he put on the garments of
vengeance, and was clad with zeal as with a cloak.

<span id="an_59:18">59:18</span> As unto revenge, as it were to repay
wrath to his adversaries, and a reward to his enemies: he will repay the
like to the islands.

<span id="an_59:19">59:19</span> And they from the west, shall fear the
name of the Lord: and they from the rising of the sun, his glory: when
he shall come as a violent stream, which the spirit of the Lord driveth
on:

<span id="an_59:20">59:20</span> And there shall come a redeemer to
Sion, and to them that return from iniquity in Jacob, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_59:21">59:21</span> This is my covenant with them, saith
the Lord: My spirit that is in thee, and my words that I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever.

<span id="an_60:1">60:1</span> ARISE, be enlightened, O Jerusalem: for
thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.

<span id="an_60:2">60:2</span> For behold darkness shall cover the
earth, and a mist the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and
his glory shall be seen upon thee.

<span id="an_60:3">60:3</span> And the Gentiles shall walk in thy light,
and kings in the brightness of thy rising.

<span id="an_60:4">60:4</span> Lift up thy eyes round about, and see:
all these are gathered together, they are come to thee: thy sons shah
come from afar, and thy daughters shall rise up at thy side.

<span id="an_60:5">60:5</span> Then shalt thou see, and abound, and thy
heart shall wonder and be enlarged, when the multitude of the sea shall
be converted to thee, the. strength of the Gentiles shall come to thee.

<span id="an_60:6">60:6</span> The multitude of camels shall cover thee,
the dromedaries of Madian and Epha: all they from Saba shall come,
bringing gold and frankincense: and shewing forth praise to the Lord.

<span id="an_60:7">60:7</span> All the flocks of Cedar shall be gathered
together unto thee, the rams of Nabaioth shall minister to thee: they
shall be offered upon my acceptable altar, and I will glorify the house
of my majesty.

<span id="an_60:8">60:8</span> Who are these, that fly as clouds, and as
doves to their windows?

<span id="an_60:9">60:9</span> For, the islands wait for me, and the
ships of the sea in the beginning: that I may bring thy sons from afar:
their silver, and their gold with them, to the name of the Lord thy God,
and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.

<span id="an_60:10">60:10</span> And the children of strangers shall
build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister to thee: for in my
wrath have I struck thee, and in my reconciliation have I had mercy upon
thee.

<span id="an_60:11">60:11</span> And thy gates shall be open
continually: they shall not be shut day nor night, that the strength of
the Gentiles may be brought to thee, and their kings may be brought.

<span id="an_60:12">60:12</span> For the nation and the kingdom that
will not serve thee, shall perish: and the Gentiles shall be wasted with
desolation.

<span id="an_60:13">60:13</span> The glory of Libanus shall come to
thee, the Ar tree, and the box tree, and the pine tree together, to
beautify the place of my sanctuary: and I will glorify the place of my
feet.

<span id="an_60:14">60:14</span> And the children of them that afflict
thee, shall come bowing down to thee, and all that slandered thee shall
worship the steps of thy feet, and shall call thee the city of the Lord,
the Sion of the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="an_60:15">60:15</span> Because thou wast forsaken, and hated,
and there was none that passed through thee, I will make thee to be an
everlasting glory, a joy unto generation and generation:

<span id="an_60:16">60:16</span> And thou shalt suck the milk of the
Gentiles, and thou shalt be nursed with the breasts of kings: and thou
shalt know that I am the Lord thy Saviour, and thy Redeemer, the Mighty
One of Jacob.

<span id="an_60:17">60:17</span> For brass I will bring gold, and for
iron I will bring silver: and for wood brass, and for stones iron: and I
will make thy visitation peace, and thy overseers justice.

<span id="an_60:18">60:18</span> Iniquity shall no more be heard in thy
land, wasting nor destruction in thy borders, and salvation shall
possess thy walls, and praise thy gates.

<span id="an_60:19">60:19</span> Thou shalt no more have the sun for thy
light by day, neither shall the brightness of the moon enlighten thee:
but the Lord shall be unto thee for an everlasting light, and thy God
for thy glory.

<span id="an_60:20">60:20</span> Thy sun shall go down no more, and thy
moon shall not decrease: for the Lord shall be unto thee for an
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

<span id="an_60:21">60:21</span> And thy people shall be all just, they
shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of
my hand to glorify me.

<span id="an_60:22">60:22</span> The least shall become a thousand, and
a little one a most strong nation: I the Lord will suddenly do this
thing in its time.

<span id="an_61:1">61:1</span> THE spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because the Lord hath anointed me: he hath sent me to preach to the
meek, to heal the contrite of heart, and to preach a release to the
captives, and deliverance to them that are shut up.

<span id="an_61:2">61:2</span> To proclaim the acceptable year of the
Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God: to comfort all that mourn:

<span id="an_61:3">61:3</span> To appoint to the mourners of Sion, and
to give them a crown for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, a garment
of praise for the spirit of grief: and they shall be called in it the
mighty ones of justice, the planting of the Lord to glorify hint.

<span id="an_61:4">61:4</span> And they shall build the places that have
been waste from of old, and shall raise up ancient ruins, and shall
repair the desolate cities, that were destroyed for generation and
generation.

<span id="an_61:5">61:5</span> And strangers shall stand and shall feed
your flocks: and the sons of strangers shall be your husbandmen, and the
dressers of your vines.

<span id="an_61:6">61:6</span> But you shall be called the priests of
the Lord: to you it shall be said: Ye ministers of our God: you shall
eat the riches of the Gentiles, and you shall pride yourselves in their
glory.

<span id="an_61:7">61:7</span> For your double confusion and shame, they
shall praise their part: therefore shall they receive double in their
land, everlasting joy shall be unto them.

<span id="an_61:8">61:8</span> For I am the Lord that love judgment, and
hate robbery in a holocaust: and I will make their work in truth, and I
will make a perpetual covenant with them.

<span id="an_61:9">61:9</span> And they shall know their seed among the
Gentiles, and their offspring in the midst of peoples: all that shall
see them, shall know them, that these are the seed which the Lord hath
blessed.

<span id="an_61:10">61:10</span> I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and
my soul shall be joyful in my God: for he hath clothed me with the
garments of salvation: and with the robe of justice he hath covered me,
as a bridegroom decked with a crown, and as a bride adorned with her
jewels.

<span id="an_61:11">61:11</span> For as the earth bringeth forth her
bud, and as the garden causeth her seed to shoot forth: so shall the
Lord God make justice to spring forth, and praise before all the
nations.

<span id="an_62:1">62:1</span> FOR Sion's sake I will not hold my peace,
and for the sake of Jerusalem, I will not rest till her just one come
forth as brightness, and her saviour be lighted as a lamp.

<span id="an_62:2">62:2</span> And the Gentiles shall see thy just one,
and all kings thy glorious one: and thou shalt be called by a new name,
which the mouth of the Lord shall name.

<span id="an_62:3">62:3</span> And thou shalt be a crown of glory in the
hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

<span id="an_62:4">62:4</span> Thou shalt no more be called Forsaken:
and thy land shall no more be called Desolate: but thou shalt be called
My pleasure in her, and thy land inhabited. Because the Lord hath been
well pleased with thee: and thy land shall be inhabited.

<span id="an_62:5">62:5</span> For the young man shall dwell with the
virgin, and thy children shall dwell in thee. And the bridegroom shall
rejoice over the bride, and thy God shall rejoice over thee.

<span id="an_62:6">62:6</span> Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, I have
appointed watchmen all the day, and all the night, they shall never hold
their peace. You that are mindful of the Lord, hold not your peace,

<span id="an_62:7">62:7</span> And give him no silence till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

<span id="an_62:8">62:8</span> The Lord hath sworn by his right hand,
and by the arm of his strength: Surely I will no more give thy corn to
be meat for thy enemies: and the sons of the strangers shall not drink
thy wine, for which thou hast laboured.

<span id="an_62:9">62:9</span> For they that gather it, shall eat it,
and shall praise the Lord: and they that bring it together, shall drink
it in my holy courts.

<span id="an_62:10">62:10</span> Go through, go through the gates,
prepare the way for the people, make the road plain, pick out the
stones, and lift up the standard to the people.

<span id="an_62:11">62:11</span> Behold the Lord hath made it to be
heard in the ends of the earth, tell the daughter of Sion: Behold thy
Saviour cometh: behold his reward is with him, and his work before him.

<span id="an_62:12">62:12</span> And they shall call them, The holy
people, the redeemed of the Lord. But thou shalt be called: A city
sought after, and not forsaken.

<span id="an_63:1">63:1</span> WHO is this that cometh from Edom, with
dyed garments from Bosra, this beautiful one in his robe, walking in the
greatness of his strength. I, that speak justice, and am a defender to
save.

<span id="an_63:2">63:2</span> Why then is thy apparel red, and thy
garments like theirs that tread in the winepress?

<span id="an_63:3">63:3</span> I have trodden the winepress alone, and
of the Gentiles there is not a man with me: I have trampled on them in
my indignation, and have trodden them down in my wrath, and their blood
is sprinkled upon my garments, and I have stained all my apparel.

<span id="an_63:4">63:4</span> For the day of vengeance is in my heart,
the year of my redemption is come.

<span id="an_63:5">63:5</span> I looked about, and there was none to
help: I sought, and there was none to give aid: and my own arm hath
saved for me, and my indignation itself hath helped me.

<span id="an_63:6">63:6</span> And I have trodden down the people in my
wrath, and have made them drunk in my indignation, and have brought down
their strength to the earth.

<span id="an_63:7">63:7</span> I will remember the tender mercies of the
Lord, the praise of the Lord for all the things that the Lord hath
bestowed upon us, and for the multitude of his good things to the house
of Israel, which he hath given them according to his kindness, and
according to the multitude of his mercies.

<span id="an_63:8">63:8</span> And he said: Surely they are my people,
children that will not deny: so he became their saviour.

<span id="an_63:9">63:9</span> In all their affliction he was not
troubled, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love, and in
his mercy he redeemed them, and he carried them and lifted them up all
the days of old.

<span id="an_63:10">63:10</span> But they provoked to wrath, and
afflicted the spirit of his Holy One: and he was turned to be their
enemy, and he fought against them.

<span id="an_63:11">63:11</span> And he remembered the days of old of
Moses, and of his people: Where is he that brought them up out of the
sea, with the shepherds of his flock? where is he that put in the midst
of them the spirit of his Holy One?

<span id="an_63:12">63:12</span> He that brought out Moses by the right
hand, by the arm of his majesty: that divided the waters before them, to
make himself an everlasting name.

<span id="an_63:13">63:13</span> He that led them out through the deep,
as a horse in the wilderness that stumbleth not.

<span id="an_63:14">63:14</span> As a beast that goeth down in the
field, the spirit of the Lord was their leader: so didst thou lead thy
people to make thyself a glorious name.

<span id="an_63:15">63:15</span> Look down from heaven, and behold from
thy holy habitation and the place of thy glory: where is thy zeal, and
thy strength, the multitude of thy bowels, and of thy mercies? they have
held back themselves from me.

<span id="an_63:16">63:16</span> For thou art our father, and Abraham
hath not known us, and Israel hath been ignorant of us: thou, O Lord,
art our father, our redeemer, from everlasting is thy name.

<span id="an_63:17">63:17</span> Why hast thou made us to err, O Lord,
from thy ways: why hast thou hardened our heart, that we should not fear
thee? return for the sake of thy servants, the tribes of thy
inheritance.

<span id="an_63:18">63:18</span> They have possessed thy holy people as
nothing: our enemies have trodden down thy sanctuary.

<span id="an_63:19">63:19</span> We are become as in the beginning, when
thou didst not rule over us, and when we were not called by thy name.

<span id="an_64:1">64:1</span> THAT thou wouldst rend the heavens, and
wouldst come down: the mountains would melt away at thy presence.

<span id="an_64:2">64:2</span> They would melt as at the burning of
fire, the waters would burn with fire, that thy name might be made known
to thy enemies: that the nations might tremble at thy presence.

<span id="an_64:3">64:3</span> When thou shalt do wonderful things, we
shall not bear them: thou didst come down, and at thy presence the
mountains melted away.

<span id="an_64:4">64:4</span> From the beginning of the world they have
not heard, nor perceived with the ears: the eye hath not seen, O God,
besides thee, what things thou hast prepared for them that wait for
thee.

<span id="an_64:5">64:5</span> Thou hast met him that rejoiceth, and
doth justice: in thy ways they shall remember thee: behold thou art
angry, and we have sinned: in them we have been always, and we shall be
saved.

<span id="an_64:6">64:6</span> And we are all become as one unclean, and
all our justices as the rag of a menstruous woman: and we have all
fallen as a leaf, and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.

<span id="an_64:7">64:7</span> There is none that calleth upon thy name:
that riseth up, and taketh hold of thee: thou hast hid thy face from us,
and hast crushed us in the hand of our iniquity.

<span id="an_64:8">64:8</span> And now, O Lord, thou art our father, and
we are clay: and thou art our maker, and we all are the works of thy
hands.

<span id="an_64:9">64:9</span> Be not very angry, O Lord, and remember
no longer our iniquity: behold, see we are all thy people.

<span id="an_64:10">64:10</span> The city of thy sanctuary is become a
desert, Sion is made a desert, Jerusalem is desolate.

<span id="an_64:11">64:11</span> The house of our holiness, and of our
glory, where our fathers praised thee, is burnt with fire, and all our
lovely things are turned into ruins.

<span id="an_64:12">64:12</span> Wilt thou refrain thyself, O Lord, upon
these things, wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us vehemently?

<span id="an_65:1">65:1</span> THEY have sought me that before asked not
for me, they have found me that sought me not. I said: Behold me, behold
me, to a nation that did not call upon my name.

<span id="an_65:2">65:2</span> I have spread forth my hands all the day
to an unbelieving people, who walk in a way that is not good after their
own thoughts.

<span id="an_65:3">65:3</span> A people that continually provoke me to
anger before my face: that immolate in gardens, and sacrifice upon
bricks.

<span id="an_65:4">65:4</span> That dwell in sepulchres, and sleep in
the temple of idols: that eat swine's flesh, and profane broth is in
their vessels.

<span id="an_65:5">65:5</span> That say: Depart from me, come not near
me, because thou art unclean: these shall be smoke in my anger, a fire
burning all the day.

<span id="an_65:6">65:6</span> Behold it is written before me: I will
not be silent, but I will render and repay into their bosom.

<span id="an_65:7">65:7</span> Your iniquities, and the iniquities of
your fathers together, saith the Lord, who have sacrificed upon the
mountains, and have reproached me upon the hills; and I will measure
back their first work in their bosom.

<span id="an_65:8">65:8</span> Thus saith the Lord: As if a grain be
found in a cluster, and it be said: Destroy it not, because it is a
blessing: so will I do for the sake of my servants, that I may not
destroy the whole.

<span id="an_65:9">65:9</span> And I will bring forth a seed out of
Jacob, and out of Juda a possessor of my mountains: and my elect shall
inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.

<span id="an_65:10">65:10</span> And the plains shall be turned to folds
of hocks, and the valley of Achor into a place for the herds to lie down
in, for my people that have sought me.

<span id="an_65:11">65:11</span> And you, that have forsaken the Lord,
that have forgotten my holy mount, that set a table for fortune, and
offer libations upon it,

<span id="an_65:12">65:12</span> I will number you in the sword, and you
shall all fall by slaughter: because I called and you did not answer: I
spoke, and you did not hear: and you did evil in my eyes, and you have
chosen the things that displease me.

<span id="an_65:13">65:13</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord God:
Behold my servants shall eat, and you shall be hungry: behold my
servants shall drink, and you shall be thirsty.

<span id="an_65:14">65:14</span> Behold my servants shall rejoice, and
you shall be confounded: behold my servants shall praise for joyfulness
of heart, and you shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for
grief of spirit.

<span id="an_65:15">65:15</span> And you shall leave your name for an
execration to my elect: and the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his
servants by another name.

<span id="an_65:16">65:16</span> In which he that is blessed upon the
earth, shall be blessed in God, amen: and he that sweareth in the earth,
shall swear by God, amen: because the former distresses are forgotten,
and because they are hid from my eyes.

<span id="an_65:17">65:17</span> For behold I create new heavens, and a
new earth: and the former things shall not be in remembrance, and they
shell not come upon the heart.

<span id="an_65:18">65:18</span> But you shall be glad and rejoice for
ever in these things, which I create: for behold I create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, end the people thereof joy.

<span id="an_65:19">65:19</span> And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and
joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall no more be heard in
her, nor the voice of crying.

<span id="an_65:20">65:20</span> There shall no more be an infant of
days there, nor an old man that shall not fill up his days: for the
child shall die a hundred years old, and the sinner being a hundred
years old shall be accursed.

<span id="an_65:21">65:21</span> And they shall build houses, and
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruits of
them.

<span id="an_65:22">65:22</span> They shall not build, and another
inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a
tree, so shall be the days of my people, and the works of their hands
shall be of long continuance.

<span id="an_65:23">65:23</span> My elect shall not labour in vain, nor
bring forth in trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the
Lord, and their posterity with them.

<span id="an_65:24">65:24</span> And it shall come to pass, that before
they call, I will hear; as they are yet speaking, I will hear.

<span id="an_65:25">65:25</span> The wolf and the lamb shall feed
together; the lion and the ox shall eat straw; and dust shall be the
serpent's food: they shall not hurt nor kill in all my holy mountain,
saith the Lord.

<span id="an_66:1">66:1</span> THUS saith the Lord: Heaven is my throne,
and the earth my footstool: what is this house that you will build to
me? and what is this place of my rest?

<span id="an_66:2">66:2</span> My hand made all these things, and all
these things were made, saith the Lord. But to whom shall I have
respect, but to him that is poor and little, and of a contrite spirit,
and that trembleth at my words?

<span id="an_66:3">66:3</span> He that sacrificeth an ox, is as if he
slew a man: he that killeth a sheep in sacrifice, as if he should brain
a dog: he that offereth an oblation, as if he should offer swine's
blood; he that remembereth incense, as if he should bless an idol. All
these things have they chosen in their ways, and their soul is delighted
in their abominations.

<span id="an_66:4">66:4</span> Wherefore I also will choose their
mockeries, and will bring upon them the things they feared: y because I
called, and there was none that would answer; I have spoken, and they
heard not; and they have done evil in my eyes, and have chosen the
things that displease me.

<span id="an_66:5">66:5</span> Hear the word of the Lord, you that
tremble at his word: Your brethren that hate you, and cast you out for
my name's sake, have said: Let the Lord be glorified, and we shall see
in your joy: but they shall be confounded.

<span id="an_66:6">66:6</span> A voice of the people from the city, a
voice from the temple, the voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense
to his enemies.

<span id="an_66:7">66:7</span> Before she was in labour, she brought
forth; before her time came to be delivered, she brought forth a man
child.

<span id="an_66:8">66:8</span> Who hath ever heard such a thing? and who
hath seen the like to this? shall the earth bring forth in one day? or
shall a nation be brought forth at once, because Sion hath been in
labour, and hath brought forth her children?

<span id="an_66:9">66:9</span> Shall not I that make others to bring
forth children, myself bring forth, saith the Lord? shall I, that give
generation to others, be barren, saith the Lord thy God?

<span id="an_66:10">66:10</span> Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad
with her, all you that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all you that
mourn for her.

<span id="an_66:11">66:11</span> That you may suck, and be filled with
the breasts of her consolations: that you may milk out, and flow with
delights, from the abundance of her glory.

<span id="an_66:12">66:12</span> For thus saith the Lord: Behold I will
bring upon her as it were a river of peace, and as an overflowing
torrent the glory of the Gentiles, which you shall suck; you shall be
carried at the breasts, end upon the knees they shall caress you.

<span id="an_66:13">66:13</span> As one whom the mother caresseth, so
will I comfort you, and you shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

<span id="an_66:14">66:14</span> You shah see and your heart shall
rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb, and the hand of the
Lord shall be known to his servants, and he shall be angry with his
enemies.

<span id="an_66:15">66:15</span> For behold the Lord will come with
fire, and his chariots are like a whirlwind, to render his wrath in
indignation, and his rebuke with flames of fire.

<span id="an_66:16">66:16</span> For the Lord shall judge by fire, and
by his sword unto all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many.

<span id="an_66:17">66:17</span> They that were sanctified, and thought
themselves clean in the gardens behind the gate within, they that did
eat swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse: they shall be
consumed together, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_66:18">66:18</span> But I know their works, and their
thoughts: I come that I may gather them together with all nations and
tongues: and they shall come and shall see my glory.

<span id="an_66:19">66:19</span> And I will set a sign among them, and I
will send of them that shall be saved, to the Gentiles into the sea,
into Africa, and Lydia them that draw the bow: into Italy, and Greece,
to the islands afar off, to them that have not heard of me, and have not
seen my glory. And they shall declare my glory to the Gentiles:

<span id="an_66:20">66:20</span> And they shall bring all your brethren
out of all nations for a gift to the Lord, upon horses, and in chariots,
and in litters, and on mules, and in coaches, to my holy mountain
Jerusalem, saith the Lord, as if the children of Israel should bring an
offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord.

<span id="an_66:21">66:21</span> And I will take of them to be priests,
and Levites, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_66:22">66:22</span> For as the new heavens, and the new
earth, which I will make to stand before me, saith the Lord: so shall
your seed stand, and your name.

<span id="an_66:23">66:23</span> And there shall be month after month,
and sabbath after sabbath: and all flesh shall come to adore before my
face, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_66:24">66:24</span> And they shall go out, and see the
carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me: their worm shah
not die, and their fire shall not be quenched: and they shall be a
loathsome sight to all flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah](jer)
