[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jos)  [Next](rut.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Judges

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> After the death of Josue the children of
Israel consulted the Lord, saying: Who shall go up before us against the
Chanaanite, and shall be the leader of the war?

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And the Lord said: Juda shall go up: behold
I have delivered the land into his hands.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And Juda said to Simeon his brother: Come
up with me into my lot, and fight against the Chanaanite, that I also
may go along with thee into thy lot. And Simeon went with him.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And Juda went up, and the Lord delivered
the Chanaanite, and the Pherezite into their hands: and they slew of
them in Bezec ten thousand men.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And they found Adonibezec in Bezec, and
fought against him, and they defeated the Chanaanite, and the Pherezite.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And Adonibezec fled: and they pursued after
him and took him, and cut off his fingers and toes.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And Adonibezec said: Seventy kings having
their fingers and toes cut off, gathered up the leavings of the meat
under my table: as I have done, so hath God requited me. And they
brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the children of Juda besieging
Jerusalem, took it, and put it to the sword, and set the whole city on
fire.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And afterwards they went down and fought
against the Chanaanite, who dwelt in the mountains, and in the south,
and in the plains.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And Juda going forward against the
Chanaanite, that dwelt in Hebron (the name whereof was in former times
Cariath-Arbe) slew Sesai, and Ahiman, and Tholmai:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And departing from thence he went to the
inhabitants of Dabir, the ancient name of which was Cariath-Sepher, that
is, the city of letters.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And Caleb said: He that shall take
Cariath-Sepher, and lay it waste, to him will I give my daughter Axa to
wife.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Othoniel the son of Cenez, the
younger brother of Caleb, having taken it, he gave him Axa his daughter
to wife.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And as she was going on her way her
husband admonished her to ask a field of her father. And as she sighed
sitting on her ass, Caleb said to her: What aileth thee?

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> But she answered: Give me a blessing, for
thou hast given me a dry land: give me also a watery land. So Caleb gave
her the upper and the nether watery ground.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And the children of the Cinite, the
kinsman of Moses, went up from the city of palms, with the children of
Juda into the wilderness of his lot, which is at the south side of Arad,
and they dwelt with him.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And Juda went with Simeon his brother,
and they together defeated the Chanaanites that dwelt in Sephaath, and
slew them. And the name of the city was called Horma, that is, Anathema.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And Juda took Gaza with its confines, and
Ascalon and Accaron with their confines.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And the Lord was with Juda, and he
possessed the hill country: but was not able to destroy the inhabitants
of the valley, because they had many chariots armed with scythes.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses
had said, who destroyed out of it the three sons of Enac.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> But the sons of Benjamin did not destroy
the Jebusites that inhabited Jerusalem: and the Jebusite hath dwelt with
the sons of Benjamin in Jerusalem until this present day.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> The house of Joseph also went up against
Bethel, and the Lord was with them.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> For when they were besieging the city,
which before was called Luza,

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> They saw a man coming out of the city,
and they said to him: Shew us the entrance into the city, and we will
shew thee mercy.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And when he had shewn them, they smote
the city with the edge of the sword: but that man and all his kindred
they let go:

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> Who being sent away, went into the land
of Hethim, and built there a city, and called it Luza: which is so
called until this day.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> Manasses also did not destroy Bethsan,
and Thanac with their villages, nor the inhabitants of Dor, and Jeblaam,
and Mageddo with their villages. And the Chanaanite began to dwell with
them.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> But after Israel was grown strong he made
them tributaries, and would not destroy them.

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Ephraim also did not slay the Chanaanite
that dwelt in Gazer, but dwelt with him.

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Zabulon destroyed not the inhabitants of
Cetron, and Naalol: but the Chanaanite dwelt among them, and became
their tributaries.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Aser also destroyed not the inhabitants
of Accho, and of Sidon, of Ahalab, and of Achazib, and of Helba, and of
Aphec, and of Rohob:

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> And he dwelt in the midst of the
Chanaanites the inhabitants of that land, and did not slay them.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> Nephtali also destroyed not the
inhabitants of Bethsames, and of Bethanath: and he dwelt in the midst of
the Chanaanites the inhabitants of the land, and the Bethsamites and
Bethanites were tributaries to him.

<span id="an_1:34">1:34</span> And the Amorrhite straitened the children
of Dan in the mountain, and gave them not place to go down to the plain:

<span id="an_1:35">1:35</span> And he dwelt in the mountain Hares, that
is, of potsherds, in Aialon and Salebim. And the hand of the house of
Joseph was heavy upon him, and he became tributary to him.

<span id="an_1:36">1:36</span> And the border of the Amorrhite was from
the ascent of the scorpion, the rock, and the higher places.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And an angel of the Lord went up from
Galgal to the place of weepers, and said: I made you go out of Egypt,
and have brought you into the land for which I swore to your fathers:
and I promised that I would not make void my covenant with you for ever:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> On condition that you should not make a
league with the inhabitants of this land, but should throw down their
altars: and you would not hear my voice: why have you done this?

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Wherefore I would not destroy them from
before your face: that you may have enemies, and their gods may be your
ruin.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And when the angel of the Lord spoke these
words to all the children of Israel, they lifted up their voice, and
wept.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And the name of that place was called, The
place of weepers, or of tears: and there they offered sacrifices to the
Lord.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And Josue sent away the people, and the
children of Israel went every one to his own possession to hold it:

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And they served the Lord all his days, and
the days of the ancients, that lived a long time after him, and who knew
all the works of the Lord, which he had done for Israel.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Josue the son of Nun, the servant of
the Lord, died, being a hundred and ten years old,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And they buried him in the borders of his
possession in Thamnathsare in mount Ephraim, on the north side of mount
Gaas.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And all that generation was gathered to
their fathers: and there arose others that knew not the Lord, and the
works which he had done for Israel.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And the children of Israel did evil in
the sight of the Lord, and they served Baalim.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And they left the Lord the God of their
fathers, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt: and they
followed strange gods, and the gods of the people that dwelt round about
them, and they adored them: and they provoked the Lord to anger.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Forsaking him, and serving Baal and
Astaroth.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And the Lord being angry against Israel,
delivered them into the hands of plunderers: who took them and sold them
to their enemies, that dwelt round about: neither could they stand
against their enemies:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> But whithersoever they meant to go, the
hand of the Lord was upon them, as he had said, and as he had sworn to
them: and they were greatly distressed.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And the Lord raised up judges, to deliver
them from the hands of those that oppressed them: but they would not
hearken to them,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Committing fornication with strange gods,
and adoring them. They quickly forsook the way, in which their fathers
had walked: and hearing the commandments of the Lord, they did all
things contrary.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And when the Lord raised them up judges,
in their days he was moved to mercy, and heard the groanings of the
afflicted, and delivered them from the slaughter of the oppressors.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But after the judge was dead, they
returned, and did much worse things than their fathers had done,
following strange gods, serving them and adoring them. They left not
their own inventions, and the stubborn way, by which they were
accustomed to walk.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against Israel, and he said: Behold this nation hath made void my
covenant, which I had made with their fathers, and hath despised to
hearken to my voice:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I also will not destroy the nations which
Josue left, when he died:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> That through them I may try Israel,
whether they will keep the way of the Lord, and walk in it, as their
fathers kept it, or not.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> The Lord therefore left all these
nations, and would not quickly destroy them, neither did he deliver them
into the hands of Josue.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> These are the nations which the Lord left,
that by them he might instruct Israel, and all that had not known the
wars of the Chanaanites:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> That afterwards their children might learn
to fight with their enemies, and to be trained up to war:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The five princes of the Philistines, and
all the Chanaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hevites that dwelt in
mount Libanus, from mount Baal Hermon to the entering into Emath.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And he left them, that he might try Israel
by them, whether they would hear the commandments of the Lord, which he
had commanded their fathers by the hand of Moses, or not.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> So the children of Israel dwelt in the
midst of the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, and the Amorrhite, and the
Pherezite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And they took their daughters to wives, and
they gave their own daughters to their sons, and they served their gods.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And they did evil in the sight of the Lord,
and they forgot their God, and served Baalim and Astaroth.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And the Lord being angry with Israel,
delivered them into the hands of Chusan Rasathaim king of Mesopotamia,
and they served him eight years.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And they cried to the Lord, who raised them
up a saviour, and delivered them, to wit, Othoniel the son of Cenez, the
younger brother of Caleb:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And the spirit of the Lord was in him,
and he judged Israel. And he went out to fight, and the Lord delivered
into his hands Chusan Rasathaim king of Syria, and he overthrew him.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> And the land rested forty years, and
Othoniel the son of Cenez died.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And the children of Israel did evil again
in the sight of the Lord: who strengthened against them Eglon king of
Moab: because they did evil in his sight.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And he joined to him the children of
Ammon, and Amalec: and he went and overthrew Israel, and possessed the
city of palm trees.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> And the children of Israel served Eglon
king of Moab eighteen years:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And afterwards they cried to the Lord,
who raised them up a saviour called Aod, the son of Gera, the son of
Jemini, who used the left hand as well as the right. And the children of
Israel sent presents to Eglon king of Moab by him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And he made himself a two-edged sword,
with a haft in the midst of the length of the palm of the hand, and was
girded therewith under his garment on the right thigh.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And he presented the gifts to Eglon king
of Moab. Now Eglon was exceeding fat.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And when he had presented the gifts unto
him, he followed his companions that came along with him.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Then returning from Galgal, where the
idols were, be said to the king: I have a secret message to thee, O
king. And he commanded silence: and all being gone out that were about
him,

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Aod went in to him: now he was sitting in
a summer parlour alone, and he said: I have a word from God to thee. And
he forthwith rose up from his throne,

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> And Aod put forth his left hand, and took
the dagger from his right thigh, and thrust it into his belly,

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> With such force that the haft went in
after the blade into the wound, and was closed up with the abundance of
fat. So that he did not draw out the dagger, but left it in his body as
he had struck it in. And forthwith by the secret parts of nature the
excrements of the belly came out.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> But Aod carefully shutting the doors of
the parlour and locking them,

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Went out by a postern door. And the
king's servants going in, saw the doors of the parlour shut, and they
said: Perhaps he is easing nature in his summer parlour.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And waiting a long time till they were
ashamed, and seeing that no man opened the door, they took a key: and
opening, they found their lord lying dead on the ground.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> But Aod, while they were in confusion,
escaped, and passed by the place of the idols, from whence he had
returned. And he came to Seirath:

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> And forthwith he sounded the trumpet in
mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel went down with him, he himself
going in the front.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> And he said to them: Follow me: for the
Lord hath delivered our enemies the Moabites into our hands. And they
went down after him, and seized upon the fords of the Jordan, which are
in the way to Moab: and they suffered no man to pass over.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> But they slew of the Moabites at that
time, about ten thousand, all strong and Valiant men: none of them could
escape.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> And Moab was humbled that day under the
hand of Israel: and the land rested eighty years.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> After him was Samgar the son of Anath,
who slew of the Philistines six hundred men with a ploughshare: and he
also defended Israel.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And the children of Israel again did evil
in the sight of the Lord after the death of Aod,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And the Lord delivered them up into the
hands of Jaban king of Chanaan, who reigned in Asor: and he had a
general of his army named Sisara, and he dwelt in Haroseth of the
Gentiles.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the children of Israel cried to the
Lord: for he had nine hundred chariots set with scythes, and for twenty
years had grievously oppressed them.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And there was at that time Debbora a
prophetess the wife of Lapidoth, who judged the people,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And she sat under a palm tree, which was
called by her name, between Rama and Bethel in mount Ephraim: and the
children of Israel came up to her for all judgment.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And she sent and called Barac the son of
Abinoem out of Cedes in Nephtali: and she said to him: The Lord God of
Israel hath commanded thee: Go, and lead an army to mount Thabor, and
thou shalt take with thee ten thousand fighting men of the children of
Nephtali, and of the children of Zabulon:

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I will bring unto thee in the place of
the torrent Cison, Sisara the general of Jabin's army, and his chariots,
and all his multitude, and will deliver them into thy hand.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And Barac said to her: If thou wilt come
with me, I will go: if thou wilt not come with me, I will not go.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> She said to him: I will go indeed with
thee, but at this time the victory shall not be attributed to thee,
because Sisara shall be delivered into the hand of a woman. Debbora
therefore arose, and went with Barac to Cedes.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And he called unto him Zabulon and
Nepbtali, and went up with ten thousand fighting men, having Debbora in
his company.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Now Haber the Cinite had some time before
departed from the rest of the Cinites his brethren the sons of Hobab,
the kinsman of Moses: and had pitched his tents unto the valley which is
called Sellnim, and was near Cedes.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And it was told Sisara, that Barac the
son of Ablinoem was gone up to mount Thabor:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And he gathered together his nine hundred
chariots armed with scythes, and all his army from Haroseth of the
Gentiles to the torrent Cison.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And Debbora said to Barac: Arise, for
this is the day wherein the Lord hath delivered Sisara into thy hands:
behold he is thy leader. And Barac went down from mount Thabor, and ten
thousand fighting men with him.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And the Lord struck a terror into Sisara,
and all his chariots, and all his multitude, with the edge of the sword,
at the sight of Barac, insomuch that Sisara leaping down from off his
chariot, fled away on foot.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Barac pursued after the fleeing
chariots and the army unto Haroseth of the Gentiles, and all the
multitude of the enemies was utterly destroyed.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But Sisara fleeing came to the tent of
Jahel the wife of Haber the Cinite, for there was peace between Jabin
the king of Asor, and the house of Haber the Cinite.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Jahel went forth to meet Sisara, and
said to him: Come in to me, my lord, come in, fear not. He went in to
her tent, and being covered by her with a cloak,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Said to her: Give me, I beseech thee, a
little water, for I am very thirsty. She opened a bottle of milk, and
gave him to drink, and covered him.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And Sisara said to her: Stand before the
door of the tent, and when any shall come and inquire of thee, saying:
Is there any man here? thou shalt say: There is none.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> So Jahel Haber's wife took a nail of the
tent, and taking also a hammer: and going in softly, and with silence,
she put the nail upon the temples of his head, and striking it With the
hammer, drove it through his brain fast into the ground: and so passing
from deep sleep to death, he fainted away and died.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And behold Barac came pursuing after
Sisara: and Jahel went out to meet him, and said to him: Come, and I
will shew thee, the man whom thou seekest. And when he came into her
tent, be saw Sisara lying dead, and the nail fastened in his temples.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> So God that day humbled Jabin the king of
Chanaan before the children of Israel:

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Who grew daily stronger, and with a
mighty hand overpowered Jabin king of Chanaan, till they quite destroyed
him.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> In that day Debbora and Barac son of
Abinoem sung, and said:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> O you of Israel, that have willingly
offered your lives to danger, bless the Lord.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Hear, O ye kings, give ear, ye princes: It
is I, it is I, that will sing to the Lord, I will sing to the Lord the
God of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> O Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, and
passedst by the regions of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens
dropped water.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> The mountains melted before the face of the
Lord, and Sinai before the face of the Lord the God of Israel.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> In the days of Samgar the son of Anath, in
the days of Jahel the paths rested: and they that went by them, walked
through by-ways.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The valiant men ceased, and rested in
Israel: until Debbora arose, a mother arose in Israel.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> The Lord chose new wars, and he himself
overthrew the gates of the enemies: a shield and spear was not seen
among forty thousand of Israel.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> My heart loveth the princes of Israel: O
you that of your own good will offered yourselves to danger, bless the
Lord.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Speak, you that ride upon fair asses, and
you that sit in judgment, and walk in the way.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Where the chariots were dashed together,
and the army of the enemies was choked, there let the justices of the
Lord be rehearsed, and his clemency towards the brave men of Israel:
then the people of the Lord went down to the gates, and obtained the
sovereignty.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Arise, arise, O Debbora, arise, arise,
and utter a canticle. Arise, Barac, and take hold of thy captives, O son
of Abinoem.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> The remnants of the people are saved, the
Lord hath fought among the valiant ones.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> Out of Ephraim he destroyed them into
Amalec, and after him out of Benjamin into thy people, O Amalec: Out of
Machir there came down princes, and out of Zabulon they that led the
army to fight.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The captains of Issachar were with
Debbora, and followed the steps of Barac, who exposed himself to danger,
as one going headlong, and into a pit. Ruben being divided against
himself, there was found a strife of courageous men.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Why dwellest thou between two borders,
that thou mayest hear the bleatings of the flocks? Ruben being divided
against himself, there was found a strife of courageous men.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Galaad rested beyond the Jordan, and Dan
applied himself to ships: Aser dwelt on the sea shore, and abode in the
havens.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But Zabulon and Nephtali offered their
lives to death in the region of Merome.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> The kings came and fought, the kings of
Chanaan fought in Thanach by the waters of Mageddo, and yet they took no
spoils.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> War from heaven was made against them,
the stars remaining in their order and courses fought against Sisara.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> The torrent of Cison dragged their
carcasses, the torrent of Cadumim, the torrent of Cisoii: tread thou, my
soul, upon the strong ones.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> The hoofs of the horses were broken
whilst the stoutest of the enemies fled amain, and fell headlong down.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Curse ye the land of Meroz, said the
angel of the Lord: curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not
to the help of the Lord, to help his most valiant men.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Blessed among women be Jahel the wife of
Haber the Cinite, and blessed be she in her tent.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> He asked her water and she gave him milk,
and offered him butter in a dish fit for princes.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> She put her left hand to the nail, and
her right hand to the workman's hammer, and she struck Sisara, seeking
in his head a place for the wound, and strongly piercing through his
temples.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> At her feet he fell: he fainted, and he
died: he rolled before her feet, and he lay lifeless and wretched.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> His mother looked out at a window, and
howled: and she spoke from the dining room: Why is his chariot so long
in coming back? Why are the feet of his horses so slow?

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> One that was wiser than the rest of his
wives, returned this answer to her mother in law:

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> Perhaps he is now dividing the spoils,
and the fairest of the women is chosen out for him: garments of divers
colours are given to Sisara for his prey, and furniture of different
kinds is heaped together to adorn the necks.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> So let all thy enemies perish, O Lord:
but let them that love thee shine, as the sun shineth in his rising.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> And the land rested for forty years.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And the children of Israel again did evil
in the sight of the Lord: and he delivered them into the hand of Madian
seven years.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And they were grievously oppressed by them.
And they made themselves dens and eaves in the mountains, and strong
holds to resist.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And when Israel had sown, Madian and
Amalec, and the rest of the eastern nations came up:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And pitching their tents among them, wasted
all things as they were in the blade even to the entrance of Gaza: and
they left nothing at all in Israel for sustenance of life, nor sheep,
nor oxen, nor asses.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For they and all their flocks came with
their tents, and like locusts filled all places, an innumerable
multitude of men, and of camels, wasting whatsoever they touched.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And Israel was humbled exceedingly in the
sight of Madian.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he cried to the Lord desiring help
against the Madianites.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And he sent unto them a prophet, and he
spoke: Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel: I made you to come up out
of Egypt, and brought you out of the house of bondage,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And delivered you out of the hands of the
Egyptians, and of all the enemies that afflicted you: and I cast them
out at your coming in, and gave you their land.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And I said: I am the Lord your God, fear
not the gods of the Amorrhites, in whose land you dwell. And you would
not hear my voice.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And an angel of the Lord came, and sat
under an oak, that was in Ephra, and belonged to Joas the father of the
family of Ezri. And when Gedeon his son was threshing and cleansing
wheat by the winepress, to flee from Madian,

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> The angel of the Lord appeared to him,
and said: The Lord is with thee, O most valiant of men.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And Gedeon said to him: I beseech thee,
my lord, if the Lord be with us, why have these evils fallen upon us?
Where are his miracles, which our fathers have told us of, saying: The
Lord brought us Out of Egypt? but now the Lord hath forsaken us, and
delivered us into the bands of Madian.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And the Lord looked upon him, and said:
Go in this thy strength, and then shalt deliver Israel out of the hand
of Madian: know that I have sent thee.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> He answered and said: I beseech thee, my
lord, wherewith shall I deliver Israel? Behold my family is the meanest
in Manasses, and I am the least in my father's house.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And the Lord said to him: I will be with
thee: and thou shalt cut off Madian as one man.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And he said: If I have found grace before
thee, give me a sign that it is thou that speakest to me,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> And depart not hence, till I return to
thee, and bring a sacrifice, and offer it to thee. And he answered: I
will wait thy coming.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> So Gedeon went in, and boiled a kid, and
made unleavened loaves of a measure of flour: and putting the flesh in a
basket, and the broth of the flesh into a pot, he carried all under the
oak, and presented to him.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> And the angel of the Lord said to him:
Take the flesh and the unleavened loaves, and lay them upon that rock,
and pour out the broth thereon. And when he had done so,

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> The angel of the Lord put forth the tip
of the rod, which he held in his hand, and touched the flesh and the
unleavened loaves: and there arose a fire from the rock, and consumed
the flesh and the unleavened loaves: and the angel of the Lord vanished
out of his sight.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And Gedeon seeing that it was the angel
of the Lord, said: Alas, my Lord God: for I have seen the angel of the
Lord face to face.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And the Lord said to him: Peace be with
thee: fear not, thou shalt not die.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> And Gedeon built there an altar to the
Lord, and called it the Lord's peace, until this present day. And when
he was yet in Ephra, which is of the family of Ezri,

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> That night the Lord said to him: Take a
bullock of thy father's, and another bullock of seven years, and thou
shalt destroy the altar of Baal, which is thy father's: and cut down the
grove that is about the altar:

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> And thou shalt build an altar to the Lord
thy God in the top of this rock, whereupon thou didst lay the sacrifice
before: and thou shalt take the second bullock, and shalt offer a
holocaust upon a pile of the wood, which thou shalt cut down out of the
grove.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Then Gedeon taking ten men of his
servants, did as the Lord had commanded him. But fearing his father's
house, and the men of that city, he would not do it by day, but did all
by night.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And when the men of that town were risen
in the morning, they saw the altar of Baal destroyed, and the grove cut
down, and the second bullock laid upon the altar, which then was built.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> And they said one to another: Who hath
done this? And when they inquired for the author of the fact, it was
said: Gedeon the son of Joas did all this.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And they said to Joas: Bring out thy son
hither, that he may die: because he hath destroyed the altar of Baal,
and hath cut down his grove.

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> He answered them: Are you the avengers of
Baal, that you fight for him? he that is his adversary, let him die
before to morrow light appear: if he be a god, let him revenge himself
on him that hath cast down his altar.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> From that day Gedeon was called Jerobaal,
because Joss had said: Let Baal revenge himself on him that hath cast
down his altar.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> Now all Madian, and Amalec, and the
eastern people were gathered together, and passing over the Jordan,
camped in the valley of Jezrael.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> But the spirit of the Lord came upon
Gedeon, and be sounded the trumpet and called together the house of
Abiezer, to follow him.

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> And he sent messengers into all Manasses,
and they also followed him: and other messengers into Aser and Zabulon
and Nephtali, and they came to meet him.

<span id="an_6:36">6:36</span> And Gedeon said to God: If thou wilt save
Israel by my hand, as thou hast said,

<span id="an_6:37">6:37</span> I will put this fleece of wool on the
floor: if there be dew on the fleece only, and it be dry on all the
ground beside, I, shall know that by my hand, as thou hast said, thou
wilt deliver Israel.

<span id="an_6:38">6:38</span> And it was so. And rising before day
wringing the fleece, he filled a vessel with the dew.

<span id="an_6:39">6:39</span> And he said again to God: let not thy
wrath be kindled against me if I try once more, seeking a sign in the
fleece. I pray that the fleece only may be dry, and all the ground wet
with dew.

<span id="an_6:40">6:40</span> And God did that night as he had
requested: and it was dry on the fleece only, and there was dew on all
the ground.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Then Jerobaal, who is the same as Gedeon,
rising up early and all the people with him, came to the fountain that
is called Harad. Now the camp of Madian was in the valley on the north
side of the high hill.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And the Lord said to Gedeon: The people
that are with thee are many, and Madian shall not be delivered into
their hands: lest Israel should glory against me, and say: I was
delivered by my own strength.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Speak to the people, and proclaim in the
hearing of all, Whosoever is fearful and timorous, let him return. So
two and twenty thousand men went away from mount Galaad and returned
home, and only ten thousand remained.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> And the Lord said to Gedeon: The people are
still too many, bring them to the waters, and there I will try them: and
of whom I shall say to thee, This shall go with thee, let him go: whom I
shall forbid to go, let him return.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And when the people were come down to the
waters, the Lord said to Gedeon: They that shall lap the water with
their tongues, as dogs are wont to lap, thou shalt set apart by
themselves: but they that shall drink bowing down their knees, shall be
on the other side.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And the number of them that had lapped
water, casting it with the hand to their mouth, was three hundred men:
and all the rest of the multitude had drunk kneeling.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And the Lord said to Gedeon: By the three
hundred men, that lapped water, I will save you, and deliver Madian into
thy hand: but let all the rest of the people return to their place.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> So taking victuals and trumpets according
to their number, he ordered all the rest of the multitude to depart to
their tents: and he with the three hundred gave himself to the battle.
Now the camp of Madian was beneath him in the valley.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> The same night the Lord said to him: Arise,
and go down into the camp: because I have delivered them into thy hand.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> But if thou be afraid to go alone, let
Phara thy servant go down with thee.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> And when thou shalt hear what they are
saying, then shall thy hands be strengthened, and thou shalt go down
more secure to the enemies' camp. And he went down with Phara his
servant into part of the camp, where was the watch of men in arms.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> But Madian and Amalec, and all the
eastern people lay scattered in the valley, as a multitude of locusts:
their camels also were innumerable as the sand that lieth on the sea
shore.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And when Gedeon was come, one told his
neighbour a dream: and in this manner related what he had seen: I dreamt
a dream, and it seemed to me as if a hearth cake of barley bread rolled
and came down into the camp of Madian: and when it was come to a tent it
struck it, and beat it down flat to the ground.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> He to whom he spoke, answered: This is
nothing else but the sword of Gedeon the son of Joas a man of Israel.
For the Lord hath delivered Madian, and all their camp into his hand.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And when Gedeon had heard the dream, and
the interpretation thereof, he adored: and returned to the camp of
Israel, and said: Arise, for the Lord hath delivered the camp of Madian
into our hands.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And he divided the three hundred men into
three parts, and gave them trumpets in their hands, and empty pitchers,
and lamps within the pitchers.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And he said to them: What you shall see
me do, do you the same: I will go into one part of the camp, and do you
as I shall do.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> When the trumpet shall sound in my hand,
do you also blow the trumpets on every side of the camp.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And Gedeon, and the three hundred men
that were with him, went into part of the camp, at the beginning of the
midnight watch, and the watchmen being alarmed, they began to sound
their trumpets, and to clap the pitchers one against another.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And when they sounded their trumpets in
three places round about the camp, and had broken their pitchers, they
held their lamps in their left hands, and with their right hands the
trumpets which they blew, and they cried out: The sword of the Lord and
of Gedeon;

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Standing every man in his place round
about the enemies' camp. So all the camp was troubled, and crying out
and howling they fled away.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> And the three hundred men nevertheless
persisted sounding the trumpets. And the Lord sent the sword into all
the camp, and they killed one another,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Fleeing as far as Bethsetta, and the
border of Abelmahula in Tebbath. But the men of Israel shouting from
Nephtali and Aser, and from all Manasses pursued after Madian.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> And Gedeon sent messengers into all mount
Ephraim, saying: Come down to meet Madian, and take the waters before
them to Bethbera and the Jordan. And all Ephraim shouted, and took the
waters before them and the Jordan as far as Bethbera.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And having taken two men of Madian, Oreb
and Zeb: Oreb they slew in the rock of Oreb, and Zeb in the winepress of
Zeb. And they pursued Madian, carrying the heads of Oreb and Zeb to
Gedeon beyond the waters of the Jordan.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the men of Ephraim said to him: What is
this that thou meanest to do, that thou wouldst not call us when thou
wentest to fight against Madian? and they chid him sharply and almost
offered violence.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And he answered them: What could I have
done like to that which you have done? Is not one bunch of grapes of
Ephraim better than the vintages of Abiezer?

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> The Lord hath delivered into your bands the
princes of Madian, Oreb and Zeb: what could I have done like to what you
have done? And when he had said this, their spirit was appeased, with
which they swelled against him.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And when Gedeon was come to the Jordan, he
passed over it with the three hundred men, that were with him: who were
so weary that they could not pursue after them that fled.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And he said to the men of Soccoth: Give, I
beseech you, bread to the people that is with me, for they are faint:
that we may pursue Zebee, and Salmana the kings of Madian.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> The princes of Soccoth answered:
Peradventure the palms of the hands of Zebee and Salmana are in thy
hand, and therefore thou demandest that we should give bread to thy
army.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And he said to them: When the Lord
therefore shall have delivered Zebee and Salmana into my hands, I will
thresh your flesh with the thorns and briers of the desert.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And going up from thence, he came to
Phanuel: and he spoke the like things to the men of that place. And they
also answered him, as the men of Soccoth had answered.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> He said therefore to them also: When I
shall return a conqueror in peace, I will destroy this tower.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> But Zebee and Salmana were resting with
all their army. For fifteen thousand men were left of all the troops of
the eastern people, and one hundred and twenty thousand warriors that
drew the sword, were slain.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And Gedeon went up by the way of them
that dwelt in tents, on the east of Nobe and Jegbaa, and smote the camp
of the enemies, who were secure, and suspected no hurt.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And Zebee and Salmana fled, and Gedeon
pursued and took them, all their host being put in confusion.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And returning from the battle before the
sun rising,

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> He took a boy of the men of Soccoth: and
he asked him the names of the princes and ancients of Soccoth, and he
described unto him seventy-seven men.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he came to Soccoth and said to them:
Behold Zebee and Salmana, concerning whom you upbraided me, saying:
Peradventure the hands of Zebee and Salmana, are in thy hands, and
therefore thou demandest that we should give bread to the men that are
weary and faint.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> So he took the ancients of the city and
thorns and briers of the desert, and tore them with the same, and cut in
pieces the men of Soccoth.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And he demolished the tower of Phanuel,
and slew the men of the city.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And he said to Zebee and Salmana: What
manner of men were they whom you slew in Thabor? They answered: They
were like thee, and one of them as the son of a king.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> He answered them: They were my brethren,
the sons of my mother. As the Lord liveth, if you had saved them, I
would not kill you.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And he said to Jether his eldest son:
Arise, and slay them. But he drew not his sword: for he was afraid,
being but yet a boy.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And Zebee and Salmana said: Do thou rise,
and run upon us: because the strength of a man is according to his age:
Gedeon rose up and slew Zebee and Salmana: and he took the ornaments and
bosses, with which the necks of the camels of kings are wont to be
adorned.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And all the men of Israel said to Gedeon:
Rule thou over us and thy son, and thy son's son: because thou hast
delivered us from the hand of Madian.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And he said to them: I will not rule over
you, neither shall my son rule over you, but the Lord shall rule over
you.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And he said to them: I desire one request
of you: Give me the earlets of your spoils. For the Ismaelites were
accustomed to wear golden earlets.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> They answered: We will give them most
willingly. And spreading a mantle on the ground, they cast upon it the
earlets of the spoils.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And the weight of the earlets that he
requested, was a thousand seven hundred sicles of gold, besides the
ornaments, and jewels, and purple raiment which the kings of Madian were
went to use, and besides the golden chains that were about the camels'
necks.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And Gedeon made an ephod thereof, and put
it in his city Ephra. And all Israel committed fornication with it, and
it became a ruin to Gedeon and to all his house.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> But Madian was humbled before the
children of Israel, neither could they any more lift up their beads: but
the land rested for forty years, while Gedeon presided.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> So Jerobaal the son of Joas went, and
dwelt in his own house.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And he had seventy sons, who came out of
his thigh, for he had many wives.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And his concubine, that he had in Sichem,
bore him a son, whose name was Abimelech.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And Gedeon the son of Joas died in a good
old age, and was buried in the sepulchre of his father in Ephra of the
family of Ezri.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> But after Gedeon was dead, the children
of Israel turned again, and committed fornication with Baalim. And they
made a covenant with Baal, that he should be their god:

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And they remembered not the Lord their
God, who delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies round
about:

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Neither did they shew mercy to the house
of Jerobaal Gedeon, according to all the good things he had done to
Israel.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Abimelech the son of Jerobaal went to
Sichem to his mother's brethren and spoke to them, and to all the
kindred of his mother's father, saying:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Speak to all the men of Sichem: whether is
better for you that seventy men all the sons of Jerobaal should rule
over you, or that one man should rule over you? And withal consider that
I am your bone, and your flesh.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And his mother's brethren spoke of him to
all the men of Sichem, all these words, and they inclined their hearts
after Abimelech, saying: He is our brother:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And they gave him seventy weight of silver
out of the temple of Baalberith: wherewith he hired to himself men that
were needy, and vagabonds, and they followed him.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And he came to his father's house in Ephra,
and slew his brethren the sons of Jerobaal, seventy men, upon one stone:
and there remained only Joatham the youngest son of Jerobaal, who was
hidden.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And all the men of Sichem were gathered
together, and all the families of the city of Mello: and they went and
made Abimelech king, by the oak that stood in Sichem.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> This being told to Joatham, he went and
stood on the top of mount Garizim: and lifting up his voice, he cried,
and said: Hear me, ye men of Sichem, so may God hear you.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> The trees went to anoint a king over them:
and they said to the olive tree: Reign thou over us.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And it answered: Can I leave my fatness,
which both gods and men make use of, to come to be promoted among the
trees?

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And the trees said to the fig tree: Come
thou and reign over us.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And it answered them: Can I leave my
sweetness, and my delicious fruits, and go to be promoted among the
other trees?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And the trees said to the vine: Come thou
and reign over us.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> And it answered them: Can I forsake my
wine, that cheereth God and men, and be promoted among the other trees?

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> And all the trees said to the bramble:
Come thou and reign over us.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And it answered them: If indeed you mean
to make me king, come ye and rest under my shadow: but if you mean it
not, let fire come out from the bramble, and devour the cedars of
Libanus.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Now therefore if you have done well, and
without sin in appointing Abimelech king over you, and have dealt well
with Jerobaal, and with his house, and have made a suitable return for
the benefits of him, who fought for you,

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And exposed his life to dangers, to
deliver you from the hands of Madian,

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And you are now risen up against my
father's house, and have killed his sons seventy men upon one stone, and
have made Abimelech the son of his handmaid king over the inhabitants of
Sichem, because he is your brother:

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> If therefore you have dealt well, and
without fault with Jerobaal, and his house, rejoice ye this day in
Abimelech, and may he rejoice in you.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> But if unjustly: let fire come out from
him, and consume the inhabitants of Sichem, and the town of Mello: and
let fire come out from the men of Sichem, and from the town of Mello,
and devour Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> And when he had said thus he fled, and
went into Bera: and dwelt there for fear of Abimelech his brother.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> So Abimelech reigned over Israel for
three years.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And the Lord sent a very evil spirit
between Abimelech and the inhabitants of Sichem: who began to detest
him,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> And to leave the crime of the murder of
the seventy sons of Jerobaal, and the shedding of their blood upon
Abimelech their brother, and upon the rest of the princes of the
Sichemites, who aided him.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And they set an ambush against him on the
top of the mountains: and while they waited for his coming, they
committed robberies, taking spoils of all that passed by: and it was
told Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And Gaal the son of Obed came with his
brethren, and went over to Sichem. And the inhabitants of Sichem taking
courage at his coming,

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> Went out into the fields, wasting the
vineyards, and treading down the grapes: and singing and dancing they
went into the temple of their god, and in their banquets and cups they
cursed Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And Gaal the son of Obed cried: Who is
Abimelech, and what is Sichem, that we should serve him? Is he not the
son of Jerobaal, and hath made Zebul his servant ruler over the men of
Emor the father of Sichem? Why then shall we serve him?

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Would to God that some man would put this
people under my hand, that I might remove Abimelech out of the way. And
it was said to Abimelech: Gather together the multitude of an army, and
come.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> For Zebul the ruler of the city, hearing
the words of Gaal, the son of Obed, was very angry,

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> And sent messengers privately to
Abimelech, saying: Behold Gaal the son of Obed is come into Sichem with
his brethren, and endeavoureth to set the city against thee.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Arise therefore in the night with the
people that is with thee and he hid in the field:

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And betimes in the morning at sun rising
set upon the city. And when he shall come out against thee with his
people, do to him what thou shalt be able.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> Abimelech therefore arose with all his
army by night, and laid ambushes near Sichem in four places.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Gaal the son of Obed went out, and
stood in the entrance of the gate of the city. And Abimelech rose up,
and all his army with him from the places of the ambushes.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And when Gaal saw the people, he said to
Zebul: Behold a multitude cometh down from the mountains. And he
answered him: Thou seest the shadows of the mountains as if they were
the heads of men, and this is thy mistake.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Again Gaal said: Behold there cometh
people down from the middle of the land, and one troop cometh by the way
that looketh towards the oak.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> And Zebul said to him: Where is now thy
mouth wherewith thou saidst? Who is Abimelech that we should serve him?
Is not this the people which thou didst despise? Go out, and fight
against him.

<span id="an_9:39">9:39</span> So Gaal went out in the sight of the
people of Sichem, and fought against Abimelech,

<span id="an_9:40">9:40</span> Who chased and put him to flight, and
drove him to the city: and many were slain of his people, even to the
gate of the city:

<span id="an_9:41">9:41</span> And Abimelech sat down in Ruma: but Zebul
drove Gaal, and his companions out of the city, and would not suffer
them to abide in it.

<span id="an_9:42">9:42</span> So the day following the people went out
into the field. And it was told Abimelech.

<span id="an_9:43">9:43</span> And he took his army, and divided it into
three companies, and laid ambushes in the fields. And seeing that the
people came out of the city, he arose and set upon them,

<span id="an_9:44">9:44</span> With his own company, assaulting and
besieging the city: whilst the two other companies chased the enemies
that were scattered about the field.

<span id="an_9:45">9:45</span> And Abimelech assaulted the city all that
day: and took it, and killed the inhabitants thereof, and demolished it,
so that he sowed salt in it.

<span id="an_9:46">9:46</span> And when they who dwelt in the tower of
Sichem had heard this, they went into the temple of their god Berith
where they had made a covenant with him, and from thence the place had
taken its name, and it was exceeding strong.

<span id="an_9:47">9:47</span> Abimelech also hearing that the men of
the tower of Sichem were gathered together,

<span id="an_9:48">9:48</span> Went up into mount Selmon he and all his
people with him: and taking an axe, he cut down the bough of a tree, and
laying it on his shoulder and carrying it, he said to his companions:
What you see me do, do you out of hand.

<span id="an_9:49">9:49</span> So they cut down boughs from the trees,
every man as fast as he could, and followed their leader. And
surrounding the fort they set it on fire: and so it came to pass that
with the smoke and with the fire a thousand persons were killed, men and
women together, of the inhabitants of the tower of Sichem.

<span id="an_9:50">9:50</span> Then Abimelech departing from thence came
to the town of Thebes, which he surrounded and besieged with his army.

<span id="an_9:51">9:51</span> And there was in the midst of the city a
high tower, to which both the men and the women were fled together, and
all the princes of the city, and having shut and strongly barred the
gate, they stood upon the battlements of the tower to defend themselves.

<span id="an_9:52">9:52</span> And Abimelech coming near the tower,
fought stoutly: and approaching to the gate, endeavoured to set fire to
it:

<span id="an_9:53">9:53</span> And behold a certain woman casting a
piece of a millstone from above, dashed it against the head of
Abimelech, and broke his skull.

<span id="an_9:54">9:54</span> And he called hastily to his
armourbearer, and said to him: Draw thy sword, and kill me: lest it
should be said that I was slain by a woman. He did as he was commanded,
and slew him.

<span id="an_9:55">9:55</span> And when he was dead, all the men of
Israel that were with him, returned to their homes.

<span id="an_9:56">9:56</span> And God repaid the evil, that Abimelech
had done against his father, killing his seventy brethren.

<span id="an_9:57">9:57</span> The Sichemites also were rewarded for
what they had done, and the curse of Joatham the son of Jerobaal came
upon them.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> After Abimelech there arose a ruler in
Israel, Thola son of Phua the uncle of Abimelech, a man of Issachar, who
dwelt in Samir of mount Ephraim:

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And he judged Israel three and twenty
years, and he died and was buried in Samir.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> To him succeeded Jair the Galaadite, who
judged Israel for two and twenty years.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Having thirty sons that rode on thirty
ass colts, and were princes of thirty cities, which from his name were
called Havoth Jair, that is, the towns of Jair, until this present day
in the land of Galaad.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> And Jair died: and was buried in the
place which was called Camon.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the children of Israel, adding new
sins to their old ones, did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served
idols, Baalim and Astaroth, and the gods of Syria and of Sidon and of
Moab and of the children of Ammon and of the Philistines: and they left
the Lord, and did not serve him.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And the Lord being angry with them,
delivered them into the hands of the Philistines and of the children of
Ammon.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And they were afflicted, and grievously
oppressed for eighteen years, all they that dwelt beyond the Jordan in
the land of the Amorrhite, who is in Galaad:

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Insomuch that the children of Ammon
passing over the Jordan, wasted Juda and Benjamin and Ephraim: and
Israel was distressed exceedingly.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And they cried to the Lord, and said:
We have sinned against thee, because we have forsaken the Lord our God,
and have served Baalim.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And the Lord said to them: Did not the
Egyptians and the Amorrhites, and the children of Ammon and the
Philistines,

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> The Sidonians also and Amalec and
Chanaan oppress you, and you cried to me, and I delivered you out of
their hand?

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And yet you have forsaken me, and have
worshipped strange gods: therefore I will deliver you no more:

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Go and call upon the gods which you
have chosen: let them deliver you in the time of distress.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And the children of Israel said to the
Lord: We have sinned, do thou unto us whatsoever pleaseth thee: only
deliver us this time.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And saying these things, they cast away
out of their coasts all the idols of strange gods and served the Lord
their God: and he was touched with their miseries.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And the children of Ammon shouting
together, pitched their tents in Galaad: against whom the children of
Israel assembled themselves together and camped in Maspha.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And the princes of Galaad said one to
another: Whosoever of us shall first begin to fight against the children
of Ammon, he shall be the leader of the people of Galaad.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> There was at that time Jephte the
Galaadite, a most valiant man and a warrior, the son of a woman that was
a harlot, and his father was Galaad.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now Galaad had a wife of whom he had
sons: who after they were grown up, thrust out Jephte, saying: Thou
canst not inherit in the house of our father, because thou art born of
another mother.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Then he fled and avoided them and dwelt
in the land of Tob: and there were gathered to him needy men, and
robbers, and they followed him as their prince.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> In those days the children of Ammon made
war against Israel.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And as they pressed hard upon them, the
ancients of Galaad went to fetch Jephte out of the land of Tob to help
them:

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And they said to him: Come thou and be
our prince, and fight against the children of Ammon.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And he answered them: Are not you the men
that hated me, and cast me out of my father's house, and now you are
come to me constrained by necessity?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the princes of Galaad said to Jephte:
For this cause we are now come to thee, that thou mayst go with us, and
fight against the children of Ammon, and be head over all the
inhabitants of Galaad.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Jephte also said to them: If you be come
to me sincerely, that I should fight for you against the children of
Ammon, and the Lord shall deliver them into my band, shall I be your
prince?

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> They answered him: The Lord who heareth
these things, he himself is mediator and witness that we will do as we
have promised.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Jephte therefore went with the princes
of Galaad, and all the people made him their prince. And Jephte spoke
all his words before the Lord in Maspha.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he sent messengers to the king of
the children of Ammon, to say in his name, What hast thou to do with me,
that thou art come against me, to waste my land?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> And he answered them: Because Israel
took away my land when he came up out of Egypt, from the confines of the
Arnon unto the Jaboc and the Jordan: now therefore restore the same
peaceably to me.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And Jephte again sent word by them, and
commanded them to say to the king of Ammon:

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Thus saith Jephte: Israel did not take
away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But when they came up out of Egypt, he
walked through the desert to the Red Sea and came into Cades.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And he sent messengers to the king of
Edom, saying: Suffer me to pass through thy land. But he would not
condescend to his request. He sent also to the king of Moab, who
likewise refused to give him passage. He abode therefore in Cades,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And went round the land of Edom at the
side, and the land of Moab: and came over against the east coast of the
land of Moab, and camped on the other side of the Arnon: and he would
not enter the bounds of Moab.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> So Israel sent messengers to Sehon king
of the Amorrhites, who dwelt in Hesebon, and they said to him: Suffer me
to pass through thy land to the river.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But he also despising the words of
Israel, suffered him not to pass through his borders: but gathering an
infinite multitude, went out against him to Jasa, and made strong
opposition.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And the Lord delivered him with all his
army into the hands of Israel, and he slew him, and possessed all the
land of the Amorrhite the inhabitant of that country,

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> And all the coasts thereof from the
Arnon to the Jaboc, and from the wilderness to the Jordan.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> So the Lord the God of Israel destroyed
the Amorrhite, his people of Israel fighting against him, and wilt thou
now possess this land?

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Are not those things which thy god
Chamos possesseth, due to thee by right? But what the Lord our God hath
obtained by conquest, shall be our possession:

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> Unless perhaps thou art better than
Balac the son of Sephor king of Moab: or canst shew that he strove
against Israel and fought against him,

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Whereas he hath dwelt in Hesebon, and
the villages thereof, and in Aroer, and its villages, and in all the
cities near the Jordan, for three hundred years. Why have you for so
long a time attempted nothing about this claim?

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Therefore I do not trespass against
thee, but thou wrongest me by declaring an unjust war against me. The
Lord be judge and decide this day between Israel and the children of
Ammon.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> And the king of the children of Ammon
would not hearken to the words of Jephte, which he sent him by the
messengers.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Therefore the spirit of the Lord came
upon Jephte, and going round Galaad, and Manasses, and Maspha of Galaad,
and passing over from thence to the children of Ammon,

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> He made a vow to the Lord, saying: If
thou wilt deliver the children of Ammon into my hands,

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> Whosoever shall first come forth out of
the doors of my house, and shall meet me when I return in peace from the
children of Ammon, the same will I offer a holocaust to the Lord.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> And Jephte passed over to the children
of Ammon, to fight against them: and the Lord delivered them into his
hands.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> And he smote them from Aroer till you
come to Mennith, twenty cities, and as far as Abel, which is set with
vineyards, with a very great slaughter: and the children of Ammon were
humbled by the children of Israel.

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> And when Jephte returned into Maspha to
his house, his only daughter met him with timbrels and with dances: for
he had no other children.

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> And when he saw her, he rent his
garments, and said: Alas! my daughter, thou hast deceived me, and thou
thyself art deceived: for I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I can
do no other thing.

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> And she answered him: My father, if
thou hast opened thy mouth to the Lord, do unto me whatsoever thou hast
promised, since the victory hath been granted to thee, and revenge of
thy enemies.

<span id="an_11:37">11:37</span> And she said to her father: Grant me
only this which I desire: Let me go, that I may go about the mountains
for two months, and may bewail my virginity with my companions.

<span id="an_11:38">11:38</span> And he answered her: Go. And he sent
her away for two months. And when she was gone with her comrades and
companions, she mourned her virginity in the mountains.

<span id="an_11:39">11:39</span> And the two months being expired, she
returned to her father, and he did to her as he had vowed, and she knew
no man. From thence came a fashion in Israel, and a custom has been
kept:

<span id="an_11:40">11:40</span> That from year to year the daughters of
Israel assemble together, and lament the daughter of Jephte the
Galaadite for four days.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> But behold there arose a sedition in
Ephraim. And passing towards the north, they said to Jephte: When thou
wentest to fight against the children of Ammon, why wouldst thou not
call us, that we might go with thee? Therefore we will burn thy house.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And he answered them: I and my people
were at great strife with the children of Ammon: and I called you to
assist me, and you would not do it.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And when I saw this, I put my life in my
own hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the Lord
delivered them into my hands. What have I deserved, that you should rise
up to fight against me?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> Then calling to him all the men of
Galaad, he fought against Ephraim: and the men of Galaad defeated
Ephraim, because he had said: Galaad is a fugitive of Ephraim, and
dwelleth in the midst of Ephraim and Manasses.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> And the Galaadites secured the fords of
the Jordan, by which Ephraim was to return. And when any one of the
number of Ephraim came thither in the flight, and said: I beseech you
let me pass: the Galaadites said to him: Art thou not an Ephraimite? If
he said: I am not:

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> They asked him: Say then, Scibboleth,
which is interpreted, An ear of corn. But he answered, Sibboleth, not
being able to express an ear of corn by the same letter. Then presently
they took him and killed him in the very passage of the Jordan. And
there fell at that time of Ephraim two and forty thousand.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And Jephte the Galaadite judged Israel
six years: and he died, and was buried in his city of Galaad.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> After him Abesan of Bethlehem judged
Israel:

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> He had thirty sons, and as many
daughters, whom he sent abroad, and gave to husbands, and took wives for
his sons of the same number, bringing them into his house. And he judged
Israel seven years:

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And he died, and was buried in
Bethlehem.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> To him succeeded Ahialon a Zahnlonite:
and he judged Israel ten years:

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> And he died, and was buried in ZahnIon.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> After him Abdon, the son of Illel, a
Pharathonite, judged Israel:

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And he had forty sons, and of them
thirty grandsons, mounted upon seventy ass colts, and he judged Israel
eight years:

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> And he died, and was buried in
Pharathon in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of Amalech.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And the children of Israel did evil again
in the sight of the Lord: and he delivered them into the hands of the
Philistines forty years.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Now there was a certain man of Saraa, and
of the race of Dan, whose name was Manue, and his wife was barren.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And an angel of the Lord appeared to her,
and said: Thou art barren and without children: but thou shalt conceive
and bear a son.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Now therefore beware and drink no wine
nor strong drink, and eat not any unclean thing.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Because thou shalt conceive and bear a
son, and no razor shall touch his head: for he shall be a Nazarite of
God, from his infancy, and from his mother's womb, and he shall begin to
deliver Israel from the hands of the Philistines.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when she was come to her husband she
said to him: A man of God came to me, having the countenance of an
angel, very awful. And when I asked him who he was, and whence he came,
and by what name he was called, he would not tell me.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> But he answered thus: Behold thou shalt
conceive and bear a son: beware thou drink no wine, nor strong drink,
nor eat any unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite of God from
his infancy, from his mother's womb until the day of his death.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Then Manue prayed to the Lord, and said:
I beseech thee, O Lord, that the mail of God, whom thou didst send, may
come again, and teach us what we ought to do concerning the child that
shall be born.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And the Lord heard the prayer of Manue,
and the angel of the Lord appeared again to his wife as she was sitting
in the field. But Manue her husband was not with her. And when she saw
the angel,

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> She made haste and ran to her husband:
and told him saying: Behold the man hath appeared to me whom I saw
before.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> He rose up and followed his wife: and
coming to the man, said to him: Art thou he that spoke to the woman? And
he answered: I am.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> And Manue said to him: When thy word
shall come to pass, what wilt thou that the child should do? or from
what shall he keep himself?

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And the angel of the Lord said to
Manue: From all the things I have spoken of to thy wife, let her refrain
herself:

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And let her eat nothing that cometh of
the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any
unclean thing: and whatsoever I have commanded her, let her fulfil and
observe.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And Manue said to the angel of the
Lord: I beseech thee to consent to my request, and let us dress a kid
for thee.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And the angel answered him: If thou
press me, I will not eat of thy bread: but if thou wilt offer a
holocaust, offer it to the Lord. And Manue knew not it was the angel of
the Lord.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And he said to him: What is thy name,
that, if thy word shall come to pass, we may honour thee?

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And he answered him: Why askest thou my
name, which is wonderful?

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Then Manue took a kid of the flocks,
and the libations, and put them upon a rock, offering to the Lord, who
doth wonderful things: and he and his wife looked on.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And when the flame from the altar went
up towards heaven, the angel of the lord ascended also in the flame. And
when Manue and his wife saw this, they fell flat on the ground.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And the angel of the Lord appeared to
them no more. And forthwith Manue understood that it was an angel of the
Lord,

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And he said to his wife: We shall
certainly die, because we have seen God.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And his wife answered him: If the Lord
had a mind to kill us, he would not have received a holocaust and
libations at our hands, neither would he have shewed us all these
things, nor have told us the things that are to come.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And she bore a son, and called his name
Samson. And the child grew, and the Lord blessed him.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> And the spirit of the Lord began to be
with him in the camp of Dan, between Saraa and Esthaol.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Then Samson went down to Thamnatlia, and
seeing there a woman of the daughters of the Philistines,

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He came up, and told his father and his
mother, saying: I saw a woman in Thamnatha of the daughters of the
Philistines: I beseech you, take her for me to wife.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And his father and mother said to him: Is
there no woman among the daughters of thy brethren, or among all my
people, that thou wilt take a wife of the Philistines, who are
uncircumcised? And Samson said to his father: Take this woman for me,
for she hath pleased my eyes.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Now his parents knew not that the thing
was done by the Lord, and that he sought an occasion against the
Philistines: for at that time the Philistines had dominion over Israel.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> Then Samson went down with his father and
mother to Thamnatha. And when they were come to the vineyards of the
town, behold a young lion met him raging and roaring.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> And the spirit of the Lord came upon
Samson, and he tore the lion as he would have torn a kid in pieces,
having nothing at all in his hand: and he would not tell this to his
father and mother.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And he went down and spoke to the woman
that had pleased his eyes.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And after some days returning to take
her, he went aside to see the carcass of the lion, and behold there was
a swarm of bees in the mouth of the lion and a honeycomb.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And when be had taken it in his hands, he
went on eating: and coming to his father and mother, he gave them of it,
and they ate: but he would not tell them, that he had taken the honey
from the body of the lion.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> So his father went down to the woman,
and made a feast for his son Samson: for so the young men used to do.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And when the citizens of that place saw
him, they brought him thirty companions to be with him.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And Samson said to them: I will propose
to you a riddle, which if you declare unto me within the seven days of
the feast, I will give you thirty shirts, and as many coats:

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> But if you shall not be able to declare
it, you shall give me thirty shirts and the same number of coats. They
answered him: Put forth the riddle that we may hear it.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And he said to them: Out of the eater
came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they
could not in three days expound the riddle.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And when the seventh day came, they
said to the wife of Samson: Soothe thy husband, and persuade him to tell
thee what the riddle meaneth. But if thou wilt not do it, we will burn
thee, and thy father's house. Have you called us to the wedding on
purpose to strip us?

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> So she wept before Samson and
complained, saying: Thou hatest me, and dost not love me: therefore thou
wilt not expound to me the riddle which thou hast proposed to the sons
of my people. But he answered: I would not tell it to my father and
mother, and how can I tell it to thee?

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> So she wept before him the seven days
of the feast: and at length on the seventh day as she was troublesome to
him, he expounded it. And she immediately told her countrymen.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> And they on the seventh day before the
sun went down said to him: What is sweeter than honey? and what is
stronger than a lion? And he said to them: If you had not ploughed with
my heifer, you had not found out my riddle.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And the spirit of the Lord came upon
him, and he went down to Ascalon, and slew there thirty men, whose
garments he took away and gave to them that had declared the riddle. And
being exceeding angry he went up to his father's house:

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> But his wife took one of his friends
and bridal companions for her husband.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And a while after, when the days of the
wheat harvest were at hand, Samson came, meaning to visit his wife, and
he brought her a kid of the flock. And when he would have gone into her
chamber as usual, her father would not suffer him, saying:

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> I thought thou hadst hated her, and
therefore I gave her to thy friend: but she hath a sister, who is
younger and fairer than she, take her to wife instead of her.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And Samson answered him: From this day I
shall be blameless in what I do against the Philistines: for I will do
you evils.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And he went and caught three hundred
foxes, and coupled them tail to tail, and fastened torches between the
tails.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> And setting them on fire he let the foxes
go, that they might run about hither and thither. And they presently
went into the standing corn of the Philistines. Which being set on fire,
both the corn that was already carried together, and that which was yet
standing, was all burnt, insomuch, that the flame consumed also the
vineyards and the oliveyards.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Then the Philistines said: Who hath done
this thing? And it was answered: Samson the son in law of the
Thamnathite, because he took away his wife, and gave her to another,
hath done these things. And the Philistines went up and burnt both the
woman and her father.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> But Samson said to them: Although you
have done this, yet will I be revenged of you, and then I will be quiet.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And he made a great slaughter of them, so
that in astonishment they laid the calf of the leg upon the thigh. And
going down he dwelt in a cavern of the rock Etam.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> Then the Philistines going up into the
land of Juda, camped in the place which afterwards was called Lechi,
that is, the Jawbone, where their army was spread.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And the men of the tribe of Juda said
to them: Why are you come up against us? They answered: We are come to
bind Samson, and to pay him for what he hath done against us.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Wherefore three thousand men of Juda,
went down to the cave of the rock Etam, and said to Samson: Knowest thou
not that the Philistines rule over us? Why wouldst thou do thus? And he
said to them: As they did to me, so have I done to them.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And they said to him, We are come to
bind thee and to deliver thee into the hands of the Philistines. And
Samson said to them: Swear to me, and promise me, that you will not kill
me.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> They said: We will not kill thee: but
we will deliver thee up bound. And they bound him with two new cords,
and brought him from the rock Etam.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Now when he was come to the place of
the Jawbone, and the Philistines shouting went to meet him, the spirit
of the Lord came strongly upon him: and as the flax is wont to be
consumed at the approach of fire, so the bands with which he was bound
were broken and loosed.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And finding a jawbone, even the jawbone
of an ass which lay there, catching it up, be slew therewith a thousand
men.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And he said: With the jawbone of an
ass, with the jaw of the colt of asses I have destroyed them, and have
slain a thousand men.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And when he had ended these words
singing, he threw the jawbone out of his hand, and called the name of
that place Ramathlechi, which is interpreted the lifting up of the
jawbone.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Arid being very thirsty, he cried to
the Lord, and said: Thou hast given this very great deliverance and
victory into the hand of thy servant: and behold I die for thirst, and
shall fall into the hands of the uncircumcised.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> Then the Lord opened a great tooth in
the jaw of the ass, and waters issued out of it. And when he had drank
them he refreshed his spirit, and recovered his strength. Therefore the
name of that place was called, The Spring of him that invoked from the
jawbone, until this present day.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And he judged Israel in the days of the
Philistines twenty years.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> He went also into Gaza, and saw there a
woman a harlot, and went in unto her.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And when the Philistines had beard this,
and it was noised about among them, that Samson was come into the city,
they surrounded him, setting guards at the gate of the city, and
watching there all the night in silence, that in the morning they might
kill him as he went out.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> But Samson slept till midnight, and then
rising he took both the doors of the gate, with the posts thereof, and
the bolt, and laying them on his shoulders, carried them up to the top
of the hill, which looketh towards Hebron.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> After this he loved a woman, who dwelt in
the valley of Sorec, and she was called Dalila.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And the princes of the Philistines came
to her, and said: Deceive him, and learn of him wherein his great
strength lieth, and how we may be able to overcome him, to bind and
afflict him: which if thou shalt do, we will give thee every one of us
eleven hundred pieces of silver.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And Dalila said to Samson: Tell me, I
beseech thee, wherein thy greatest strength lieth, and what it is
wherewith if thou wert bound thou couldst not break loose.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And Samson answered her: If I shall be
bound with seven cords made of sinews not yet dry, but still moist, I
shall be weak like other men.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And the princes of the Philistines
brought unto her seven cords, such is he spoke of, with which she bound
him;

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Men lying privately in wait with her, and
in the chamber expecting the event of the thing, and she cried out to
him: The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And he broke the bands, as a
man would break a thread of tow twined with spittle, when it smelleth
the fire: so it was not known wherein his strength Jay.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And Dalila said to him: Behold thou
hast mocked me, and hast told me a false thing: but now at least tell me
wherewith thou mayest be bound.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> And he answered her: If I shall be
bound with new ropes, that were never in work, I shall be weak and like
other men.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Dalila bound him again with these, and
cried out: The Philistines are upon thee, Samson, there being an ambush
prepared for him in the chamber. But he broke the bands like threads of
webs.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And Dalila said to him again: How long
dost thou deceive me, and tell me lies? Shew me wherewith thou mayest be
bound. And Samson answered her: If thou plattest the seven locks of my
head with a lace, and tying them round about a nail fastenest it in the
ground, I shall be weak.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> And when Dalila had done this, she said
to him: The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And awaking out of his
sleep he drew out the nail with the hairs and the lace.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> And Dalila said to him: How dost thou
say thou lovest me, when thy mind is not with me? Thou hast told me lies
these three times, and wouldst not tell me wherein thy great strength
lieth.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> And when she pressed him much, and
continually hung upon him for many days, giving him no time to rest, his
soul fainted away, and was wearied even until death.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Then opening the truth of the thing, he
said to her: The razor hath never come upon my head, for I am a
Nazarite, that is to say, consecrated to God from my mother's womb: if
my head be shaven, my strength shall depart from me, and I shall become
weak, and shall be like other men.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Then seeing that be had discovered to
her all his mind, she sent to the princes of the Philistines, saying:
Come up this once more, for now he hath opened his heart to me. And they
went up taking with them the money which they had promised.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> But she made him sleep upon her knees,
and lay his head in her bosom. And she called a barber, and shaved his
seven locks, and began to drive him away, and thrust him from her: for
immediately his strength departed from him.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And she said: The Philistines are upon
thee, Samson. And awaking from sleep, he said in his mind: I will go out
as I did before, and shake myself, not knowing that the Lord was
departed from him.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Then the Philistines seized upon him,
and forthwith pulled out his eyes, and led him bound in chains to Gaza,
and shutting him up in prison made him grind.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And now his hair began to grow again.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> And the princes of the Philistines
assembled together, to offer great sacrifices to Dagon their god, and to
make merry, saying: Our god hath delivered our enemy Samson into our
hands.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> And the people also seeing this,
praised their god, and said the same: Our god hath delivered our
adversary into our bands, him that destroyed our country and killed very
many.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> And rejoicing in their feasts, when
they had now taken their good cheer, they commanded that Samson should
be called, and should play before them. And being brought out of prison
he played before them, and they made him stand between two pillars.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> And he said to the lad that guided his
steps: Suffer me to touch the pillars which support the whole house, and
let me lean upon them, and rest a little.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> Now the house was full of men and
women, and all the princes of the Philistines were there. Moreover about
three thousand persons of both sexes from the roof and the higher part
of the house, were beholding Samson's play.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> But he called upon the Lord, saying: O
Lord God, remember me, and restore to me now my former strength, O my
God, that I may revenge myself on my enemies, and for the loss of my two
eyes I may take one revenge.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> And laying hold on both the pillars on
which the house rested, and holding the one with his right hand, and the
other with his left,

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> He said: Let me die with the
Philistines. And when he had strongly shook the pillars, the house fell
upon all the princes, and the rest of the multitude that was there: and
he killed many more at his death, than he had killed before in his life.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> And his brethren and all his kindred,
going down took his body, and buried it between Saraa and Esthaol in the
buryingplace of his father Manue: and he judged Israel twenty years.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> There was at that time a man of mount
Ephraim whose name was Michas,

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> Who said to his mother: The eleven
hundred pieces of silver, which thou hadst put aside for thyself, and
concerning which thou didst swear in my hearing, behold I have, and they
are with me. And she said to him: Blessed be my son by the Lord.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> So he restored them to his mother, who
said to him: I have consecrated and vowed this silver to the Lord, that
my son may receive it at my hand, and make a graven and a molten god, so
now I deliver it to thee.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And he restored them to his mother: and
she took two hundred pieces of silver and gave them to the silversmith,
to make of them a graven and a molten god, which was in the house of
Michas.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And he separated also therein a little
temple for the god, and made an ephod, and theraphim, that is to say, a
priestly garment, and idols: and he filled the hand of one of his sons,
and he became his priest.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> In those days there was no king in
Israel, but every one did that which seemed right to himself.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> There was also another young man of
Bethlehem Juda, of the kindred thereof: and he was a Levite, and dwelt
there.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> Now he went out from the city of
Bethlehem, and desired to sojourn wheresoever he should find it
convenient for him. And when he was come to mount Ephraim, as he was on
his journey, and had turned aside a little into the house of Michas,

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> He was asked by him whence he came. And
he answered: I am a Levite of Bethlehem Juda, and I am going to dwell
where I can, and where I shall find a place to my advantage.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And Michas said: Stay with me, and be
unto me a father and a priest, and I will give thee every year ten
pieces of silver, and a double suit of apparel, and thy victuals.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> He was content, and abode with the man,
and was unto him as one of his sons.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> And Michas filled his hand, and had the
young man with him, for his priest, saying:

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Now I know God will do me good, since I
have a priest of the race of the Levites.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> In those days there was no king in
Israel, and the tribe of Dan sought them an inheritance to dwell in: for
unto that day they had not received their lot among the other tribes.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> So the children of Dan sent five most
valiant men of their stock and family from Saraa and Esthaol, to spy out
the land, and to view it diligently: and they said to them: Go, and view
the land. They went on their way, and when they came to mount Ephraim,
they went into the house of Michas, and rested there:

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And knowing the voice of the young man
the Levite, and lodging with him, they said to him: Who brought thee
hither? what dost thou here? why wouldst thou come hither?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> He answered them: Michas hath done such
and such things for me, and hath hired me to be his priest.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Then they desired him to consult the
Lord, that they might know whether their journey should be prosperous,
and the thing should have effect.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> He answered them: Go in peace, the Lord
looketh on your way, and the journey that you go.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> So the five men going on came to Lais:
and they saw how the people dwelt therein without any fear, according to
the custom of the Sidonians, secure and easy, having no man at all to
oppose them, being very rich, and living separated, at a distance from
Sidon and from all men.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And they returned to their brethren in
Saraa and Esthaol, who asked them what they had done? to whom they
answered:

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> Arise, and let us go up to them: for we
have seen the land which is exceeding rich and fruitful: neglect not,
lose no time: let us go and possess it, there will be no difficulty.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> We shall come to a people that is
secure, into a spacious country, and the Lord will deliver the place to
us, in which there is no want of any thing that groweth on the earth.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> There went therefore of the kindred of
Dan, to wit, from Saraa and Esthaol, six hundred men, furnished with
arms for war,

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And going up they lodged in
Cariathiarim of Juda: which place from that time is called the camp of
Dan, and is behind Cariathiarim.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> From thence they passed into mount
Ephraim. And when they were come to the house of Michas,

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> The five men, that before had been sent
to view the land of Lais, said to the rest of their brethren: You know
that in these houses there is an ephod, and theraphim, and a graven, and
a molten god: see what you are pleased to do.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> And when they had turned a little
aside, they went into the house of the young man the Levite, who was in
the house of Michas: and they saluted him with words of peace.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And the six hundred men stood before
the door, appointed with their arms.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> But they that were gone into the house
of the young man, went about to take away the graven god, and the ephod,
and the theraphim, and the molten god, and the priest stood before the
door, the six hundred valiant men waiting not far off.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> So they that were gone in took away the
graven thing, the ephod, and the idols, and the molten god. And the
priest said to them: What are you doing?

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And they said to him: Hold thy peace
and put thy finger on thy mouth and come with us, that we may have thee
for a father, and a priest. Whether is better for thee, to be a priest
in the house of one man, or in a tribe and family in Israel?

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> When he had heard this, he agreed to
their words, and took the ephod, and the idols, and the graven god, and
departed with them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And when they were going forward, and
had put before them the children and the cattle and all that was
valuable,

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> And were now at a distance from the
house of Michas, the men that dwelt in the houses of Michas gathering
together followed them,

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And began to shout out after them. They
looked back, and said to Michas: What aileth thee? Why dost thou cry?

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And he answered: You have taken away my
gods which I have made me and the priest, and all that I have, and do
you say: What aileth thee?

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And the children of Dan said to him:
See thou say no more to us, lest men enraged come upon thee, and thou
perish with all thy house.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> And so they went on the journey they
had begun. But Michas seeing that they were stronger than he, returned
to his house.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And the six hundred men took the
priest, and the things we spoke of before, and came to Lais to a people
that was quiet and secure, and smote them with the edge of the sword:
and the city was burnt with fire,

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> There being no man at all who brought
them any succour, because they dwelt far from Sidon, and had no society
or business with any man. And the city was in the land of Rohob: and
they rebuilt it and dwelt therein.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> Calling the name of the city Dan after
the name of their father, who was the son of Israel, which before was
called Lais.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And they set up to themselves the
graven idol, and Jonathan the son of Gersam the son of Moses, he and his
sons were priests in the tribe of Dan, until the day of their captivity.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> And the idol of Michas remained with
them all the time that the house of God was in Silo. In those days there
was no king in Israel.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> There was a certain Levite, who dwelt on
the side of mount Ephraim, who took a wife of Bethlehem Juda:

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And she left him and returned to her
father's house in Bethlehem, and abode with him four months.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And her husband followed her, willing to
be reconciled with her, and to speak kindly to her, and to bring her
back with him, having with him a servant and two asses: and she received
him, and brought him into her father's house. And when his father in law
had heard this, and had seen him, he met him with joy,

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And embraced the man. And the son in law
tarried in the house of his father in law three days, eating with him
and drinking familiarly.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> But on the fourth day arising early in
the morning he desired to depart. But his father in law kept him, and
said to him: Taste first a little bread, and strengthen thy stomach, and
so thou shalt depart.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And they sat down together, and ate and
drank. And the father of the young woman said to his son in law: I
beseech thee to stay here to day, and let us make merry together.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> But he rising up began to be for
departing. And nevertheless his father in law earnestly pressed him, and
made him stay with him.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> But when morning was come, the Levite
prepared to go on his journey. And his father in law said to him again:
I beseech thee to take a little meat, and strengthening thyself, till
the day be farther advanced, afterwards thou mayest depart. And they ate
together.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And the young man arose to set forward
with his wife and servant. And his father in law spoke to him again:
Consider that the day is declining, and draweth toward evening: tarry
with me to day also, and spend the day in mirth, and to morrow thou
shalt depart, that thou mayest go into thy house.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> His son in law would not consent to his
words: but forthwith went forward and came over against Jebus, which by
another name is called Jerusalem, leading with him two asses laden, and
his concubine.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And now they were come near Jebus, and
the day was far spent: and the servant said to his master: Come, I
beseech thee, let us turn into the city of the Jebusites, and lodge
there.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> His master answered him: I will not go
into the town of another nation, who are not of the children of Israel,
but I will pass over to Gabaa:

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And when I shall come thither, we will
lodge there, or at least in the city of Rama.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> So they passed by Jebus, and went on
their journey, and the sun went down upon them when they were by Gabaa,
which is in the tribe of Benjamin:

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And they turned into it, to lodge
there. And when they were come in, they sat in the street of the city,
for no man would receive them to lodge.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And behold they saw an old man,
returning out of the field and from his work in the evening, and he also
was of mount Ephraim, and dwelt as a stranger in Gabaa; but the men of
that country were the children of Jemini.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> And the old man lifting up his eyes,
saw the man sitting with his bundles in the street of the city, and said
to him: Whence comest thou? and whither goest thou?

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> He answered him: We came out from
Bethlehem Juda, and we are going to our home, which is on the side of
mount Ephraim, from whence we went to Bethlehem: and now we go to the
house of God, and none will receive us under his roof:

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> We have straw and hay for provender of
the asses, and bread and wine for the use of myself and of thy handmaid,
and of the servant that is with me: we want nothing but lodging.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And the old man answered him: Peace be
with thee: I will furnish all things that are necessary: only I beseech
thee, stay not in the street.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And he brought him into his house, and
gave provender to his asses: and after they had washed their feet, he
entertained them with a feast.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> While they were making merry, and
refreshing their bodies with meat and drink, after the labour of the
journey, the men of that city, sons of Belial, (that is, without yoke,)
came and beset the old man's house, and began to knock at the door,
calling to the master of the house, and saying: Bring forth the man that
came into thy house, that we may abuse him.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> And the old man went out to them, and
said: Do not so, my brethren, do not so wickedly: because this man is
come into my lodging, and cease I pray you from this folly.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> I have a maiden daughter, and this man
hath a concubine, I will bring them out to you, and you may humble them,
and satisfy your lust: only, I beseech you, commit not this crime
against nature on the man.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> They would not be satisfied with his
words; which the man seeing, brought out his concubine to them, and
abandoned her to their wickedness: and when they had abused her all the
night, they let her go in the morning.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> But the woman, at the dawning of the
day, came to the door of the house where her lord lodged, and there fell
down.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And in the morning the man arose, and
opened the door that he might end the journey he had begun: and behold
his concubine lay before the door with her hands spread on the
threshold.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> He thinking she was taking her rest,
said to her: Arise, and let us be going. But as she made no answer,
perceiving she was dead, he took her up, and laid her upon his ass, and
returned to his house.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And when he was come home he took a
sword, and divided the dead body of his wife with her bones into twelve
parts, and sent the pieces into all the borders of Israel.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And when every one had seen this, they
all cried out: There was never such a thing done in Israel from the day
that our fathers came up out of Egypt, until this day: give sentence,
and decree in common what ought to be done.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Then all the children of Israel went out
and gathered together as one man from Dan to Bersabee, with the land of
Galaad, to the Lord in Maspha:

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And all the chiefs of the people, and all
the tribes of Israel met together in the assembly of the people of God,
four hundred thousand footmen fit for war.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> (Nor were the children of Benjamin
ignorant that the children of Israel were come up to Maspha.) And the
Levite the husband of the woman that was killed, being asked, how so
great a wickedness had been committed,

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Answered: I came into Gabaa of Benjamin
with my wife, and there I lodged:

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And behold the men of that city in the
night beset the house wherein I was, intending to kill me, and abused my
wife with an incredible fury of lust, so that at last she died.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And I took her and cut her in pieces, and
sent the, parts into all the borders of your possession: because there
never was so heinous a crime, and so great an abomination committed in
Israel.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> You are all here, O children of Israel,
determine what you ought to do.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And all the people standing, answered as
by the voice of one man: We will not return to our tents, neither shall
any one of us go into his own house:

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> But this we will do in common against
Gabaa:

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> We will take ten men of a hundred out
of all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred out of a thousand, and a
thousand out of ten thousand, to bring victuals for the army, that we
might fight against Gabaa of Benjamin, and render to it for its
wickedness, what it deserveth.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And all Israel were gathered together
against the city, as one man, with one mind, and one counsel:

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> And they sent messengers to all the
tribe of Benjamin to say to them: Why hath so great an abomination been
found among you?

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Deliver up the men of Gabaa, that have
committed this heinous crime, that they may die, and the evil may be
taken away out of Israel. But they would not hearken to the proposition
of their brethren the children of Israel:

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> But out of all the cities which were of
their lot, they gathered themselves together into Gabaa, to aid them,
and to fight against the whole people of Israel.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> And there were found of Benjamin five
and twenty thousand men that drew the sword, besides the inhabitants of
Gabaa,

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Who were seven hundred most valiant
men, fighting with the left hand as well as with the right: and slinging
stones so sure that they could hit even a hair, and not miss by the
stone's going on either side.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> Of the men of Israel also, beside the
children of Benjamin, were found four hundred thousand that drew swords,
and were prepared to fight.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> And they arose and came to the house of
God, that is, to Silo: and they consulted God, and said: Who shall be in
our army the first to go to the battle against the children of Benjamin?
And the Lord answered them: Let Juda be your leader.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And forthwith the children of Israel
rising in the morning, camped by Gabaa:

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And going out from thence to fight
against Benjamin, began to assault the city.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> And the children of Benjamin coming out
of Gabaa, slew of the children of Israel that day two and twenty
thousand men.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Again Israel trusting in their strength
and their number, set their army in array in the same place, where they
had fought before:

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Yet so that they first went up and wept
before the Lord until night: and consulted him, and said: Shall I go out
any more to fight against the children of Benjamin my brethren, or not?
And he answered them: Go up against them, and join battle.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And when the children of Israel went
out the next day to fight against the children of Benjamin,

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> The children of Benjamin sallied forth
out of the gates of Gabaa: and meeting them made so great a slaughter of
them, as to kill eighteen thousand men that drew the sword.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> Wherefore all the children of Israel
came to the house of God, and sat and wept before the Lord: and they
fasted that day till the evening, and offered to him holocausts, and
victims of peace offerings,

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And inquired of him concerning their
state. At that time the ark of the covenant of the Lord was there,

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> And Phinees the son of Eleazar the son
of Aaron was over the house. So they consulted the Lord and said: Shall
we go out any more to fight against the children of Benjamin our
brethren, or shall we cease? And the Lord said to them: Go up, for to
morrow I will deliver them into your hands.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And the children of Israel set ambushes
round about the city of Gabaa:

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And they drew up their army against
Benjamin the third time, as they had done the first and second.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And the children of Benjamin boldly
issued out of the city, and seeing their enemies flee, pursued them a
long way, so as to wound and kill some of them, as they had done the
first and second day, whilst they fled by two highways, whereof one
goeth up to Bethel, and the other to Gabaa, and they slew about thirty
men:

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> For they thought to cut them off, as
they did before. But they artfully feigning a flight, designed to draw
them away from the city, and by their seeming to flee to bring them to
the highways aforesaid.

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> Then all the children of Israel rising
up out of the places where they were, set their army in battle array, in
the place which is called Baalthamar. The ambushes also which were about
the city, began by little and little to come forth,

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And to march from the west side of the
city. And other ten thousand men chosen out of all Israel attacked the
inhabitants of the city. And the battle grew hot against the children of
Benjamin: and they understood not that present death threatened them on
every side.

<span id="an_20:35">20:35</span> And the Lord defeated them before the
children of Israel, and they slew of them in that day five and twenty
thousand, and one hundred, all fighting men and that drew the sword.

<span id="an_20:36">20:36</span> But the children of Benjamin when they
saw themselves to be too weak, began to flee. Which the children of
Israel seeing, gave them place to flee, that they might come to the
ambushes that were prepared, which they had set near the city.

<span id="an_20:37">20:37</span> And they that were in ambush arose on a
sudden out of their coverts, and whilst Benjamin turned their backs to
the slayers, went into the city, and smote it with the edge of the
sword.

<span id="an_20:38">20:38</span> Now the children of Israel had given a
sign to them, whom they had laid in ambushes, that after they had taken
the city, they should make a fire: that by the smoke rising on high,
they might shew that the city was taken.

<span id="an_20:39">20:39</span> And when the children of Israel saw
this in the battle (for the children of Benjamin thought they fled and
pursued them vigorously, killing thirty men of their army)

<span id="an_20:40">20:40</span> And perceived as it were a pillar of
smoke rise up from the city; and Benjamin looking back, saw that the
city was taken, and that the flames ascended on high:

<span id="an_20:41">20:41</span> They that before had made as if they
fled, turning their faces stood bravely against them; which the children
of Benjamin seeing, turned their backs,

<span id="an_20:42">20:42</span> And began to go towards the way of the
desert, the enemy pursuing them thither also. And they that fired the
city came also out to meet them.

<span id="an_20:43">20:43</span> And so it was, that they were slain on
both sides by the enemies, and there was no rest of their men dying.
They fell and were beaten down on the east side of the city Gabaa.

<span id="an_20:44">20:44</span> And they that were slain in the same
place were eighteen thousand men, all most valiant soldiers.

<span id="an_20:45">20:45</span> And when they that remained of Benjamin
saw this, they fled into the wilderness and made towards the rock that
is called Remmon. In that flight, also as they were straggling and going
different ways, they slew of them five thousand men. And as they went
farther, they still pursued them, and slew also other two thousand.

<span id="an_20:46">20:46</span> And so it came to pass, that all that
were slain of Benjamin in divers places, were five and twenty thousand
fighting men, most valiant for war.

<span id="an_20:47">20:47</span> And there remained of all the number of
Benjamin only six hundred men that were able to escape, and flee to the
wilderness: and they abode in the rock Remmon four months.

<span id="an_20:48">20:48</span> But the children of Israel returning,
put all the remains of the city to the sword, both men and beasts, and
all the cities and villages of Benjamin were consumed with devouring
flames.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Now the children of Israel had also sworn
in Maspha, saying: None of us shall give of his daughters to the
children of Benjamin to wife.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And they all came to the house of God in
Silo, and abiding before him till the evening, lifted up their voices,
and began to lament and weep, saying:

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> O Lord God of Israel, why is so great an
evil come to pass in thy people, that this day one tribe should be taken
away from among us?

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And rising early the next day, they built
an altar: and offered there holocausts, and victims of peace, and they
said:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Who is there among all the tribes of
Israel that came not up with the army of the Lord? for they had bound
themselves with a great oath, when they were in Maspha, that whosoever
were wanting should be slain.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the children of Israel being moved
with repentance for their brother Benjamin, began to say: One tribe is
taken away from Israel.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Whence shall they take wives? For we have
all in general sworn, not to give our daughters to them.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Therefore they said: Who is thereof all
the tribes of Israel, that came not up to the Lord to Maspha. And behold
the inhabitants of Jabes Galaad were found not to have been in that
army.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> (At that time also when they were in
Silo, no one of them was found there.)

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> So they sent ten thousand of the most
valiant men, and commanded them, saying: Go and put the inhabitants of
Jabes Galaad to the sword, with their wives and their children.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And this is what you shall observe:
Every male, and all women that have known men, you shall kill, but the
virgins you shall save.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And there were found of Jabes Galaad
four hundred virgins, that had not known the bed of a man, and they
brought them to the camp Silo, into the land of Chanaan.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And they sent messengers to the
children of Benjamin, that were in the rock Remmon, and commanded them
to receive them in peace.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And the children of Benjamin came at
that time, and wives were given them of the daughters of Jabes Galaad:
but they found no others, whom they might give in like manner.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And all Israel was very sorry, and
repented for the destroying of one tribe out of Israel.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And the ancients said: What shall we do
with the rest, that have not received wives? for all the women in
Benjamin are dead.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And we must use all care, and provide
with great diligence, that one tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> For as to our own daughters we cannot
give them, being bound with an oath and a curse, whereby we said: Cursed
be he that shall give Benjamin any of his daughters to wife.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> So they took counsel, and said: Behold
there is a yearly solemnity of the Lord in Silo, which is situate on the
north of the city of Bethel, and on the east side of the way, that goeth
from Bethel to Sichem, and on the south of the town of Lebona.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And they commanded the children of
Benjamin, and said: Go, and lie hid in the vineyards,

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And when you shall see the daughters of
Silo come out, as the custom is, to dance, come ye on a sudden out of
the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife among them, and go into
the land of Benjamin.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And when their fathers and their
brethren shall come, and shall begin to complain against you, and to
chide, we will say to them: Have pity on them for they took them not
away as by the right of war or conquest, but when they asked to have
them, you gave them not, and the fault was committed on your part.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And the children of Benjamin did, as
they had been commanded: and according to their number, they carried off
for themselves every man his wife of them that were dancing: and they
went into their possession and built up their cities, and dwelt in them.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> The children of Israel also returned by
their tribes, and families, to their dwellings. In those days there was
no king in Israel: but every one did that which seemed right to himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth](rut.md)
