[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe2)  [Next](jo2.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: 1 John

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> That which was from the beginning, which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled, of the word of life:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> For the life was manifested; and we have
seen and do bear witness, and declare unto you the life eternal, which
was with the Father, and hath appeared to us:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> That which we have seen and have heard, we
declare unto you, that you also may have fellowship with us, and our
fellowship may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And these things we write to you, that you
may rejoice, and your joy may be full.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And this is the declaration which we have
heard from him, and declare unto you: That God is light, and in him
there is no darkness.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> If we say that we have fellowship with him,
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> But if we walk in the light, as he also is
in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> If we say that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in us.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> If we say that we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My little children, these things I write to
you, that you may not sin. But if any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the just:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And he is the propitiation for our sins:
and not for ours only, but also for those of the whole world.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And by this we know that we have known him,
if we keep his commandments.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He who saith that he knoweth him, and
keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But he that keepeth his word, in him in
very deed the charity of God is perfected; and by this we know that we
are in him.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> He that saith he abideth in him, ought
himself also to walk, even as he walked.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Dearly beloved, I write not a new
commandment to you, but an old commandment which you had from the
beginning. The old commandment is the word which you have heard.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Again a new commandment I write unto you,
which thing is true both in him and in you; because the darkness is
passed, and the true light now shineth.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> He that saith he is in the light, and
hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> He that loveth his brother, abideth in
the light, and there is no scandal in him.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> But he that hateth his brother, is in
darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth;
because the darkness hath blinded his eyes.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I write unto you, little children,
because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> I write unto you, fathers, because you
have known him, who is from the beginning. I write unto you, young men,
because you have overcome the wicked one.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> I write unto you, babes, because you have
known the Father. I write unto you, young men, because you are strong,
and the word of God abideth in you, and you have overcome the wicked
one.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Love not the world, nor the things which
are in the world. If any man love the world, the charity of the Father
is not in him.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> For all that is in the world, is the
concupiscence of the flesh, and the concupiscence of the eyes, and the
pride of life, which is not of the Father, but is of the world.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And the world passeth away, and the
concupiscence thereof: but he that doth the will of God, abideth for
ever.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Little children, it is the last hour; and
as you have heard that Antichrist cometh, even now there are become many
Antichrists: whereby we know that it is the last hour.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> They went out from us, but they were not
of us. For if they had been of us, they would no doubt have remained
with us; but that they may be manifest, that they are not all of us.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But you have the unction from the Holy
One, and know all things.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> I have not written to you as to them that
know not the truth, but as to them that know it: and that no lie is of
the truth.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Who is a liar, but he who denieth that
Jesus is the Christ? This is Antichrist, who denieth the Father, and the
Son.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath
not the Father. He that confesseth the Son, hath the Father also.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> As for you, let that which you have heard
from the beginning, abide in you. If that abide in you, which you have
heard from the beginning, you also shall abide in the Son, and in the
Father.

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> And this is the promise which he hath
promised us, life everlasting.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> These things have I written to you,
concerning them that seduce you.

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And as for you, let the unction, which
you have received from him, abide in you. And you have no need that any
man teach you; but as his unction teacheth you of all things, and is
truth, and is no lie. And as it hath taught you, abide in him.

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> And now, little children, abide in him,
that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be confounded
by him at his coming.

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> If you know, that he is just, know ye,
that every one also, who doth justice, is born of him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Behold what manner of charity the Father
hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called, and should be the sons
of God. Therefore the world knoweth not us, because it knew not him.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Dearly beloved, we are now the sons of God;
and it hath not yet appeared what we shall be. We know, that, when he
shall appear, we shall be like to him: because we shall see him as he
is.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And every one that hath this hope in him,
sanctifieth himself, as he also is holy.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Whosoever committeth sin commmitteth also
iniquity; and sin is iniquity.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And you know that he appeared to take away
our sins, and in him there is no sin.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Whosoever abideth in him, sinneth not; and
whosoever sinneth, hath not seen him, nor known him.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Little children, let no man deceive you. He
that doth justice is just, even as he is just.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> He that commmitteth sin is of the devil:
for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose, the Son of
God appeared, that he might destroy the works of the devil.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Whosoever is born of God, commmitteth not
sin: for his seed abideth in him, and he can not sin, because he is born
of God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> In this the children of God are manifest,
and the children of the devil. Whosoever is not just, is not of God, nor
he that loveth not his brother.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> For this is the declaration, which you
have heard from the beginning, that you should love one another.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Not as Cain, who was of the wicked one,
and killed his brother. And wherefore did he kill him? Because his own
works were wicked: and his brother's just.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Wonder not, brethren, if the world hate
you.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> We know that we have passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not, abideth in
death.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Whosoever hateth his brother is a
murderer. And you know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in
himself.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> In this we have known the charity of God,
because he hath laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our
lives for the brethren.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> He that hath the substance of this world,
and shall see his brother in need, and shall shut up his bowels from
him: how doth the charity of God abide in him?

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> My little children, let us not love in
word, nor in tongue, but in deed, and in truth.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> In this we know that we are of the truth:
and in his sight shall persuade our hearts.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For if our heart reprehend us, God is
greater than our heart, and knoweth all things.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Dearly beloved, if our heart do not
reprehend us, we have confidence towards God:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And whatsoever we shall ask, we shall
receive of him: because we keep his commandments, and do those things
which are pleasing in his sight.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> And this is his commandment, that we
should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ: and love one
another, as he hath given commandment unto us.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> And he that keepeth his commandments,
abideth in him, and he in him. And in this we know that he abideth in
us, by the Spirit which he hath given us.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits if they be of God: because many false prophets are
gone out into the world.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> By this is the spirit of God known. Every
spirit which confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And every spirit that dissolveth Jesus, is
not of God: and this is Antichrist, of whom you have heard that he
cometh, and he is now already in the world.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> You are of God, little children, and have
overcome him. Because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in
the world.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> They are of the world: therefore of the
world they speak, and the world heareth them.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> We are of God. He that knoweth God, heareth
us. He that is not of God, heareth us not. By this we know the spirit of
truth, and the spirit of error.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Dearly beloved, let us love one another,
for charity is of God. And every one that loveth, is born of God, and
knoweth God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> He that loveth not, knoweth not God: for
God is charity.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> By this hath the charity of God appeared
towards us, because God hath sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we may live by him.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> In this is charity: not as though we had
loved God, but because he hath first loved us, and sent his Son to be a
propitiation for our sins.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> My dearest, if God hath so loved us; we
also ought to love one another.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> No man hath seen God at any time. If we
love one another, God abideth in us, and his charity is perfected in us.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> In this we know that we abide in him, and
he in us: because he hath given us of his spirit.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And we have seen, and do testify, that
the Father hath sent his Son to be the Saviour of the world.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the
Son of God, God abideth in him, and he in God.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And we have known, and have believed the
charity, which God hath to us. God is charity: and he that abideth in
charity, abideth in God, and God in him.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> In this is the charity of God perfected
with us, that we may have confidence in the day of judgment: because as
he is, we also are in this world.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Fear is not in charity: but perfect
charity casteth out fear, because fear hath pain. And he that feareth,
is not perfected in charity.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Let us therefore love God, because God
first hath loved us.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> If any man say, I love God, and hateth
his brother; he is a liar. For he that loveth not his brother, whom he
seeth, how can he love God, whom he seeth not?

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And this commandment we have from God,
that he, who loveth God, love also his brother.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the
Christ, is born of God. And every one that loveth him who begot, loveth
him also who is born of him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> In this we know that we love the children
of God: when we love God, and keep his commandments.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For this is the charity of God, that we
keep his commandments: and his commandments are not heavy.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> For whatsoever is born of God, overcometh
the world: and this is the victory which overcometh the world, our
faith.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Who is he that overcometh the world, but he
that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> This is he that came by water and blood,
Jesus Christ: not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the
Spirit which testifieth, that Christ is the truth.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And there are three who give testimony in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. And these three are
one.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And there are three that give testimony on
earth: the spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three are
one.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> If we receive the testimony of men, the
testimony of God is greater. For this is the testimony of God, which is
greater, because he hath testified of his Son.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> He that believeth in the Son of God, hath
the testimony of God in himself. He that believeth not the Son, maketh
him a liar: because he believeth not in the testimony which God hath
testified of his Son.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And this is the testimony, that God hath
given to us eternal life. And this life is in his Son.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> He that hath the Son, hath life. He that
hath not the Son, hath not life.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> These things I write to you, that you may
know that you have eternal life, you who believe in the name of the Son
of God.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And this is the confidence which we have
towards him: That, whatsoever we shall ask according to his will, he
heareth us.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And we know that he heareth us whatsoever
we ask: we know that we have the petitions which we request of him.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> He that knoweth his brother to sin a sin
which is not to death, let him ask, and life shall be given to him, who
sinneth not to death. There is a sin unto death: for that I say not that
any man ask.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> All iniquity is sin. And there is a sin
unto death.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> We know that whosoever is born of God,
sinneth not: but the generation of God preserveth him, and the wicked
one toucheth him not.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> We know that we are of God, and the whole
world is seated in wickedness.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And we know that the Son of God is come:
and he hath given us understanding that we may know the true God, and
may be in his true Son. This is the true God and life eternal.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Little children, keep yourselves from
idols. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 John](jo2.md)
