[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](est)  [Next](psa.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Job

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> There was a man in the land of Hus, whose
name was Job, and that man was simple and upright, and fearing God, and
avoiding evil.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> And there were born to him seven sons and
three daughters.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And his possession was seven thousand
sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and
five hundred she asses, and a family exceeding great: and this man was
great among all the people of the east.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And his sons went, and made a feast by
houses every one in his day. And sending they called their three sisters
to eat and drink with them.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And when the days of their feasting were
gone about, Job sent to them, and sanctified them: and rising up early
offered holocausts for every one of them. For he said: Lest perhaps my
sons have sinned, and have blessed God in their hearts. So did Job all
days.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Now on a certain day when the sons of God
came to stand before the Lord, Satan also was present among them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And the Lord said to him: Whence comest
thou ? And he answered and said: I have gone round about the earth, and
walked through it.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And the Lord said to him: Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a
simple and upright man, and fearing God, and avoiding evil?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Satan answering, said: Doth Job fear
God in vain ?

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Hast not thou made a fence for him, and
his house, and all his substance round about, blessed the works of his
hands, and his possession hath increased on the earth ?

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But stretch forth thy hand a little, and
touch all that he hath, and see if he blesseth thee not to thy face.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Then the Lord said to Satan: Behold, all
that he hath is in thy hand: only put not forth thy hand upon his
person. And Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Now upon a certain day when his sons and
daughters were eating and drinking wine in the house of their eldest
brother,

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> There came a messenger to Job, and said:
The oxen were ploughing, and the asses feeding beside them,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And the Sabeans rushed in, and took all
away, and slew the servants with the sword, and I alone have escaped to
tell thee.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And while he was yet speaking, another
came, and said: The fire of God fell from heaven, and striking the sheep
and the servants, hath consumed them, and I alone have escaped to tell
thee.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And while he also was yet speaking, there
came another, and said: The Chaldeans made three troops, and have fallen
upon the camels, and taken them, moreover they have slain the servants
with the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell thee.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> He was yet speaking, and behold another
came in, and said: Thy sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine
in the house of their elder brother:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> A violent wind came on a sudden from the
side of the desert, and shook the four corners of the house, and it fell
upon thy children and they are dead, and I alone have escaped to fell
thee.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Then Job rose up, and rent his garments,
and having shaven his head fell down upon the ground and worshipped,

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And said: Naked came I out of my mother's
womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath
taken away: as it hath pleased the Lord so is it done: blessed be the
name of the Lord.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> In all these things Job sinned not by his
lips, nor spoke he any foolish thing against God.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And it came to pass, when on a certain day
the sons of God came, and stood before the Lord, and Satan came among
them, and stood in his sight,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That the Lord said to Satan: Whence comest
thou ? And he answered and said: I have gone round about the earth, and
walked through it.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the Lord said to Satan: Hast thou
considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a
man simple, and upright, and fearing Cod, and avoiding evil, and still
keeping his innocence ? But thou hast moved me against him, that I sho
uld afflict him without cause.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And Satan answered, and said: Skin for
skin, and all that a man hath he will give for his life:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> gut put forth thy hand, and touch his bone
and his flesh, and then thou shalt gee that he will bless thee to thy
face.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And the Lord said to Satan: Behold be is in
thy hand, but yet save his life.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So Satan went forth from the presence Of
the Lord, and struck Job with a very grievous ulcer, from the sole of
the foot even to the top of his head:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And he took a potsherd and scraped the
corrupt matter, sitting on a dunghill.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And his wife said to him: Dost thou still
continue in thy simplicity? bless God and die.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And he said to her: Thou hast; spoken
like one of the foolish women: if we have received good things at the
hand of God, why should we not receive evil? In all these things Job did
not sin with his lips.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Now when Job's three friends heard all
the evil that had befallen him, they came every one from his own place,
Alphas the Themanite, and Baldad the Suhite, and Sophar the Naamathite.
For they had made an appointment to come together and visit him, a nd
comfort him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And when they had lifted up their eyes
afar off, they knew him not, and crying out they wept, and rending their
garments they sprinkled dust upon their heads towards heaven.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And they sat with him on the ground seven
days and seven nights, and no man spoke to him a word: for they saw that
his grief was very great.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed
his day,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> and he said:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let the day perish wherein I was born, and
the night in which it was said: A man child is conceived.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Let that day be turned into darkness, let
not God regard it from above, and let not the light shine upon it.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Let darkness, and the shadow of death cover
it, let a mist overspread it, and let it be wrapped up in bitterness.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Let a darksome whirlwind seize upon that
night, let it not be counted in the days of the year, nor numbered in
the months.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Let that night be solitary, and not worthy
of praise.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Let them curse it who curse the day. who
are ready to raise up a leviathan:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Let the stars be darkened with the mist
thereof: let it expect light and not see it, nor the rising of the
dawning of the day:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Because it shut not up the doors of the
womb that bore me, nor took away evils from my eyes.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Why did I not die in the womb, why did I
not perish when I came out of the belly?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Why received upon the knees? why suckled
at the breasts ?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For now I should have been asleep and
still, and should have rest in my sleep.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> With kings and consuls of the earth, who
build themselves solitudes:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Or with princes, that possess gold, and
All their houses with silver:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Or as a hidden untimely birth I should
not be, or as they that being conceived have not seen the light.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> There the wicked cease from tumult, and
there the wearied in strength are at rest.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And they sometime bound together without
disquiet, have not heard the voice of the oppressor.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The small and great are there, and the
servant is free from his master.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Why is light given to him that is in
misery, and life to them that are in bitterness of soul?

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> That look for death, and it cometh not,
as they that dig for a treasure:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And they rejoice exceedingly when they
have found the grave.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> To a man whose way is hidden, and God
hath surrounded him with darkness?

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Before I eat I sigh: and as overflowing
waters, so is my roaring:

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> For the fear which I feared hath come
upon me: and that which I was afraid of, hath befallen me.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Have I not dissembled ? have I not kept
silence ? have I not been quiet? and indignation is come upon me.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Themanite answered, and
said:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> If we begin to speak to thee, perhaps thou
wilt take it ill, but who can withhold the words he hath conceived?

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Behold thou hast taught many, and thou hast
strengthened the weary hands:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Thy words have confirmed them that were
staggering, and thou hast strengthened the trembling knees:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But now the scourge is come upon thee, and
thou faintest: it hath touched thee, and thou art troubled.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Where is thy fear, thy fortitude, thy
patience, and the perfection of thy ways?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished
being innocent? or when were the just destroyed?

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> On the contrary I have seen those who work
iniquity, and sow sorrows, and reap them,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Perishing by the blast of God, and consumed
by the spirit of his wrath.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> The roaring of the lion, and the voice of
the lioness, and the teeth of the whelps of lions are broken:

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> The tiger hath perished for want of prey,
and the young lions are scattered abroad.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Now there was a word spoken to me in
private, and my ears by stealth as it were received the veins of its
whisper.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> In the horror of a vision by night, when
deep sleep is wont to hold men,

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Fear seized upon me, and trembling, and
all my bones were affrighted:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And when a spirit passed before me, the
hair of my flesh stood up.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> There stood one whose countenance I knew
not, an image before my eyes, and I heard the voice as it were of a
gentle wind:

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Shall man be justified in comparison of
God, or shall a man be more pure than his maker?

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Behold they that serve him are not
steadfast, and in his angels he found wickedness:

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> How much more shall they that dwell in
houses of clay, who have an earthly foundation, be consumed as with the
moth?

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> From morning till evening they shall be
cut down: and because no one understandeth, they shall perish for ever.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And they that shall be left, shall be
taken away from them: they shall die, and not in wisdom.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Call now if there be any that will answer
thee, and turn to some of the saints.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Anger indeed killeth the foolish, and envy
slayeth the little one.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have seen a fool with a strong root, and
I cursed his beauty immediately.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> His children shall be far from safety, and
shall be destroyed in the gate, and there shall be none to deliver them.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Whose harvest the hungry shall eat, and the
armed man shall take him by violence, and the thirsty shall drink up his
riches.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Nothing upon earth is done without a voice
cause, and sorrow doth not spring out of the ground.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Man is born to labour and the bird to fly.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Wherefore I will pray to the Lord, and
address my speech to God:

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Who doth great things and unsearchable and
wonderful things without number:

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Who giveth rain upon the face of the
earth, and watereth all things with waters:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Who setteth up the humble on high, and
comforteth with health those that mourn.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Who bringeth to nought the designs of the
malignant, so that their hands cannot accomplish what they had begun:

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> Who catcheth the wise in their
craftiness, and disappointeth the counsel of the wicked:

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> They shall meet with darkness in the day,
and grope at noonday as in the night.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But he shall save the needy from the
sword of their mouth, and the poor from the hand of the violent.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And to the needy there shall he hope, but
iniquity shall draw in her mouth.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Blessed is the mall whom God correcteth:
refuse not therefore the chastising of the lord:

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For he woundeth, and cureth: he striketh,
and his hands shall heal.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> In six troubles he shall deliver thee,
and in the seventh, evil shall not touch thee.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> In famine he shall deliver thee from
death: and in battle, from the hand of the sword.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Thou shalt he hidden from the scourge of
the tongue: and thou shalt not fear calamity when it cometh.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> In destruction and famine then shalt
laugh: and thou shalt not be afraid of the beasts of the earth.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> But thou shalt have a covenant with the
stones of the lands, and the beasts of the earth shall be at pence with
thee.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle
is in peace, and visiting thy beauty thou shalt not sin.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall
be multiplied, and thy offspring like the grass of the earth.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Thou shalt enter into the grave in
abundance, as a heap of wheat is brought in its season.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> Behold, this is even so, as we have
searched oat: which thou having heard, consider it thoroughly in thy
mind.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> But Job answered, and said:

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> O that my sins, whereby I have deserved
wrath, and the calamity that I suffer, were weighed in a balance.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> As the sand of the sea this would appear
heavier: therefore my words are full of sorrow :

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For the arrows of the Lord are in me, the
rage whereof drinketh up my spirit, and the terrors of the Lord war
against me.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Will the wild ass bray when he hath grass?
or will the ox low when he standeth before a full manger?

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Or can an unsavoury thing be eaten, that is
not seasoned with salt? or can a man taste that which when tasted
bringeth death?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> The things which before my soul would not
touch, now, through anguish are my meats.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Who will grant that my request may come:
and that God may give me what I look for?

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And that he that hath begun may destroy me,
that he may let loose his hand, and cut me off?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And that this may be my comfort, that
afflicting me with sorrow, he spare not, nor I contradict the words of
the Holy One.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> For what is my strength, that I can hold
out? or what is my end that I should keep patience?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> My strength is not the strength of
stones, nor is my flesh of brass.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Behold there is no help for me in myself,
and my familiar friends also are departed from me.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> He that taketh away mercy from his
friend, forsaketh the fear of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> My brethren have passed by me, as the
torrent that passeth swiftly in the valleys.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> They that fear the hoary frost, the snow
shall fall upon them.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> At the time when they shall be scattered
they shall perish: and after it groweth hot they shall be melted out of
their place.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> The paths of their steps are entangled:
they shall walk in vain, and shall perish.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Consider the paths of Thema, the ways of
Saba, and wait a little while.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> They are confounded, because I have
hoped: they are come also even unto me, and are covered with shame.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Now you are come: and now seeing my
affliction you are afraid.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> Did I say: Bring to me, and give me of
your substance?

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Or deliver me from the hand of the enemy,
and rescue me out of the hand of the mighty?

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> Teach me, and I will hold my peace: and
if I have been ignorant in any thing, instruct me.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Why have you detracted the words of
truth, whereas there is none of you that can reprove me?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> You dress up speeches only to rebuke, and
you utter words to the wind.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> You rush in upon the fatherless, and you
endeavour to overthrow your friend.

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> However finish what you have begun, give
ear, and see whether I lie.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> Answer, I beseech you, without
contention: and speaking that which is just, judge ye.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And you shall not And iniquity in my
tongue, neither shall folly sound in my mouth.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> The life of man upon earth is a warfare,
and his days are like the days of a hireling.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> As a servant longeth for the shade, as the
hireling looketh for the end of his work;

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> So I also have had empty months, and have
numbered to myself wearisome nights.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> If I lie down to sleep, I shall say: When
shall arise? and again I shall look for the evening, and shall be filled
with sorrows even till darkness.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> My flesh is clothed with rottenness and the
filth of dust, my skin is withered and drawn together.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> My days have passed more swiftly than the
web is cut by the weaver, and are consumed without any hope.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Remember that my life is but wind, and my
eyes shall not return to see good things.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Nor shall the sight of man behold me: thy
eyes are upon me, and I shall be no more.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> As a cloud is consumed, and passeth away:
so he that shall go down to hell shall not come up.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Nor shall he return my more into his
house, neither shall his place know him any more.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Wherefore I will not spare my month, I
will speak in the affliction of my spirit: I will talk with the
bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou hast
enclosed me in a prison?

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> If I say: My bed shall comfort me, and I
shall be relieved speaking with myself on my couch:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Thou wilt frighten me with dreams and
terrify me with visions.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> So that my soul rather chooseth hanging,
and my bones death.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have done with hope, I shall now live
no longer: spare me, for my days are nothing.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> What is a man that thou shouldst magnify
him? or why dost thou set thy heart upon him?

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Thou visitest him early in the morning,
and thou provest him suddenly.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> How long wilt thou not spare me, nor
suffer me to swallow down my spittle?

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> I have sinned: what shall I do to thee, O
keeper of men? why hast thou set me opposite to thee, and I am become
burdensome to myself?

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Why dost thou not remove my sin, and why
dost thou not take away my iniquity? Behold now I shall sleep in the
dust: and if thou seek me in the morning, I shall not be.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> The Baldad the Suhite answered, and said:

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> How long wilt thou speak these things, and
how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a strong wind?

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Doth God pervert judgment, or doth the
Almighty overthrow that which is just?

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Although thy children have sinned against
him, and he hath left them in the hand of their iniquity:

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Yet if thou wilt arise early to God, and
wilt beseech the Almighty:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> If thou wilt walk clean and upright, he
will presently awake onto thee, and will make the dwelling of thy
justice peaceable:

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Insomuch, that if thy former things were
small, thy latter things would be multiplied exceedingly.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> For inquire of the former generation, and
search diligently into the memory of the fathers:

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> (For we are but of yesterday, and are
ignorant that our days upon earth are but a shadow:)

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And they shall teach thee: they shall
speak to thee, and utter words out of their hearts.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> Can the rush be green without moisture?
or a sedge-bush grow without water?

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> When it is yet in flower, and is not
plucked up with the hand, it withereth before all herbs.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Even so are the ways of all that forget
God, and the hope of the hypocrite shall perish:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> His folly shall not please him, and his
trust shall be like the spider's web.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> He shall lean upon his house, and it
shall not stand: he shall prop it up, and it shall not rise:

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> He seemeth to have moisture before the
sun cometh, and at his rising his blossom shall shoot forth.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> His roots shall be thick upon a heap of
stones, and among the stones he shall abide.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> If one swallow him up out of his place,
he shall deny him, and shall say: I know thee not.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For this is the joy of his way, that
others may spring again out of the earth.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> God will not cast away the simple, nor
reach out his hand to the evildoer:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Until thy mouth be filled with laughter,
and thy lips with rejoicing.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> They that hate thee, shall be clothed
with confusion: and the dwelling of the wicked shall not stand.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> And Job answered, and said:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Indeed I know it is so, and that man cannot
be justified compared with

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> If he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one for a thousand.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> He is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength: who hath resisted him, and hath had peace ?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Who hath removed mountains, and they whom
he overthrew in his wrath, knew it not.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Who shaketh the earth out of her place, and
the pillars thereof tremble.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Who commandeth tile sun and it riseth not:
and shutteth up the stars as it were under a seal:

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Who alone spreadeth out the heavens, and
walketh upon the waves of the sea.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Who maketh Arcturus, and Orion, and Hyades,
and the inner parts of the south.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> Who doth things great and
incomprehensible, and wonderful, of which there is no number.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> If he come to me, I shall not see him: if
he depart I shall not understand.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If he examine on a sudden, who shall
answer him? or who can say: Why dost thou so?

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> God, whose wrath no mall can resist, and
under whom they stoop that bear up the world.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What am I then, that I should answer him,
and have words with him?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> I, who although I should have any just
thing, would not answer, but would make supplication to my judge.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And if he should hear me when I call, I
should not believe that he had heard my voice.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For he shall crush me in a whirlwind, and
multiply my wounds even without cause.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> He alloweth not my spirit to rest, and he
filleth me with bitterness.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> If strength be demanded, he is most
strong: if equity of judgment, no man dare bear witness for me.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> If I would justify myself, my own mouth
shall condemn me: if I would shew myself innocent, he shall prove me
wicked.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Although I should be simple, even this my
soul shall be ignorant of, and I shall be weary of my life.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> One thing there is that I have spoken,
both the innocent and the wicked he consumeth.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> If he scourge, let him kill at once, and
not laugh at the pains of the innocent.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> The earth is given into the hand of the
wicked, he covereth the face of the judges thereof: and if it be not he,
who is it then?

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> My days have been swifter than a post:
they have fled away and have not seen good.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> They have passed by as ships carrying
fruits, as an eagle flying to the prey.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> If I say: I will not speak so: I change
my face, and am tormented with sorrow.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> I feared all my works, knowing that thou
didst not spare the offender.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> But if so also I am wicked, why have I
laboured in vain?

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> If I be washed as it were with snow
waters, and my hands shall shine ever so clean :

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> Yet thou shalt plunge me in filth, and my
garments shall abhor me,

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> For I shall not answer a man that is like
myself: nor one that may be heard with me equally in judgment.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> There is none that may be able to reprove
both, and to put his hand between both.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> Let him take his rod away from me, and
let not his fear terrify me.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> I will speak, and will not fear him: for
I cannot answer while I am in fear.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> My soul is weary of my life, I will let
go my speech against myself, I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> I will say to God: Do not condemn me:
tell me why thou judgest me so.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Doth it seem good to thee that thou
shouldst calumniate me, and oppress me, the work of thy own hands, and
help the counsel of the wicked?

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Hast thou eyes of flesh: or, shalt thou
see as man seeth?

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> Are thy days as the days of man, and are
thy years as the times of men:

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> That thou shouldst inquire after my
iniquity, and search after my sin?

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And shouldst know that I have done no
wicked thing, whereas there is no man that can deliver out of thy hand.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me
wholly round about, and dost thou thus cast me down headlong on a
sudden?

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast
made me as the clay, and thou wilt bring me into dust again.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Hast thou not milked me as milk, and
curdled me like cheese?

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Thou hast clothed me with skin and
flesh: thou hast put me together with bones and sinews:

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Thou hast granted me life and mercy,
and thy visitation hath preserved my spirit.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Although thou conceal these things in
thy heart, yet I know that thou rememberest all things.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> If I have sinned and thou hast spared
me for an hour: why dost thou not suffer me to be clean from my
iniquity?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And if I be wicked, woe unto me: and if
just, I shall not lift up my head, being filled with affliction and
misery.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> And for pride thou wilt take me as a
lioness, and returning thou tormentest me wonderfully.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Thou renewest thy witnesses against me,
and multipliest thy wrath upon me, and pains war against me.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Why didst thou bring me forth out of
the womb: O that I had been consumed that eye might not see me!

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> I should have been as if I had not
been, carried from the womb to the grave.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> Shall not the fewness of my days be
ended shortly? suffer me, therefore, that I may lament my sorrow a
little:

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> Before I go, and return no more, to a
land that is dark and covered with the mist of death:

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> A land of misery and darkness, where
the shadow of death, and no order, but everlasting horror dwelleth.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> Then Sophar the Naamathite answered, and
said:

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Shall not he that speaketh much, hear
also? or shall a man full of talk be justified?

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Shall men hold their peace to thee only?
and when thou hast mocked others, shall no man confute thee?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> For thou hast said: My word is pure, and
I am clean in thy sight.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And I wish that God would speak with
thee, and would open his lips to thee,

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> That he might shew thee the secrets of
wisdom, and that his law is manifold, and thou mightest understand that
he exacteth much less of thee, than thy iniquity deserveth.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> Peradventure thou wilt comprehend the
steps of God, and wilt find out the Almighty perfectly?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> He is higher than heaven, and what wilt
thou do ? he is deeper than hell, and how wilt thou know?

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> The measure of him is longer than the
earth, and broader than the sea.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> If he shall overturn all things, or
shall press them together, who shall contradict him?

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> For he knoweth the vanity of men, and
when he seeth iniquity, doth he not consider it?

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> A vain man is lifted up into pride, and
thinketh himself born free like a wild ass's colt.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Rut thou hast hardened thy heart, and
hast spread thy hands to him.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If thou wilt put away from thee the
iniquity that is in thy hand, and lot not injustice remain in thy
tabernacle:

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> Then mayst thou lift up thy face
without spot, and thou shalt be steadfast, and shalt not fear.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> Thou shalt also forget misery, and
remember it only as waters that are passed away.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And brightness like that of the
noonday, shall arise to thee at evening: and when thou shalt think
thyself consumed, thou shalt rise as the day star.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And thou shalt have confidence, hope
being set before thee, and being buried thou shalt sleep secure.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Thou shalt rest, and there shall be
none to make thee afraid: and many shall entreat thy face.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> But the eyes of the wicked shall decay,
and the way to escape shall fail them, and their hope the abomination of
the soul.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> When Job answered, and said:

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Are you then men alone, and shall wisdom
die with you?

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> I also have a heart as well as you: for
who is ignorant of these things, which you know?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> He that is mocked by his friends as I,
shall call upon God and he will hear him: for the simplicity of the just
man is laughed to scorn.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> The lamp despised in the thoughts of the
rich, is ready for the time appointed.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The tabernacles of robbers abound, and
they provoke God boldly; whereas it is he that hath given all into their
hands:

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> But ask now the beasts, and they shall
teach thee: and the birds of the air, and they shall tell thee.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Speak to the earth, and it shall answer
thee: and the fishes of the sea shall tell.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Who is ignorant that the hand of the Lord
hath made all these things?

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> In whose hand is the soul of every
living thing, and the spirit of all flesh of man.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> Doth not the ear discern words, and the
palate of him that eateth, the taste?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> In the ancient is wisdom, and in length
of days prudence.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> With him is wisdom and strength, he
hath counsel and understanding.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> If he pull down, there is no man that
can build up: if he shut up a. man, there is none that can open.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> If he withhold the waters, all things
shall be dried up: and if he send them out, they shall overturn the
earth.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> With him is strength and wisdom: he
knoweth both the deceiver, and him that is deceived.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He bringeth counsellors to a foolish
end, and judges to insensibility.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> He looseth the belt of kings, and
girdeth their loins with a cord.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He leadeth away priests without glory,
and overthroweth nobles.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> He changeth the speech of the true
speakers, and taketh away the doctrine of the aged.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> He poureth contempt upon princes, and
relieveth them that were oppressed.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> He discovereth deep things out of
darkness, and bringeth up to light the shadow of death.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> He multiplieth nations, and destroyeth
them, and restoreth them again after they were overthrown.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> He changeth the heart of the princes of
the people of the earth, and deceiveth them that they walk in vain where
there is no way.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> They shall grope as in the dark, and
not in the light, and he shall make them stagger like men that are
drunk.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Behold my eye hath seen all these things,
and my ear hath heard them, and I have understood them all.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> According to your knowledge I also know:
neither am I inferior to you.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> But yet I will speak to the Almighty, and
I desire to reason with God.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Having first shewn that you are forgers
of lies, and maintainers of perverse opinions.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And I wish you would hold your peace,
that you might be thought to be wise men..

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Hear ye therefore my reproof, and attend
to the judgment of my lips.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Hath God any need of your lie, that you
should speak deceitfully for him?

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Do you accept his person, and do you
endeavour to judge for God?

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> Or shall it please him, from whom nothing
can be concealed ? or shall he be deceived as a man, with your deceitful
dealings ?

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> He shall reprove you, because in secret
you accept his person.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> As soon as he shall move himself, he
shall trouble you: and his dread shall fall upon you.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Your remembrance shall be compared to
ashes, and your necks shall be brought to clay.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Hold your peace a little while, that I
may speak whatsoever my mind shall suggest to me.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Why do I tear my flesh with my teeth,
and carry my soul in my hands?

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Although he should bill me, I will
trust in him: but yet I will reprove my ways in his sight.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And he shall be my saviour: for no
hypocrite shall come before his presence.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> Hear ye my speech, and receive with
Sour ears hidden truths.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> If I shall be judged, I know that I
shall be found just.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> Who is he that will plead against me?
let him come: why am I consumed holding my peace?

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Two things only do not to me, and then
from thy face I shall not be hid:

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Withdraw thy hand far from me, and let
not thy dread terrify me.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Call me, and I will answer thee: or
else I will speak, and do thou answer me.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> How many are my iniquities and sins?
make me know my crimes and offences.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Why hidest thou thy face, and thinkest
me thy enemy?

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> Against a leaf, that is carried away
with the wind, thou shewest thy power, and thou pursuest a dry straw.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> For thou writest bitter things against
me, and wilt consume me for the sins of my youth.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> Thou hast put my feet in the stocks,
and hast observed all my paths, and hast considered the steps of my
feet:

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> Who am to be consumed as rottenness,
and as a garment that is moth-eaten.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> Man born of a woman, living for a short
time, is filled with many miseries.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Who cometh forth like a flower, and is
destroyed, and fleeth as a shadow, and never continueth in the same
state.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> And dost thou think it meet to open thy
eyes upon such an one, and to bring him into judgment with thee?

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who can make him clean that is conceived
of unclean seed ? is it not thou who only art?

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> The days of man are short, and the number
of his months is with thee: thou hast appointed his bounds which cannot
be passed.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Depart a little from him, that he may
rest, until his wished for day come, as that of the hireling.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> A tree hath hope: if it be cut, it
groweth green again, and the boughs thereof sprout.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> If its root be old in the earth, and its
stock be dead in the dust:

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> At the scent of water, it shall spring,
and bring forth leaves, as when it was first planted.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But man when he shall be dead, and
stripped and consumed, I pray you where is he?

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> As if the waters should depart out of
the sea, and an emptied river should be dried up:

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> So man when he is fallen asleep shall
not rise again; till the heavens be broken, he shall not awake, nor rise
up out of his sleep.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Who will grant me this, that thou
mayest protect me in hell, and hide me till thy wrath pass, and appoint
me a. time when thou wilt remember me?

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> Shall man that is dead, thinkest thou,
live again? all the days in which I am now in warfare, I expect until my
change come.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> Thou shalt call me, and I will answer
thee: to the work of thy hands thou shalt reach out thy right hand.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Thou indeed hast numbered my steps, but
spare my sins.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> Thou hast sealed up my offences as it
were in a bag, but hast cured my iniquity.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> A mountain falling cometh to nought,
and a rock is removed out of its place.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Waters wear away the stones, and with
inundation the ground by little and little is washed away: so in like
manner thou shalt destroy man.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Thou hast strengthened him for a little
while, that he may pass away for ever: thou shalt change his face, and
shalt send him away.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> Whether his children come to honour or
dishonour, he shall not understand.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> But yet his flesh, while he shall live,
shall have pain, and his soul shall mourn over him.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> And Eliphaz the Themanite, answered, and
said:

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Will a wise man answer as if he were
speaking in the wind, and fill his stomach with burning heat?

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> Thou reprovest him by words, who is not
equal to thee, and thou speakest that which is not good for thee.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> As much as is in thee, thou hast made
void fear, and hast taken away prayers from before God.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> For thy iniquity hath taught thy mouth,
and thou imitatest the tongue of blasphemers.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> Thy own mouth shall condemn thee, and not
I: and thy own lips shall answer thee.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Art thou the first man that was born, or
wast thou made before the hills ?

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> Hast thou heard God's counsel, and shall
his wisdom be inferior to thee?

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> What knowest thou that we are ignorant
of? what dost thou understand that we know not?

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> There are with us also aged and ancient
men, much elder than thy fathers.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Is it a great matter that God should
comfort thee? but thy wicked words hinder this.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Why doth thy heart elevate thee, and
why dost thou stare with thy eyes, as if they were thinking great things
?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Why doth thy spirit swell against God,
to utter such words out of thy mouth ?

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> What is man that he should be without
spot, and he that is born of a woman that he should appear just?

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> Behold among his saints none is
unchangeable, and the heavens are not pure in his sight.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> How much more is man abominable, and
unprofitable, who drinketh iniquity like water?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I will shew thee, hear me : and I mill
tell thee what I have seen.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> Wise men confess and hide not their
fathers.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> To whom alone the earth was given, and
no stranger hath passed among them.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> The wicked man is proud all his days,
and the number of the years of his tyranny is uncertain.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> The sound of dread is always in his
ears: and when there is peace, he always suspecteth treason.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> He believeth not that he may return
from darkness to light, looking round about for the sword on every side.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> When he moveth himself to seek bread,
he knoweth that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Tribulation shall terrify him, and
distress shall surround him, as a king that is prepared for the battle.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> For he hath stretched out his hand
against God, and hath strengthened himself against the Almighty.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> He hath run against him with his neck
raised up, and is armed with a fat neck.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> Fatness hath covered his face, and the
fat hangeth down on his sides.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> He hath dwelt in desolate cities, and
in desert houses that are reduced into heaps.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> He shall not be enriched, neither shall
his substance continue, neither shall he push his root in the earth.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> He shall not depart out of darkness:
the flame shall dry up his branches, and he shall be taken away by the
breath of his own month.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> He shall not believe, being vainly
deceived by error, that he may be redeemed with any price.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Before his days be full he shall
perish: and his hands shall wither away.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> He shall be blasted as a vine when its
grapes are in the first flower, and as an olive tree that casteth its
flower.

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> For the congregation of the hypocrite
is barren, and fire shall devour their tabernacles, who love to take
bribes.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> He hath conceived sorrow, and hath
brought forth iniquity, and his womb prepareth deceits.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> Then Job answered, and said:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> I have often heard such things as these:
you are all troublesome comforters.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Shall windy words have no end? or is it
any trouble to thee to speak?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> I also could speak like you: and would
God your soul were for my soul.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> I would comfort you also with words, and
would wag my head over you.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> I would strengthen you with my mouth, and
would move my lips, as sparing you.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But what shall I do? If I speak, my pain
will not rest: and if I hold my peace, it will not depart from me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> But now my sorrow hath oppressed me, and
all my limbs are brought to nothing.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> My wrinkles bear witness against me, and
a false speaker riseth up against my face, contradicting me.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> He hath gathered together his fury
against me, and threatening me he hath gnashed with his teeth upon me:
my enemy hath beheld me with terrible eyes.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> They have opened their mouths upon me,
and reproaching me they have struck me on the cheek, they are filled
with my pains.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> God hath shut me up with the unjust
man, and hath delivered me into the hands of the wicked.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> I that was formerly so wealthy, am all
on a sudden broken to pieces: he hath taken me by my neck, he hath
broken me, and hath set me up to be his mark.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> He hath compassed me round about with
his lances, he hath wounded my loins, he hath not spared, and hath
poured out my bowels on the earth.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> He hath torn me with wound upon wound,
he hath rushed in upon me like a giant.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> I have sowed sackcloth upon my skin,
and have covered my flesh with ashes.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> My face is swollen with weeping, and my
eyelids are dim.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> These things have I suffered without
the iniquity of my hand, when I offered pure prayers to God.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> O earth, cover not thou my blood,
neither let my cry find a hiding place in thee.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> For behold my witness is in heaven, and
he that knoweth my conscience is on high.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> My friends are full of words: my eye
poureth out tears to God.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And O that a man might so be judged
with God, as the son of man is judged with his companion!

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> For behold short years pass away and I
am walking in a path by which l shall not return.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> My spirit shall be wasted, my days shall
be shortened, and only the grave remaineth for me.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> I have not sinned, and my eye abideth in
bitterness.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> Deliver me O Lord, and set me beside
thee, and let any man's hand fight against me.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> Thou hast set their heart far from
understanding, therefore they shall not be exalted.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He promiseth a prey to his companions,
and the eyes of his children shall fail.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> He hath made me as it were a byword of
the people, and I am an example before them.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> My eye is dim through indignation, and my
limbs are brought as it were to nothing.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The just shall be astonished at this, and
the innocent shall be raised up against the hypocrite.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And the just man shall hold on his way,
and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> Wherefore be you all converted, and
come, and I shall not find among you any wise man.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> My days have passed away, my thoughts
are dissipated, tormenting my heart.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> They have turned night into day, and
after darkness I hope for light again.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> If I wait hell is my house, and I have
made my bed in darkness.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> If I have said to rottenness: Thou art
my father; to worms, my mother and my sister.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> Where is now then my expectation, and
who considereth my patience?

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> All that I have shall go down into the
deepest pit: thinkest thou that there at least I shall have rest?

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> Then Baldad the Suhite answered, and
said:

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> How long will you throw out words?
understand first, and so let us speak.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> Why are we reputed as beasts, and counted
vile before you?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Thou that destroyest thy soul in thy
fury, shall the earth be forsaken for thee, and shall rocks be removed
out of their place?

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Shall not the light of the wicked be
extinguished, and the flame of his fire not shine?

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> The light shall be dark in his
tabernacle, and the lamp that is over him, shall be put out.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The step of his strength shall be
straitened, and his own counsel shall cast him down headlong.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> For he hath thrust his feet into a net,
and walketh in its meshes.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> The sole of his foot shall be held in a
snare, and thirst shall burn against him.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> A gin is hidden for him in the earth,
and his trap upon the path.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> Fears shall terrify him on every side,
and shall entangle his feet.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Let his strength be wasted with famine,
and let hunger invade his ribs.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> Let it devour the beauty of his skin,
let the firstborn death consume his arms.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Let his confidence be rooted out of his
tabernacle, and let destruction tread upon him like a king.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> Let the companions of him that is not,
dwell in his tabernacle, let brimstone be sprinkled in his tent.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> Let his roots be dried up beneath, and
his harvest destroyed above.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Let the memory of him perish from the
earth and let not his name be renowned in the streets.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> He shall drive him out of light into
darkness, and shall remove him out of the world.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> His seed shall not subsist, nor his
offspring among his people, nor any remnants in his country.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> They that come after him shall be
astonished at his day, and horror shall fall upon them that went before.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> These men are the tabernacles of the
wicked, and this the place of him that knoweth not God.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Then Job answered , and said:

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> How long do you afflict my soul, and
break me in pieces with words?

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> Behold, these ten times you confound me,
and are not ashamed to oppress me.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> For if I have been ignorant, my ignorance
shall be with me.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> But you have set yourselves up against
me, and reprove me with my reproaches.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> At least now understand, that God hath
not afflicted me with an equal judgment, and compassed me with his
scourges.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Behold I cry suffering violence, and no
one will hear: I shall cry aloud, and there is none to judge.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He hath hedged in my path round about,
and I cannot pass, and in my way he hath set darkness.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> He hath stripped me of my glory, and hath
taken the crown from my head.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> He hath destroyed me on every side, and
I am lost, and he hath taken away my hope, as from a tree that is
plucked up.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> His wrath is kindled against me, and he
hath counted me as his enemy.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> His troops have come together, and have
made themselves a way by me, and have besieged my tabernacle round
about.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> He hath put my brethren far from me,
and my acquaintance like strangers have departed from me.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> My kinsmen have forsaken me, and they
that knew me, have forgotten me.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> They that dwelt in my house, and my
maidservants have counted me a stranger, and I have been like an alien
in their eyes.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> I called my servant, and he gave me no
answer, I entreated him with my own mouth.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> My wife hath abhorred my breath, and I
entreated the children of my womb.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Even fools despise me; and when I gone
from them, they spoke against me.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> They that were sometime my counsellors,
have abhorred me: and he whom I love most is turned against me.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> The flesh being consumed. My bone hath
cleaved to my skin, and nothing but lips are left about my teeth.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Have pity on me, have pity on me, at
least you my friends, because the hand of the Lord hath touched me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> Why do you persecute me as God, and
glut yourselves with my flesh?

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Who will grant me that my words may be
written? Who will grant me that they may be marked down in a book?

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> With an iron pen and in a plate of
lead, or else be graven with an instrument in flint stone.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and
in the last day I shall rise out of the earth.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And I shall be clothed again with my
skin, and in my flesh I will see my God.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Whom I myself shall see, and my eyes
shall behold, and not another: this my hope is laid up in my bosom.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> Why then do you say now: Let us
persecute him, and let us find occasion of word against him?

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Flee then from the face of the sword,
for the sword is the revenger of iniquities: and know ye that there is
judgment.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Then Sophar the Naamathite answered, and
said:

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Therefore various thoughts succeed one
another in me, and my mind is hurried away to different things.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> The doctrine with which thou reprovest
me, I will hear, and the spirit of my understanding shall answer for me.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> This I know from the beginning, since man
was placed upon the earth,

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> that the praise of the wicked is short,
and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> If his pride mount up even to heaven, and
his head touch the clouds:

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> In the end he shall be destroyed like a
dunghill, and they that has seen him shall say: Where is he?

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> As a dream that fleeth away he shall not
be found, he shall pass as a vision of the night:

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> The eyes that had seen him, shall see him
no more, neither shall his place any more behold him.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> His children shall be oppressed with
want, and his hands shall render him his sorrow.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> His bones shall be filled with the
vices of his youth, and they shall sleep with him in the dust.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> For when evil shall be sweet in his
mouth, he will hide it under his tongue.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> He will spare it, and not leave it, and
will hide it in his throat.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> His bread in his belly shall be turned
into the gall of asps within him.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> The riches which he hath swallowed; he
shall vomit up, and God shall draw them out of his belly.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> He shall suck the head of asps, and the
viper's tongue shall kill him.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> (Let him not see the streams of the
river, the brooks of honey and of butter.)

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> He shall be punished for all that he
did, and yet shall not be consumed: according to the multitude of his
devices so also shall he suffer.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Because he broke in and stripped the
poor: he hath violently taken away a house which he did not build.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> And yet his belly was not filled: and
when he hath the things he coveted, he shall not be able to possess
them.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> There was nothing left of his meat, and
therefore nothing shall continue of his goods:

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> When he shall be filled, he shall be
straitened, he shall burn, and every sorrow shall fall upon him.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> May his belly be filled, that God may
send forth the wrath of his indignation upon him, and rain down his war
upon him.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> He shall flee from weapons of iron, and
shall fall upon a bow of brass.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> The sword is drawn out, and cometh
forth from its scabbard, and glittereth in his bitterness: the terrible
ones shall go and come upon him.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> All darkness is hid in his secret
places: a fire that is not kindled shall devour him, he shall be
afflicted when left in his tabernacle.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The heavens shall reveal his iniquity,
and the earth shall rise up against him.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> The offspring of his house shall be
exposed, he shall be pulled down in the day of God's wrath.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> This is the portion of a wicked man
from God, and the inheritance of his doings from the Lord.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Then Job answered, and said:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Hear, I beseech you, my words, and do
penance.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> Suffer me, and I will speak, and after,
if you please, laugh at my words.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Is my debate against man, that I should
not have just reason to be troubled?

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Hearken to me and be astonished, and lay
your finger on your mouth.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> As for me, when I remember, I am afraid,
and trembling taketh hold on my flesh.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> Why then do the wicked live, are they
advanced, and strengthened with riches?

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> Their seed continueth before them, a
multitude of kinsmen, and of children's children in their sight.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Their houses are secure and peaceable,
and the rod of God is not upon them.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> Their cattle have conceived, and failed
not: their cow has calved, and is not deprived of her fruit.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> Their little ones go out like a flock,
and their children dance and play.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> They take the timbrel, and the harp,
and rejoice at the sound of the organ.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> They spend their days in wealth, and in
a moment they go down to hell.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> Who have said to God: Depart from us,
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> Who is the Almighty, that we should
serve him? and what doth it profit us if we pray to him?

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> Yet because their good things are not
in their hand, may the counsel of the wicked be far from me.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> How often shall the lamp of the wicked
be put out, and a deluge come upon them, and he shall distribute the
sorrows of his wrath?

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> They shall be as chaff before the face
of the wind, and as ashes which the whirlwind scattereth.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> God shall lay up the sorrow of the
father for his children: and when he shall repay, then shall he know.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> His eyes shall see his own destruction,
and he shall drink of the wrath of the Almighty.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> For what is it to him what befalleth
his house after him: and if the number of his months be diminished by
one half?

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> Shall any one teach God knowledge, who
judgeth those that are high?

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> One man dieth strong, and hale, rich
and happy.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> His bowels are full of fat, and his
bones are moistened with marrow.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> But another dieth in bitterness of soul
without any riches:

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> And yet they shall sleep together in
the dust, and worms shall cover them.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> Surely I know your thoughts, and your
unjust judgments against me.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> For you say: Where is the house of the
prince ? and where are the dwelling places of the wicked?

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> Ask any one of them that go by the way,
and you shall perceive that he knoweth these same things.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> Because the wicked man is reserved to
the day of destruction, and he shall be brought to the day of wrath.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Who shall reprove his way to his face?
and who shall repay him what he hath done?

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> He shall be brought to the graves, and
shall watch in the heap of the dead.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> He hath been acceptable to the gravel
of Cocytus, and he shall draw every man after him, and there are
innumerable before him.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> How then do ye comfort me in vain,
whereas your answer is shewn to be repugnant to truth ?

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> Then Eliphaz the Themanite answered, and
said:

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> Can man be compared with God, even though
he were of perfect knowledge?

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> What doth it profit God if thou be just?
or what dost thou give him if thy way be unspotted?

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Shall he reprove thee for fear, and come
with thee into judgment:

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> And not for thy manifold wickedness, and
thy infinite iniquities?

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> For thou hast taken away the pledge of
thy brethren without cause, and stripped the naked of their clothing.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Thou hast not given water to the weary,
thou hast withdrawn bread from the hungry.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> In the strength of thy arm thou didst
possess the land, and being the most mighty thou holdest it.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the
arms of the fatherless thou hast broken in pieces.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Therefore art thou surrounded with
snares, and sudden fear troubleth thee.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And didst thou think that thou shouldst
not see darkness, and that thou shouldst not be covered with the
violence of overflowing waters?

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> Dost not thou think that God is higher
than heaven, and is elevated above the height of the stars?

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And thou sayst: What doth God know? and
he judgeth as it were through a mist.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The clouds are his covert, and he doth
not consider our things, and he walketh about the poles of heaven.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Dost thou desire to keep the path of
ages, which wicked men have trodden?

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Who were taken away before their time,
and a flood hath overthrown their foundation.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Who said to God: Depart from us: and
looked upon the Almighty as if he could do nothing:

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Whereas he had filled their houses with
good things: whose way of thinking be far from me.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> The just shall see, and shall rejoice,
and the innocent shall laugh them to scorn.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Is not their exaltation cut down, and
hath not fire devoured the remnants of them?

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> Submit thyself then to him, and be at
peace: and thereby thou shalt have the best fruits.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Receive the law of his mouth, and lay
up his words in thy heart.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> If thou wilt return to the Almighty,
thou shalt be built up, and shalt put away iniquity far from thy
tabernacle.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> He shall give for earth flint, and for
flint torrents of gold.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> And the Almighty shall be against thy
enemies, and silver shall be heaped together for thee.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Then shalt thou abound in delights in
the Almighty, and shalt lift up thy face to God.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> Thou shalt pray to him, and he will
hear thee, and thou shalt pay vows.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Thou shalt decree a thing, and it I
shall come to thee, and light shall shine in thy ways.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> For he that hath been humbled, shall be
in glory: and he that shall bow down his eyes, he shall be saved.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> The innocent shall be saved, and he
shall be saved by the cleanness of his hands.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> Then Job answered, and said:

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Now also my words are in bitterness, and
the hand of my scourge is more grievous than my mourning.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Who will grant me that I might know and
find him, and come even to his throne?

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> I would set judgment before him, and
would fill my mouth with complaints.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> That I might know the words that he would
answer me, and understand what he would say to me.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> I would not that he should contend with
me with much strength, nor overwhelm me with the weight of his
greatness.

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Let him propose equity against me, and
let my judgment come to victory.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But if I go to the east, he appeareth
not; if to the west, I shall not understand him.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> If to the left hand, what shall I do? I
shall not take hold on him: if I turn myself to the right hand, I shall
not see him.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> But he knoweth my way, and has tried me
as gold that passeth through the fire:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> My foot hath followed his steps, I have
kept his way, and have not declined from it.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> I have not departed from the
commandments of his lips, and the words of his mouth I have hid in my
bosom.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> For he is alone, and no man can turn
away his thought: and whatsoever is soul hath desired, that hath he
done.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> And when he shall have fulfilled his
will in me, many other like things are also at hand with him.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> And therefore I am troubled at his
presence, and when I consider him I am made pensive with fear.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> God hath softened my heart, and the
Almighty hath troubled me.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> For I have not perished because of the
darkness that hangs over me, neither hath the mist covered my face.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Times are not hid from the Almighty: but
they that know him, know not his days.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Some have removed landmarks, have taken
away flocks by force, and fed them.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> They have driven away the ass of the
fatherless, and have taken away the widow's ox for a pledge.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> They have overturned the way of the poor,
and have oppressed together the meek of the earth.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> Others like wild asses in the desert go
forth to their work: by watching for a prey they get bread for their
children.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> They reap the field that is not their
own, and gather the vintage of his vineyard whom by violence they have
oppressed.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> They send men away naked, taking away
their clothes who have no covering in the cold:

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Who are wet, with the showers of the
mountains, and having no covering embrace the stones.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> They have violently robbed the
fatherless, and stripped the poor common people.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> From the naked and them that go without
clothing, and from the hungry they have taken away the ears of corn.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> They have taken their rest at noon
among the stores of them, who after having trodden the winepresses
suffer thirst.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> Out of the cities they have made men to
groan, and the soul of the wounded hath cried out, and God doth not
suffer it to pass unrevenged.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> They have been rebellious to the light,
they have not known his ways, neither have they returned by his paths.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> The murderer riseth at the very break
of day, he killeth the needy, and the poor man: but in the night he will
be as a thief.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> The eye of the adulterer observeth
darkness, saying: No eye shall see me: and he will cover his face.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> He diggeth through houses in the dark,
as in the day they had appointed for themselves, and they have not known
the light.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> If the morning suddenly appear, it is
to them the shadow of death: and they walk in darkness as if it were in
light.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> He is light upon the face of the water:
cursed be his portion on the earth, let him not walk by the way of the
vineyards.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Let him pass from the snow waters to
excessive heat, and his sin even to hell.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> Let mercy forget him: may worms be his
sweetness: let him be remembered no more, but be broken in pieces as an
unfruitful tree.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> For he hath fed the barren that beareth
not, and to the widow he hath done no good.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> He hath pulled down the strong by his
might: and when he standeth up, he shall not trust to his life.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> God hath given him place for penance,
and he abuseth it unto pride: but his eyes are upon his ways.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> They are lifted up for a little while
and shall not stand, and shall be brought down as all things, and shall
be taken away, and as the tops of the ears of corn they shall be broken.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> And if it be not so, who can convince
me that I have lied, and set my words before God?

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> Then Baldad the Suhite answered, and I
said:

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> Power and terror are with him, who maketh
peace in his high places.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> Is there any numbering of his soldiers?
and upon whom shall not his light arise?

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Can man be justified compared with God,
or he that is born of a woman appear clean?

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Behold even the moon doth not shine, and
the stars are not pure in his sight.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> How much less man that is rottenness and
the son of man who is a worm?

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> Then Job answered, and said:

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> Whose helper art thou? is it of him that
is weak? and dost thou hold up the arm of him that has no strength?

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> To whom hast thou given counsel? perhaps
to him that hath no wisdom, and thou hast shewn thy very great prudence.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Whom hast thou desired to teach? was it
not him that made life?

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Behold the giants groan under the waters,
and they that dwell with them.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> Hell is naked before him, and there is no
covering for destruction.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> He stretched out the north over the empty
space, and hangeth the earth upon nothing.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> He bindeth up the waters in his clouds,
so that they break not out and fall down together.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> He withholdeth the face of his throne,
and spreadeth his cloud over it.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> He hath set bounds about the waters,
till light and darkness come to an end.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> The pillars of heaven tremble, and
dread at his beck.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> By his power the seas are suddenly
gathered together, and his wisdom has struck the proud one.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> His spirit hath adorned the heavens,
and his obstetric hand brought forth the winding serpent.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Lo, these things are said in part of
his ways: and seeing we have heard scarce a little drop of his word, who
shall be able to behold the thunder of his greatness?

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Job also added, taking up his parable,
and said:

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> As God liveth, who hath taken away my
judgment, and the Almighty, who hath brought my soul to bitterness,

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> As long as breath remaineth in me, and
the spirit of God in my nostrils,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> My lips shall not speak iniquity, neither
shall my tongue contrive lying.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> God forbid that I should judge you to be
just: till I die I will not depart from my innocence.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> My justification, which I have begun to
hold, I will not forsake: for my heart doth not reprehend me in all my
life.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> Let my enemy be as the ungodly, and my
adversary as the wicked one.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> For what is the hope of the hypocrite if
through covetousness he take by violence, and God deliver not his soul?

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Will God hear his cry, when distress
shall come upon him?

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Or can he delight himself in the
Almighty, and call upon God at all times?

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> I will teach you by the hand of God,
what the Almighty hath, and I will not conceal it.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> Behold you all know it, and why do you
speak vain things without cause?

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> This is the portion of a wicked man
with God, and the inheritance of the violent, which they shall receive
of the Almighty.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> If his sons be multiplied, they shall
be for the sword, and his grandsons shall not be filled with bread.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> They that shall remain of him, shall be
buried in death, and his widows shall not weep.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> If he shall heap together silver as
earth, and prepare raiment as clay,

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> He shall prepare indeed, but the just
man shall be clothed with it: and the innocent shall divide the silver.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> He hath built his house as a moth, and
as a keeper he hath made a booth.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> The rich man when he shall sleep shall
take away nothing with him: he shall open his eyes and find nothing.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Poverty like water shall take hold on
him, a tempest shall oppress him in the night.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> A burning wind shall take him up, and
carry him away, and as a whirlwind shall snatch him from his place.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> And he shall cast upon him, and shall
not spare: out of his hand he would willingly flee.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> He shall clasp his hands upon him, and
shall hiss at him, beholding his place.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> Silver hath beginnings of its veins, and
gold hath a place wherein it is melted.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> Iron is taken out of the earth, and stone
melted with heat is turned into brass.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> He hath set a time for darkness, and the
end of all things he considereth, the stone also that is in the dark and
the shadow of death.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> The flood divideth from the people that
are on their journey, those whom the food of the needy man hath
forgotten, and who cannot be come at.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> The land, out of which bread grew in its
place, hath been overturned with fire.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> The stones of it are the place of
sapphires, and the clods of it are gold.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> The bird hath not known the path, neither
hath the eye of the vulture beheld it.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> The children of the merchants have not
trodden it, neither hath the lioness passed by it.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He hath stretched forth his hand to the
flint, he hath overturned mountains from the roots.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> In the rocks he hath cut out rivers,
and his eye hath seen every precious thing.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> The depths also of rivers he hath
searched, and hidden things he hath brought forth to light.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> But where is wisdom to be found, and
where is the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Man knoweth not the price thereof,
neither is it found in the land of them that live in delights.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> The depth saith: It is not in me: and
the sea saith: It is not with me.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> The finest gold shall not purchase it,
neither shall silver be weighed in exchange for it

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> It shall not be compared with the dyed
colours of India, or with the most precious stone sardonyx, or the
sapphire.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> Gold or crystal cannot equal it,
neither shall any vessels of gold be changed for it.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> High and eminent things shall not be
mentioned in comparison of it: but wisdom is drawn out of secret places.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> The topaz of Ethiopia shall not be
equal to it, neither shall it be compared to the cleanest dyeing.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is
the place of understanding?

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> It is hid from the eyes of all living.
and the fowls of the air know it not.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> Destruction and death have said: With
our ears we have heard the fame thereof.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> God understandeth the way of it, and he
knoweth the place thereof.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> For he beholdeth the ends of the world:
and looketh on all things that are under heaven.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> Who made a weight for the winds and
weighed the waters by measure.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> When he gave a law for the rain, and a
way for the sounding storms.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> Then he saw it, and declared, and
prepared, and searched it.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> And he said to man: Behold the fear of
the Lord, that is wisdom: and to depart from evil, is understanding.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> Job also added, taking up his parable,
and said:

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> Who will grant me, that I might be
according to the months past, according to the days in which God kept
me?

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> When his lamp shined over my head, and I
walked by his light in darkness?

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> As I was in the days of my youth, when
God was secretly in my tabernacle?

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> When the Almighty was with me: and my
servants round about me?

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> When I washed my feet with butter, and
the rock poured me out rivers of oil?

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> When I went out to the gate of the city,
and in the street they prepared me a chair?

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> The young men saw me, and hid themselves:
and the old men rose up and stood.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> The princes ceased to speak, and laid the
finger on their mouth.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> The rulers held their peace, and their
tongue cleaved to their throat.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> The ear that heard me blessed me, and
the eye that saw me gave witness to me:

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> Because I had delivered the poor man
that cried out; and the fatherless that had no helper.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The blessing of him that was ready to
perish came upon me, and I comforted the heart of the widow.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> I was clad with justice: and I clothed
myself with my judgment, as with a robe and a diadem.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> I was an eye to the blind, and a foot
to the lame.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> I was the father of the poor: and the
cause which I knew not, I searched out most diligently.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> I broke the jaws of the wicked man, and
out of his teeth I took away the prey.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> And I said: I shall die in my nest, and
as a palm tree shall multiply my days.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> My root is opened beside the waters,
and dew shall continue in my harvest.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> My glory shall always be renewed, and
my bow in my hand shall be repaired.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> They that heard me, waited for my
sentence, and being attentive held their peace at my counsel.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> To my words they durst add nothing, and
my speech dropped upon them.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> They waited for me as for rain, and
they opened their mouth as for a latter shower.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> If at any time I laughed on them, they
believed not, and the light of my countenance fell not on earth.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> If I had a mind to go to them, I sat
first, and when I sat as a king, with his army standing about him, yet I
was a comforter of them that mourned.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> But now the younger in time scorn me,
whose fathers I would not have set with the dogs of my flock:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> The strength of whose hands was to me as
nothing, and they were thought unworthy of life itself.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> Barren with want and hunger, who gnawed
in the wilderness, disfigured with calamity and misery.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> And they ate grass, and barks of trees,
and the root of junipers was their food.

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Who snatched up these things out of the
valleys, and when they had found any of them, they ran to them with a
cry.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> They dwelt in the desert places of
torrents, and in caves of earth, or upon the gravel.

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> They pleased themselves among these kind
of things, and counted it delightful to be under the briers.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> The children of foolish and base men, and
not appearing at all upon the earth.

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Now I am turned into their song, and am
become their byword.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> They abhor me, and flee far from me,
and are not afraid to spit in my face.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> For he hath opened his quiver, and hath
afflicted me, and hath put a bridle into my mouth.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> At the right hand of my rising, my
calamities forthwith arose: they have overthrown my feet, and have
overwhelmed me with their paths as with waves.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> They have destroyed my ways, they have
lain in wait against me, and they have prevailed, and there was none to
help.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> They have rushed in upon me, as when a
wall is broken, and a gate opened, and have rolled themselves down to my
miseries.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> I am brought to nothing: as a wind thou
hast taken away my desire: and my prosperity hath passed away like a
cloud.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> And now my soul fadeth within myself,
and the days of affliction possess me.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> In the night my bone is pierced with
sorrows: and they that feed upon me, do not sleep.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> With the multitude of them my garment
is consumed, and they have girded me about, as with the collar of my
coat.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> I am compared to dirt, and am likened
to embers and ashes.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> I cry to thee, and thou hearest me not:
I stand up, and thou dost not regard me.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> Thou art changed to be cruel toward me,
and in the hardness of thy hand thou art against me.

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> Thou hast lifted me up, and set me as
it were upon the wind, and thou hast mightily dashed me.

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> I know that thou wilt deliver me to
death, where a house is appointed for every one that liveth.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> But yet thou stretchest not forth thy
hand to their consumption: and if they shall fall down thou wilt save.

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> I wept heretofore for him that was
afflicted, and my soul had compassion on the poor.

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> I expected good things, and evils are
come upon me: I waited for light, and darkness broke out.

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> My inner parts have boiled without any
rest, the days of affliction have prevented me.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> I went mourning without indignation; I
rose up, and cried in the crowd.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> I was the brother of dragons, and
companion of ostriches.

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> My skin is become black upon me, and my
bones are dried up with heat.

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> My harp is turned to mourning, and my
organ into the voice of those that weep.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> I made a covenant with my eyes, that I
would not so much as think upon a virgin.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> For what part should God from above have
in me, and what inheritance the Almighty from on high?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Is not destruction to the wicked, and
aversion to them that work iniquity?

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Doth not he consider my ways, and number
all my steps?

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> If I have walked in vanity, and my foot
hath made haste to deceit:

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Let him weigh me in a just balance, and
let God know my simplicity.

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> If my step hath turned out of the way,
and if my heart hath followed my eyes, and if a spot hath cleaved to my
hands:

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Then let me sow and let another eat: and
let my offspring be rooted out.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> If my heart hath been deceived upon a
woman, and if I have laid wait at my friend's door:

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Let my wife be the harlot of another,
and let other men lie with her.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> For this is a heinous crime, and a most
grievous iniquity.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> It is a fire that devoureth even to
destruction, and rooteth up all things that spring.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> If I have despised to abide judgment
with my manservant, or my maidservant, when they had any controversy
against me:

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> For what shall I do when God shall rise
to judge? and when he shall examine, what shall I answer him?

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> Did not he that made me in the womb
make him also: and did not one and the same form me in the womb?

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> If I have denied to the poor what they
desired, and have made the eyes of the widow wait:

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> If I have eaten my morsel alone, and
the fatherless hath not eaten thereof:

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> (For from my infancy mercy grew up with
me: and it came out with me from my mother's womb :)

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> If I have despised him that was
perishing for want of clothing, and the poor man that had no covering:

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> If his sides have not blessed me, and
if he were not warmed with the fleece of my sheep:

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> If I have lifted up my hand against the
fatherless, even when I saw myself superior in the gate:

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> Let my shoulder fall from its joint,
and let my arm with its bones be broken.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> For I have always feared God as waves
swelling over me, and his weight I was not able to bear.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> If I have thought gold my strength, and
have said to fine gold: My confidence:

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> If I have rejoiced over my great
riches, and because my hand had gotten much.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> If I beheld the sun when it shined, and
the moon going in brightness:

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> And my heart in secret hath rejoiced,
and I have kissed my hand with my mouth:

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Which is a very great iniquity, and a
denial against the most high God.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> If I have been glad at the downfall of
him that hated me, and have rejoiced that evil had found him.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> For I have not given my mouth to sin,
by wishing a curse to his soul.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> If the men of my tabernacle have not
said: Who will give us of his flesh that we may be filled?

<span id="an_31:32">31:32</span> The stranger did not stay without, my
door was open to the traveller.

<span id="an_31:33">31:33</span> If as a man I have hid my sin, and have
concealed my iniquity in my bosom.

<span id="an_31:34">31:34</span> If I have been afraid at a very great
multitude, and the contempt of kinsmen hath terrified me: and I have not
rather held my peace, and not gone out of the door.

<span id="an_31:35">31:35</span> Who would grant me a hearer, that the
Almighty may hear my desire; and that he himself that judgeth would
write a book,

<span id="an_31:36">31:36</span> That I may carry it on my shoulder, and
put it about me as a crown?

<span id="an_31:37">31:37</span> At every step of mine I would pronounce
it, and offer it as to a prince.

<span id="an_31:38">31:38</span> If my land cry against me, and with it
the furrows thereof mourn:

<span id="an_31:39">31:39</span> If I have eaten the fruits thereof
without money, and have afflicted the soul of the tillers thereof:

<span id="an_31:40">31:40</span> Let thistles grow up to me instead of
wheat, and thorns instead of barley.

<span id="an_32:1">32:1</span> So these three men ceased to answer Job,
because he seemed just to himself.

<span id="an_32:2">32:2</span> And Eliu the son of Barachel the Buzite,
of the kindred of Ram, was angry and was moved to indignation : now he
was angry against Job, because he said he was just before God.

<span id="an_32:3">32:3</span> And he was angry with his friends because
they had not found a reasonable answer, but only had condemned Job.

<span id="an_32:4">32:4</span> So Eliu waited while Job was speaking,
because they were his elders that were speaking.

<span id="an_32:5">32:5</span> But when he saw that the three were not
able to answer, he was exceedingly angry.

<span id="an_32:6">32:6</span> Then Eliu the son of Barachel the Buzite
answered and said : I am younger in days, and you are more ancient;
therefore hanging down my head, I was afraid to shew you my opinion.

<span id="an_32:7">32:7</span> For I hoped that greater age would speak,
and that a multitude of years would teach wisdom.

<span id="an_32:8">32:8</span> But, as I see, there is a spirit in men,
and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth understanding.

<span id="an_32:9">32:9</span> They that are aged are not the wise men,
neither do the ancients understand judgment.

<span id="an_32:10">32:10</span> Therefore I will speak : Hearken to me,
I also will shew you my wisdom.

<span id="an_32:11">32:11</span> For I have waited for your words, I
have given ear to your wisdom, as long as you were disputing in words.

<span id="an_32:12">32:12</span> And as long as I thought you said some
thing, I considered : but, as I see, there is none of you that can
convince Job, and answer his words.

<span id="an_32:13">32:13</span> Lest you should say : We have found
wisdom, God hath cast him down, not man.

<span id="an_32:14">32:14</span> He hath spoken nothing to me, and I
will not answer him according to your words.

<span id="an_32:15">32:15</span> They were afraid, and answered no more,
and they left off speaking.

<span id="an_32:16">32:16</span> Therefore because I have waited, and
they have not spoken : they stood, and answered no more :

<span id="an_32:17">32:17</span> I also will answer my part, and will
shew my knowledge.

<span id="an_32:18">32:18</span> Behold, my belly is as new wine which
wanteth vent, which bursteth the new vessels.

<span id="an_32:20">32:20</span> I will speak and take breath a little :
I will open my lips, and will answer.

<span id="an_32:21">32:21</span> I will not accept the person of man,
and I will not level God with man.

<span id="an_32:22">32:22</span> For I know not how long I shall
continue, and whether after a while my Maker may take me away.

<span id="an_33:1">33:1</span> Hear therefore, O Job, my speeches, and
hearken to all my words.

<span id="an_33:2">33:2</span> Behold now I have opened my mouth, let my
tongue speak within my jaws.

<span id="an_33:3">33:3</span> My words are from my upright heart, and
my lips shall speak a pure sentence.

<span id="an_33:4">33:4</span> The spirit of God made me, and the breath
of the Almighty gave me life.

<span id="an_33:5">33:5</span> If thou canst, answer me, and stand up
against my face.

<span id="an_33:6">33:6</span> Behold God hath made me as well as thee,
and of the same clay I also was formed.

<span id="an_33:7">33:7</span> But yet let not my wonder terrify thee,
and let not my eloquence be burdensome to thee.

<span id="an_33:8">33:8</span> Now thou has said in my hearing, and I
have heard the voice of thy words :

<span id="an_33:9">33:9</span> I am clean, and without sin : I am
unspotted, and there is no iniquity in me.

<span id="an_33:10">33:10</span> Because he hath found complaints
against me, therefore he hath counted me for his enemy.

<span id="an_33:11">33:11</span> He hath put my feet in the stocks, he
hath observed all my paths.

<span id="an_33:12">33:12</span> Now this is the thing in which thou art
not justified : I will answer thee, that God is greater than man.

<span id="an_33:13">33:13</span> Dost thou strive against him, because
he hath not answered thee to all words?

<span id="an_33:14">33:14</span> God speaketh once, and repeateth not
the selfsame thing the second time.

<span id="an_33:15">33:15</span> By a dream in a vision by night, when
deep sleep falleth upon men, and they are sleeping in their beds :

<span id="an_33:16">33:16</span> Then he openeth the ears of men, and
teaching instructeth them in what they are to learn.

<span id="an_33:17">33:17</span> That he may withdraw a man from the
things he is doing, and may deliver him from pride.

<span id="an_33:18">33:18</span> Rescuing his soul from corruption : and
his life from passing to the sword.

<span id="an_33:19">33:19</span> He rebuketh also by sorrow in the bed,
and he maketh all his bones to wither.

<span id="an_33:20">33:20</span> Bread becometh abominable to him in his
life, and to his soul the meat which before he desired.

<span id="an_33:21">33:21</span> His flesh shall be consumed away, and
his bones that were covered shall be made bare.

<span id="an_33:22">33:22</span> His soul hath drawn near to corruption,
and his life to the destroyers.

<span id="an_33:23">33:23</span> If there shall be an angel speaking for
him, one among thousands, to declare man's uprightness,

<span id="an_33:24">33:24</span> He shall have mercy on him, and shall
say : Deliver him, that he may not go down to corruption : I have found
wherein I may be merciful to him.

<span id="an_33:25">33:25</span> His flesh is consumed with punishment,
let him return to the days of his youth.

<span id="an_33:26">33:26</span> He shall pray to God, and he will be
gracious to him : and he shall see his face with joy, and he will render
to man his justice.

<span id="an_33:27">33:27</span> He shall look upon men, and shall say :
I have sinned, and indeed I have offended, and I have not received what
I have deserved.

<span id="an_33:28">33:28</span> He hath delivered his soul from going
into destruction, that it may live and see the light.

<span id="an_33:29">33:29</span> Behold, all these things God worketh
three times within every one.

<span id="an_33:30">33:30</span> That he may withdraw their souls from
corruption, and enlighten them with the light of the living.

<span id="an_33:31">33:31</span> Attend, Job, and hearken to me : and
hold thy peace, whilst I speak.

<span id="an_33:32">33:32</span> But if thou hast any thing to say,
answer me, speak : for I would have thee to appear just.

<span id="an_33:33">33:33</span> And if thou have not, hear me : hold
thy peace, and I will teach thee wisdom.

<span id="an_34:1">34:1</span> And Eliu continued his discourse, and
said :

<span id="an_34:2">34:2</span> Hear ye, wise men, my words, and ye
learned, hearken to me :

<span id="an_34:3">34:3</span> For the ear trieth words, and the mouth
discerneth meats by the taste.

<span id="an_34:4">34:4</span> Let us choose to us judgment, and let us
see among ourselves what is the best.

<span id="an_34:5">34:5</span> For Job hath said : I am just, and God
hath overthrown my judgment.

<span id="an_34:6">34:6</span> For in judging me there is a lie : my
arrow is violent without any sin.

<span id="an_34:7">34:7</span> What man is there like Job, who drinketh
up scorning like water?

<span id="an_34:8">34:8</span> Who goeth in company with them that work
iniquity, and walketh with wicked men?

<span id="an_34:9">34:9</span> For he hath said : Man shall not please
God, although he run with him.

<span id="an_34:10">34:10</span> Therefore, ye men of understanding,
hear me : far from god be wickedness, and iniquity from the Almighty.

<span id="an_34:11">34:11</span> For he will render to a man his work,
and according to the ways of every one he will reward them.

<span id="an_34:12">34:12</span> For in very deed God will not condemn
without cause, neither will the Almighty pervert judgment.

<span id="an_34:13">34:13</span> What other hath he appointed over the
earth? or whom hath he set over the world which he made?

<span id="an_34:14">34:14</span> If he turn his heart to him, he shall
draw his spirit and breath unto himself.

<span id="an_34:15">34:15</span> All flesh shall perish together, and
man shall return into ashes.

<span id="an_34:16">34:16</span> If then thou hast understanding, hear
what is said, and hearken to the voice of my words.

<span id="an_34:17">34:17</span> Can he be healed that loveth not
judgment? and how dost thou so far condemn him that is just?

<span id="an_34:18">34:18</span> Who saith to the king : Thou art an
apostate : who calleth rulers ungodly?

<span id="an_34:19">34:19</span> Who accepteth not the persons of
princes : nor hath regarded the tyrant, when he contended against the
poor man : for all are the work of his hands.

<span id="an_34:20">34:20</span> They shall suddenly die, and the people
shall be troubled at midnight, and they shall pass, and take away the
violent without hand.

<span id="an_34:21">34:21</span> For his eyes are upon the ways of men,
and he considereth all their steps.

<span id="an_34:22">34:22</span> There is no darkness, and there is no
shadow of death, where they may be hid who work iniquity.

<span id="an_34:23">34:23</span> For it is no longer in the power of man
to enter into judgment with God.

<span id="an_34:24">34:24</span> He shall break in pieces many and
innumerable, and shall make others to stand in their stead.

<span id="an_34:25">34:25</span> For he knoweth their works : and
therefore he shall bring night on them, and they shall be destroyed.

<span id="an_34:26">34:26</span> He hath struck them, as being wicked,
in open sight.

<span id="an_34:27">34:27</span> Who as it were on purpose have revolted
from him, and would not understand all his ways :

<span id="an_34:28">34:28</span> So that they caused the cry of the
needy to come to him, and he heard the voice of the poor.

<span id="an_34:29">34:29</span> For when he granteth peace, who is
there that can condemn? When he hideth his countenance, who is there
that can behold him, whether it regard nations, or all men?

<span id="an_34:30">34:30</span> Who maketh a man that is a hypocrite to
reign for the sins of the people?

<span id="an_34:31">34:31</span> Seeing then I have spoken of God, I
will not hinder thee in thy turn.

<span id="an_34:32">34:32</span> If I have erred, teach thou me : if I
have spoken iniquity, I will add no more.

<span id="an_34:33">34:33</span> Doth God require it of thee, because it
hath displeased thee? for thou begannest to speak, and not I. : but if
thou know any thing better, speak.

<span id="an_34:34">34:34</span> Let men of understanding speak to me,
and let a wise man hearken to me.

<span id="an_34:35">34:35</span> But Job hath spoken foolishly, and his
words sound not discipline.

<span id="an_34:36">34:36</span> My father, let Job be tried even to the
end : cease not from the man of iniquity.

<span id="an_34:37">34:37</span> Because he addeth blasphemy upon his
sins, let him be tied fast in the mean time amongst us : and then let
him provoke God to judgment with his speeches.

<span id="an_35:1">35:1</span> Moreover Eliu spoke these words :

<span id="an_35:2">35:2</span> Doth thy thought seem right to thee, that
thou shouldst say : I am more just than God?

<span id="an_35:3">35:3</span> For thou saidst : That which is right
doth not please thee : or what will it profit thee if I sin?

<span id="an_35:4">35:4</span> Therefore I will answer thy words, and
thy friends with thee.

<span id="an_35:5">35:5</span> Look up to heaven and see, and behold the
sky, that it is higher than thee.

<span id="an_35:6">35:6</span> If thou sin, what shalt thou hurt him?
and if thy iniquities be multiplied, what shalt thou do against him?

<span id="an_35:7">35:7</span> And if thou do justly, what shalt thou
give him, or what shall he receive of thy hand?

<span id="an_35:8">35:8</span> Thy wickedness may hurt a man that is
like thee : and thy justice may help the son of man.

<span id="an_35:9">35:9</span> By reason of the multitude of oppressions
they shall cry out : and shall wail for the violence of the arm of
tyrants.

<span id="an_35:10">35:10</span> And he hath not said : Where is God,
who made me, who hath given songs in the night?

<span id="an_35:11">35:11</span> Who teacheth us more than the beasts of
the earth, and instructeth us more than the fowls of the air.

<span id="an_35:12">35:12</span> There shall they cry, and he will not
hear, because of the pride of evil men.

<span id="an_35:13">35:13</span> God therefore will not hear in vain,
and the Almighty will look into the causes of every one.

<span id="an_35:14">35:14</span> Yea when thou shalt say : He
considereth not : be judged before him, and expect him.

<span id="an_35:15">35:15</span> For he doth not now bring on his fury,
neither doth he revenge wickedness exceedingly.

<span id="an_35:16">35:16</span> Therefore Job openeth his mouth in
vain, and multiplieth words without knowledge.

<span id="an_36:1">36:1</span> Eliu also proceeded, and said :

<span id="an_36:2">36:2</span> Suffer me a little, and I will shew thee
: for I have yet somewhat to speak in God's behalf.

<span id="an_36:3">36:3</span> I will repeat my knowledge from the
beginning, and I will prove my Maker just.

<span id="an_36:4">36:4</span> For indeed my words are without a lie,
and perfect knowledge shall be proved to thee.

<span id="an_36:5">36:5</span> God doth not cast away the mighty,
whereas he himself also is mighty.

<span id="an_36:6">36:6</span> But he saveth not the wicked, and he
giveth judgment to the poor.

<span id="an_36:7">36:7</span> He will not take away his eyes from the
just, and he placeth kings on the throne for ever, and they are exalted.

<span id="an_36:8">36:8</span> And if they shall be in chains, and be
bound with the cords of poverty :

<span id="an_36:9">36:9</span> He shall shew them their works, and their
wicked deeds, because they have been violent.

<span id="an_36:10">36:10</span> He also shall open their ear, to
correct them : and shall speak, that they may return from iniquity.

<span id="an_36:11">36:11</span> If they shall hear and observe, they
shall accomplish their days in good, and their years in glory.

<span id="an_36:12">36:12</span> But if they hear not, they shall pass
by the sword, and shall be consumed in folly.

<span id="an_36:13">36:13</span> Dissemblers and crafty men prove the
wrath of God, neither shall they cry when they are bound.

<span id="an_36:14">36:14</span> Their soul shall die in a storm, and
their life among the effeminate.

<span id="an_36:15">36:15</span> He shall deliver the poor out of his
distress, and shall open his ear in affliction.

<span id="an_36:16">36:16</span> Therefore he shall set thee at large
out of the narrow mouth, and which hath no foundation under it : and the
rest of thy table shall be full of fatness.

<span id="an_36:17">36:17</span> Thy cause hath been judged as that of
the wicked, cause and judgment thou shalt recover.

<span id="an_36:18">36:18</span> Therefore let not anger overcome thee
to oppress any man : neither let multitude of gifts turn thee aside.

<span id="an_36:19">36:19</span> Lay down thy greatness without
tribulation, and all the mighty of strength.

<span id="an_36:20">36:20</span> Prolong not the night that people may
come up for them.

<span id="an_36:21">36:21</span> Beware thou turn not aside to iniquity
: for this thou hast begun to follow after misery.

<span id="an_36:22">36:22</span> Behold, God is high in his strength,
and none is like him among the lawgivers.

<span id="an_36:23">36:23</span> Who can search out his ways? or who can
say to him : Thou has wrought iniquity?

<span id="an_36:24">36:24</span> Remember that thou knowest not his
work, concerning which men have sung.

<span id="an_36:25">36:25</span> All men see him, every one beholdeth
afar off.

<span id="an_36:26">36:26</span> Behold, God is great, exceeding our
knowledge : the number of his years is inestimable.

<span id="an_36:27">36:27</span> He lifteth up the drops of rain, and
poureth out showers like floods :

<span id="an_36:28">36:28</span> Which flow from the clouds that cover
all above.

<span id="an_36:29">36:29</span> If he will spread out clouds as his
tent,

<span id="an_36:30">36:30</span> And lighten with his light from above,
he shall cover also the ends of the sea.

<span id="an_36:31">36:31</span> For by these he judgeth people, and
giveth food to many mortals.

<span id="an_36:32">36:32</span> In his hands he hideth the light, and
commandeth it to come again.

<span id="an_36:33">36:33</span> He sheweth his friend concerning it,
that it is his possession, and that he may come up to it.

<span id="an_37:1">37:1</span> At this my heart trembleth, and is moved
out of its place.

<span id="an_37:2">37:2</span> Hear ye attentively the terror of his
voice, and the sound that cometh out of his mouth.

<span id="an_37:3">37:3</span> He beholdeth under all the heavens, and
his light is upon the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_37:4">37:4</span> After it a noise shall roar, he shall
thunder with the voice of his majesty, and shall not be found out, when
his voice shall be heard.

<span id="an_37:5">37:5</span> God shall thunder wonderfully with his
voice, he that doth great and unsearchable things.

<span id="an_37:6">37:6</span> He commandeth the snow to go down upon
the earth, and the winter rain, and the shower of his strength.

<span id="an_37:7">37:7</span> He sealeth up the hand of all men, that
every one may know his works.

<span id="an_37:8">37:8</span> Then the beast shall go into his covert,
and shall abide in his den.

<span id="an_37:9">37:9</span> Out of the inner parts shall a tempest
come, and cold out of the north.

<span id="an_37:10">37:10</span> When God bloweth there cometh frost,
and again the waters are poured out abundantly.

<span id="an_37:11">37:11</span> Corn desireth clouds, and the clouds
spread their light :

<span id="an_37:12">37:12</span> Which go round about, whithersoever the
will of him that governeth them shall lead them, to whatsoever he shall
command them upon the face of the whole earth :

<span id="an_37:13">37:13</span> Whether in one tribe, or in his own
land, or in what place soever of his mercy he shall command them to be
found.

<span id="an_37:14">37:14</span> Hearken to these things, Job : Stand,
and consider the wondrous works of God.

<span id="an_37:15">37:15</span> Dost thou know when God commanded the
rains, to shew his light of his clouds?

<span id="an_37:16">37:16</span> Knowest thou the great paths of the
clouds, and the perfect knowledges?

<span id="an_37:17">37:17</span> Are not thy garments hot, when the
south wind blows upon the earth?

<span id="an_37:18">37:18</span> Thou perhaps hast made the heavens with
him, which are most strong, as if they were of molten brass.

<span id="an_37:19">37:19</span> Shew us what we may say to him : for we
are wrapped up in darkness.

<span id="an_37:20">37:20</span> Who shall tell him the things I speak?
even if a man shall speak, he shall be swallowed up.

<span id="an_37:21">37:21</span> But now they see not the light : the
air on a sudden shall be thickened into clouds, and the wind shall pass
and drive them away.

<span id="an_37:22">37:22</span> Cold cometh out of the north, and to
God praise with fear.

<span id="an_37:23">37:23</span> We cannot find him worthily : he is
great in strength, and in judgment, and in justice, and he is ineffable.

<span id="an_37:24">37:24</span> Therefore men shall fear him, and all
that seem to themselves to be wise, shall not dare to behold him.

<span id="an_38:1">38:1</span> Then the Lord answered Job out of a
whirlwind, and said :

<span id="an_38:2">38:2</span> Who is this that wrappeth up sentences in
unskillful words?

<span id="an_38:3">38:3</span> Gird up thy loins like a man : I will ask
thee, and answer thou me.

<span id="an_38:4">38:4</span> Where wast thou when I laid up the
foundations of the earth ? tell me if thou hast understanding.

<span id="an_38:5">38:5</span> Who hath laid the measures thereof, if
thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it?

<span id="an_38:6">38:6</span> Upon what are its bases grounded? or who
laid the corner stone thereof,

<span id="an_38:7">38:7</span> When the morning stars praised me
together, and all the sons of God made a joyful melody?

<span id="an_38:8">38:8</span> Who shut up the sea with doors, when it
broke forth as issuing out of the womb :

<span id="an_38:9">38:9</span> when I made a cloud the garment thereof,
and wrapped it in a mist as in swaddling bands?

<span id="an_38:10">38:10</span> I set my bounds around it, and made it
bars and doors :

<span id="an_38:11">38:11</span> And I said : Hitherto thou shalt come,
and shalt go no further, and here thou shalt break thy swelling waves.

<span id="an_38:12">38:12</span> Didst thou since thy birth command the
morning, and shew the dawning of the day its place?

<span id="an_38:13">38:13</span> And didst thou hold the extremities of
the earth shaking them, and hast thou shaken the ungodly out of it?

<span id="an_38:14">38:14</span> The seal shall be restored as clay, and
shall stand as a garment :

<span id="an_38:15">38:15</span> From the wicked their light shall be
taken away, and the high arm shall be broken.

<span id="an_38:16">38:16</span> Hast thou entered into the depths of
the sea, and walked in the lowest parts of the deep?

<span id="an_38:17">38:17</span> Have the gates of death been opened to
thee, and hast thou seen the darksome doors?

<span id="an_38:18">38:18</span> Hast thou considered the breadth of the
earth? tell me, if thou knowest all things?

<span id="an_38:19">38:19</span> Where is the way where light dwelleth,
and where is the place of darkness :

<span id="an_38:20">38:20</span> That thou mayst bring every thing to
its own bounds, and understand the paths of the house thereof.

<span id="an_38:21">38:21</span> Didst thou know then that thou shouldst
be born ? and didst thou know the number of thy days?

<span id="an_38:22">38:22</span> Hast thou entered into the storehouses
of the snow, or has thou beheld the treasures of the hail :

<span id="an_38:23">38:23</span> Which I have prepared for the time of
the enemy, against the day of battle and war?

<span id="an_38:24">38:24</span> By what way is the light spread, and
heat divided upon the earth?

<span id="an_38:25">38:25</span> Who gave a course to violent showers,
or a way for noisy thunder :

<span id="an_38:26">38:26</span> That it should rain on the earth
without man in the wilderness, where no mortal dwelleth :

<span id="an_38:27">38:27</span> That it should fill the desert and
desolate land, and should bring forth green grass?

<span id="an_38:28">38:28</span> Who is the father of rain ? or who
begot the drops of dew?

<span id="an_38:29">38:29</span> Out of whose womb came the ice; and the
frost from heaven who hath gendered it?

<span id="an_38:30">38:30</span> The waters are hardened like a stone,
and the surface of the deep is congealed.

<span id="an_38:31">38:31</span> Shalt thou be able to join together the
shining stars the Pleiades, or canst thou stop the turning about of
Arcturus?

<span id="an_38:32">38:32</span> Canst thou bring forth the day star in
its time, and make the evening star to rise upon the children of the
earth?

<span id="an_38:33">38:33</span> Dost thou know the order of heaven, and
canst thou set down the reason thereof on the earth?

<span id="an_38:34">38:34</span> Canst thou lift up thy voice to the
clouds, that an abundance of waters may cover thee?

<span id="an_38:35">38:35</span> Canst thou send lightnings, and will
they go, and will they return and say to thee : Here we are?

<span id="an_38:36">38:36</span> Who hath put wisdom in the heart of
man? or who gave the cock understanding?

<span id="an_38:37">38:37</span> Who can declare the order of the
heavens, or who can make the harmony of heaven to sleep?

<span id="an_38:38">38:38</span> When was the dust poured on the earth,
and the clods fastened together?

<span id="an_38:39">38:39</span> Wilt thou take the prey for the
lioness, and satisfy the appetite of her whelps,

<span id="an_38:40">38:40</span> When they couch in the dens and lie in
wait in holes?

<span id="an_38:41">38:41</span> Who provideth food for the raven, when
her young ones cry to God, wandering about, because they have no meat?

<span id="an_39:1">39:1</span> Knowest thou the time when the wild goats
bring forth among the rocks, or hast thou observed the hinds when they
fawn?

<span id="an_39:2">39:2</span> Hast thou numbered the months of their
conceiving, or knowest thou the time when they bring forth?

<span id="an_39:3">39:3</span> They bow themselves to bring forth young,
and they cast them, and send forth roarings.

<span id="an_39:4">39:4</span> Their young are weaned and go to feed :
they go forth, and return not to them.

<span id="an_39:5">39:5</span> Who hath sent out the wild ass free, and
who hath loosed his bonds?

<span id="an_39:6">39:6</span> To whom I have given a house in the
wilderness, and his dwellings in the barren land.

<span id="an_39:7">39:7</span> He scorneth the multitude of the city, he
heareth not the cry of the driver.

<span id="an_39:8">39:8</span> He looketh round about the mountains of
his pasture, and seeketh for every green thing.

<span id="an_39:9">39:9</span> Shall the rhinoceros be willing to serve
thee, or will he stay at thy crib?

<span id="an_39:10">39:10</span> Canst thou bind the rhinoceros with thy
thong to plough, or will he break the clods of the valleys after thee?

<span id="an_39:11">39:11</span> Wilt thou have confidence in his great
strength, and leave thy labours to him?

<span id="an_39:12">39:12</span> Wilt thou trust him that he will render
thee the seed, and gather it into thy barnfloor?

<span id="an_39:13">39:13</span> The wing of the ostrich is like the
wings of the heron, and of the hawk.

<span id="an_39:14">39:14</span> When she leaveth her eggs on the earth,
thou perhaps wilt warm them in the dust.

<span id="an_39:15">39:15</span> She forgetteth that the foot may tread
upon them, or that the beasts of the field may break them.

<span id="an_39:16">39:16</span> She is hardened against her young ones,
as though they were not hers, she hath laboured in vain, no fear
constraining her.

<span id="an_39:17">39:17</span> For God hath deprived her of wisdom,
neither hath he given her understanding.

<span id="an_39:18">39:18</span> When time shall be, she setteth up her
wings on high : she scorneth the horse and his rider.

<span id="an_39:19">39:19</span> Wilt thou give strength to the horse,
or clothe his neck with neighing?

<span id="an_39:20">39:20</span> Wilt thou lift him up like the locusts?
the glory of his nostrils is terror.

<span id="an_39:21">39:21</span> He breaketh up the earth with his hoof,
he pranceth boldly, he goeth forward to meet armed men.

<span id="an_39:22">39:22</span> He despiseth fear, he turneth not his
back to the sword,

<span id="an_39:23">39:23</span> Above him shall the quiver rattle, the
spear and shield shall glitter.

<span id="an_39:24">39:24</span> Chasing and raging he swalloweth the
ground, neither doth he make account when the noise of the trumpet
soundeth.

<span id="an_39:25">39:25</span> When he heareth the trumpet he saith :
Ha, ha : he smelleth the battle afar off, the encouraging of the
captains, and the shouting of the army.

<span id="an_39:26">39:26</span> Doth the hawk wax feathered by thy
wisdom, spreading her wings to the south?

<span id="an_39:27">39:27</span> Will the eagle mount up at thy command,
and make her nest in high places?

<span id="an_39:28">39:28</span> She abideth among the rocks, and
dwelleth among cragged flints, and stony hills, where there is no
access.

<span id="an_39:29">39:29</span> From thence she looketh for the prey,
and her eyes behold afar off.

<span id="an_39:30">39:30</span> Her young ones shall suck up blood :
and wheresoever the carcass shall be, she is immediately there.

<span id="an_39:31">39:31</span> And the Lord went on, and said to Job :

<span id="an_39:32">39:32</span> Shall he that contendeth with God be so
easily silenced? surely he that reproveth God, ought to answer him.

<span id="an_39:33">39:33</span> Then Job answered the Lord, and said :

<span id="an_39:34">39:34</span> One thing I have spoken, which I wish I
had not said : and another, to which I will add no more.

<span id="an_40:1">40:1</span> And the Lord answering Job out of the
whirlwind, said :

<span id="an_40:2">40:2</span> Gird up thy loins like a man : I will ask
thee, and do thou tell me.

<span id="an_40:3">40:3</span> Wilt thou make void my judgment : and
condemn me, that thou mayst be justified?

<span id="an_40:4">40:4</span> And hast thou an arm like God, and canst
thou thunder with a voice like him?

<span id="an_40:5">40:5</span> Clothe thyself with beauty, and set
thyself up on high and be glorious, and put on goodly garments.

<span id="an_40:6">40:6</span> Scatter the proud in thy indignation, and
behold every arrogant man, and humble him.

<span id="an_40:7">40:7</span> Look on all that are proud, and confound
them, and crush the wicked in their place.

<span id="an_40:8">40:8</span> Hide them in the dust together, and
plunge their faces into the pit.

<span id="an_40:9">40:9</span> Then I will confess that thy right hand
is able to save thee.

<span id="an_40:10">40:10</span> Behold behemoth whom I made with thee,
he eateth grass like an ox.

<span id="an_40:11">40:11</span> His strength is in his loins, and his
force in the navel of his belly.

<span id="an_40:12">40:12</span> He setteth up his tail like a cedar,
the sinews of his testicles are wrapped together.

<span id="an_40:13">40:13</span> His bones are like pipes of brass, his
gristle like plates of iron.

<span id="an_40:14">40:14</span> He is the beginning of the ways of God,
who made him, he will apply his sword.

<span id="an_40:15">40:15</span> To him the mountains bring forth grass
: there all the beasts of the field shall play.

<span id="an_40:16">40:16</span> He sleepeth under the shadow, in the
covert of the reed, and in moist places.

<span id="an_40:17">40:17</span> The shades cover his shadow, the
willows of the brook shall compass him about.

<span id="an_40:18">40:18</span> Behold, he will drink up a river, and
not wonder : and he trusteth that the Jordan may run into his mouth.

<span id="an_40:19">40:19</span> In his eyes as with a hook he shall
take him, and bore through his nostrils with stakes.

<span id="an_40:20">40:20</span> Canst thou draw out the leviathan with
a hook, or canst thou tie his tongue with a cord?

<span id="an_40:21">40:21</span> Canst thou put a ring in his nose, or
bore through his jaw with a buckle?

<span id="an_40:22">40:22</span> Will he make many supplications to
thee, or speak soft words to thee?

<span id="an_40:23">40:23</span> Will he make a covenant with thee, and
wilt thou take him to be a servant for ever?

<span id="an_40:24">40:24</span> Shalt thou play with him as with a
bird, or tie him up for thy handmaids?

<span id="an_40:25">40:25</span> Shall friends cut him in pieces, shall
merchants divide him?

<span id="an_40:26">40:26</span> Wilt thou fill nets with his skin, and
the cabins of fishes with his head?

<span id="an_40:27">40:27</span> Lay thy hand upon him : remember the
battle, and speak no more.

<span id="an_40:28">40:28</span> Behold his hope shall fail him, and in
the sight of all he shall be cast down.

<span id="an_41:1">41:1</span> I will not stir him up, like one that is
cruel : for who can resist my countenance?

<span id="an_41:2">41:2</span> Who hath given me before that I should
repay him? All things that are under heaven are mine.

<span id="an_41:3">41:3</span> I will not spare him, nor his mighty
words, and framed to make supplication.

<span id="an_41:4">41:4</span> Who can discover the face of his garment?
or who can go into the midst of his mouth?

<span id="an_41:5">41:5</span> Who can open the doors of his face? his
teeth are terrible round about.

<span id="an_41:6">41:6</span> His body is like molten shields, shut
close up with scales pressing upon one another.

<span id="an_41:7">41:7</span> One is joined to another, and not so much
as any air can come between them :

<span id="an_41:8">41:8</span> They stick one to another and they hold
one another fast, and shall not be separated.

<span id="an_41:9">41:9</span> His sneezing is like the shining of fire,
and his eyes like the eyelids of the morning.

<span id="an_41:10">41:10</span> Out of his mouth go forth lamps, like
torches of lighted fire.

<span id="an_41:11">41:11</span> Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, like
that of a pot heated and boiling.

<span id="an_41:12">41:12</span> His breath kindleth coals, and a flame
cometh forth out of his mouth.

<span id="an_41:13">41:13</span> In his neck strength shall dwell, and
want goeth before his face.

<span id="an_41:14">41:14</span> The members of his flesh cleave one to
another : he shall send lightnings against him, and they shall not be
carried to another place.

<span id="an_41:15">41:15</span> His heart shall be as hard as a stone,
and as firm as a smith's anvil.

<span id="an_41:16">41:16</span> When he shall raise him up, the angels
shall fear, and being affrighted shall purify themselves.

<span id="an_41:17">41:17</span> When a sword shall lay at him, it shall
not be able to hold, nor a spear, nor a breastplate.

<span id="an_41:18">41:18</span> For he shall esteem iron as straw, and
brass as rotten wood.

<span id="an_41:19">41:19</span> The archer shall not put him to flight,
the stones of the sling are to him like stubble.

<span id="an_41:20">41:20</span> As stubble will he esteem the hammer,
and he will laugh him to scorn who shaketh the spear.

<span id="an_41:21">41:21</span> The beams of the sun shall be under
him, and he shall strew gold under him like mire.

<span id="an_41:22">41:22</span> He shall make the deep sea to boil like
a pot, and shall make it as when ointments boil.

<span id="an_41:23">41:23</span> A path shall shine after him, he shall
esteem the deep as growing old.

<span id="an_41:24">41:24</span> There is no power upon earth that can
be compared with him who was made to fear no one.

<span id="an_41:25">41:25</span> He beholdeth every high thing, he is
king over all the children of pride.

<span id="an_42:1">42:1</span> Then Job answered the Lord, and said :

<span id="an_42:2">42:2</span> I know that thou canst do all things, and
no thought is hid from thee.

<span id="an_42:3">42:3</span> Who is this that hideth counsel without
knowledge? Therefore I have spoken unwisely, and things that above
measure exceeded my knowledge.

<span id="an_42:4">42:4</span> Hear, and I will speak : I will ask thee,
and do thou tell me.

<span id="an_42:5">42:5</span> With the hearing of the ear, I have heard
thee, but now my eye seeth thee.

<span id="an_42:6">42:6</span> Therefore I reprehend myself, and do
penance in dust and ashes.

<span id="an_42:7">42:7</span> And after the Lord had spoken these words
to Job, he said to Eliphaz the Themanite : My wrath is kindled against
thee, and against thy two friends, because you have not spoken the thing
that is right before my, as my servant Job hath.

<span id="an_42:8">42:8</span> Take unto you therefore seven oxen, and
seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer for yourselves a
holocaust : and my servant Job shall pray for you : his face I will
accept, that folly be not imputed to you : for you have not spoken right
things before me, as my servant Job hath.

<span id="an_42:9">42:9</span> So Eliphaz the Themanite, and Baldad the
Suhite, and Sophar the Naamathite went, and did as the Lord had spoken
to them, and the Lord accepted the face of Job.

<span id="an_42:10">42:10</span> The Lord also was turned at the penance
of Job, when he prayed for his friends. And the Lord gave Job twice as
much as he had before.

<span id="an_42:11">42:11</span> And all his brethren came to him, and
all his sisters, and all that knew him before, and they ate bread with
him in his house : and bemoaned him, and comforted him upon all the evil
that God had brought upon him. And every man gave him one ewe, and one
earring of fold.

<span id="an_42:12">42:12</span> And the Lord blessed the latter end of
Job more than his beginning. And he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six
thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she asses.

<span id="an_42:13">42:13</span> And he had seven sons, and three
daughters.

<span id="an_42:14">42:14</span> And he called the names of one Dies,
and the name of the second Cassia, and the name of the third
Cornustibil.

<span id="an_42:15">42:15</span> And there were not found in all the
earth women so beautiful as the daughters of Job : and their father gave
them inheritance among their brethren.

<span id="an_42:16">42:16</span> And Job lived after these things, a
hundred and forty years, and he saw his children, and his children's
children, unto the fourth generation, and he died an old man, and full
of days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms](psa.md)
