[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](deu)  [Next](jdg.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Joshua

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Now it came to pass after the death of
Moses the servant of the Lord, that the Lord spoke to Josue the son of
Nun, the minister of Moses, and said to him:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Moses my servant is dead: arise, and pass
over this Jordan, thou and thy people with thee, into the land which I
will give to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I will deliver to you every place that the
sole of your foot shall tread upon, as I have said to Moses.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> From the desert and from Libanus unto the
great river Euphrates, all the land of the Hethites unto the great sea
toward the going; down of the sun, shall be your border.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> No man shall be able to resist you all the
days of thy life: as I have been with Moses, so will I be with thee: I
will not leave thee, nor forsake thee.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Take courage, and be strong: for thou shalt
divide by lot to this people the land, for which I swore to their
fathers, that I would deliver it to them.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Take courage therefore, and be very
valiant: that thou mayst observe and do all the law, which Moses my
servant hath commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or to
the left, that thou mayst understand all things which thou dost.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Let not the book of this law depart from
thy mouth: but thou shalt meditate on it day and night, that thou mayst
observe and do all things that are written in it: then shalt thou direct
thy way, and understand it.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Behold I command thee, take courage, end be
strong. Fear not and be not dismayed: because the Lord thy God is with
thee in all things whatsoever thou shalt go to.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And Josue commanded the princes of the
people, saying: Pass through the midst of the camp, and command the
people, and say:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Prepare you victuals: for after the third
day you shall pass over the Jordan and shall go in to possess the land,
which the Lord your God will give you.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And he said to the Rubenites, and the
Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses:

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Remember the word, which Moses the
servant of the Lord commanded you, saying: The Lord your God hath given
you rest, and all this land.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Your wives, and children, and cattle
shall remain in the land which Moses gave you on this side of the
Jordan: but pass you over armed before your brethren, all of you that
are strong of hand, and fight for them,

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Until the Lord give rest to your brethren
as he hath given you, and they also possess the land which the Lord your
God will give them: and so you shall return into the land of your
possession, and you shall dwell in it, which Moses the servant of the
Lord gave you beyond the Jordan, toward the rising of the sun.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And they made answer to Josue, and said:
All that thou hast commanded us we will do; and whithersoever thou shalt
send us, we will go.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> As we obeyed Moses in all things, so will
we obey thee also: only be the Lord thy God with thee, as he was with
Moses.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> He that shall gainsay thy mouth, and not
obey all thy words, that thou shalt command him, let him die: only take
thou courage, and do manfully.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> And Josue the son of Nun sent from Setim
two men, to spy secretly: and said to them: Go, and view the land and
the city of Jericho. n They went and entered into the house of a woman
that was a harlot named Rahab, and lodged with her.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And it was told the king of Jericho, and
was said : Behold there are men come in hither, by night, of the
children of Israel, to spy the land.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And the king of Jericho sent to Rahab,
saying: Bring forth the men that came to thee, and are entered into thy
house: for they are spies, and are come to view all the land.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And the woman taking the men, hid them, and
said: I confess they came to me, but I knew not whence they were:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And at the time of shutting the gate in the
dark, they also went out together. I know not whither they are gone:
pursue after them quickly, and you will overtake them.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> But she made the men go up to the top of
her house, and covered them with the stalks of flax, which was there.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Now they that were sent, pursued after
them, by the way that leadeth to the fords of the Jordan: and as soon as
they were gone out, the gate was presently shut.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The men that were hidden were not yet
asleep, when behold the woman went up to them, and said:

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> I know that the Lord hath given this land
to you: for the dread of you is fallen upon us, and all the inhabitants
of the land have lost all strength.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> We have heard that the Lord dried up the
water of the Red Sea at your going in, when you came out of Egypt: and
what things you did to the two kings of the Amorrhites, that were beyond
the Jordan: Sehon and Og whom you slew.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And hearing these things we were
affrighted, and our heart fainted away, neither did there remain any
spirit in us at your coming in: for the Lord your God he is God in
heaven above, and in the earth beneath.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now therefore swear ye to me by the Lord,
that as I have shewn mercy to you, so you also will shew mercy to my
father's house: and give me a true token,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> That you will save my father and mother,
my brethren end sisters, and all things that are theirs, and deliver our
souls from death.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> They answered her: Be our lives for you
unto death, only if thou betray us not. And when the Lord shall have
delivered us the land, we will shew thee mercy and truth.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Then she let them down with a cord out of
a window: for her house joined close to the wall.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And she said to them: Get ye up to the
mountains, lest perhaps they meet you as they return: and there lie ye
hid three days, till they come back, and so you shall go on your way.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And they said to her: We shall be
blameless of this oath, which thou hast made us swear:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> If when we come into the land, this
scarlet cord be a sign, and thou tie it in the window, by which thou
hast let us down: and gather together thy father and mother, and
brethren and all thy kindred into thy house.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Whosoever shall go out of the door of thy
house, his blood shall be upon his own head, and we shall be quit. But
the blood of all that shall be with thee in the house, shall light upon
our head, if any man touch them.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But if thou wilt betray us, and utter
this word abroad, we shall be quit of this oath which thou hast made us
swear.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And she answered: As you have spoken, so
be it done. And sending them on their way, she hung the scarlet cord in
the window.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But they went and came to the mountains,
and stayed there three days till they that pursued them were returned.
For having sought them through all the way, they found them not.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And when they were gone back into the
city, the spies returned, and came down from the mountain: and passing
over the Jordan, they came to Josue the son of Nun, and told him all
that befel them.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> And said: The Lord hath delivered all
this land into our hands, and all the inhabitants thereof are overthrown
with fear.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And Josue rose before daylight, and removed
the camp: and they departed from Setim, and came to the Jordan, he, and
all the children of Israel, and they abode there for three days.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> After which, the heralds went through the
midst of the camp,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And began to proclaim: When you shall see
the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, and the priests of the
race of Levi carrying it, rise you up also, and follow them as they go
before:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And let there be between you and the ark
the space of two thousand cubits: that you may see it afar off, and know
which way you must go: for you have not gone this way before: and take
care you come not near the ark.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And Josue said to the people: Be ye
sanctified: for to morrow the Lord will do wonders among you.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And he said to the priests: Take up the ark
of the covenant, and go before the people. And they obeyed his commands,
and took it up and walked before them.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And the Lord said to Josue: This day will I
begin to exalt thee before Israel: that they may know that as I was with
Moses, so I am with thee also.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And do thou command the priests that carry
the ark of the covenant, and say to them: When you shall have entered
into part of the water of the Jordan, stand in it.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And Josue said to the children of Israel:
Come hither and hear the word of the Lord your God.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And again he said: By this you shall know
that the Lord the living God is in the midst of you, and that he shall
destroy before your sight the Chanaanite and the Hethite, the Hevite and
the Pherezite, the Gergesite also and the Jebusite, and the Amorrhite.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Behold the ark of the covenant of the
Lord of all the earth shall go before you into the Jordan.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Prepare ye twelve men of the tribes of
Israel, one of every tribe.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> And when the priests, that carry the ark
of the Lord the God of the whole earth, shall set the soles of their
feet in the waters of the Jordan, the waters that are beneath shall run
down and go off: and those that come from above, shall stand together
upon a heap.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> So the people went out of their tents, to
pass over the Jordan: and the priests that carried the ark of the
covenant. went on before them.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And as soon as they came into the Jordan,
and their feet were dipped in part of the water, (now the Jordan, it
being harvest time, had filled the banks of its channel,)

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> The waters that came down from above
stood in one place, and swelling up like a mountain, were seen afar off
from the city that is called Adom, to the place of Sarthan: but those
that were beneath, ran down into the sea of the wilderness (which now is
called the Dead Sea) until they wholly failed.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the people marched over against
Jericho: and the priests that carried the ark of the covenant of the
Lord, stood girded upon the dry ground in the midst of the Jordan, and
all the people passed over through the channel that was dried up.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And when they were passed over, the Lord
said to Josue:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Choose twelve men, one of every tribe:

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And command them to take out of the midst
of the Jordan, where the feet of the priests stood, twelve very hard
stones, which you shall set in the place of the camp, where you shall
pitch your tents this night.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And Josue called twelve men, whom he had
chosen out of the children of Israel, one out of every tribe,

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And he said to them: Go before the ark of
the Lord your God to the midst of the Jordan, and carry from thence
every man a stone on your shoulders, according to the number of the
children of Israel,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> That it may be a sign among you end when
your children shall ask you to morrow, saying: What mean these stones?

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> You shall answer them: The waters of the
Jordan ran off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, when it
passed over the same: therefore were these atones set for a monument of
the children of Israel for ever.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> The children of Israel therefore did as
Josue commanded them, carrying out of the channel of the Jordan twelve
stones, as the Lord had commanded him, according to the number of the
children of Israel, unto the place wherein they camped, and there they
set them.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And Josue put other twelve stones in the
midst of the channel of the Jordan, where the priests stood that carried
the ark of the covenant: and they are there until this present day.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Now the priests that carried the ark,
stood in the midst of the Jordan till all things were accomplished which
the Lord had commanded Josue to speak to the people, and Moses had said
to him. And the people made haste and passed over.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And when they had all passed over, the
ark also of the Lord passed over, and the priests went before the
people.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> The children of Ruben also and Gad, and
half the tribe of Manasses, went armed before the children of Israel as
Moses had commanded them.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And forty thousand fighting men by their
troops, and bands, marched through the plains and fields of the city of
Jericho.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> In that day the Lord magnified Josue in
the sight of all Israel, that they should fear him, as they had feared
Moses, while he lived.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And he said to him:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Command the priests, that carry the ark
of the covenant, to come up out of the Jordan.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And he commanded them, saying: Come ye up
out of the Jordan.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And when they that carried the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, were come up, and began to tread on the dry
ground, the waters returned into the channel, and ran as they were wont
before.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And the people came up out of the Jordan,
the tenth day of the first month, and camped in Galgal, over against the
east side of the city of Jericho.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And the twelve stones which they had
taken out of the channel of the Jordan, Josue pitched in Galgal,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And said to the children of Israel: When
your children shall ask their fathers, to morrow, and shall say to them:
What mean these stones?

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> You shall teach them and say: Israel
passed over this Jordan through the dry channel.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> The Lord your God drying up the waters
thereof in your sight, until you passed over:

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> As he had done before in the Red Sea,
which he dried up till we passed through :

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> That all the people of the earth may
learn the most mighty hand of the Lord, that you also may fear the Lord
your God for ever.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now when all the kings of the Amorrhites,
who dwelt beyond the Jordan westward, and all the kings of Chanaan, who
possessed the places near the great sea, had heard that the Lord had
dried up the waters of the Jordan before the children of Israel, till
they passed over, their heart failed them, and there remained no spirit
in them, fearing the coming in of the children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> At that time the Lord said to Josue: Make
thee knives of stone, and circumcise the second time the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> He did what the Lord had commanded, and he
circumcised the children of Israel in the hill of the foreskins.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Now this is the cause of the second
circumcision: All the people that came out of Egypt that were males, all
the men fit for war, died in the desert, during the time of the long
going about in the way.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Now these were all circumcised. But the
people that were born in the desert,

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Luring the forty years of the journey in
the wide wilderness, were uncircumcised: till all they were consumed
that had not heard the voice of the Lord, and to whom he had sworn
before, that he would not shew them the land flowing with milk and
honey.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The children of these succeeded in the
place of their fathers, and were circumcised by Josue: for they were
uncircumcised even as they were born, and no one had circumcised them in
the way.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Now after they were all circumcised, they
remained in the same place of the camp, until they were healed.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And the Lord said to Josue: This day have I
taken away from you the reproach of Egypt. And the name of that place
was called Galgal, until this present day.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And the children of Israel abode in
Galgal, and they kept the phase on the fourteenth day of the month, at
evening, in the plains of Jericho:

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And they ate on the next day unleavened
bread of the corn of the land, and frumenty of the same year.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And the manna ceased after they ate of
the corn of the land, neither did the children of Israel use that food
any more, but they ate of the corn of the present year of the land of
Chanaan.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And when Josue was in the field of the
city of Jericho, he lifted up his eyes, and saw a man standing over
against him: holding a drawn sword, and he went to him, and said: Art
thou one of ours, or of our adversaries?

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And he answered: No: but I am prince of
the host of the Lord, and now I am come.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Josue fell on his face to the ground. And
worshipping, add: What saith my lord to his servant?

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Loose, saith he, thy shoes from off thy
feet: for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Josue did as was
commanded him.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Now Jericho was close shut up and fenced,
for fear of the children of Israel, and no man durst go out or come in.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And the Lord said to Josue: Behold I have
given into thy hands Jericho, and the king thereof, and all the valiant
men.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Go round about the city, all ye fighting
men, once a day: so shall ye do for six days.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And on the seventh day the priests shall
take the seven trumpets, which are used in the jubilee, and shall go
before the ark of the covenant: and you shall go about the city seven
times, and the priests shall sound the trumpets.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And when the voice of the trumpet shall
give a longer and broken tune, and shall sound in your ears, all the
people shall shout together with a very great shout, and the walls of
the city shall fall to the ground, and they shall enter in every one at
the place against which they shall stand.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Then Josue the son of Nun called the
priests, and said to them: Take the ark of the covenant: and let seven
other priests take the seven trumpets of the jubilee, and march before
the ark of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And he said to the people: Go, and compass
the city, armed, marching before the ark of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And when Josue had ended his words, and the
seven priests blew the seven trumpets before the ark of the covenant of
the Lord,

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And all the armed men went before, the rest
of the common people followed the ark, and the sound of the trumpets was
heard on all sides.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> But Josue had commanded the people,
saying: You shall not shout, nor shall your voice be heard, nor any word
go out of your mouth: until the day come wherein I shall say to you:
Cry, and shout.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So the ark of the Lord went about the
city once a day, and returning into the camp, abode there.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And Josue rising before day, the priests
took the ark of the Lord,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And seven of them seven trumpets, which
are used in the jubilee: and they went before the ark of the Lord
walking and sounding the trumpets: and the armed men went before them,
and the rest of the common people followed the ark, and they blew the
trumpets.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> And they went round about the city the
second day once, and returned into the camp. So they did six days.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> But the seventh day, rising up early,
they went about the city, as it was ordered, seven times.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And when in the seventh going about the
priests sounded with the trumpets, Josue said to all Israel: Shout: for
the Lord hath delivered the city to you:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> And let this city be an anathema, and all
things that are in it, to the Lord. Let only Rahab the harlot live, with
all that are with her in the house: for she hid the messengers whom we
sent.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> But beware ye lest you touch ought of
those things that are forbidden, and you be guilty of transgression, and
all the camp of Israel be under sin, and be troubled.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> But whatsoever gold or silver there shall
be, or vessels of brass and iron, let it be consecrated to the Lord,
laid up in his treasures.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> So all the people making a shout, and the
trumpets sounding, when the voice and the sound thundered in the ears of
the multitude, the walls forth- with fell down: and every man went up by
the place that was over against him: s and they took the city,

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And killed all that were in it, man and
woman, young and old. The oxen also and the sheep, and the asses, they
slew with the edge of the sword.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> But Josue said to the two men that had
been sent for spies: Go into the harlot's house, and bring her out, and
all things that are hers, as you assured her by oath.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> And the young men went in and brought out
Rahab, and her parents, her brethren also and all her goods and her
kindred, and made them to stay without the camp.

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> But they burned the city, and all things
that were therein; except the gold and silver, and vessels of brass and
iron, which they consecrated into the treasury of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> But Josue saved Rahab the harlot and her
father's house, and all she had, and they dwelt in the midst of Israel
until this present day: because she hid the messengers whom he had sent
to spy out Jericho. At that time, Josue made an imprecation, saying:

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Cursed be the man before the Lord, that
shall raise up and build the city of Jericho. In his firstborn may he
lay the foundation thereof, and in the last of his children set up its
gates.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And the Lord was with Josue, and his name
was noised throughout all the land.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> But the children of Israel transgressed the
commandment, and took to their own use of the anathema. For Achan the
son of Charmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zare of the tribe of Juda,
took something of the anathema: and the Lord was angry against the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And when Josue sent men from Jericho
against Hai, which is beside Bethaven, on the east side of the town of
Bethel, he said to them: Go up, and view the country: and they fulfilled
his command, and viewed Hai.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And returning they said to him: Let not all
the people go up, but let two or three thousand men go and destroy the
city: why should all the people be troubled in vain against enemies that
are very few?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> There went up therefore three thou- sand
fighting men: who immediately turned their backs,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And were defeated by the men of the city of
Hai, and there fell of them six and thirty men : and the enemies pursued
them from the gate as far as Sabarim, and they slew them as they fled by
the descent: and the heart of the people was struck with fear, and
melted like water.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But Josue rent his garments, and fell flat
on the ground before the ark of the Lord until the evening, both he and
all the ancients of Israel: and they put dust upon their heads.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Josue said: Alas, O Lord God, why
wouldst thou bring this people over the river Jordan, to deliver us into
the hand of the Amorrhite, and to destroy us? would God, we had stayed
beyond the Jordan as we began.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> My Lord God, what shall I say, seeing
Israel turning their backs to their enemies?

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> The Chanaanites, and all the inhabitants of
the land will hear of it, and being gathered together will surround us
and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do to thy great
name?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And the Lord said to Josue: Arise, why
liest thou flat on the ground?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Israel hath sinned, and transgressed my
covenant: and they have taken of the anathema, and have stolen and lied,
and have hidden it among their goods.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Neither can Israel stand before his
enemies, but he shall flee from them: because he is defiled with the
anathema. I will be no more with you, till you destroy him that is
guilty of this wickedness.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Arise, sanctify the people, and say to
them: Be ye sanctified against to morrow: for thus saith the Lord God of
Israel: The anathema is in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not
stand before thy enemies, till he be destroyed out of thee that is
defiled with this wickedness.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And you shall come in the morning every
one by your tribes: and what tribe soever the lot shall find, it shall
come by its kindreds and the kindred by its houses, and the house by the
men.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And whosoever he be that shall be found
guilty of this fact, he shall be burnt with fire with all his substance,
because he hath transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and hath done
wickedness in Israel.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> Josue, therefore, when he rose in the
morning, made Israel to come by their tribes, and the tribe of Juda was
found,

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Which being brought by its families, it
was found to be the family of Zare. Bringing that also by the houses, he
found it to be Zabdi.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And bringing his house man by man, he
found Achan the son of Charmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zare of the
tribe of Juda.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And Josue said to Achan: My son, give
glory to the Lord God of Israel, and confess, and tell me what thou hast
done, hide it not.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And Achan answered Josue, and said to
him: Indeed I have sinned against the Lord the God of Israel, and thus
and thus have I done.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> For I saw among the spoils a scarlet
garment exceeding good, and two hundred sides of silver, and a golden
rule of fifty sides: and I coveted them, and I took them away, and hid
them in the ground is the midst of my tent, and the silver I covered
with the earth that I dug up.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Josue therefore sent ministers: who
running to his tent, found all hidden in the same place, together with
the silver.

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And taking them away out of the tent,
they brought them to Josue, and to all the children of Israel, and threw
them down before the Lord.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Then Josue and all Israel with him took
Achan the son of Zare, and the silver and the garments, and the golden
rule, his sons also and his daughters, his oxen and asses and sheep, the
tent also, and all the goods: and brought them to the valley of Achor:

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Where Josue said: Because thou hast
troubled us, the Lord trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him:
and all things that were his, were consumed with fire.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And they gathered together upon him a
great heap of stones, which remaineth until this present day. And the
wrath of the Lord was turned away from them. And the name of that place
was called the Valley of Achor, until this day.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And the Lord said to Josue: Fear not, nor
be thou dismayed: take with thee all the multitude of fighting men,
arise and go up to the town of Hai. Behold I have delivered into thy
hand the king thereof, and the people, and the city, and the land.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And thou shalt do to the city of Hai, and
to the king thereof, as thou hast done to Jericho, and to the king
thereof: but the spoils and all the cattle you shall take for a prey to
yourselves: lay an ambush for the city behind it.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And Josue arose, and all the army of the
fighting men with him, to go up against Hai: and he sent thirty thousand
chosen valiant men in the night,

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And commanded them, saying: Lay an ambush
behind the city: and go not very far from it: and be ye all ready.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> But I and the rest of the multitude which
is with me; will approach on the contrary side against the city. And
when they shall come out against us, we will flee, and turn our backs,
as we did before:

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Till they pursuing us be drawn farther from
the city: for they will think that we flee as before.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And whilst we are fleeing, and they
pursuing, you shall arise out of the ambush, and shall destroy the city:
and the Lord your God will deliver it into our hands.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And when you shall have taken it, set it on
fire, and you shall do all things so as I have commanded.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And he sent them away, and they went on to
the place of the ambush, and abode between Bethel and Hai, on the west
side of the city of Hai. But Josue stayed that night in the midst of the
people,

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And rising early in the morning, he
mustered his soldiers, and went up with the ancients in the front of the
army environed with the aid of the fighting men.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And when they were come, and were gone up
over against the city, they stood on the north side of the city, between
which and them there was a valley in the midst.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> And he had chosen five thousand men, and
set them to lie in ambush between Bethel and Hai, on the west side of
the same city:

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> But all the rest of the army went in
battle array on the north side, so that the last of that multitude
reached to the west side of the city. So Josue went that night, and
stood in the midst of the valley.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And when the king of Hai saw this, he
made haste in the morning, and went out with all the army of the city,
and set it in battle array toward the desert, not knowing that there lay
an ambush behind his back.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> But Josue, and all Israel gave back,
making as if they were afraid, and fleeing by the way of the wilderness.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> But they shouting together, and
encouraging one another, pursued them. And when they were come from the
city,

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And not one remained in the city of Hai
and of Bethel, that did not pursue after Israel, leaving the towns open
as they had rushed out,

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> The Lord said to Josue: Lift up the
shield that is in thy hand, towards the city of Hai, for I will deliver
it to thee.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And when he had lifted up his shield
towards the city, the ambush that lay hid, rose up immediately: and
going to the city, took it and set it on fire.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And the men of the city, that pursued
after Josue, looking back and seeing the smoke of the city rise up to
heaven, had no more power to flee this way or that way: especially as
they that had counterfeited flight, end were going toward the
wilderness, turned back most valiantly against them that pursued.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> So Josue and all Israel seeing that the
city was taken, and that the smoke of the city rose up, returned and
slew the men of Hai.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> And they also that had taken and set the
city on fire, issuing out of the city to meet their own men, began to
cut off the enemies who were surrounded by them. So that the enemies
being cut off on both sides, not one of so great a multitude was saved.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And they took the king of the city of Hai
alive, and brought him to Josue.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> So all being slain that had pursued after
Israel in his flight to the wilderness, and tailing by the sword in the
same place, the children of Israel returned and laid waste the city.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And the number of them that fell that
day, both of men and women, was twelve thousand persons all of the city
of Hai.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> But Josue drew not back his hand, which
he had stretched out on high, holding the shield, till all the
inhabitants of Hai were slain.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And the children of Israel divided among
them the cattle and the prey of the city, as the Lord had commanded
Josue.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And he burned the city, and made it a
heap for ever:

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And he hung the king thereof on a gibbet
until the evening and the going down of the sun. Then Josue commanded,
and they took down his carcass from the gibbet: and threw it in the very
entrance of the city, heaping upon it a great heap of stones, which
remaineth until this present day.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> Then Josue built an altar to the Lord the
God of Israel in mount Hebal,

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> As Moses the servant of the Lord had
commanded the children of Israel, and it is written in the book of the
law of Moses: an altar of unhewn stones which iron had not touched: and
he offered upon it holocausts to the Lord, and immolated victims of
peace offerings.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he wrote upon stones the Deuteronomy
of the law of Moses, which he had ordered before the children of Israel.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And all the people, and the ancients, and
the princes and judges stood on both sides of the ark, before the
priests that carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord, both the
stranger and he that was born among them, half of them by mount Garizim,
and half by mount Hebal, as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded.
And first he blessed the people of Israel.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> After this he read all the words of the
blessing and the cursing and all things that were written in the hook of
the law.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> He left out nothing of those things which
Moses had commanded, but he repeated all before all the people of
Israel, with the women and children and strangers that dwelt among them.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Now When these things were heard of, all
the kings beyond the Jordan, that dwelt in the mountains and in the
plains, in the places near the sea, and on the coasts of the great sea,
they also that dwell by Libanus, the Hethite and the Amorrhite, the
Chanaanite, the Pherezite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite,

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> Gathered themselves together, to fight
against Josue and Israel with one mind, and one resolution.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> But they that dwelt in Gabaon, hearing all
that Josue had done to Jericho and Hai:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Cunningly devising took for themselves
provisions, laying old sacks upon their asses, and wine bottles rent and
sewed up again,

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And very old shoes, which for a show of age
were clouted with patches, and old garments upon them: the leaves also,
which they carried for provisions by the way, were hard, and broken into
pieces:

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> And they went to Josue, who then abode in
the camp at Galgal, and said to him, and to all Israel with him: We are
come from a far country, desiring to make peace with you. And the
children of Israel answered them, and said:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Perhaps you dwell in the land which falls
to our lot; if so, we can make no league with you.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> But they said to Josue: We are thy
servants. Josue said to them: Who are you? and whence came you?

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> They answered: From a very far country thy
servants are come in the name of the Lord thy God. For we have heard the
fame of his power, all the things that he did in Egypt.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And to the two kings of the Amorrhites
that were beyond the Jordan, Sehon king of Hesebon, and Og king of
Basan, that was in Astaroth:

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And our ancients, and all the inhabitants
of our country said to us: Take with you victuals for a long way, and go
meet them, and say: We are your servants, make ye a league with us.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Behold, these leaves we took hot, when we
set out from our houses to come to you, now they are become dry, and
broken in pieces, by being exceeding old.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> These bottles of wine when we filled them
were new, now they are rent and burst. These garments we have on, and
the shoes we have on our feet, by reason of the very long journey are
worn out, and almost consumed.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> They took therefore of their victuals,
and consulted not the mouth of the Lord.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And Josue made peace with them, and
entering into a league promised that they should not be slain: the
princes also of the multitude swore to them.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> Now three days after the league was made,
they heard that they dwelt nigh, and they should be among them.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> And the children of Israel removed the
camp, and came into their cities on the third day, the names of which
are Gabaon, and Caphira, and Beroth, and Cariathiarim.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And they slew them not, because the
princes of the multitude had sworn in the name of the Lord the God of
Israel. Then all the common people murmured against the princes.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And they answered them: We have sworn to
them in the name of the Lord the God of Israel, and therefore we may not
touch them.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> But this we mill do to them: Let their
lives be saved, lest the wrath of the Lord be stirred up against us, if
we should be forsworn.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> But so let them live, as to serve the
whole multitude in hewing wood, and bringing in water. As they were
speaking these things,

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> Josue called the Gabaonites and said to
them: Why would you impose upon us, saying: We dwell far off from you,
whereas you are in the midst of us?

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> Therefore you shall be under a curse, and
your race shall always be hewers of wood, and carriers of water unto the
house of my God.

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> They answered: It was told us thy
servants, that the Lord thy God had promised his servant Moses to give
you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants thereof. Therefore
we feared exceedingly and provided for our lives. compelled by the dread
we had of you and we took this counsel.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And now we are in thy hand: deal with us
as it seemeth good and right unto thee.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> So Josue did as he had said, and
delivered them from the hand of the children of Israel, that they should
not be slain.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And he gave orders in that day that they
should be in the service of all the people, and of the altar of the
Lord, hewing wood and carrying water, until this present time, in the
place which the Lord hath chosen.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> When Adonisedec king of Jerusalem had
heard these things, to wit, that Josue had taken Hai, and had destroyed
it, (for as he had done to Jericho and the king thereof, so did he to
Hai, and its king,) and that the Gabaonites were gone over to Israel,
and were their confederates,

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> He was exceedingly afraid. For Gabaon was
a great city, and one of the royal cities, and greater than the town of
Hai, and all its fighting men were most valiant.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> Therefore Adonisedec king of Jerusalem
sent to Oham king of Hebron, and to Pharam king of Jerimoth, and to
Japhia king of Lachis, and to Dabir king of Eglon, saying:

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Come up to me, and bring help, that we
may take Gabaon, because it hath gone over to Josue, and to the children
of Israel.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> So the five kings of the Amorrhites being
assembled together went up: the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron,
the king of Jerimoth, the king of Lachis, the king of Eglon, they and
their armies, and camped about Gabaon, laying siege to it.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the inhabitants of the city of Gabaon
which was besieged, sent to Josue, who then abode in the camp at Galgal,
and said to him: Withdraw not thy hands from helping thy servants: come
up quickly and save us, and bring us succour: for all the kings of the
Amorrhites, who dwell in the mountains, are gathered together against
us.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And Josue went up from Galgal, and all
the army of the warriors with him, most valiant men.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> And the Lord said to Josue: Fear them
not: for I have delivered them into thy hands: none of them shall be
able to stand against thee.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> So Josue going up from Galgal all the
night, came upon them suddenly.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And the Lord troubled them at the sight
of Israel: and he slew them with a great slaughter in Gabaon, and
pursued them by the way of the ascent to Beth-horon, and cut them off
all the way to Azeca and Maceda.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And when they were fleeing from the
children of Israel, and were in the descent of Beth-horon, the Lord cast
down upon them great stones from heaven as far as Azeca: and many more
were killed with the hailstones than were slain by the swords of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Then Josue spoke to the Lord, in the
day that he delivered the Amorrhite in the sight of the children of
Israel, and he said before them: Move not, O sun, toward Gabaon, nor
thou, O moon, toward the valley of Ajalon.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And the sun and the moon stood still,
till the people revenged themselves of their enemies. Is not this
written in the book of the just? So the sun stood still in the midst of
heaven, and hasted not to go down the space of one day.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> There was not before nor after so long
a day, the Lord obeying the voice of a man, and fighting for Israel.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And Josue returned with all Israel into
the camp of Galgal.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> For the five kings were fled, and had
hidden themselves in a cave of the city of Maceda.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> And it was told Josue that the five
kings were found hidden in a cave of the city of Maceda.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And he commanded them that were with
him, saying: Roll great stones to the mouth of the cave, and set careful
men, to keep them shut up:

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> And stay you not, but pursue after the
enemies, and kill all the hindermost of them as they flee, and do not
suffer them whom the Lord God hath delivered into your hands to shelter
themselves in their cities.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> So the enemies being slain with a great
slaughter, and almost utterly consumed, they that were able to escape
from Israel, entered into fenced cities.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> And all the army returned to Josue in
Maceda, where the camp then was, in good health and without the loss of
any one: and no man durst move his tongue against the children of
Israel.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And Josue gave orders, saying: Open the
mouth of the cave, and bring forth to me the five kings that lie hid
therein.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And the ministers did as they were
commanded: and they brought out to him the five kings out of the cave:
the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jerimoth, the
king of Lachis, the king of Eglon.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> And when they were Drought out to him,
he called all the men of Israel, and said to the chiefs of the army that
were with him: Go, and set your feet on the necks of these kings. And
when they had gone, and put their feet upon the necks of them lying
under them,

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> He said again to them: Fear not,
neither be ye dismayed, take courage and be strong: for so will the Lord
do to all your enemies, against whom you fight.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> And Josue struck, and slew them, and
hanged them upon five gibbets, and they hung until the evening.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> And when the sun was down, he commanded
the soldiers to take them down from the gibbets. And after they were
taken down, they cast them into the cave where they had lain hid, and
put great stones at the mouth thereof, which remain until this day.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The same day Josue took Maceda and
destroyed it, with the edge of the sword, and killed the king and all
the inhabitants thereof: he left not in it the least remains. And he did
to the king of Maceda, as he had done to the king of Jericho.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> And he passed from Maceda with all
Israel to Lebna, and fought against it:

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> And the Lord delivered it with the king
thereof into the hands of Israel: and they destroyed the city with the
edge of the sword, and all the inhabitants thereof. They left not in it
any remains. And they did to the king of Lebna, as they had done to the
king of Jericho.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> From Lebna he passed unto Lachis, with
all Israel: and investing it with his army, besieged it.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> And the Lord delivered Lachis into the
hands of Israel, and he took it the following day, and put it to the
sword, and every soul that was in it, as he had done to Lebna.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> At that time Horam king of Gazer, came
up to succour Lachis: and Josue slew him with all his people, so as to
leave none alive.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> And he passed from Lachis to Eglon, and
surrounded it,

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> And took it the same day: and put to
the sword all the souls that were in it, according to all that he had
done to Lachis.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> He went up also with all Israel from
Eglon to Hebron, and fought against it:

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> Took it, and destroyed it with the edge
of the sword: the king also thereof, and all the towns of that country,
and all the souls that dwelt in it: he left not therein any remains: as
he had done to Eglon, so did he also to Hebron, putting to the sword all
that he found in it.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> Returning from thence to Dabir,

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> He took it and destroyed it: the king
also thereof and all the towns round about he destroyed with the edge of
the sword: he left not in it any remains: as he had done to Hebron and
Lebna and to their kings, so did he to Dabir and to the king thereof.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> So Josue conquered all the country of
the hills and of the south and of the plain, and of Asedoth, with their
kings: he left not any remains therein, but slew all that breathed, as
the Lord the God of Israel had commanded him,

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> From Cadesbarne even to Gaza. All the
land of Gosen even to Gabaon,

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And all their kings, and their lands he
took and wasted at one onset: for the Lord the God of Israel fought for
him.

<span id="an_10:43">10:43</span> And he returned with all Israel to the
place of the camp in Galgal.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And when Jabin king of Asor had heard
these things, he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of
Semeron, and to the king of Achsaph:

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And to the kings of the north, that dwelt
in the mountains and in the plains over against the south side of
Ceneroth, and in the levels and the countries of Dor by the sea side :

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> To the Chanaanites also on the ease and
on the west, and the Amorrhite, and the Hethite, and the Pherezite, and
the Jebusite in the mountains: to the Hevite also who dwelt at the foot
of Hermon in the land of Maspha.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And they all came out with their troops,
a people exceeding numerous as the sand that is on the sea shore, their
horses also and chariots a very great multitude,

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> And all these kings assembled together at
the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And the Lord said to Josue: Fear them
not: for to morrow at this same hour I will deliver all these to be
slain in the sight of Israel: thou shalt hamstring their horses, and
thou shalt burn their chariots with fire.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And Josue came, and all the army with
him, against them to the waters of Merom on a sudden, and fell upon
them.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And the Lord delivered them into the
hands of Israel. And they defeated them, and chased them as far as the
great Sidon, and the waters of Maserophot, and the field of Masphe,
which is on the east side thereof. He slew them all, so as to leave no
remains of them:

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And he did as the Lord had commanded him,
he hamstringed their horses and burned their chariots.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And presently turning back he took
Asor: and slew the king thereof with the sword. Now Asor of old was the
head of all these kingdoms.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And he cut off all the souls that abode
there: he left not in it any remains, but utterly destroyed all, and
burned the city itself with fire.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And he took and put to the sword and
destroyed all the cities round about, and their kings, as Moses the
servant of God had commanded him.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Except the cities that were on hills
and high places, the rest Israel burned: only Asor that was very strong
he consumed with fire.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And the children of Israel divided
among themselves all the spoil of these cities and the cattle, killing
all the men.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> As the Lord had commanded Moses his
servant, so did Moses command Josue, and he accomplished all: he left
not one thing undone of all the commandments which the Lord had
commanded Moses.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> So Josue took all the country of the
hills, and of the south, and the land of Gosen, and the plains and the
west country, and the mountain of Israel, and the plains thereof:

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And part of the mountain that goeth up
to Seir as far as Baalgad, by the plain of Libanus under mount Hermon:
all their kings he took, smote and slew.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Josue made war a long time against
these kings.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> There was hot a city that delivered
itself to the children of Israel, except the Hevite, who dwelt in
Gabaon: for he took all by fight.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> For it was the sentence of the Lord,
that their hearts should be hardened, and they should fight against
Israel, and fall, and should not deserve any clemency, and should be
destroyed as the Lord had commanded Moses.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> At that time Josue came and cut off the
Enacims from the mountains, from Hebron, and Dabir, and Anab, and from
all the mountain of Juda and Israel, and destroyed their cities.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> He left not any of the stock of the
Enacims, in the land of the children of Israel: except the cities of
Gaza, and Geth, and Azotus, in which alone they were left.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> So Josue took all the land, as the Lord
spoke to Moses, and delivered it in possession to the children of
Israel, according to their divisions and tribes. And the land rested
from wars.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> These are the kings, whom the children of
Israel slew and possessed their land beyond the Jordan towards the
rising of the sun, from the torrent Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the
east country that looketh towards the wilderness.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Sehon king of the Amorrhites, who dwelt
in Hesebon, and had dominion from Aroer, which is seated upon the bank
of the torrent Arnon, and of the middle part in the valley, and of half
Galaad, as far as the torrent Jaboc, which is the border of the children
of Ammon.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> And from the wilderness, to the sea of
Ceneroth towards the east, and to the sea of the wilderness, which is
the most salt sea, on the east side by the way that leadeth to
Bethsimoth: and on the south side that lieth under Asedoth, Phasga.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> The border of Og the king of Basan, of
the remnant of the Raphaims who dwelt in Astaroth, and in Edrai, and had
dominion in mount Hermon, and in Salecha, and in all Basan, unto the
herders

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Of Gessuri and Machati, and of half
Galaad: the borders of Sehon the king of Hesebon.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Moses the servant of the Lord, and the
children of Israel slew them, and Moses delivered their land in
possession to the Rubenites, and Gadites, and the half tribe of
Manasses.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> These are the kings of the land, whom
Josue and the children of Israel slew beyond the Jordan on the west side
from Baalgad in the held of Libanus, unto the mount, part of which goeth
up into Seir: and Josue delivered it in possession to the tribes of
Israel, to every one their divisions,

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> As well in the mountains as in the plains
and the champaign countries. In Asedoth, and in the wilderness, and in
the south was the Hethite and the Amorrhite, the Chanaanite and the
Pherezite, the Hevite and the Jebusite.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> The king of Jericho one: the king of Hai,
which is on the side of Bethel, one:

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The king of Jerusalem one, the king of
Hebron one.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> The king of Jerimoth one, the king of
Lachis one,

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The king of Eglon one, the king of
Gazer one,

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> The king of Dabir one, the king of
Gader one,

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> The king of Herma one, the king of
Hered one,

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The king of Lebna one, the king of
Odullam one,

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> The king of Maceda one, the king of
Bethel one,

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> The king of Taphua one, the king of
Opher one,

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> The king of Aphec one, the king of
Saron one,

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The king of Madon one, the king of Asor
one,

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> The king of Semeron one, the king of
Achsaph one,

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> The king of Thenac one, the king of
Megeddo one,

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> The king of Cades one, the king of
Jachanan of Carmel one,

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> The king of Dor, and of the province of
Dor one, the king of the nations of Galgal one,

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The king of Thersa one: all the kings
thirty and one.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> Josue was old, and far advanced in years,
and the Lord said to him: Thou art grown old, and advanced in age, and
there is a very large country left, which is not yet divided by lot:

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> To wit, all Galilee, Philistia, and all
Gessuri.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> From the troubled river, that watereth
Egypt, unto the borders of Accaron northward: the land of Chanaan, which
is divided among the lords of the Philistines, the Gazites, the
Azotians, the Ascalonites, the Gethites, and the Accronites.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And on the south side are the Hevites,
all the land of Chanaan, and Maara of the Sidonians as far as Apheca,
and the borders of the Amorrhite,

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And his confines. The country also of
Libanus towards the east from Baalgad under mount Hermon to the entering
into Emath.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Of all that dwell in the mountains from
Libanus, to the waters of Maserephoth, and all the Sidonians. I am he
that will cut them off from before the face of the children of Israel.
So let their land come in as a part of the inheritance of Israel, as I
have commanded thee.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And now divide the land in possession to
the nine tribes, and to the half tribe of Manasses,

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> With whom Ruben and Gad have possessed
the land, which Moses the servant of the Lord delivered to them beyond
the river Jordan, on the east side.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> From Aroer, which is upon the bank of the
torrent Amen, and in the midst of the valley and all the plains of
Medaba, as far as Dibon:

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And all the cities of Sehon, king of
the Amorrhites, who reigned in Hesebon, unto the borders of the children
of Ammon.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And Galaad, and the borders of Gessuri
and Machati, and all mount Hermon, and all Basan as far as Salecha,

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> All the kingdom of Og in Basan, who
reigned in Astaroth and Edrai, he was of the remains of the Raphaims:
and Moses overthrew and destroyed them.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> And the children of Israel would not
destroy Gessuri and Machati: and they have dwelt in the midst of Israel,
until this present day.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But to the tribe of Levi he gave no
possession: but the sacrifices and victims of the Lord God of Israel,
are his inheritance, as he spoke to him.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> And Moses gave a possession to the
children of Ruben according to their kindreds.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> And their border was from Aroer, which
is on the bank of the torrent Arnon, and in the midst of the valley of
the same torrent: all the plain, that leadeth to Medaba,

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> And Hesebon, and all their villages,
which are in the plains. Dibon also, and Bamothbaal, and the town of
Baalmaon,

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> And Jassa, and Cidimoth, and Mephaath,

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> And Cariathaim, and Sabama, and
Sarathasar in the mountain of the valley.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Bethphogor and Asedoth, Phasga and
Bethiesimoth,

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> And all the cities of the plain, and
all the kingdoms of Sehon king of the Amorrhites, that reigned in
Hesebon, whom Moses slew with the princes of Madian: Hevi, and Recem,
and Sur and Hur, and Rebe, dukes of Sehon inhabitants of the land.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> Balaam also the son of Beer the
soothsayer, the children of Israel slew with the sword among the rest
that were slain.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> And the river Jordan was the herder of
the children of Ruben. This is the possession of the Rubenites, by their
kindreds, of cities and villages.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> And Moses gave to the tribe of Gad and
to his children by their kindreds a possession, of which this is the
division.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The border of Jaser, and all the cities
of Galaad, and half the land of the children of Ammon: as far as Aroer
which is over against Rabba:

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And from Hesebon unto Ramoth, Masphe
and Betonim: and from Manaim unto the borders of Dabir.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And in the valley Betharan and
Bethnemra, and Socoth, and Saphon the other part of the kingdom of Sehon
king of Hesebon: the limit of this also is the Jordan, as far as the
uttermost part of the sea of Cenereth beyond the Jordan on the east
side.

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> This is the possession of the children
of Gad by their families, their cities, and villages.

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> He gave also to the half tribe of
Manasses and his children possession according to their kindreds,

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> The beginning whereof is this: from
Manaim all Basan, and all the kingdoms of Og king of Basan, and all the
villages of Jair, which are in Basan, threescore towns.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> And half Galaad, and Astaroth, and
Edrai, cities of the kingdom of Og in Basan: to the children of Machir,
the son of Manasses, to one? half of the children of Machir according to
their kindreds.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> This possession Moses divided in the
plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan, over against Jericho on the east
side.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> But to the tribe of Levi he gave no
possession: because the Lord the God of Israel himself is their
possession, as he spoke to them.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> This is what the children of Israel
possessed in the land of Chanaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Josue
the son of Nun, and the princes of the families by the tribes of Israel
gave to them:

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> Dividing all by lot, as the Lord had
commanded by the hand of Moses, to the nine tribes, and the half tribe.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For to two tribes and a half Moses had
given possession beyond the Jordan: besides the Levites, who received no
land among their brethren:

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> But in their place succeeded the children
of Joseph divided into two tribes, of Manasses and Ephraim: neither did
the Levites receive other portion of land, but cities to dwell in, and
their suburbs to feed their beasts and flocks.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> As the Lord had commanded Moses, so did
the children of Israel, and they divided the land.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> Then the children of Juda came to Josue
in Galgal, and Caleb the son of Jephone the Cenezite spoke to him: Thou
knowest what the Lord spoke to Moses the man of God concerning me and
thee in Cadesbarne.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> I was forty Bears old when Moses the
servant of the Lord sent me m from Cadesbarne, to view the land, and I
brought him word again as to me seemed true.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> But my brethren, that had gone up with
me, discouraged the heart of the people: and I nevertheless followed the
Lord my God.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And Moses swore in that day, saying: The
land which thy foot hath trodden upon shall be thy possession, and thy
children's for ever, because thou hast followed the Lord my God.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The Lord therefore hath granted me
life, as he promised until this present day. It is forty and five years
since the Lord spoke this word to Moses, when Israel journeyed through
the wilderness: this day I am eighty-five years old,

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> As strong as I was at that time when I
was sent to view the land : the strength of that time continueth in me
until this day, as well to fight as to march.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Give me therefore this mountain, which
the Lord promised, in thy hearing also, wherein are the Enacims, and
cities great and strong: if so be the Lord will be with me, and I shall
be able to destroy them, as he promised me.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> And Josue blessed him, and gave him
Hebron in possession.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And from that time Hebron belonged to
Caleb the son of Jephone the Cenezite, until this present day: because
he followed the Lord the God of Israel.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> The name of Hebron before was called
Cariath-Arbe: Adam the greatest among the Enacims was laid there: and
the land rested from wars.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> Now the lot of the children of Juda by
their kindreds was this: From the frontier of Edom, to the desert of Sin
southward, and to the uttermost part of the south coast.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Its beginning was from the top of the
most salt sea, and from the bay thereof, that looketh to the south.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> And it goeth out towards the ascent of
the Scorpion, and passeth on to Sina: and ascendeth into Cadesbarne, and
reacheth into Esron, going up to Addar, and compassing Carcaa.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> And from thence passing along into
Asemona, and reaching the torrent of Egypt: and the bounds thereof shall
be the great sea, this shall be the limit of the south coast.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But on the east side the beginning shall
be the most salt sea even to the end of the Jordan: and towards the
north, from the bay of the sea unto the same river Jordan.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And the border goeth up into Beth-Hagla,
and passeth by the north into Beth-Araba: going up to the stone of Boen
the son of Ruben.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> And reaching as far as the borders of
Debara from the valley of Achor, and so northward looking towards
Galgal, which is opposite to the ascent of Adommin, on the south side of
the torrent: and the border passeth the waters that are called the
fountain of the sun: and the goings out thereof shall be at the fountain
Rogel.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> And it goeth up by the valley of the son
of Ennom on the side of the Jebusite towards the south, the same is
Jerusalem: and thence ascending to the top of the mountain, which is
over against Geennom to the west in the end of the valley of Raphaim,
northward.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And it passeth on from the top of the
mountain to the fountain of the water of Nephtoa: and reacheth to the
towns of mount Ephron: and it bendeth towards Baala, which is
Cariathiarim, that is to say, the city of the woods.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And it compasseth from Baala westward
unto mount Seir: and passeth by the side of mount Jarim to the north
into Cheslon: and goeth down into Bethsames, and passeth into Thamna.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And it reacheth northward to a part of
Accaron at the side: and bendeth to Sechrona, and passeth mount Baala:
and cometh into Jebneel, and is bounded westward with the great sea.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> These are the borders round about of
the children of Juda in their kindreds.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But to Caleb the son of Jephone he gave
a portion in the midst of the children of Juda, as the Lord had
commanded him: Cariath-Arbe the father of Enac. which is Hebron.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And Caleb destroyed out of it the three
sons of Ehac, Sesai and Ahiman. and Tholmai of the race of Enac.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And going up from thence he came to the
inhabitants of Dabir, which before was called Cariath-Sepher, that is to
say, the city of letters.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> And Caleb said: He that shall smite
Cariath-Sepher, and take it, I will give him Axa my daughter to wife.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> And Othoniel the son of Cenez, the
younger brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Axa his daughter to
wife.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> And as they were going together, she
was moved by her husband to ask a field of her father, and she sighed as
she sat on her ass. And Caleb said to her: What aileth thee?

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> But she answered: Give me a blessing:
thou hast given me a southern and dry land, give me also a land that is
watered. And Caleb gave her the upper and the nether watery ground.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> This is the possession of the tribe of
the children of Juda by their kindreds.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And the cities from the uttermost parts
of the children of Juda by the borders of Edom to the south, were
Cabseel and Eder and Jagur,

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And Cina and Dimona and Adada,

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> And Cades and Asor and Jethnam,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> Ziph and Telem and Baloth,

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> New Asor and Carioth, Hesron, which is
Asor.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Amam, Sama and Molada,

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> And Asergadda and Hassemon and
Bethphelet,

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> And Hasersual and Bersabee and
Baziothia,

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And Baala and Jim and Esem,

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And Eltholad and Cesil and Harma,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> And Siceleg and Medemena and Sensenna,

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> Lebaoth and Selim and Aen and Remmon:
all the cities twenty-nine, and their villages.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> But in the plains: Estaol and Sarea and
Asena,

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And Zanoe and Engannim and Taphua and
Enaim,

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And Jerimoth and Adullam, Socho and
Azeca,

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And Saraim and Adithaim and Gedera and
Gederothaim: fourteen cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> Sanan and Hadassa and Magdalgad,

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> Delean and Masepha and Jecthel,

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> Lachis and Bascath and Eglon,

<span id="an_15:40">15:40</span> Chebbon and Leheman and Cethlis,

<span id="an_15:41">15:41</span> And Gideroth and Bethdagon and Naama
and Maceda: sixteen cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_15:42">15:42</span> Labana and Ether and Asan,

<span id="an_15:43">15:43</span> Jephtha and Esna and Nesib,

<span id="an_15:44">15:44</span> And Ceila and Achzib and Maresa: nine
cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_15:45">15:45</span> Accaron with the towns and villages
thereof.

<span id="an_15:46">15:46</span> From Accaron even to the sea: all
places that lie towards Azotus and the villages thereof.

<span id="an_15:47">15:47</span> Azotus with its towns and villages.
Gaza with its towns and villages, even to the torrent of Egypt, and the
great sea that is the border thereof.

<span id="an_15:48">15:48</span> And in the mountain Samir and Jether
and Socoth,

<span id="an_15:49">15:49</span> And Danna and Cariath-senna, this is
Dabir :

<span id="an_15:50">15:50</span> Anab and Istemo and Anim,

<span id="an_15:51">15:51</span> Gosen and Olon and Gilo: eleven cities
and their villages.

<span id="an_15:52">15:52</span> Arab and Ruma and Esaan,

<span id="an_15:53">15:53</span> And Janum and Beththaphua and Apheca,

<span id="an_15:54">15:54</span> Athmatha and Cariath-Arbe, this is
Hebron and Sior: nine cities and their villages.

<span id="an_15:55">15:55</span> Maon and Carmel and Ziph and Jota,

<span id="an_15:56">15:56</span> Jezrael and Jucadam and Zanoe,

<span id="an_15:57">15:57</span> Accain, Gabaa and Thamna: ten cities
and their villages.

<span id="an_15:58">15:58</span> Halhul, and Bessur, and Gedor,

<span id="an_15:59">15:59</span> Mareth, and Bethanoth, and Eltecon: six
cities and their villages.

<span id="an_15:60">15:60</span> Cariathbaal, the same is Cariathiarim,
the city of woods, and Arebba: two cities and their villages.

<span id="an_15:61">15:61</span> In the desert Betharaba, Meddin and
Sachacha,

<span id="an_15:62">15:62</span> And Nebsan, and the city of salt, and
Engaddi: six cities and their villages.

<span id="an_15:63">15:63</span> But the children of Juda could not
destroy the Jebusite that dwelt in Jerusalem: and the Jebusite dwelt
with the children of Juda in Jerusalem until this present day.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> And the lot of the sons of Joseph fell
from the Jordan over against Jericho and the waters thereof, on the
east: the wilderness which goeth up from Jericho to the mountain of
Bethel:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> And goeth out from Bethel to Luza: and
passeth the border of Archi, to Ataroth,

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And goeth down westward, by the border of
Jephleti, unto the borders of Beth-horon the nether, and to Gazer :and
the countries of it are ended by the great sea:

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> And Manasses and Ephraim the children of
Joseph possessed it.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And the border of the children of Ephraim
was according to their kindreds: and their possession towards the east
was Ataroth-addar unto Beth-horon the upper.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> And the confines go out unto the sea: but
Machmethath looketh to the north, and it goeth round the borders
eastward into Thanath-selo: and passeth along on the east side to Janoe.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> And it goeth down from Janoe into Ataroth
and Naaratha: and it cometh to Jericho, and goeth out to the Jordan.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> From Taphua it passeth on towards the sea
into the valley of reeds, and the goings out thereof are at the most
salt sea. This is the possession of the tribe of the children of Ephraim
by their families.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> And there were cities with their villages
separated for the children of Ephraim in the midst of the possession of
the children of Manasses.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> And the children of Ephraim slew not
the Chanaanite, who dwelt in Gazer: and the Chanaanite dwelt in the
midst of Ephraim until this day, paying tribute.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> And this lot fell to the tribe of
Manasses (for he is the firstborn of Joseph) to Machir the firstborn of
Manasses the father of Galaad, who was a warlike man, and had for
possession Galaad and Basan.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And to the rest of the children of
Manasses according to their families: to the children of Abiezer, and to
the children of Helec, and to the children of Esriel, and to the
children of Sechem, and to the children of Hepher, and to the children
of Semida: these are the male children of Manasses the son of Joseph, by
their kindreds.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> But Salphaad the son of Hepher the son of
Galaad the son of Machir the son of Manasses had no sons, but only
daughters: whose names are these, Maala and Noa and Hegla and Melcha and
Thersa.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And they came in the presence of Eleazar
the priest and of Josue the son of Nun, and of the princes, saying: The
Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, that a possession should be given
us in the midst of our brethren. And he gave them according to the
commandment of the Lord a possession amongst the brethren of their
father.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And there fell ten portions to Manasses,
beside the land of Galaad and Basan beyond the Jordan.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> For the daughters of Manasses possessed
inheritance in the midst of his sons. And the land of Galaad fell to the
lot of the rest of the children of Manasses.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And the border of Manasses was from Aser,
Machmethath which looketh towards Sichem: and it goeth out on the right
hand by the inhabitants of the fountain of Taphua.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> For the lot of Manasses took in the land
of Taphua, which is on the borders of Manasses, and belongs to the
children of Ephraim.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And the border goeth down to the valley
of the reeds, to the south of the torrent of the cities of Ephraim,
which are in the midst of the cities of Manasses: the border of Manasses
is on the north side of the torrent, and the outgoings of it are at the
sea:

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> So that the possession of Ephraim is on
the south, and on the north that of Manasses, and the sea is the border
of both, and they are joined together in the tribe of Aser on the north,
and in the tribe of Issachar on the east.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> And the inheritance of Manasses in
Issachar and in Aser, was Bethsan and its villages, and Jeblaam with its
villages, and the inhabitants of Dor, with the towns thereof: the
inhabitants also of Endor with the villages thereof: and in like manner
the inhabitants of Thenac with the villages thereof: and the inhabitants
of Mageddo with their villages, and the third part of the city of
Nopheth.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> Neither could the children of Manasses
overthrow these cities, but the Chanaanite began to dwell in his land.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> But after that the children of Israel
were grown strong, they subdued the Chanaanites, and made them their
tributaries, and they did not kill them.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And the children of Joseph spoke to
Josue, and said: Why hast thou given me but one lot and one portion to
possess, whereas I am of so great a multitude, and the Lord hath blessed
me?

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And Josue said to them: If thou be a
great people, go up into the woodland, and cut down room for thyself in
the land of the Pherezite and the Raphaims: because the possession of
mount Ephraim is too narrow for thee.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> And the children of Joseph answered
him: We cannot go up to the mountains, for the Chanaanites that dwell in
the low lands, wherein are situate Bethsan with its towns, and Jezrael
in the midst of the valley, have chariots of iron

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And Josue said to the house of Joseph,
to Ephraim and Manasses: Thou art a great people, and of great strength,
thou shalt not have one lot only:

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> But thou shalt pass to the mountain,
and shalt cut down the wood, and make thyself room to dwell in: and
mayst proceed farther, when thou hast destroyed the Chanaanites, who as
thou sayest have iron chariots, and are very strong.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> And all the children of Israel assembled
together in Silo, and there they set up the tabernacle of the testimony,
and the land was subdued before them.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> But there remained seven tribes of the
children of Israel, which as yet had not received their possessions.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And Josue said to them: How long are you
indolent and slack, and go not in to possess the land which the Lord the
God of your fathers hath given you?

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Choose of every tribe three men, that I
may send them, and they may go and compass the land, and mark it out
according to the number of each multitude: and bring back to me what
they have marked out.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> Divide to yourselves the land into seven
parts: let Juda be in his bounds on the south side, and the house of
Joseph on the north.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> The land in the midst between these mark
ye out into seven parts; and you shall come hither to me, that I may
cast lots for you before the Lord your God.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> For the Levites have no part among you,
but the priesthood of the Lord is their inheritance. And Gad and Ruben,
and the half tribe of Manasses have already received their possessions
beyond the Jordan eastward: which Moses the servant of the Lord gave
them.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And when the men were risen up, to go to
mark out the land, Josue commanded them, saying: Go round the land and
mark it out, and return to me: that I may cast lots for you before the
Lord in Silo.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> So they went: and surveying it divided it
into seven parts, writing them down in a book. And they returned to
Josue, to the camp in Silo.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> And he cast lots before the Lord in
Silo, and divided the land to the children of Israel into seven parts.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> And first came up the lot of the
children of Benjamin by their families, to possess the land between the
children of Juda, and the children of Joseph.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> And their border northward was from the
Jordan: going along by the side of Jericho on the north side, and thence
going up westward to the mountains, and reaching to the wilderness of
Bethaven,

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And passing along southward by Luza,
the same is Bethel: and it goeth down into Ataroth-addar to the
mountain, that is on the south of the nether Beth-horon.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> And it bendeth thence going round
towards the sea, south of the mountain that looketh towards Beth-horon
to the southwest: and the outgoings thereof are into Cariathbaal, which
is called also Cariathiarim, a city of the children of Juda. This is
their coast towards the sea, westward.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> But on the south side the border goeth
out from part of Cariathiarim towards the sea, and cometh to the
fountain of the waters of Nephtoa.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And it goeth down to that part of the
mountain that looketh on the valley of the children of Ennom: and is
over against the north quarter in the furthermost part of the valley of
Raphaim, and it goeth down into Geennom (that is the valley of Ennom) by
the side of the Jebusite to the south: and cometh to the fountain of
Rogel,

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> Passing thence to the north, and going
out to Ensemes, that is to say, the fountain of the sue:

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> And it passeth along to the hills that
are over against the ascent of Adommim: and it goeth down to Abenboen,
that is, the stone of Been the son of Ruben: and it passeth on the north
side to the champaign countries; and goeth down into the plain,

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> And it passeth by Bethhagla northward:
and the outgoings thereof are towards the north of the most salt sea at
the south end of the Jordan:

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Which is the border of it on the east
side. This is the possession of the children of Benjamin by their
borders round about, and their families.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> And their cities were, Jericho and
Bethhagla and Vale-Casis,

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Betharaba and Samaraim and Bethel,

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> And Avim and Aphara and Ophera,

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> The town Emona and Ophni and Gabee:
twelve cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> Gabam and Rama and Beroth,

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> 26And Mesphe, and Caphara, and Amosa,

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And Recem, Jarephel and Tharela,

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> And Sela, Eleph and Jebus, which is
Jerusalem, Gabaath and Cariath: fourteen cities, and their villages.
This is the possession of the children of Benjamin by their families.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> And the second lot came forth for the
children of Simeon by their kindreds: and their inheritance was

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> In the midst of the possession of the
children of Juda: Bersabee and Sabee and Molada,

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And Hasersual, Bala and Asem,

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> And Eltholad, Bethul and Harma,

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> And Siceleg and Bethmarchaboth and
Hasersusa,

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> And Bethlebaoth and Sarohen: thirteen
cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> Ain and Remmon and Athor and Asan: four
cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> And all the villages round about these
cities to Baalath Beer Ramath to the south quarter. This is the
inheritance of the children of Simeon according to their kindreds,

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> In the possession and lot of the children
of Juda: because it was too great, and therefore the children of Simeon
had their possession in the midst of their inheritance.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> And the third lot fell to the children
of Zabulon by their kindreds: and the border of their possession was
unto Sarid.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> And it went up from the sea and from
Merala, and came to Debbaseth: as far as the torrent, which is over
against Jeconam.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> And it returneth from Sarid eastward to
the borders of Ceseleththabor: and it goeth out to Dabereth, and
ascendeth towards Japhie.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> And it passeth along from thence to the
east side of Gethhepher and Thacasin: and goeth out to Remmon, Amthar
and Noa.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> And it turneth about to the north of
Hanathon: and the outgoings thereof are the valley of Jephtahel,

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And Cateth and Naalol and Semeron and
Jedala and Bethlehem: twelve cities and their villages.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> This is the inheritance of the tribe of
the children of Zabulon by their kindreds, the cities and their
villages.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> The fourth lot came out to Issachar by
their kindreds.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> And his inheritance was Jezrael and
Casaloth and Sunem,

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> And Hapharaim and Seen and Anaharath,

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> And Rabboth and Cesion, Abes,

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> And Rameth and Engannim and Enhadda and
Bethpheses.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And the border thereof cometh to Thabor
and Sehesima and Bethsames: and the outgoings thereof shall be at the
Jordan: sixteen cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> This is the possession of the sons of
Issachar by their kindreds, the cities and their villages.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And the fifth lot fell to the tribe of
the children of Aser by their kindreds:

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And their border was Halcath and Chali
and Beten and Axaph,

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And Elmelech and Amaad and Messal: and
it reacheth to Carmel by the sea and Sihor and Labanath,

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> And it returneth towards the east to
Bethdagon: and passeth along to Zabulon and to the valley of Jephthael
towards the north to Bethemec and Nehiel. And it goeth out to the left
side of Cabul,

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And to Abaran and Rohob and Hamon and
Cana, as far as the great Sidon.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And it returneth to Horma to the strong
city of Tyre, and to Hosa: and the outgoings thereof shall be at the sea
from the portion of Achziba:

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And Amma and Aphec and Rohob:
twenty-two cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_19:31">19:31</span> This is the possession of the children
of Aser by their kindreds, and the cities and their villages.

<span id="an_19:32">19:32</span> The sixth lot came out to the sons of
Nephtali by their families:

<span id="an_19:33">19:33</span> And the border began from Heleph and
Elon to Saananim, and Adami, which is Neceb, and Jebnael even to Lecum:
and their outgoings unto the Jordan:

<span id="an_19:34">19:34</span> And the border returneth westward to
Azanotthabor, and goeth out from thence to Hucuca, and passeth along to
Zabulon southward, and to Aser westward, and to Juda upon the Jordan
towards the rising of the sun.

<span id="an_19:35">19:35</span> And the strong cities are Assedim, Ser,
and Emath, and Reccath and Cenereth,

<span id="an_19:36">19:36</span> And Edema and Arama, Asor,

<span id="an_19:37">19:37</span> And Cedes and Edri, Enhasor,

<span id="an_19:38">19:38</span> And Jeron and Magdalel, Herem, and
Bethanath and Bethsames: nineteen cities, and their villages.

<span id="an_19:39">19:39</span> This is the possession of the tribe of
the children of Nephtali by their kindreds, the cities and their
villages.

<span id="an_19:40">19:40</span> The seventh lot came out to the tribe
of the children of Dan by their families:

<span id="an_19:41">19:41</span> And the border of their possession was
Saraa and Esthaol, and Hirsemes, that is, the city of the sun.

<span id="an_19:42">19:42</span> Selebin and Aialon and Jethela,

<span id="an_19:43">19:43</span> Elon and Themna and Acron,

<span id="an_19:44">19:44</span> Elthece, Gebbethon and Balaath,

<span id="an_19:45">19:45</span> And Jud and Bane and Barach and
Gethremmon :

<span id="an_19:46">19:46</span> And Mejarcon and Arecon, with the
border that looketh towards Joppe,

<span id="an_19:47">19:47</span> And is terminated there. And the
children of Dan went up and fought against Lesem, and took it: and they
put it to the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt in it, calling the name
of it Lesem Dan, by the name of Dan their father.

<span id="an_19:48">19:48</span> This is the possession of the tribe of
the sons of Dan, by their kindreds, the cities and their villages.

<span id="an_19:49">19:49</span> And when he had made an end of dividing
the land by lot to each one by their tribes, the children of Israel gave
a possession to Josue the son of Nun in the midst of them,

<span id="an_19:50">19:50</span> According to the commandment of the
Lord, the city which he asked for, Thamnath Saraa, in mount Ephraim: and
he built up the city, and dwelt in it.

<span id="an_19:51">19:51</span> These are the possessions which Eleazar
the priest, and Josue the son of Nun, and the princes of the families,
and of the tribes of the children of Israel, distributed by lot in Silo,
before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle of the testimony, and they
divided the land.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> And the Lord spoke to Josue, saying:
Speak to the children of Israel and say to them:

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> Appoint cities of refuge, of which I
spoke to you by the hand of Moses:

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> That whosoever shall kill a person
unawares may flee to them: and may escape the wrath of the kinsman, who
is the avenger of blood:

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And when he shall flee to one of these
cities: he shall stand before the gate of the city, and shall speak to
the ancients of that city, such things as prove him innocent: and so
shall they receive him, and give him a place to dwell in.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And when the avenger of blood shall
pursue him, they shall not deliver him into his hands, because he slew
his neighbour unawares, and is not proved to have been his enemy two or
three days before.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> And he shall dwell in that city, till he
stand before judgment to give an account of his fact, and till the death
of the high priest, who shall be at that time: then shall the manslayer
return, and go into his own city and house from whence he fled.

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> And they appointed Cedes in Galilee of
mount Nephtali, and Sichem in mount Ephraim, and Cariath-Arbe, the same
is Hebron in the mountain of Juda.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And beyond the Jordan to the east of
Jericho, they appointed Bosor, which is upon the plain of the wilderness
of the tribe of Ruben, and Ramoth in Galaad of the tribe of Cad, and
Gaulon in Basan of the tribe of Manasses.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> These cities were appointed for all the
children of Israel, and for the strangers, that dwelt among them: that
whosoever had killed a person unawares might flee to them, and not die
by the hand of the kinsman, coveting to revenge the blood that was shed,
until he should stand before the people to lay open his cause.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> Then the princes of the families of Levi
came to Eleazar the priest, and to Josue the son of Nun, and to the
princes of the kindreds of all the tribes of the children of Israel:

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> And they spoke to them in Silo in the
land of Chanaan, and said: The Lord commanded by the hand of Moses, that
cities should be given us to dwell in, and their suburbs to feed our
cattle.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And the children of Israel gave out of
their possessions according to the commandment of the Lord, cities and
their suburbs.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> And the lot came out for the family of
Caath of the children of Aaron the priest out of the tribes of Juda, and
of Simeon, and of Benjamin, thirteen cities.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> And to the rest of the children of Caath,
that is, to the Levites, who remained, out of the tribes of Ephraim, and
of Dan, and the half tribe of Manasses, ten cities.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the lot came out to the children of
Gerson, that they should take of the tribes of Issachar and of Aser and
of Nephtali, and of the half tribe of Manasses in Basan, thirteen
cities.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And to the sons of Merari by their
kindreds, of the tribes of Ruben and or Cad and of Zabulon, twelve
cities.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And the children of Israel gave to the
Levites the cities and their suburbs, as the Lord commanded by the hand
of Moses, giving to every one by lot.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> Of the tribes of the children of Juda and
of Simeon Josue gave cities: whose names are these,

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> To the sons of Aaron, of the families
of Caath of the race of Levi (for the first lot came out for them)

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> The city of Arbe the father of Enac,
which is called Hebron, in the mountain of Juda, and the suburbs thereof
round about.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> But the fields and the villages thereof
he had given to Caleb the son of Jephone for his possession.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> He gave therefore to the children of
Aaron the priest, Hebron a city of refuge, and the suburbs thereof: and
Lobna with the suburbs thereof,

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And Jether and Estemo,

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And Holon, and Dabir,

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And Ain, and Jeta, and Bethsames, with
their suburbs : nine cities out of the two tribes, as hath been said.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And out of the tribe of the children of
Benjamin, Gabaon, and Gabae,

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And Anathoth and Almon, with their
suburbs: four cities.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> All the cities together of the children
of Aaron the priest, were thirteen, with their suburbs.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And to the rest of the families of the
children of Caath of the race of Levi was given this possession.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> Of the tribe of Ephraim, Sichem one of
the cities of refuge, with the suburbs thereof in mount Ephraim, and
Cater,

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And Cibsaim, and Beth-horon, with their
suburbs, four cities.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And of the tribe of Dan, Eltheco and
Gabathon,

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> And Aialon and Gethremmon, with their
suburbs, four cities.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> And of the half tribe of Manasses,
Thanac and Gethremmon, with their suburbs, two cities.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> All the cities were ten, with their
suburbs, which were given to the children of Caath, of the inferior
degree.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> To the children of Gerson also of the
race of Levi out of the half tribe of Manasses, Gaulon in Basan, one of
the cities of refuge, and Bosra, with their suburbs, two cities.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> And of the tribe of Issachar, Cesion,
and Dabereth,

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And Jaramoth, and Engannim, with their
suburbs, four cities.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And of the tribe of Aser, Masal and
Abdon,

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> 31And Helcath, and Rohob, with their
suburbs, four cities.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> Of the tribe also of Nephtali, Cedes in
Galilee, one of the cities of refuge: and Hammoth Dor, and Carthan, with
their suburbs, three cities.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> All the cities of the families of
Gerson, were thirteen, with their suburbs.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And to the children of Merari, Levites
of the inferior degree, by their families were given of the tribe of
Zabulon, Jecnam and Cartha,

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And Damna and Naalol, four cities with
their suburbs;

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Of the tribe of Ruben beyond the Jordan
over against Jericho, Bosor in the wilderness, one of the cities of
refuge, Miser and Jaser and Jethson and Mephaath, four cities with their
suburbs.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> Of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Galaad,
one of the cities of refuge, and Manaim and Hesebon and Jaser, four
cities with their suburbs.

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> All the cities of the children of
Merari by their families and kindreds, were twelve.

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> So all the cities of the Levites within
the possession of the children of Israel were forty-eight,

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> With their suburbs, each distributed by
the families.

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> And the Lord God gave to Israel all the
land that he had sworn to give to their fathers: and they possessed it
and dwelt in it.

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> And he gave them peace from all nations
round about: and none of their enemies durst stand against them, but
were brought under their dominion.

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> Not so much as one word, which he had
promised to perform unto them, was made void, but all came to pass.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> At the same time Josue called the
Rubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses,

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> And said to them: You have done all that
Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you: you have also obeyed me in
all things,

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> Neither have you left your brethren this
long time, until this present day, keeping the commandment of the Lord
your God.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Therefore as the Lord your God hath given
your brethren rest and peace, as he promised: return, and go to your
dwellings, and to the land of your possession, which Moses the servant
of the Lord gave you beyond the Jordan:

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Yet so that you observe attentively, and
in work fulfil the commandment and the law which Moses the servant of
the Lord commanded you: that you love the Lord your God, and walk in all
his ways, and keep all his commandments, and cleave to him, and serve
him with all your heart, and with all your soul.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And Josue blessed them, and sent them
away, and they returned to their dwellings.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> Now to half the tribe of Manasses, Moses
had given a possession in Basan: and therefore to the half that
remained, Josue gave a lot among the rest of their brethren beyond the
Jordan to the west. And when he sent them away to their dwellings and
had blessed them,

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He said to them : With much substance and
riches, you return to your settlements, with silver and gold, brass and
iron, and variety of raiment: divide the prey of your enemies with your
brethren.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> So the children of Ruben, and the
children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses returned, and parted
from the children of Israel in Silo, which is in Chanaan, to go into
Galaad the land of their possession, which they had obtained according
to the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And when they were come to the banks of
the Jordan, in the land of Chanaan, they built an altar immensely great
near the Jordan.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And when the children of Israel had
heard of it, and certain messengers had brought them an account that the
children of Ruben, and of Cad, and the half tribe of Manasses had built
an altar in the land of Chanaan, upon the banks of the Jordan, over
against the children of Israel:

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> They all assembled in Silo, to go up
and fight against them.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> And in the mean time they sent to them
into the land of Galaad, Phinees the son of Eleazar the priest,

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> And ten princes with him, one of every
tribe.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Who came to the children of Ruben, and
of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasses, into the land of Galaad, and
said to them:

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> Thus saith all the people of the Lord:
What meaneth this transgression? Why have you forsaken the Lord the God
of Israel, building a sacrilegious altar, and revolting from the worship
of him?

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Is it a small thing to you that you
sinned with Beelphegor, and the stain of that crime remaineth in us to
this day? and many of the people perished.

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> And you have forsaken the Lord to day,
and to morrow his wrath will rage against all Israel.

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> But if you think the land of your
possession to be unclean, pass over to the land wherein is the
tabernacle of the Lord, and dwell among us: only depart not from the
Lord, and from our society, by building an altar beside the altar of the
Lord our God.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Did not Achan the son of Zare
transgress the commandment of the Lord, and his wrath lay upon all the
people of Israel? And he was but one man, and would to God he alone had
perished in his wickedness.

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> And the children of Ruben, and of Gad,
and of the half tribe of Manasses answered the princes of the embassage
of Israel:

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> The Lord the most mighty God, the Lord
the most mighty God, he knoweth, and Israel also shall understand: If
with the design of transgression we have set up this altar, let him not
save us, but punish us immediately:

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> And if we did it with that mind, that
we might lay upon it holocausts, and sacrifice, and victims of peace
offerings, let him require and judge:

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> And not rather with this thought and
design, that we should say: To morrow your children will say to our
children: What have you to do with the Lord the God of Israel?

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> The Lord hath put the river Jordan for
a border between us and you, O ye children of Ruben, and ye children of
Gad: and therefore you have no part in the Lord. And by this occasion
you children shall turn away our children from the fear of the Lord. We
therefore thought, it best,

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> And said: Let us build us an altar, not
for holocausts, nor to offer victims,

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> But for a testimony between us and you,
and our posterity and yours, that we may serve the Lord, and that we may
have a right to offer both holocausts, and victims and sacrifices of
peace offerings: and that your children to morrow may not say to our
children: You have no part in the Lord.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> And if they will say so, they shall
answer them: Behold the altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, not
for holocausts, nor for sacrifice, but for a testimony between us and
you.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> God keep us from any such wickedness
that we should revolt from the Lord, and leave off following his steps,
by building an altar to offer holocausts, and sacrifices, and victims,
beside the altar of the Lord our God, which is erected before his
tabernacle.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> And when Phinees the priest, and the
princes of the embassage, who were with him, had heard this, they were
satisfied: and they admitted most willingly the words of the children of
Ruben, and Gad, and of the half tribe of Manasses.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And Phinees the priest the son of
Eleazar said to them: Now we know that the Lord is with us, because you
are not guilty of this revolt, and you have delivered the children of
Israel from the hand of the Lord.

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> And he returned with the princes from
the children of Ruben and Gad, out of the land of Galaad, into the land
of Chanaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them word again.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And the saying pleased all that heard
it. And the children of Israel praised God, and they no longer said that
they would go up against them, and fight, and destroy the land of their
possession.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> And the children of Ruben, and the
children of Cad called the altar which they had built, Our testimony,
that the Lord is God.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> And when a long time was passed, after
that the Lord had given peace to Israel, all the nations round about
being subdued, and Josue being now old, and far advanced in years:

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Josue called for all Israel, and for the
elders, and for the princes, and for the judges, and for the masters,
and said to them: I am old, and far advanced in years:

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> And you see all that the Lord your God
hath done to all the nations round about, how he himself hath fought for
you:

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> And now since he hath divided to you by
lot all the land, from the east of the Jordan unto the great sea, and
many nations yet remain:

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> The Lord your God will destroy them, and
take them away from before your face, and you shall possess the land as
he hath promised you.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Only take courage, and be careful to
observe all things that are written in the book of the law of Moses: and
turn not aside from them neither to the right hand nor to the left:

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Lest after that you are come in among the
Gentiles, who will remain among you, you should swear by the name of
their gods, and serve them, and adore them:

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But cleave ye unto the Lord your God: as
you have done until this day.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And then the Lord God will take away
before your eyes nations that are great and very strong, and no man
shall be able to resist you.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> One of you shall chase a thousand men
of the enemies: because the Lord your God himself will fight for you, as
he hath promised.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> 11This only take care of with all
diligence, that you love the Lord your God.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> But if you will embrace the errors of
these nations that dwell among you, and make marriages with them, and
join friendships:

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Know ye for a certainty that the Lord
your God will not destroy them be- fore your face, but they shall be a
pit and a snare in your way, and a stumblingblock at your side, and
stakes in your eyes, till he take you away and destroy you from off this
excellent land, which he hath given you.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Behold this day I am going into the way
of all the earth, and you shall know with all your mind that of all the
words which the Lord promised to perform for you, not one hath failed.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Therefore as he hath fulfilled in deed,
what he promised, and all things prosperous have come: so Will he bring
upon you all the evils he hath threatened, till he take you away and
destroy you from off this excellent land, which he hath given you,

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> When you shall have transgressed the
covenant of the Lord your God, which he hath made with you, and shall
have served strange gods, and adored them : then shall the indignation
of the Lord rise up quickly and speedily against you, and you shall be
taken away from this excellent land, which he hath delivered to you.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> And Josue gathered together all the
tribes of Israel in Sichem, and called for the ancients, and the
princes, and the judges, and the masters: and they stood in the sight of
the Lord:

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And he spoke thus to the people: Thus
saith the Lord the God of Israel: Your fathers dwelt of old on the other
side of the river, Thare the father of Abraham, and Nachor: and they
served strange gods.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And I took your father Abraham from the
borders of Mesopotamia: and brought him into the land of Chanaan: and I
multiplied his seed,

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And gave him Isaac: and to him again I
gave Jacob and Esau. And I gave to Esau mount Seir for his possession:
but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> And I sent Moses and Aaron, and I struck
Egypt with many signs and wonders.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And I brought you and your fathers out of
Egypt, and you came to the sea: and the Egyptians pursued your fathers
with chariots and horsemen, as far as the Red Sea.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> And the children of Israel cried to the
Lord: and he put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the
sea upon them, and covered them. Your eyes saw all that I did in Egypt,
and you dwelt in the wilderness a long time:

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> And I brought you into the land of the
Amorrhite, who dwelt beyond the Jordan. And when they fought against
you, I delivered them into your hands, and you possessed their land, and
slew them.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> And Balac son of Sephor king of Moab
arose and fought against Israel. And he sent and called for Balaam son
of Beor, to curse you:

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And I would not hear him, but on the
contrary I blessed you by him, and I delivered you out of his hand.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And you passed over the Jordan, and you
came to Jericho. And the men of that city fought against you, the
Amorrhite, and the Pherezite, and the Chanaanite, and the Hethite, and
the Gergesite, and the Hevite, and the Jebusite: and I delivered them
into your hands.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And I sent before you hornets: and I
drove them out from their places, the two kings of the Amorrhites, not
with thy sword nor with thy bow.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> And I gave you a land, in which you had
not laboured, and cities to dwell in which you built not, vineyards and
oliveyards, which you planted not.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve
him with a perfect and most sincere heart: and put away the gods which
your fathers served in Mesopotamia and in Egypt, and serve the Lord.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> But if it seem evil to you to serve the
Lord, you have your choice: choose this day that which pleaseth you,
whom you would rather serve, whether the gods which your fathers served
in Mesopotamia, or the gods of the Amorrhites, in whose land you dwell:
but as for me and my house we will serve the Lord.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> And the people answered, and said: God
forbid we should leave the Lord, and serve strange gods.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> The Lord our God he brought us and our
fathers out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: and did
very great signs in our sight, and preserved us in all the way by which
we journeyed, and among all the people through whom we passed.

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And he hath cast out all the nations,
the Amorrhite the inhabitant of the land into which we are come.
Therefore we will serve the Lord, for he is our God.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And Josue said to the people: You will
not be able to serve the Lord: for he is a holy God, and mighty and
jealous, and will not forgive your wickedness and sins.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> If you leave the Lord, and serve
strange gods, he will turn, and will afflict you, and will destroy you
after all the good he hath done you.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> And the people said to Josue: No, it
shall not be so as thou sayest, but we will serve the Lord.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And Josue said to the people: You are
witnesses, that you yourselves have chosen you the Lord to serve him.
And they answered: We are witnesses.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Now therefore, said he, put away
strange gods from among you, and incline your hearts to the Lord the God
of Israel.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> And the people said to Josue: We will
serve the Lord our God, and we will be obedient to his commandments.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Josue therefore on that day made a
covenant, and set before the people commandments and judgments in
Sichem.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> And he wrote all these things in the
volume of the law of the Lord: and he took a great stone, and set it
under the oak that was in the sanctuary of the Lord.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> And he said to all the people: Behold
this stone shall be a testimony unto you, that it hath heard all the
words of the Lord, which he hath spoken to you: lest perhaps hereafter
you will deny it, and lie to the Lord your God.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> And he sent the people away every one
to their own possession.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> And after these things Josue the son of
Nun the servant of the Lord died, being a hundred and ten years old:

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And they buried him in the border of
his possession in Thamnathsare, which is situate in mount Ephraim, on
the north side of mount Gaas.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> 31And Israel served the Lord all the
days of Josue, and of the ancients that lived a long time after Josue,
and that had known all the works of the Lord which he had done in
Israel.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> And the bones of Joseph which the
children of Israel had taken out of Egypt, they buried in Sichem, in
that part of the field which Jacob had bought of the sons of Hemor the
father of Sichem, for a hundred young ewes, and it was in the possession
of the sons of Joseph.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> Eleazar also the son of Aaron died: and
they buried him in Gabaath that belongeth to Phinees his son, which was
given him in mount Ephraim.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges](jdg.md)
