[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jer)  [Next](eze) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Lamentations

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Aleph. How doth the city sit solitary that
was full of people! how is the mistress of the Gentiles become as a
widow: the princes of provinces made tributary!

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Beth. Weeping she hath wept in the night,
and her tears are on her cheeks: there is none to comfort her among all
them that were dear to her: all her friends have despised her, and are
become her enemies.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Ghimel. Juda hath removed her dwelling
place because of her affliction, and the greatness of her bondage: she
hath dwelt among the nations, and she hath found no rest: all her
persecutors have taken her in the midst of straits.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Daleth. The ways of Sion mourn, because
there are none that come to the solemn feast: all her gates are broken
down: her priests sigh: her virgins are in affliction, and she is
oppressed with bitterness.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> He. Her adversaries are become her lords,
her enemies are enriched: because the Lord hath spoken against her for
the multitude of her iniquities: her children are led into captivity:
before the face of the oppressor.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Vau. And from the daughter of Sion all her
beauty is departed: her princes are become like rams that find no
pastures: and they are gone away without strength before the face of the
pursuer.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Zain. Jerusalem hath remembered the days of
her affliction, and prevarication of all her desirable things which she
had from the days of old, when her people fell in the enemy's hand, and
there was no helper: the enemies have seen her, and have mocked at her
sabbaths.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Heth. Jerusalem hath grievously sinned,
therefore is she become unstable: all that honoured her have despised
her, because they have seen her shame: but she sighed and turned
backward.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Teth. Her filthiness is on her feet, and
she hath not remembered her end: she is wonderfully cast down, not
having a comforter: behold, O Lord, my affliction, because the enemy is
lifted up.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Jod. The enemy hath put out his hand to
all her desirable things: for she hath seen the Gentiles enter into her
sanctuary, of whom thou gavest commandment that they should not enter
into thy church.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Caph. All her people sigh, they seek
bread: they have given all their precious things for food to relieve the
soul: see, O Lord, and consider, for I am become vile.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Lamed. O all ye that pass by the way,
attend, and see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow: for he hath
made a vintage of me, as the Lord spoke in the day of his fierce anger.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Mem. From above he hath sent fire into my
bones, and hath chastised me: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath
turned me back: he hath made me desolate, wasted with sorrow all the day
long.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Nun. The yoke of my iniquities hath
watched: they are folded together in his hand, and put upon my neck: my
strength is weakened: the Lord hath delivered me into a hand out of
which I am not able to rise.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Samech. The Lord hath taken away all my
mighty men out of the midst of me: he hath called against me the time,
to destroy my chosen men: the Lord hath trodden the winepress for the
virgin daughter of Juda.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Ain. Therefore do I weep, and my eyes run
down with water: because the comforter, the relief of my soul, is far
from me: my children are desolate because the enemy hath prevailed.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Phe. Sion hath spread forth her hands,
there is none to comfort her: the Lord hath commanded against Jacob, his
enemies are round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among
them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Sade. The Lord is just, for I have
provoked his mouth to wrath: hear, I pray you, all ye people, and see my
sorrow: my virgins, and my young men are gone into captivity.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Coph. I called for my friends, but they
deceived me: my priests and my ancients pined away in the city: while
they sought their food, to relieve their souls.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Res. Behold, O Lord, for I am in
distress, my bowels are troubled: my heart is turned within me, for I am
full of bitterness: abroad the sword destroyeth, and at home there is
death alike.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Sin. They have heard that I sigh, and
there is none to comfort me: all my enemies have heard of my evil, they
have rejoiced that thou hast done it: thou hast brought a day of
consolation, and they shall be like unto me.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Thau. Let all their evil be present
before thee: and make vintage of them, as thou hast made vintage of me
for all my iniquities: for my sighs are many, and my heart is sorrowful.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Aleph. How hath the Lord covered with
obscurity the daughter of Sion in his wrath! how hath he cast down from
heaven to the earth the glorious one of Israel, and hath not remembered
his footstool in the day of his anger!

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Beth. The Lord hath cast down headlong, and
hath not spared, all that was beautiful in Jacob: he hath destroyed in
his wrath the strong holds of the virgin of Juda, and brought them down
to the ground: he hath made the kingdom unclean, and the princes
thereof.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Ghimel. He hath broken in his fierce anger
all the horn of Israel: he hath drawn back his right hand from before
the enemy: and he hath kindled in Jacob as it were a flaming fire
devouring round about.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Daleth. He hath bent his bow as an enemy,
he hath fixed his right hand as an adversary: and he hath killed all
that was fair to behold in the tabernacle of the daughter of Sion, he
hath poured out his indignation like fire.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> He. The Lord is become as an enemy: he hath
cast down Israel headlong, he hath overthrown all the walls thereof: he
hath destroyed his strong holds, and hath multiplied in the daughter of
Juda the afflicted, both men and women.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Vau. And he hath destroyed his tent as a
garden, he hath thrown down his tabernacle: the Lord hath caused feasts
and sabbaths to be forgotten in Sion: and hath delivered up king and
priest to reproach, and to the indignation of his wrath.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Zain. The Lord hath cast off his altar, he
hath cursed his sanctuary: he hath delivered the walls of the towers
thereof into the hand of the enemy: they have made a noise in the house
of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn feast.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Heth. The Lord hath purposed to destroy the
wall of the daughter of Sion: he hath stretched out his line, and hath
not withdrawn his hand from destroying: and the bulwark hath mourned,
and the wall hath been destroyed together.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Teth. Her gates are sunk into the ground:
he hath destroyed, and broken her bars: her king and her princes are
among the Gentiles: the law is no more, and her prophets have found no
vision from the Lord.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Jod. The ancients of the daughter of Sion
sit upon the ground, they have held their peace: they have sprinkled
their heads with dust, they are girded with haircloth, the virgins of
Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Caph. My eyes have failed with weeping,
my bowels are troubled: my liver is poured out upon the earth, for the
destruction of the daughter of my people, when the children, and the
sucklings, fainted away in the streets of the city.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Lamed. They said to their mothers: Where
is corn and wine? when they fainted away as the wounded in the streets
of the city: when they breathed out their souls in the bosoms of their
mothers.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Mem. To what shall I compare thee? or to
what shall I liken thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? to what shall I equal
thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Sion? for great as
the sea is thy destruction: who shall heal thee?

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Nun. Thy prophets have seen false and
foolish things for thee: and they have not laid open thy iniquity, to
excite thee to penance: but they have seen for thee false revelations
and banishments.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Samech. All they that passed by the way
have clapped their hands at thee: they have hissed, and wagged their
heads at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying: Is this the city of perfect
beauty, the joy of all the earth?

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Phe. All thy enemies have opened their
mouth against thee: they have hissed, and gnashed with the teeth, and
have said: We will swallow her up: lo, this is the day which we looked
for: we have found it, we have seen it.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Ain. The Lord hath done that which he
purposed, he hath fulfilled his word, which he commanded in the days of
old: he hath destroyed, and hath not spared, and he hath caused the
enemy to rejoice over thee, and hath set up the horn of thy adversaries.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Sade. Their heart cried to the Lord upon
the walls of the daughter of Sion: Let tears run down like a torrent day
and night: give thyself no rest, and let not the apple of thy eye cease.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Coph. Arise, give praise in the night, in
the beginning of the watches: pour out thy heart like water before the
face of the Lord: lift up thy hands to him for the life of thy little
children, that have fainted for hunger at the top of all the streets.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Res. Behold, O Lord, and consider whom
thou hast thus dealt with: shall women then eat their own fruit, their
children of a span long? shall the priest and the prophet be slain in
the sanctuary of the Lord ?

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Sin. The child and the old man lie
without on the ground: my virgins and my young men are fallen by the
sword: thou hast slain them in the day of thy wrath: thou hast killed,
and shewn them no pity.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Thau. Thou hast called as to a festival,
those that should terrify me round about, and there was none in the day
of the wrath of the Lord that escaped and was left: those that I brought
up, and nourished, my enemy hath consumed them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Aleph. I am the man that see my poverty by
the rod of his indignation.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Aleph. He hath led me, and brought me into
darkness, and not into light.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Aleph. Only against me he hath turned, and
turned again his hand all the day.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Beth. My skin and my flesh he hath made
old, he hath broken my bones.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Beth. He hath built round about me, and he
hath compassed me with gall and labour.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Beth. He hath set me in dark places as
those that are dead for ever.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Ghimel. He hath built against me round
about, that I may not get out: he hath made my fetters heavy.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Ghimel. Yea, and when I cry, and entreat,
he hath shut out my prayer.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Ghimel. He hath shut up my ways with square
stones, he hath turned my paths upside down.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Daleth. He is become to me as a bear
lying in wait: as a lion in secret places.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Daleth. He hath turned aside my paths,
and hath broken me in pieces, he hath made me desolate.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Daleth. He hath bent his bow, and set me
as a mark for his arrows.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> He. He hath shot into my reins the
daughters of his quiver.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> He. I am made a derision to all my
people, their song all the day long.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> He. He hath filled me with bitterness, he
hath inebriated me with wormwood.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Vau. And he hath broken my teeth one by
one, he hath fed me with ashes.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Vau. And my soul is removed far off from
peace, I have forgotten good things.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> Vau. And I said: My end and my hope is
perished from the Lord.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Zain. Remember my poverty, and
transgression, the wormwood, and the gall.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Zain. I will be mindful and remember, and
my soul shall languish within me.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> Zain. These things I shall think over in
my heart, therefore will I hope.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Heth. The mercies of the Lord that we are
not consumed: because his commiserations have not failed.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Heth. They are new every morning, great
is thy faithfulness.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Heth. The Lord is my portion, said my
soul: therefore will I wait for him.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Teth. The Lord is good to them that hope
in him, to the soul that seeketh him.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Teth. It is good to wait with silence for
the salvation of God.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Teth. It is good for a man, when he hath
borne the yoke from his youth.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Jod. He shall sit solitary, and hold his
peace: because he hath taken it up upon himself.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Jod. He shall put his mouth in the dust,
if so be there may be hope.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Jod. He shall give his cheek to him that
striketh him, he shall be filled with reproaches.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Caph. For the Lord will not cast off for
ever.

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> Caph. For if he hath cast off, he will
also have mercy, according to the multitude of his mercies.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> Caph. For he hath not willingly
afflicted, nor cast off the children of men.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> Lamed. To crush under his feet all the
prisoners of the land,

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> Lamed. To turn aside the judgment of a
man before the face of the most High,

<span id="an_3:36">3:36</span> Lamed. To destroy a man wrongfully in his
judgment, the Lord hath not approved.

<span id="an_3:37">3:37</span> Mem. Who is he that hath commanded a
thing to be done, when the Lord commandeth it not?

<span id="an_3:38">3:38</span> Mem. Shall not both evil and good proceed
out of the mouth of the Highest?

<span id="an_3:39">3:39</span> Mem. Why hath a living man murmured, man
suffering for his sins?

<span id="an_3:40">3:40</span> Nun. Let us search our ways, and seek,
and return to the Lord.

<span id="an_3:41">3:41</span> Nun. Let us lift up our hearts with our
hands to the Lord in the heavens.

<span id="an_3:42">3:42</span> Nun. We have done wickedly, and provoked
thee to wrath: therefore thou art inexorable.

<span id="an_3:43">3:43</span> Samech. Thou hast covered in thy wrath,
and hast struck us: thou hast killed and hast not spared.

<span id="an_3:44">3:44</span> Samech. Thou hast set a cloud before
thee, that our prayer may not pass through.

<span id="an_3:45">3:45</span> Samech. Thou hast made me as an outcast,
and refuse in the midst of the people.

<span id="an_3:46">3:46</span> Phe. All our enemies have opened their
mouths against us.

<span id="an_3:47">3:47</span> Phe. Prophecy is become to us a fear, and
a snare, and destruction.

<span id="an_3:48">3:48</span> Phe. My eye hath run down with streams of
water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_3:49">3:49</span> Ain. My eye is afflicted, and hath not
been quiet, because there was no rest:

<span id="an_3:50">3:50</span> Ain. Till the Lord regarded and looked
down from the heavens.

<span id="an_3:51">3:51</span> Ain. My eye hath wasted my soul because
of all the daughters of my city.

<span id="an_3:52">3:52</span> Sade. My enemies have chased me and
caught me like a bird, without cause.

<span id="an_3:53">3:53</span> Sade. My life is fallen into the pit, and
they have laid a stone over me.

<span id="an_3:54">3:54</span> Sade. Waters have flowed over my head: I
said: I am cut off.

<span id="an_3:55">3:55</span> Coph. I have called upon thy name, O
Lord, from the lowest pit.

<span id="an_3:56">3:56</span> Coph. Thou hast heard my voice: turn not
away thy ear from my sighs, and cries.

<span id="an_3:57">3:57</span> Coph. Thou drewest near in the day, when
I called upon thee, thou saidst: Fear not.

<span id="an_3:58">3:58</span> Res. Thou hast judged, O Lord, the cause
of my soul, thou the Redeemer of my life.

<span id="an_3:59">3:59</span> Res. Thou hast seen, O Lord, their
iniquity against me: judge thou my judgment.

<span id="an_3:60">3:60</span> Res. Thou hast seen all their fury, and
all their thoughts against me.

<span id="an_3:61">3:61</span> Sin. Thou hast heard their reproach, O
Lord, all their imaginations against me.

<span id="an_3:62">3:62</span> Sin. The lips of them that rise up
against me: and their devices against me all the day.

<span id="an_3:63">3:63</span> Sin. Behold their sitting down, and their
rising up, I am their song.

<span id="an_3:64">3:64</span> Thau. Thou shalt render them a
recompense, O Lord, according to the works of their hands.

<span id="an_3:65">3:65</span> Thau. Thou shalt give them a buckler of
heart, thy labour.

<span id="an_3:66">3:66</span> Thau. Thou shalt persecute them in anger,
and shalt destroy them from under the heavens, O Lord.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Aleph. How is the gold become dim, the
finest colour is changed, the stones of the sanctuary are scattered in
the top of every street?

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Beth. The noble sons of Sion, and they that
were clothed with the best gold: how are they esteemed as earthen
vessels, the work of the potter's hands?

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Ghimel. Even the sea monsters have drawn
out the breast, they have given suck to their young: the daughter of my
people is cruel, like the ostrich in the desert.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Daleth. The tongue of the sucking child
hath stuck to the roof of his mouth for thirst: the little ones have
asked for bread, and there was none to break it unto them.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> He. They that were fed delicately have died
in the streets; they that were brought up in scarlet have embraced the
dung.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Vau. And the iniquity of the daughter of my
people is made greater than the sin of Sodom, which was overthrown in a
moment, and hands took nothing in her.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Zain. Her Nazarites were whiter than snow,
purer than milk, more ruddy than the old ivory, fairer than the
sapphire.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Heth. Their face is now made blacker than
coals, and they are not known in the streets: their skin hath stuck to
their bones, it is withered, and is become like wood.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Teth. It was better with them that were
slain by the sword, than with them that died with hunger: for these
pined away being consumed for want of the fruits of the earth.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Jod. The hands of the pitiful women have
sodden their own children: they were their meat in the destruction of
the daughter of my people.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Caph. The Lord hath accomplished his
wrath, he hath poured out his fierce anger: and he hath kindled a fire
in Sion, and it hath devoured the foundations thereof.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Lamed. The kings of the earth, and all
the inhabitants of the world would not have believed, that the adversary
and the enemy should enter in by the gates of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Mem. For the sins of her prophets, and
the iniquities of her priests, that have shed the blood of the just in
the midst of her.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Nun. They have wandered as blind men in
the streets, they were defiled with blood: and when they could not help
walking in it, they held up their skirts.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Samech. Depart you that are defiled, they
cried out to them: Depart, get ye hence, touch not: for they quarrelled,
and being removed, they said among the Gentiles: He will no more dwell
among them.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Phe. The face of the Lord hath divided
them, he will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the
priests, neither had they pity on the ancient.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Ain. While we were yet standing, our eyes
failed, expecting help for us in vain, when we looked attentively
towards a nation that was not able to save.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Sade. Our steps have slipped in the way
of our streets, our end draweth near: our days are fulfilled, for our
end is come.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Coph. Our persecutors were swifter than
the eagles of the air: they pursued us upon the mountains, they lay in
wait for us in the wilderness.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Res. The breath of our mouth, Christ the
Lord, is taken in our sins: to whom we said: Under thy shadow we shall
live among the Gentiles.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Sin. Rejoice, and be glad, O daughter of
Edom, that dwellest in the land of Hus: to thee also shall the cup come,
thou shalt be made drunk, and naked.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Thau. Thy iniquity is accomplished, O
daughter of Sion, he will no more carry thee away into captivity: he
visited thy iniquity, O daughter of Edom, he hath discovered thy sins.
The Prayer of Jeremias the Prophet.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us:
consider and behold our reproach.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Our inheritance is turned to aliens: our
houses to strangers.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> We are become orphans without a father: our
mothers are as widows.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> We have drunk our water for money: we have
bought our wood.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> We were dragged by the necks, we were weary
and no rest was given us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> We have given our hand to Egypt, and to the
Assyrians, that we might be satisfied with bread.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Our fathers have sinned, and are not: and
we have borne their iniquities.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Servants have ruled over us: there was none
to redeem us out of their hand.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> We fetched our bread at the peril of our
lives, because of the sword in the desert.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Our skin was burnt as an oven, by reason
of the violence of the famine.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> They oppressed the women in Sion, and the
virgins in the cities of Juda.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> The princes were hanged up by their hand:
they did not respect the persons of the ancient.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> They abused the young men indecently: and
the children fell under the wood.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> The ancients have ceased from the gates:
the young men from the choir of the singers.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> The joy of our heart is ceased, our
dancing is turned into mourning.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> The crown is fallen from our head woe to
us, because we have sinned.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Therefore is our heart sorrowful,
therefore are our eyes become dim,

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For mount Sion, because it is destroyed,
foxes have walked upon it.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> But thou, O Lord, shalt remain for ever,
thy throne from generation to generation.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Why wilt thou forget us for ever? why
wilt thou forsake us for a long time?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> Convert us, O Lord, to thee, and we shall
be converted: renew our days, as from the beginning.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But thou hast utterly rejected us, thou
art exceedingly angry against us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel](eze)
