[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mal)  [Next](mar) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Matthew

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> THE book of the generation of Jesus Christ,
the son of David, the son of Abraham:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Abraham begot Isaac. And Isaac begot Jacob.
And Jacob begot Judas and his brethren.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And Judas begot Phares and Zara of Thamar.
And Phares begot Esron. And Esron begot Aram.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And Aram begot Aminadab. And Aminadab begot
Naasson. And Naasson begot Salmon.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And Salmon begot Booz of Rahab. And Booz
begot Obed of Ruth. And Obed begot Jesse.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And Jesse begot David the king. And David
the king begot Solomon, of her that had been the wife of Urias.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And Solomon begot Roboam. And Roboam begot
Abia. And Abia begot Asa.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> And Asa begot Josaphat. And Josaphat begot
Joram. And Joram begot Ozias.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And Ozias begot Joatham. And Joatham begot
Achaz. And Achaz begot Ezechias.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And Ezechias begot Manasses. And Manesses
begot Amon. And Amon begot Josias.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And Josias begot Jechonias and his
brethren in the transmigration of Babylon.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> And after the transmigration of Babylon,
Jechonias begot Salathiel. And Salathiel begot Zorobabel.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And Zorobabel begot Abiud. And Abiud
begot Eliacim. And Eliacim begot Azor.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And Azor begot Sadoc. And Sadoc begot
Achim. And Achim begot Eliud.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And Eliud begot Eleazar. And Eleazar
begot Mathan. And Mathan begot Jacob.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And Jacob begot Joseph the husband of
Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> So all the generations, from Abraham to
David, are fourteen generations. And from David to the transmigration of
Babylon, are fourteen generations: and from the transmigration of
Babylon to Christ are fourteen generations.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Now the generation of Christ was in this
wise. When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came
together, she was found with child, of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Whereupon Joseph her husband, being a
just man, and not willing publicly to expose her, was minded to put her
away privately.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But while he thought on these things,
behold the angel of the Lord appeared to him in his sleep, saying:
Joseph, son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that
which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And she shall bring forth a son: and thou
shalt call his name JESUS. For he shall save his people from their sins.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> Now all this was done that it might be
fulfilled which the Lord spoke by the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Behold a virgin shall be with child, and
bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being
interpreted is, God with us.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> And Joseph rising up from sleep, did as
the angel of the Lord had commanded him, and took unto him his wife.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And he knew her not till she brought
forth her firstborn son: and he called his name JESUS.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> WHEN Jesus therefore was born in Bethlehem
of Juda, in the days of king Herod, behold, there came wise men from the
east to Jerusalem.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> Saying, Where is he that is born king of
the Jews? For we have seen his star in the east, and are come to adore
him.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And king Herod hearing this, was troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And assembling together all the chief
priests and the scribes of the people, he inquired of them where Christ
should be born.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But they said to him: In Bethlehem of Juda.
For so it is written by the prophet:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And thou Bethlehem the land of Juda art not
the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come forth
the captain that shall rule my people Israel.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Then Herod, privately calling the wise men,
learned diligently of them the time of the star which appeared to them;

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And sending them into Bethlehem, said: Go
and diligently inquire after the child, and when you have found him,
bring me word again, that I also may come to adore him.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Who having heard the king, went their way;
and behold the star which they had seen in the east, went before them,
until it came and stood over where the child was.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And seeing the star they rejoiced with
exceeding great joy.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And entering into the house, they found
the child with Mary his mother, and falling down they adored him; and
opening their treasures, they offered him gifts; gold, frankincense, and
myrrh.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> And having received an answer in sleep
that they should not return to Herod, they went back another way into
their country.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And after they were departed, behold an
angel of the Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph, saying: Arise, and take
the child and his mother, and fly into Egypt: and be there until I shall
tell thee. For it will come to pass that Herod will seek the child to
destroy him.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who arose, and took the child and his
mother by night, and retired into Egypt: and he was there until the
death of Herod:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> That it might be fulfilled which the Lord
spoke by the prophet, saying: Out of Egypt have I called my son.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Then Herod perceiving that he was deluded
by the wise men, was exceeding angry; and sending killed all the men
children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the borders thereof, from
two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently
inquired of the wise men.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Then was fulfilled that which was spoken
by Jeremias the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> A voice in Rama was heard, lamentation
and great mourning; Rachel bewailing her children, and would not be
comforted, because they are not.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But when Herod was dead, behold an angel
of the Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph in Egypt,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Saying: Arise, and take the child and his
mother, and go into the land of Israel. For they are dead that sought
the life of the child.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Who arose, and took the child and his
mother, and came into the land of Israel.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But hearing that Archelaus reigned in
Judea in the room of Herod his father, he was afraid to go thither: and
being warned in sleep retired into the quarters of Galilee.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And coming he dwelt in a city called
Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was said by prophets: That he
shall be called a Nazarene.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> AND in those days cometh John the Baptist
preaching in the desert of Judea.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> And saying: Do penance: for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For this is he that was spoken of by Isaias
the prophet, saying: A voice of one crying in the desert, Prepare ye the
way of the Lord, make straight his paths.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And the same John had his garment of
camels' hair, and a leathern girdle about his loins: and his meat was
locusts and wild honey.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Then went out to him Jerusalem and all
Judea, and all the country about Jordan:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And were baptized by him in the Jordan,
confessing their sins.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And seeing many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them: Ye brood of vipers,
who hath shewed you to flee from the wrath to come?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Bring forth therefore fruit worthy of
penance.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And think not to say within yourselves, We
have Abraham for our father. For I tell you that God is able of these
stones to raise up children to Abraham.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> For now the axe is laid to the root of
the trees. Every tree therefore that doth not yield good fruit, shall be
cut down, and cast into the fire.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> I indeed baptize you in the water unto
penance, but he that shall come after me, is mightier than I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you in the Holy Ghost
and fire.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Whose fan is in his hand, and he will
thoroughly cleanse his floor and gather his wheat into the barn; but the
chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to the
Jordan, unto John, to be baptized by him.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But John stayed him, saying: I ought to
be baptized by thee, and comest thou to me?

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And Jesus answering, said to him: Suffer
it to be so now. For so it becometh us to fulfill all justice. Then he
suffered him.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And Jesus being baptized, forthwith came
out of the water: and lo, the heavens were opened to him: and he saw the
Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming upon him.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And behold a voice from heaven, saying:
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> THEN Jesus was led by the spirit into the
desert, to be tempted by the devil.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And when he had fasted forty days and forty
nights, afterwards he was hungry.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And the tempter coming said to him: If thou
be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Who answered and said: It is written, Not
in bread alone doth man live, but in every word that proceedeth from the
mouth of God.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Then the devil took him up into the holy
city, and set him upon the pinnacle of the temple,

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And said to him: If thou be the Son of God,
cast thyself down, for it is written: That he hath given his angels
charge over thee, and in their hands shall they bear thee up, lest
perhaps thou dash thy foot against a stone.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Jesus said to him: It is written again:
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Again the devil took him up into a very
high mountain, and shewed him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them,

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And said to him: All these will I give
thee, if falling down thou wilt adore me.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Then Jesus saith to him: Begone, Satan:
for it is written, The Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and him only shalt
thou serve.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Then the devil left him; and behold
angels came and ministered to him.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And when Jesus had heard that John was
delivered up, he retired into Galilee:

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> And leaving the city Nazareth, he came
and dwelt in Capharnaum on the sea coast, in the borders of Zabulon and
Nephthalim;

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> That it might be fulfilled which was said
by Isaias the prophet:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Land of Zabulon and land of Nephthalim,
the way of the sea beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles:

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> The people that sat in darkness, hath
seen great light: and to them that sat in the region of the shadow of
death, light is sprung up.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> From that time Jesus began to preach, and
to say: Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee,
saw two brethren, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother,
casting a net into the sea (for they were fishers).

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And he saith to them: Come ye after me,
and I will make you to be fishers of men.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> And they immediately leaving their nets,
followed him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> And going on from thence, he saw other
two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship
with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: and he called them.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And they forthwith left their nets and
father, and followed him.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> And Jesus went about all Galilee,
teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom:
and healing all manner of sickness and every infirmity, among the
people.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> And his fame went throughout all Syria,
and they presented to him all sick people that were taken with divers
diseases and torments, and such as were possessed by devils, and
lunatics, and those that had palsy, and he cured them:

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> And much people followed him from
Galilee, and from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and
from beyond the Jordan.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> AND seeing the multitudes, he went up into
a mountain, and when he was set down, his disciples came unto him.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> And opening his mouth, he taught them,
saying:

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> Blessed are the meek: for they shall
possess the land.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall
be comforted.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after justice: for they shall have their fill.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Blessed are the merciful: for they shall
obtain mercy.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Blessed are the clean of heart: for they
shall see God.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Blesses are the peacemakers: for they shall
be called children of God.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Blessed are they that suffer persecution
for justice' sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> Blessed are ye when they shall revile
you, and persecute you, and speak all that is evil against you, untruly,
for my sake:

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Be glad and rejoice, for your reward is
very great in heaven. For so they persecuted the prophets that were
before you.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> You are the salt of the earth. But if the
salt lose its savour, wherewith shall it be salted? It is good for
nothing any more but to be cast out, and to be trodden on by men.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> You are the light of the world. A city
seated on a mountain cannot be hid.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Neither do men light a candle and put it
under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it may shine to all that
are in the house.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> So let your light shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Do not think that I am come to destroy
the law, or the prophets. I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For amen I say unto you, till heaven and
earth pass, one jot, or one tittle shall not pass of the law, till all
be fulfilled.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> He therefore that shall break one of
these least commandments, and shall so teach men, shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven. But he that shall do and teach, he shall
be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> For I tell you, that unless your justice
abound more than that of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> You have heard that it was said to them
of old: Thou shalt not kill. And whosoever shall kill shall be in danger
of the judgment.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> But I say to you, that whosoever is angry
with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment. And whosoever
shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council. And
whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> If therefore thou offer thy gift at the
altar, and there thou remember that thy brother hath any thing against
thee;

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Leave there thy offering before the
altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother: and then coming
thou shalt offer thy gift.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> Be at agreement with thy adversary
betimes, whilst thou art in the way with him: lest perhaps the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer,
and thou be cast into prison.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> Amen I say to thee, thou shalt not go out
from thence till thou repay the last farthing.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> You have heard that it was said to them
of old: Thou shalt not commit adultery.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> But I say to you, that whosoever shall
look on a woman to lust after her, hath already committed adultery with
her in his heart.

<span id="an_5:29">5:29</span> And if thy right eye scandalize thee,
pluck it out and cast it from thee. For it is expedient for thee that
one of thy members should perish, rather than that thy whole body be
cast into hell.

<span id="an_5:30">5:30</span> And if thy right hand scandalize thee,
cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is expedient for thee that one
of thy members should perish, rather than that thy whole body be cast
into hell.

<span id="an_5:31">5:31</span> And it hath been said, Whoseoever shall
put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce.

<span id="an_5:32">5:32</span> But I say to you, that whosoever shall
put away his wife, excepting for the cause of fornication, maketh her to
commit adultery: and he that shall marry her that is put away,
committeth adultery.

<span id="an_5:33">5:33</span> Again you have heard that it was said to
them of old, Thou shalt not forswear thyself: but thou shalt perform thy
oaths to the Lord.

<span id="an_5:34">5:34</span> But I say to you not to swear at all,
neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God:

<span id="an_5:35">5:35</span> Nor by the earth, for it is his
footstool: nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great king:

<span id="an_5:36">5:36</span> Neither shalt thou swear by thy head,
because thou canst not make one hair white or black.

<span id="an_5:37">5:37</span> But let your speech be yea, yea: no, no:
and that which is over and above these, is of evil.

<span id="an_5:38">5:38</span> You have heard that it hath been said, An
eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.

<span id="an_5:39">5:39</span> But I say to you not to resist evil: but
if one strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him also the other:

<span id="an_5:40">5:40</span> And if a man will contend with thee in
judgment, and take away thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto him.

<span id="an_5:41">5:41</span> And whosoever will force thee one mile,
go with him other two,

<span id="an_5:42">5:42</span> Give to him that asketh of thee and from
him that would borrow of thee turn not away.

<span id="an_5:43">5:43</span> You have heard that it hath been said,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thy enemy.

<span id="an_5:44">5:44</span> But I say to you, Love your enemies: do
good to them that hate you: and pray for them that persecute and
calumniate you:

<span id="an_5:45">5:45</span> That you may be the children of your
Father who is in heaven, who maketh his sun to rise upon the good, and
bad, and raineth upon the just and the unjust.

<span id="an_5:46">5:46</span> For if you love them that love you, what
reward shall you have? do not even the publicans this?

<span id="an_5:47">5:47</span> And if you salute your brethren only,
what do you more? do not also the heathens this?

<span id="an_5:48">5:48</span> Be you therefore perfect, as also your
heavenly Father is perfect.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> TAKE heed that you do not your justice
before men, to be seen by them: otherwise you shall not have a reward of
your Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Therefore when thou dost an almsdeed, sound
not a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in
the streets, that they may be honoured by men. Amen I say to you, they
have received their reward.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> But when thou dost alms, let not thy left
hand know what thy right hand doth.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> That thy alms may be in secret, and thy
Father who seeth in secret will repay thee.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> And when ye pray, you shall not be as the
hypocrites, that love to stand and pray in the synagogues and corners of
the streets, that they may be seen by men: Amen I say to you, they have
received their reward.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But thou when thou shalt pray, enter into
thy chamber, and having shut the door, pray to thy Father in secret: and
thy Father who seeth in secret will repay thee.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> And when you are praying, speak not much,
as the heathens. For they think that in their much speaking they may be
heard.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Be not you therefore like to them, for your
Father knoweth what is needful for you, before you ask him.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Thus therefore shall you pray: Our Father
who art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on
earth as it is in heaven.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Give us this day our supersubstantial
bread.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> And forgive us our debts, as we also
forgive our debtors.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And lead us not into temptation. But
deliver us from evil. Amen.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For if you will forgive men their
offences, your heavenly Father will forgive you also your offences.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> But if you will not forgive men, neither
will your Father forgive you your offences.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> And when you fast, be not as the
hypocrites, sad. For they disfigure their faces, that they may appear
unto men to fast. Amen I say to you, they have received their reward.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But thou, when thou fastest anoint thy
head, and wash thy face;

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> That thou appear not to men to fast, but
to thy Father who is in secret: and thy Father who seeth in secret, will
repay thee.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> Lay not up to yourselves treasures on
earth: where the rust, and moth consume, and where thieves break through
and steal.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But lay up to yourselves treasures in
heaven: where neither the rust nor moth doth consume, and where thieves
do not break through, nor steal.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> For where thy treasure is, there is thy
heart also.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> The light of thy body is thy eye. If thy
eye be single, thy whole body shall be lightsome.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> But if thy eye be evil thy whole body
shall be darksome. If then the light that is in thee, be darkness: the
darkness itself how great shall it be!

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> No man can serve two masters. For either
he will hate the one, and love the other: or he will sustain the one,
and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Therefore I say to you, be not solicitous
for your life, what you shall eat, nor for your body, what you shall put
on. Is not the life more than the meat: and the body more than the
raiment?

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> Behold the birds of the air, for they
neither sow, nor do they reap, nor gather into barns: and your heavenly
Father feedeth them. Are not you of much more value than they?

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> And which of you by taking thought, can
add to his stature by one cubit?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> And for raiment why are you solicitous?
Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they labour not,
neither do they spin.

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> But I say to you, that not even Solomon
in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> And if the grass of the field, which is
to day, and to morrow is cast into the oven, God doth so clothe: how
much more you, O ye of little faith?

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> Be not solicitous therefore, saying, What
shall we eat: or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed?

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> For after all these things do the
heathens seek. For your Father knoweth that you have need of all these
things.

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> Seek ye therefore first the kingdom of
God, and his justice, and all these things shall be added unto you.

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Be not therefore solicitous for to
morrow; for the morrow will be solicitous for itself. Sufficient for the
day is the evil thereof.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> JUDGE not, that you may not be judged,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For with what judgment you judge, you shall
be judged: and with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you
again.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Any why seest thou the mote that is in thy
brother's eye; and seest not the beam that is in thy own eye?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Or how sayest thou to thy brother: Let me
cast the mote out of thy eye; and behold a beam is in thy own eye?

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam in
thy own eye, and then shalt thou see to cast out the mote out of thy
brother's eye.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> Give not that which is holy to dogs;
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest perhaps they trample them
under their feet, and turning upon you, they tear you.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and
you shall find: knock, and it shall be opened to you.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> For every one that asketh, receiveth: and
he that seeketh, findeth: and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Or what man is there among you, of whom if
his son shall ask bread, will he reach him a stone?

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Or if he shall ask him a fish, will he
reach him a serpent?

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> If you then being evil, know how to give
good gifts to your children: how much more will your Father who is in
heaven, give good things to them that ask him?

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> All things therefore whatsoever you would
that men should do to you, do you also to them. For this is the law and
the prophets.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Enter ye in at the narrow gate: for wide
is the gate, and broad is the way that leadeth to destruction, and many
there are who go in thereat.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> How narrow is the gate, and strait is the
way that leadeth to life: and few there are that find it!

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Beware of false prophets, who come to you
in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> By their fruits you shall know them. Do
men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Even so every good tree bringeth forth
good fruit, and the evil tree bringeth forth evil fruit.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit, neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> Every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit, shall be cut down, and shall be cast into the fire.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Wherefore by their fruits you shall know
them.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> Not every one that saith to me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that doth the will
of my Father who is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Many will say to me in that day: Lord,
Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name, and cast out devils in thy
name, and done many miracles in thy name?

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> And then will I profess unto them, I
never knew you: depart from me, you that work iniquity.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Every one therefore that heareth these my
words, and doth them, shall be likened to a wise man that built his
house upon a rock,

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> And the rain fell, and the floods came,
and the winds blew, and they beat upon that house, and it fell not, for
it was founded on a rock.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> And every one that heareth these my
words, and doth them not, shall be like a foolish man that built his
house upon the sand,

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> And the rain fell, and the floods came,
and the winds blew, and they beat upon that house, and it fell, and
great was the fall thereof.

<span id="an_7:28">7:28</span> And it came to pass when Jesus had fully
ended these words, the people were in admiration at his doctrine.

<span id="an_7:29">7:29</span> For he was teaching them as one having
power, and not as the scribes and Pharisees.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> AND when he was come down from the
mountain, great multitudes followed him:

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And behold a leper came and adored him,
saying: Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> And Jesus stretching forth his hand,
touched him, saying: I will, be thou made clean. And forthwith his
leprosy was cleansed.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> And Jesus saith to him: See thou tell no
man: but go, shew thyself to the priest, and offer the gift which Moses
commanded for a testimony unto them.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> And when he had entered into Capharnaum,
there came to him a centurion, beseeching him,

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> And saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home
sick of the palsy, and is grieviously tormented.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And Jesus saith to him: I will come and
heal him.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And the centurion making answer, said:
Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldst enter under my roof: but only
say the word, and my servant shall be healed.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> For I also am a man subject to authority,
having under me soldiers; and I say to this, Go, and he goeth, and to
another, Come, and he cometh, and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth
it.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And Jesus hearing this, marvelled; and
said to them that followed him: Amen I say to you, I have not found so
great faith in Israel.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And I say to you that many shall come
from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven:

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> But the children of the kingdom shall be
cast out into the exterior darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And Jesus said to the centurion: Go, and
as thou hast believed, so be it done to thee. And the servant was healed
at the same hour.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> And when Jesus was come into Peter's
house, he saw his wife's mother lying, and sick of a fever:

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> And he touched her hand, and the fever
left her, and she arose and ministered to them.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And when evening was come, they brought
to him many that were possessed with devils: and he cast out the spirits
with his word: and all that were sick he healed:

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> That it might be fulfilled, which was
spoken by the prophet Isaias, saying: He took our infirmities, and bore
our diseases.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> And Jesus seeing great multitudes about
him, gave orders to pass over the water.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And a certain scribe came and said to
him: Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou shalt go.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And Jesus saith to him: The foxes have
holes, and the birds of the air nests: but the son of man hath not where
to lay his head.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And another of his disciples said to him:
Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> But Jesus said to him: Follow me, and let
the dead bury their dead.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And when he entered into the boat, his
disciples followed him:

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And behold a great tempest arose in the
sea, so that the boat was covered with waves, but he was asleep.

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> And they came to him, and awaked him,
saying: Lord, save us, we perish.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> And Jesus saith to them: Why are you
fearful, O ye of little faith? Then rising up he commanded the winds,
and the sea, and there came a great calm.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> But the men wondered, saying: What manner
of man is this, for the winds and the sea obey him?

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And when he was come on the other side of
the water, into the country of the Gerasens, there met him two that were
possessed with devils, coming out of the sepulchres, exceeding fierce,
so that none could pass by that way.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> And behold they cried out, saying: What
have we to do with thee, Jesus Son of God? art thou come hither to
torment us before the time?

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And there was, not far from them, an herd
of many swine feeding.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> And the devils besought him, saying: If
thou cast us out hence, send us into the herd of swine.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> And he said to them: Go. But they going
out went into the swine, and behold the whole herd ran violently down a
steep place into the sea: and they perished in the waters.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> And they that kept them fled: and coming
into the city, told every thing, and concerning them that had been
possessed by the devils.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> And behold the whole city went out to
meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they besought him that he would
depart from their coasts.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> AND entering into a boat, he passed over
the water and came into his own city.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> And behold they brought to him one sick of
the palsy lying in a bed. And Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the man
sick of the palsy: Be of good heart, son, thy sins are forgiven thee.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> And behold some of the scribes said within
themselves: He blasphemeth.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> And Jesus seeing their thoughts, said: Why
do you think evil in your hearts?

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Whether is easier, to say, Thy sins are
forgiven thee: or to say, Arise, and walk?

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> But that you may know that the Son of man
hath power on earth to forgive sins, (then said he to the man sick of
palsy,) Arise, take up thy bed, and go into thy house.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he arose, and went into his house.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And the multitude seeing it, feared, and
glorified God that gave such power to men.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And when Jesus passed on from hence, he saw
a man sitting in the custom house, named Matthew; and he saith to him:
Follow me. And he rose up and followed him.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And it came to pass as he was sitting at
meat in the house, behold many publicans and sinners came, and sat down
with Jesus and his disciples.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And the Pharisees seeing it, said to his
disciples: Why doth your master eat with publicans and sinners?

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> But Jesus hearing it, said: They that are
in health need not a physician, but they that are ill.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> Go then and learn what this meaneth, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice. For I am not come to call the just,
but sinners.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Then came to him the disciples of John,
saying: Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples do not
fast?

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> And Jesus said to them: Can the children
of the bridegroom mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the
days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and
then they shall fast.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> And nobody putteth a piece of raw cloth
unto an old garment. For it taketh away the fullness thereof from the
garment, and there is made a greater rent.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Neither do they put new wine into old
bottles. Otherwise the bottles break, and the wine runneth out, and the
bottles perish. But new wine they put into new bottles: and both are
preserved.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> As he was speaking these things unto
them, behold a certain ruler came up, and adored him, saying: Lord, my
daughter is even now dead; but come, lay thy hand upon her, and she
shall live.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> And Jesus rising up followed him, with
his disciples.

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> And behold a woman who was troubled with
an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of
his garment.

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> For she said within herself: If I shall
touch only his garment, I shall be healed.

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> But Jesus turning and seeing her, said:
Be of good heart, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. And the
woman was made whole from that hour.

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> And when Jesus was come into the house of
the ruler, and saw the minstrels and the multitude making a rout,

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> He said: Give place, for the girl is not
dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorn.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> And when the multitude was put forth, he
went in, and took her by the hand. And the maid arose.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And the fame hereof went abroad into all
that country.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And as Jesus passed from thence, there
followed him two blind men crying out and saying, Have mercy on us, O
Son of David.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> And when he was come to the house, the
blind men came to him. And Jesus saith to them, Do you believe, that I
can do this unto you? They say to him, Yea, Lord.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> Then he touched their eyes, saying,
According to your faith, be it done unto you.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> And their eyes were opened, and Jesus
strictly charged them, saying, See that no man know this.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But they going out, spread his fame
abroad in all that country.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> And when they were gone out, behold they
brought him a dumb man, possessed with a devil.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> And after the devil was cast out, the
dumb man spoke, and the multitudes wondered, saying, Never was the like
seen in Israel.

<span id="an_9:34">9:34</span> But the Pharisees said, By the prince of
devils he casteth out devils.

<span id="an_9:35">9:35</span> And Jesus went about all the cities, and
towns, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the
kingdom, and healing every disease, and every infirmity.

<span id="an_9:36">9:36</span> And seeing the multitudes, he had
compassion on them: because they were distressed, and lying like sheep
that have no shepherd.

<span id="an_9:37">9:37</span> Then he saith to his disciples, The
harvest indeed is great, but the labourers are few.

<span id="an_9:38">9:38</span> Pray ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he send forth labourers into his harvest.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> AND having called his twelve disciples
together, he gave them power over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and
to heal all manner of diseases, and all manner of infirmities.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> And the names of the twelve apostles are
these: The first, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother,

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the publican, and
James the son of Alpheus, and Thaddeus,

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> Simon the Cananean, and Judas Iscariot,
who also betrayed him.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> These twelve Jesus sent: commanding them,
saying: Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the city of the
Samaritans enter ye not.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But go ye rather to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> And going, preach, saying: The kingdom of
heaven is at hand.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse
the lepers, cast out devils: freely have you received, freely give.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor
money in your purses:

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> Nor scrip for your journey, nor two
coats, nor shoes, nor a staff; for the workman is worthy of his meat.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> And into whatsoever city or town you
shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy, and there abide till you go
thence.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And when you come into the house,
salute it, saying: Peace be to this house.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> And if that house be worthy, your peace
shall come upon it; but if it be not worthy, your peace shall return to
you.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> And whosoever shall not receive you,
nor hear your words: going forth out of that house or city shake off the
dust from your feet.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> Amen I say to you, it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment,
than for that city.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> Behold I send you as sheep in the midst
of wolves. Be ye therefore wise as serpents and simple as doves.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> But beware of men. For they will
deliver you up in councils, and they will scourge you in their
synagogues.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> And you shall be brought before
governors, and before kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and to
the Gentiles:

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But when they shall deliver you up,
take no thought how or what to speak: for it shall be given you in that
hour what to speak.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> For it is not you that speak, but the
Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The brother also shall deliver up the
brother to death, and the father the son: and the children shall rise up
against their parents, and shall put them to death.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> And you shall be hated by all men for
my name's sake: but he that shall persevere unto the end, he shall be
saved.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> And when they shall persecute you in
this city, flee into another. Amen I say to you, you shall not finish
all the cities of Israel, till the Son of man come.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> The disciple is not above the master,
nor the servant above his lord.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> It is enough for the disciple that he
be as his master, and the servant as his lord. If they have called the
goodman of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household?

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> Therefore fear them not. For nothing is
covered that shall not be revealed: nor hid, that shall not be known.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> That which I tell you in the dark,
speak ye in the light: and that which you hear in the ear, preach ye
upon the housetops.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> And fear ye not them that kill the
body, and are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him that can
destroy both soul and body in hell.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing? and not one of them shall fall on the ground without your
Father.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> Fear not therefore: better are you than
many sparrows.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> Every one therefore that shall confess
me before men, I will also confess him before my Father who is in
heaven.

<span id="an_10:33">10:33</span> But he that shall deny me before men, I
will also deny him before my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_10:34">10:34</span> Do not think that I came to send peace
upon earth: I came not to send peace, but the sword.

<span id="an_10:35">10:35</span> For I came to set a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law.

<span id="an_10:36">10:36</span> And as a man's enemies shall be they of
his own household.

<span id="an_10:37">10:37</span> He that loveth father or mother more
than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loveth son or daughter more
than me, is not worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:38">10:38</span> And he that taketh not up his cross,
and followeth me, is not worthy of me.

<span id="an_10:39">10:39</span> He that findeth his life, shall lose
it: and he that shall lose his life for me, shall find it.

<span id="an_10:40">10:40</span> He that receiveth you, receiveth me:
and he that receiveth me, receiveth him that sent me.

<span id="an_10:41">10:41</span> He that receiveth a prophet in the name
of a prophet, shall receive the reward of a prophet: and he that
receiveth a just man in the name of a just man, shall receive the reward
of a just man.

<span id="an_10:42">10:42</span> And whosoever shall give to drink to
one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a
disciple, amen I say to you, he shall not lose his reward.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> AND it came to pass, when Jesus had made
an end of commanding his twelve disciples, he passed from thence, to
teach and preach in their cities.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Now when John had heard in prison the
works of Christ: sending two of his disciples he said to him:

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Art thou he that art to come, or look we
for another?

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And Jesus making answer said to them: Go
and relate to John what you have heard and seen.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, the poor have the
gospel preached to them.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And blessed is he that shall not be
scandalized in me.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And when they went their way, Jesus began
to say to the multitudes concerning John: What went you out into the
desert to see? a reed shaken with the wind?

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> But what went you out to see? a man
clothed in soft garments? Behold they that are clothed in soft garments,
are in the houses of kings.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> But what went you out to see? a prophet?
yea I tell you, and more than a prophet.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> For this is he of whom it is written:
Behold I send my angel before thy face, who shall prepare thy way before
thee.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> Amen I say to you, there hath not risen
among them that are born of women a greater than John the Baptist: yet
he that is the lesser in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And from the days of John the Baptist
until now, the kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent
bear it away.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For all the prophets and the law
prophesied until John:

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And if you will receive it, he is Elias
that is to come.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> But whereunto shall I esteem this
generation to be like? It is like to children sitting in the market
place.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> Who crying to their companions say: We
have piped to you, and you have not danced: we have lamented, and you
have not mourned.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> For John came neither eating nor
drinking; and they say: He hath a devil.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> The Son of man came eating and
drinking, and they say: Behold a man that is a glutton and a wine
drinker, a friend of publicans and sinners. And wisdom is justified by
her children.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Then began he to upbraid the cities
wherein were done the most of his miracles, for that they had not done
penance.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Woe to thee, Corozain, woe to thee,
Bethsaida: for if in Tyre and Sidon had been wrought the miracles that
have been wrought in you, they had long ago done penance in sackcloth
and ashes.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> But I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment, than for you.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And thou Capharnaum, shalt thou be
exalted up to heaven? thou shalt go down even unto hell. For if in Sodom
had been wrought the miracles that have been wrought in thee, perhaps it
had remained unto this day.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> But I say unto you, that it shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for
thee.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> At that time Jesus answered and said: I
confess to thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to
the little ones.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> Yea, Father; for so hath it seemed good
in thy sight.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> All things are delivered to me by my
Father. And no one knoweth the Son, but the Father: neither doth any one
know the Father, but the Son, and he to whom it shall please the Son to
reveal him.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> Come to me, all you that labour, and
are burdened, and I will refresh you.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> Take up my yoke upon you, and learn of
me, because I am meek, and humble of heart: and you shall find rest to
your souls.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For my yoke is sweet and my burden
light.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> AT that time Jesus went through the corn
on the sabbath: and his disciples being hungry, began to pluck the ears,
and to eat.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And the Pharisees seeing them, said to
him: Behold thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do on the
sabbath days.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> But he said to them: Have you not read
what David did when he was hungry, and they that were with him:

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> How he entered into the house of God, and
did eat the loaves of proposition, which it was not lawful for him to
eat, nor for them that were with him, but for the priests only?

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> Or have ye not read in the law, that on
the sabbath days the priests in the temple break the sabbath, and are
without blame?

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> But I tell you that there is here a
greater than the temple.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> And if you knew what this meaneth: I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice: you would never have condemned the
innocent.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> For the Son of man is Lord even of the
sabbath.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> And when he has passed from thence, he
came into their synagogues.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> And behold there was a man who had a
withered hand, and they asked him, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the
sabbath days? that they might accuse him.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> But he said to them: What man shall
there be among you, that hath one sheep: and if the same fall into a pit
on the sabbath day, will he not take hold on it and lift it up?

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> How much better is a man than a sheep?
Therefore it it lawful to do a good deed on the sabbath days.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Then he saith to the man: Stretch forth
thy hand; and he stretched it forth, and it was restored to health even
as the other.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And the Pharisees going out made a
consultation against him, how they might destroy him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> But Jesus knowing it, retired from
thence: and many followed him, and he healed them all.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And he charged them that they should
not make him known.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by Isaias the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> Behold my servant whom I have chosen,
my beloved in whom my soul hath been well pleased. I will put my spirit
upon him, and he shall shew judgment to the Gentiles.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> He shall not contend, nor cry out,
neither shall any man hear his voice in the streets.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> The bruised reed he shall not break:
and smoking flax he shall not extinguish: till he send forth judgment
unto victory.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And in his name the Gentiles shall
hope.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then was offered to him one possessed
with a devil, blind and dumb: and he healed him, so that he spoke and
saw.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> And all the multitudes were amazed, and
said: Is not this the son of David?

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> But the Pharisees hearing it, said:
This man casteth not out the devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the
devils.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said
to them: Every kingdom divided against itself shall be made desolate:
and every city or house divided against itself shall not stand.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> And if Satan cast out Satan, he is
divided against himself: how then shall his kingdom stand?

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils,
by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore they shall be your
judges.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> But if I by the Spirit of God cast out
devils, then is the kingdom of God come upon you.

<span id="an_12:29">12:29</span> Or how can any one enter into the house
of the strong, and rifle his goods, unless he first bind the strong? and
then he will rifle his house.

<span id="an_12:30">12:30</span> He that is not with me, is against me:
and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth.

<span id="an_12:31">12:31</span> Therefore I say to you: Every sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit shall
not be forgiven.

<span id="an_12:32">12:32</span> And whosoever shall speak a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but he that shall
speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come.

<span id="an_12:33">12:33</span> Either make the tree good and its fruit
good: or make the tree evil, and its fruit evil. For by the fruit the
tree is known.

<span id="an_12:34">12:34</span> O generation of vipers, how can you
speak good things, whereas you are evil? for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaketh.

<span id="an_12:35">12:35</span> A good man out of a good treasure
bringeth forth good things: and an evil man out of an evil treasure
bringeth forth evil things.

<span id="an_12:36">12:36</span> But I say unto you, that every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall render an account for it in the
day of judgment.

<span id="an_12:37">12:37</span> For by thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.

<span id="an_12:38">12:38</span> Then some of the scribes and Pharisees
answered him, saying: Master we would see a sign from thee.

<span id="an_12:39">12:39</span> Who answering said to them: An evil and
adulterous generation seeketh a sign: and a sign shall not be given it,
but the sign of Jonas the prophet.

<span id="an_12:40">12:40</span> For as Jonas was in the whale's belly
three days and three nights: so shall the Son of man be in the heart of
the earth three days and three nights.

<span id="an_12:41">12:41</span> The men of Ninive shall rise in
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because they did
penance at the preaching of Jonas. And behold a greater than Jonas here.

<span id="an_12:42">12:42</span> The queen of the south shall rise in
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: because she came
from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold a
greater than Solomon here.

<span id="an_12:43">12:43</span> And when an unclean spirit is gone out
of a man he walketh through dry places seeking rest, and findeth none.

<span id="an_12:44">12:44</span> Then he saith: I will return into my
house from whence I came out. And coming he findeth it empty, swept, and
garnished.

<span id="an_12:45">12:45</span> Then he goeth, and taketh with him
seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and
dwell there: and the last state of that man in made worse than the
first. So shall it be also to this wicked generation.

<span id="an_12:46">12:46</span> As he was yet speaking to the
multitudes, behold his mother and his brethren stood without, seeking to
speak to him.

<span id="an_12:47">12:47</span> And one said unto him: Behold thy
mother and thy brethren stand without, seeking thee.

<span id="an_12:48">12:48</span> But he answering him that told him,
said: Who is my mother, and who are my brethren?

<span id="an_12:49">12:49</span> And stretching forth his hand towards
his disciples, he said: Behold my mother and my brethren.

<span id="an_12:50">12:50</span> For whosoever shall do the will of my
Father, that is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> THE same day Jesus going out of the
house, sat by the sea side.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> And great multitudes were gathered unto
him, so that he went up into a boat and sat: and all the multitude stood
on the shore.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> And he spoke to them many things in
parables, saying: Behold the sower went forth to sow.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> And whilst he soweth some fell by the way
side, and the birds of the air came and ate them up.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> And other some fell upon stony ground,
where they had not much earth: and they sprung up immediately, because
they had no deepness of earth.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> And when the sun was up they were
scorched: and because they had not root, they withered away.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> And others fell among thorns: and the
thorns grew up and choked them.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> And others fell upon good ground: and
they brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold, some sixtyfold, and some
thirtyfold.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> And his disciples came and said to him:
Why speakest thou to them in parables?

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Who answered and said to them: Because
to you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: but
to them it is not given.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> For he that hath, to him shall be
given, and he shall abound: but he that hath not, from him shall be
taken away that also which he hath.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Therefore do I speak to them in
parables: because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not,
neither do they understand.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> And the prophecy of Isaias is fulfilled
in them, who saith: By hearing you shall hear, and shall not understand:
and seeing you shall see, and shall not perceive.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For the heart of this people is grown
gross, and with their ears they have been dull of hearing, and their
eyes they have shut: lest at any time they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and be
converted, and I should heal them.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> But blessed are your eyes, because they
see, and your ears, because they hear.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> For, amen, I say to you, many prophets
and just men have desired to see the things that you see, and have not
seen them, and to hear the things that you hear and have not heard them.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Hear you therefore the parable of the
sower.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> When any one heareth the word of the
kingdom, and understandeth it not, there cometh the wicked one, and
catcheth away that which was sown in his heart: this is he that received
the seed by the way side.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> And he that received the seed upon
stony ground, is he that heareth the word, and immediately receiveth it
with joy.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> Yet hath he not root in himself, but is
only for a time: and when there ariseth tribulation and persecution
because of the word, he is presently scandalized.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> And he that received the seed among
thorns, is he that heareth the word, and the care of this world and the
deceitfulness of riches choketh up the word, and he becometh fruitless.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> But he that received the seed upon good
ground, is he that heareth the word, and understandeth, and beareth
fruit, and yieldeth the one an hundredfold, and another sixty, and
another thirty.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> Another parable he proposed to them,
saying: The kingdom of heaven is likened to a man that sowed good seeds
in his field.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> But while men were asleep, his enemy
came and oversowed cockle among the wheat and went his way.

<span id="an_13:26">13:26</span> And when the blade was sprung up, and
had brought forth fruit, then appeared also the cockle.

<span id="an_13:27">13:27</span> And the servants of the goodman of the
house coming said to him: Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in thy
field? whence then hath it cockle?

<span id="an_13:28">13:28</span> And he said to them: An enemy hath done
this. And the servants said to him: Wilt thou that we go and gather it
up?

<span id="an_13:29">13:29</span> And he said: No, lest perhaps gathering
up the cockle, you root up the wheat also together with it.

<span id="an_13:30">13:30</span> Suffer both to grow until the harvest,
and in the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers: Gather up
first the cockle, and bind it into bundles to burn, but the wheat gather
ye into my barn.

<span id="an_13:31">13:31</span> Another parable he proposed unto them,
saying: The kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed, which
a man took and sowed in his field.

<span id="an_13:32">13:32</span> Which is the least indeed of all seeds;
but when it is grown up, it is greater than all herbs, and becometh a
tree, so that the birds of the air come, and dwell in the branches
thereof.

<span id="an_13:33">13:33</span> Another parable he spoke to them: The
kingdom of heaven is like to leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, until the whole was leavened.

<span id="an_13:34">13:34</span> All these things Jesus spoke in
parables to the multitudes: and without parables he did not speak to
them.

<span id="an_13:35">13:35</span> That it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the prophet, saying: I will open my mouth in parables, I will
utter things hidden from the foundation of the world.

<span id="an_13:36">13:36</span> Then having sent away the multitudes,
he came into the house, and his disciples came to him, saying: Expound
to us the parable of the cockle of the field.

<span id="an_13:37">13:37</span> Who made answer and said to them: He
that soweth the good seed, is the Son of man.

<span id="an_13:38">13:38</span> And the field, is the world. And the
good seed are the children of the kingdom. And the cockle, are the
children of the wicked one.

<span id="an_13:39">13:39</span> And the enemy that sowed them, is the
devil. But the harvest is the end of the world. And the reapers are the
angels.

<span id="an_13:40">13:40</span> Even as cockle therefore is gathered
up, and burnt with fire: so shall it be at the end of the world.

<span id="an_13:41">13:41</span> The Son of man shall send his angels,
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all scandals, and them that
work iniquity.

<span id="an_13:42">13:42</span> And shall cast them into the furnace of
fire: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_13:43">13:43</span> Then shall the just shine as the sun,
in the kingdom of their Father. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.

<span id="an_13:44">13:44</span> The kingdom of heaven is like unto a
treasure hidden in a field. Which a man having found, hid it, and for
joy thereof goeth, and selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.

<span id="an_13:45">13:45</span> Again the kingdom of heaven is like to
a merchant seeking good pearls.

<span id="an_13:46">13:46</span> Who when he had found one pearl of
great price, went his way, and sold all that he had, and bought it.

<span id="an_13:47">13:47</span> Again the kingdom of heaven is like to
a net cast into the sea, and gathering together of all kind of fishes.

<span id="an_13:48">13:48</span> Which, when it was filled, they drew
out, and sitting by the shore, they chose out the good into vessels, but
the bad they cast forth.

<span id="an_13:49">13:49</span> So shall it be at the end of the world.
The angels shall go out, and shall separate the wicked from among the
just.

<span id="an_13:50">13:50</span> And shall cast them into the furnace of
fire: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_13:51">13:51</span> Have ye understood all these things?
They say to him: Yes.

<span id="an_13:52">13:52</span> He said unto them: Therefore every
scribe instructed in the kingdom of heaven, is like to a man that is a
householder, who bringeth forth out of his treasure new things and old.

<span id="an_13:53">13:53</span> And it came to pass: when Jesus had
finished these parables, he passed from thence.

<span id="an_13:54">13:54</span> And coming into his own country, he
taught them in their synagogues, so that they wondered and said: How
came this man by this wisdom and miracles?

<span id="an_13:55">13:55</span> Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not
his mother called Mary, and his brethren James, and Joseph, and Simon,
and Jude:

<span id="an_13:56">13:56</span> And his sisters, are they not all with
us? Whence therefore hath he all these things?

<span id="an_13:57">13:57</span> And they were scandalized in his
regard. But Jesus said to them: A prophet is not without honour, save in
his own country, and in his own house.

<span id="an_13:58">13:58</span> And he wrought not many miracles there,
because of their unbelief.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> AT that time Herod the Tetrarch heard the
fame of Jesus.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And he said to his servants: This is John
the Baptist: he is risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works shew
forth themselves in him.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For Herod had apprehended John and bound
him, and put him into prison, because of Herodias, his brother's wife.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> For John said to him: It is not lawful
for thee to have her.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And having a mind to put him to death, he
feared the people: because they esteemed him as a prophet.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> But on Herod's birthday, the daughter of
Herodias danced before them: and pleased Herod.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Whereupon he promised with an oath, to
give her whatsoever she would ask of him.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> But she being instructed before by her
mother, said: Give me here in a dish the head of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And the king was struck sad: yet because
of his oath, and for them that sat with him at table, he commanded it to
be given.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> And he sent, and beheaded John in the
prison.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And his head was brought in a dish: and
it was given to the damsel, and she brought it to her mother.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And his disciples came and took the
body, and buried it, and came and told Jesus.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Which when Jesus had heard, he retired
from thence by boat, into a desert place apart, and the multitudes
having heard of it, followed him on foot out of the cities.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And he coming forth saw a great
multitude, and had compassion on them, and healed their sick.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And when it was evening, his disciples
came to him, saying: This is a desert place, and the hour is now past:
send away the multitudes, that going into the towns, they may buy
themselves victuals.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> But Jesus said to them, They have no
need to go: give you them to eat.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> They answered him: We have not here,
but five loaves, and two fishes.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> He said to them: Bring them hither to
me.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> And when he had commanded the
multitudes to sit down upon the grass, he took the five loaves and the
two fishes, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, and brake, and gave
the loaves to his disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> And they did all eat, and were filled.
And they took up what remained, twelve full baskets of fragments.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> And the number of them that did eat,
was five thousand men, besides women and children.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> And forthwith Jesus obliged his
disciples to go up into the boat, and to go before him over the water,
till he dismissed the people.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> And having dismissed the multitude, he
went into a mountain alone to pray. And when it was evening, he was
there alone.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> But the boat in the midst of the sea
was tossed with the waves: for the wind was contrary.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> And in the fourth watch of the night,
he came to them walking upon the sea.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> And they seeing him walk upon the sea,
were troubled, saying: It is an apparition. And they cried out for fear.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> And immediately Jesus spoke to them,
saying: Be of good heart: it is I, fear ye not.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> And Peter making answer, said: Lord, if
it be thou, bid me come to thee upon the waters.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> And he said: Come. And Peter going down
out of the boat, walked upon the water to come to Jesus.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> But seeing the wind strong, he was
afraid: and when he began to sink, he cried out, saying: Lord, save me.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> And immediately Jesus stretching forth
his hand took hold of him, and said to him: O thou of little faith, why
didst thou doubt?

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> And when they were come up into the
boat, the wind ceased.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> And they that were in the boat came and
adored him, saying: Indeed thou art the Son of God.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> And having passed the water, they came
into the country of Genesar.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> And when the men of that place had
knowledge of him, they sent into all that country, and brought to him
all that were diseased.

<span id="an_14:36">14:36</span> And they besought him that they might
touch but the hem of his garment. And as many as touched, were made
whole.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> THEN came to him from Jerusalem scribes
and Pharisees, saying:

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Why do thy disciples trangress the
tradition of the ancients? For they wash not their hands when they eat
bread.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> But he answering, said to them: Why do
you also transgress the commandment of God for your tradition? For God
said:

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> Honour thy father and mother: And: He
that shall curse father or mother, let him die the death.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> But you say: Whosoever shall say to
father or mother, The gift whatsoever proceedeth from me, shall profit
thee.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> And he shall not honour his father or his
mother: and you have made void the commandment of God for your
tradition.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Hypocrites, well hath Isaias prophesied
of you, saying:

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> This people honoureth me with their lips:
but their heart is far from me.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> And in vain do they worship me, teaching
doctrines and commandments of men.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And having called together the
multitudes unto him, he said to them: Hear ye and understand.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Not that which goeth into the mouth
defileth a man: but what cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> Then came his disciples, and said to
him: Dost thou know that the Pharisees, when they heard this word, were
scandalized?

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> But he answering them, said: Every
plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> Let them alone: they are blind, and
leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both will fall
into the pit.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> And Peter answering, said to him:
Expound to us this parable.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> But he said: Are you also yet without
understanding?

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> Do you not understand, that whatsoever
entereth into the mouth, goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the
privy?

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> But the things which proceed out of the
mouth, come forth from the heart, and those things defile a man.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> For from the heart come forth evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false testimonies,
blasphemies.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> These are the things that defile a man.
But to eat with unwashed hands doth not defile a man.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> And Jesus went from thence, and retired
into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> And behold a woman of Canaan who came
out of those coasts, crying out, said to him: Have mercy on me, O Lord,
thou son of David: my daughter is grieviously troubled by the devil.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> Who answered her not a word. And his
disciples came and besought him, saying: Send her away, for she crieth
after us:

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> And he answering, said: I was not sent
but to the sheep that are lost of the house of Israel.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But she came and adored him, saying:
Lord, help me.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Who answering, said: It is not good to
take the bread of the children, and to cast it to the dogs.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> But she said: Yea, Lord; for the whelps
also eat of the crumbs that fall from the table of their masters.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> Then Jesus answering, said to her: O
woman, great is thy faith: be it done to thee as thou wilt: and her
daughter was cured from that hour.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And when Jesus had passed away from
thence, he came nigh the sea of Galilee. And going up into a mountain,
he sat there.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> And there came to him great multitudes,
having with them the dumb, the blind, the lame, the maimed, and many
others: and they cast them down at his feet, and he healed them:

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> So that the multitudes marvelled seeing
the dumb speak, the lame walk, and the blind see: and they glorified the
God of Israel.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> And Jesus called together his
disciples, and said: I have compassion on the multitudes, because they
continue with me now three days, and have not what to eat, and I will
not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> And the disciples say unto him: Whence
then should we have so many loaves in the desert, as to fill so great a
multitude?

<span id="an_15:34">15:34</span> And Jesus said to them: How many loaves
have you? But they said: Seven, and a few little fishes.

<span id="an_15:35">15:35</span> And he commanded the multitude to sit
down upon the ground.

<span id="an_15:36">15:36</span> And taking the seven loaves and the
fishes, and giving thanks, he brake, and gave to his disciples, and the
disciples to the people.

<span id="an_15:37">15:37</span> And they did all eat, and had their
fill. And they took up seven baskets full, of what remained of the
fragments.

<span id="an_15:38">15:38</span> And they that did eat, were four
thousand men, beside children and women.

<span id="an_15:39">15:39</span> And having dismissed the multitude, he
went up into a boat, and came into the coasts of Magedan.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> AND there came to him the Pharisees and
Sadduccees tempting: and they asked him to shew them a sign from heaven.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> But he answered and said to them: When it
is evening, you say, It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> And in the morning: To day there will be
a storm, for the sky is red and lowering. You know then how to discern
the face of the sky: and can you not know the signs of the times?

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> A wicked and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign: and a sign shall not be given it, but the sign of
Jonas the prophet. And he left them, and went away.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And when his disciples were come over the
water, they had forgotten to take bread.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Who said to them: Take heed and beware of
the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> But they thought within themselves,
saying: Because we have taken no bread.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> And Jesus knowing it, said: Why do you
think within yourselves, O ye of little faith, for that you have no
bread?

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Do you not yet understand, neither do you
remember the five loaves among five thousand men, and how many baskets
you took up?

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Nor the seven loaves among four
thousand men, and how many baskets you took up?

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Why do you not understand that it was
not concerning the bread I said to you: Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees?

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Then they understood that he said not
that they should beware of the leaven of bread, but of the doctrine of
the Pharisees and Sadducees.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> And Jesus came into the quarters of
Cesarea Philippi: and he asked his disciples, saying: Whom do men say
that the Son of man is?

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> But they said: Some John the Baptist,
and other some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Jesus saith to them: But whom do you
say that I am?

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Simon Peter answered and said: Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> And Jesus answering, said to him:
Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona: because flesh and blood hath not
revealed it to thee, but my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> And I say to thee: That thou art Peter;
and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> And I will give to thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. And whatsoever thou shalt bind upon earth, it shall
be bound also in heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose upon earth, it
shall be loosed also in heaven.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> Then he commanded his disciples, that
they should tell no one that he was Jesus the Christ.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> From that time Jesus began to shew to
his disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from
the ancients and scribes and chief priests, and be put to death, and the
third day rise again.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> And Peter taking him, began to rebuke
him, saying: Lord, be it far from thee, this shall not be unto thee.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Who turning, said to Peter: Go behind
me, Satan, thou art a scandal unto me: because thou savourest not the
things that are of God, but the things that are of men.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Then Jesus said to his disciples: If
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> For he that will save his life, shall
lose it: and he that shall lose his life for my sake, shall find it.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> For what doth it profit a man, if he
gain the whole world, and suffer the loss of his own soul? Or what
exchange shall a man give for his soul?

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> For the Son of man shall come in the
glory of his Father with his angels: and then will he render to every
man according to his works.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> Amen I say to you, there are some of
them that stand here, that shall not taste death, till they see the Son
of man coming in his kingdom.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> AND after six days Jesus taketh unto him
Peter and James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high
mountain apart:

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> And he was transfigured before them. And
his face did shine as the sun: and his garments became white as snow.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> And behold there appeared to them Moses
and Elias talking with him.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> And Peter answering, said to Jesus: Lord,
it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three
tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> And as he was yet speaking, behold a
bright cloud overshadowed them. And lo, a voice out of the cloud,
saying: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear ye him.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> And the disciples hearing, fell upon
their face, and were very much afraid.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> And Jesus came and touched them: and said
to them, Arise, and fear not.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> And they lifting up their eyes saw no one
but only Jesus.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> And as they came down from the mountain,
Jesus charged them, saying: Tell the vision to no man, till the Son of
man be risen from the dead.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> And his disciples asked him, saying:
Why then do the scribes say that Elias must come first?

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> But he answering, said to them: Elias
indeed shall come, and restore all things.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> But I say to you, that Elias is already
come, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they had
a mind. So also the Son of man shall suffer from them.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> Then the disciples understood, that he
had spoken to them of John the Baptist.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> And when he was come to the multitude,
there came to him a man falling down on his knees before him, saying:
Lord, have pity on my son, for he is a lunatic, and suffereth much: for
he falleth often into the fire, and often into the water.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> And I brought him to thy disciples, and
they could not cure him.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> Then Jesus answered and said: O
unbelieving and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you? How
long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> And Jesus rebuked him, and the devil
went out of him, and the child was cured from that hour.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> Then came the disciples to Jesus
secretly, and said: Why could not we cast him out?

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> Jesus said to them: Because of your
unbelief. For, amen I say to you, if you have faith as a grain of
mustard seed, you shall say to this mountain, Remove from hence hither,
and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible to you.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> But this kind is not cast out but by
prayer and fasting.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> And when they abode together in
Galilee, Jesus said to them: The Son of man shall be betrayed into the
hands of men:

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> And they shall kill him, and the third
day he shall rise again. And they were troubled exceedingly.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> And when they were come to Capharnaum,
they that recieved the didrachmas, came to Peter and said to him: Doth
not your master pay the didrachmas?

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> He said: Yes. And when he was come into
the house, Jesus prevented him, saying: What is thy opinion, Simon? The
kings of the earth, of whom do they receive tribute or custom? of their
own children, or of strangers?

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> And he said: Of strangers. Jesus said
to him: Then the children are free.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> But that we may not scandalize them, go
to the sea, and cast in a hook: and that fish which shall first come up,
take: and when thou hast opened its mouth, thou shalt find a stater:
take that, and give it to them for me and thee.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> AT that hour the disciples came to Jesus,
saying: Who thinkest thou is the greater in the kingdom of heaven?

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> And Jesus calling unto him a little
child, set him in the midst of them,

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> And said: Amen I say to you, unless you
be converted, and become as little children, you shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Whosoever therefore shall humble himself
as this little child, he is the greater in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> And he that shall receive one such little
child in my name, receiveth me.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> But he that shall scandalize one of these
little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone
should be hanged about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the
depth of the sea.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> Woe to the world because of scandals. For
it must needs be that scandals come: but nevertheless woe to that man by
whom the scandal cometh.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> And if thy hand, or thy foot scandalize
thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee. It is better for thee to go
into life maimed or lame, than having two hands or two feet, to be cast
into everlasting fire.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> And if thy eye scandalize thee, pluck it
out, and cast it from thee. It is better for thee having one eye to
enter into life, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> See that you despise not one of these
little ones: for I say to you, that their angels in heaven always see
the face of my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> For the Son of man is come to save that
which was lost.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> What think you? If a man have an
hundred sheep, and one of them should go astray: doth he not leave the
ninety-nine in the mountains, and go to seek that which is gone astray?

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> And if it so be that he find it: Amen I
say to you, he rejoiceth more for that, than for the ninety-nine that
went not astray.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> Even so it is not the will of your
Father, who is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> But if thy brother shall offend against
thee, go, and rebuke him between thee and him alone. If he shall hear
thee, thou shalt gain thy brother.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> And if he will not hear thee, take with
thee one or two more: that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word may stand.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> And if he will not hear them: tell the
church. And if he will not hear the church, let him be to thee as the
heathen and publican.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> Amen I say to you, whatsoever you shall
bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever you shall
loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in heaven.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> Again I say to you, that if two of you
shall consent upon earth, concerning any thing whatsoever they shall
ask, it shall be done to them by my Father who is in heaven.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> For where there are two or three
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Then came Peter unto him and said:
Lord, how often shall my brother offend against me, and I forgive him?
till seven times?

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> Jesus saith to him: I say not to thee,
till seven times; but till seventy times seven times.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> Therefore is the kingdom of heaven
likened to a king, who would take an account of his servants.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> And when he had begun to take the
account, one was brought to him, that owed him ten thousand talents.

<span id="an_18:25">18:25</span> And as he had not wherewith to pay it,
his lord commanded that he should be sold, and his wife and children and
all that he had, and payment to be made.

<span id="an_18:26">18:26</span> But that servant falling down, besought
him, saying: Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

<span id="an_18:27">18:27</span> And the lord of that servant being
moved with pity, let him go and forgave him the debt.

<span id="an_18:28">18:28</span> But when that servant was gone out, he
found one of his fellow servants that owed him an hundred pence: and
laying hold of him, throttled him, saying: Pay what thou owest.

<span id="an_18:29">18:29</span> And his fellow servant falling down,
besought him, saying: Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all.

<span id="an_18:30">18:30</span> And he would not: but went and cast him
into prison, till he paid the debt.

<span id="an_18:31">18:31</span> Now his fellow servants seeing what was
done, were very much grieved, and they came and told their lord all that
was done.

<span id="an_18:32">18:32</span> Then his lord called him; and said to
him: Thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all the debt, because thou
besoughtest me:

<span id="an_18:33">18:33</span> Shouldst not thou then have had
compassion also on thy fellow servant, even as I had compassion on thee?

<span id="an_18:34">18:34</span> And his lord being angry, delivered him
to the torturers until he paid all the debt.

<span id="an_18:35">18:35</span> So also shall my heavenly Father do to
you, if you forgive not every one his brother from your hearts.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> AND it came to pass when Jesus had ended
these words, he departed from Galilee, and came into the coasts of
Judea, beyond Jordan.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> And great multitudes followed him: and he
healed them there.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> And there came to him the Pharisees
tempting him, and saying: Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife
for every cause?

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Who answering, said to them: Have ye not
read, that he who made man from the beginning, Made them male and
female? And he said:

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> For this cause shall a man leave father
and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two shall be in one
flesh.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Therefore now they are not two, but one
flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> They say to him: Why then did Moses
command to give a bill of divorce, and to put away?

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> He saith to them: Because Moses by reason
of the hardness of your heart permitted you to put away your wives: but
from the beginning it was not so.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> And I say to you, that whosoever shall
put away his wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry
another, committeth adultery: and he that shall marry her that is put
away, committeth adultery.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> His disciples say unto him: If the case
of a man with his wife be so, it is not expedient to marry.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> Who said to them: All men take not this
word, but they to whom it is given.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> For there are eunuchs, who were born so
from their mother's womb: and there are eunuchs, who were made so by
men: and there are eunuchs, who have made themselves eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven. He that can take, let him take it.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> Then were little children presented to
him, that he should impose hands upon them and pray. And the disciples
rebuked them.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> But Jesus said to them: Suffer the
little children, and forbid them not to come to me: for the kingdom of
heaven is for such.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> And when he had imposed hands upon
them, he departed from thence.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> And behold one came and said to him:
Good master, what good shall I do that I may have life everlasting?

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> Who said to him: Why asketh thou me
concerning good? One is good, God. But if thou wilt enter into life,
keep the commandments.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> He said to him: Which? And Jesus said:
Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not
steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> Honour thy father and thy mother: and,
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> The young man saith to him: All these I
have kept from my youth, what is yet wanting to me?

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> Jesus saith to him: If thou wilt be
perfect, go sell what thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven: and come follow me.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> And when the young man had heard this
word, he went away sad: for he had great possessions.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> Then Jesus said to his disciples: Amen,
I say to you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> And again I say to you: It is easier
for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> And when they had heard this, the
disciples wondered very much, saying: Who then can be saved?

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> And Jesus beholding, said to them: With
men this is impossible: but with God all things are possible.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Then Peter answering, said to him:
Behold we have left all things, and have followed thee: what therefore
shall we have?

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> And Jesus said to them: Amen, I say to
you, that you, who have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son
of man shall sit on the seat of his majesty, you also shall sit on
twelve seats judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> And every one that hath left house, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands for my name's sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall
possess life everlasting.

<span id="an_19:30">19:30</span> And many that are first, shall be last:
and the last shall be first.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> THE kingdom of heaven is like to an
householder, who went out early in the morning to hire labourers into
his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> And having agreed with the labourers for
a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> And going about the third hour, he saw
others standing in the market place idle.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> And he said to them: Go you also into my
vineyard, and I will give you what shall be just.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> And they went their way. And again he
went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did in like manner.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> But about the eleventh hour he went out
and found others standing, and he saith to them: Why stand you here all
the day idle?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> They say to him: Because no man hath
hired us. He saith to them: Go you also into my vineyard.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> And when evening was come, the lord of
the vineyard saith to his steward: Call the labourers and pay them their
hire, beginning from the last even to the first.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> When therefore they were come, that came
about the eleventh hour, they received every man a penny.

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> But when the first also came, they
thought that they should receive more: and they also received every man
a penny.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> And receiving it they murmured against
the master of the house,

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> Saying: These last have worked but one
hour, and thou hast made them equal to us, that have borne the burden of
the day and the heats.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> But he answering said to one of them:
Friend, I do thee no wrong: didst thou not agree with me for a penny?

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> Take what is thine, and go thy way: I
will also give to this last even as to thee.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> Or, is it not lawful for me to do what
I will? is thy eye evil, because I am good?

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> So shall the last be first, and the
first last. For many are called, but few chosen.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took
the twelve disciples apart, and said to them:

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the
Son of man shall be betrayed to the chief priests and the scribes, and
they shall condemn him to death.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> And shall deliver him to the Gentiles
to be mocked, and scourged, and crucified, and the third day he shall
rise again.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> Then came to him the mother of the sons
of Zebedee with her sons, adoring and asking something of him.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> Who said to her: What wilt thou? She
saith to him: Say that these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right
hand, and the other on thy left, in thy kingdom.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> And Jesus answering, said: You know not
what you ask. Can you drink the chalice that I shall drink? They say to
him: We can.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> He saith to them: My chalice indeed you
shall drink; but to sit on my right or left hand, is not mine to give to
you, but to them for whom it is prepared by my Father.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> And the ten hearing it, were moved with
indignation against the two brethren.

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> But Jesus called them to him, and said:
You know that the princes of the Gentiles lord it over them; and they
that are the greater, exercise power upon them.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> It shall not be so among you: but
whosoever will be the greater among you, let him be your minister:

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> And he that will be first among you,
shall be your servant.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Even as the Son of man is not come to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a redemption
for many.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> And when they went out from Jericho, a
great multitude followed him.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> And behold two blind men sitting by the
way side, heard that Jesus passed by, and they cried out, saying: O
Lord, thou son of David, have mercy on us.

<span id="an_20:31">20:31</span> And the multitude rebuked them that
they should hold their peace. But they cried out the more, saying: O
Lord, thou son of David, have mercy on us.

<span id="an_20:32">20:32</span> And Jesus stood, and called them, and
said: What will ye that I do to you?

<span id="an_20:33">20:33</span> They say to him: Lord, that our eyes be
opened.

<span id="an_20:34">20:34</span> And Jesus having compassion on them,
touched their eyes. And immediately they saw, and followed him.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> AND when they drew nigh to Jerusalem, and
were come to Bethphage, unto mount Olivet, then Jesus sent two
disciples,

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Saying to them: Go ye into the village
that is over against you, and immediately you shall find an ass tied,
and a colt with her: loose them and bring them to me.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> And if any man shall say anything to you,
say ye, that the Lord hath need of them: and forthwith he will let them
go.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Now all this was done that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying:

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> Tell ye the daughter of Sion: Behold thy
king cometh to thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal
of her that is used to the yoke.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> And the disciples going, did as Jesus
commanded them.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> And they brought the ass and the colt,
and laid their garments upon them, and made him sit thereon.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> And a very great multitude spread their
garments in the way: and others cut boughs from the trees, and strewed
them in the way:

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> And the multitudes that went before and
that followed, cried, saying: Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> And when he was come into Jerusalem,
the whole city was moved, saying: Who is this?

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> And the people said: This is Jesus the
prophet, from Nazareth of Galilee.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> And Jesus went into the temple of God,
and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew
the tables of the money changers, and the chairs of them that sold
doves:

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> And he saith to them: It is written, My
house shall be called the house of prayer; but you have made it a den of
thieves.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> And there came to him the blind and the
lame in the temple; and he healed them.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> And the chief priests and scribes,
seeing the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the
temple, and saying: Hosanna to the son of David; were moved with
indignation.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> And said to him: Hearest thou what
these say? And Jesus said to them: Yea, have you never read: Out of the
mouth of infants and of sucklings thou hast perfected praise?

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> And leaving them, he went out of the
city into Bethania, and remained there.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> And in the morning, returning into the
city, he was hungry.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> And seeing a certain fig tree by the
way side, he came to it, and found nothing on it but leaves only, and he
saith to it: May no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And
immediately the fig tree withered away.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> And the disciples seeing it wondered,
saying: How is it presently withered away?

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> And Jesus answering, said to them:
Amen, I say to you, if you shall have faith, and stagger not, not only
this of the fig tree shall you do, but also if you shall say to this
mountain, Take up and cast thyself into the sea, it shall be done.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> And in all things whatsoever you shall
ask in prayer, believing, you shall receive.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> And when he was come into the temple,
there came to him, as he was teaching, the chief priests and ancients of
the people, saying: By what authority dost thou these things? and who
hath given thee this authority?

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> Jesus answering, said to them: I also
will ask you one word, which if you shall tell me, I will also tell you
by what authority I do these things.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> The baptism of John, whence was it?
from heaven or from men? But they thought within themselves, saying:

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> If we shall say, from heaven, he will
say to us: Why then did you not believe him? But if we shall say, from
men, we are afraid of the multitude: for all held John as a prophet.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> And answering Jesus, they said: We know
not. He also said to them: Neither do I tell you by what authority I do
these things.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> But what think you? A certain man had
two sons; and coming to the first, he said: Son, go work to day in my
vineyard.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> And he answering, said: I will not. But
afterwards, being moved with repentance, he went.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> And coming to the other, he said in
like manner. And he answering, said: I go, Sir; and he went not.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> Which of the two did the father's will?
They say to him: The first. Jesus saith to them: Amen I say to you, that
the publicans and the harlots shall go into the kingdom of God before
you.

<span id="an_21:32">21:32</span> For John came to you in the way of
justice, and you did not believe him. But the publicans and the harlots
believed him: but you, seeing it, did not even afterwards repent, that
you might believe him.

<span id="an_21:33">21:33</span> Hear ye another parable. There was a
man an householder, who planted a vineyard, and made a hedge round about
it, and dug in it a press, and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen; and went into a strange country.

<span id="an_21:34">21:34</span> And when the time of the fruits drew
nigh, he sent his servants to the husbandmen that they might receive the
fruits thereof.

<span id="an_21:35">21:35</span> And the husbandmen laying hands on his
servants, beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.

<span id="an_21:36">21:36</span> Again he sent other servants more than
the former; and they did to them in like manner.

<span id="an_21:37">21:37</span> And last of all he sent to them his
son, saying: They will reverence my son.

<span id="an_21:38">21:38</span> But the husbandmen seeing the son, said
among themselves: This is the heir: come, let us kill him, and we shall
have his inheritance.

<span id="an_21:39">21:39</span> And taking him, they cast him forth out
of the vineyard, and killed him.

<span id="an_21:40">21:40</span> When therefore the lord of the vineyard
shall come, what will he do to those husbandmen?

<span id="an_21:41">21:41</span> They say to him: He will bring those
evil men to an evil end; and will let out his vineyard to other
husbandmen, that shall render him the fruit in due season.

<span id="an_21:42">21:42</span> Jesus saith to them: Have you never
read in the Scriptures: The stone which the builders rejected, the same
is become the head of the corner? By the Lord this has been done; and it
is wonderful in our eyes.

<span id="an_21:43">21:43</span> Therefore I say to you, that the
kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation
yielding the fruits thereof.

<span id="an_21:44">21:44</span> And whosoever shall fall on this stone,
shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to
powder.

<span id="an_21:45">21:45</span> And when the chief priests and
Pharisees had heard his parables, they knew that he spoke of them.

<span id="an_21:46">21:46</span> And seeking to lay hands on him, they
feared the multitudes: because they held him as a prophet.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> AND Jesus answering, spoke again in
parables to them, saying:

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The kingdom of heaven is likened to a
king, who made a marriage for his son.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> And he sent his servants, to call them
that were invited to the marriage; and they would not come.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> Again he sent other servants, saying:
Tell them that were invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my
beeves and fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come ye to the
marriage.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> But they neglected, and went their own
ways, one to his farm, and another to his merchandise.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> And the rest laid hands on his servants,
and having treated them contumeliously, put them to death.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> But when the king had heard of it, he was
angry, and sending his armies, he destroyed those murderers, and burnt
their city.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> Then he saith to his servants: The
marriage indeed is ready; but they that were invited were not worthy.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> Go ye therefore into the highways; and as
many as you shall find, call to the marriage.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> And his servants going forth into the
ways, gathered together all that they found, both bad and good: and the
marriage was filled with guests.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> And the king went in to see the guests:
and he saw there a man who had not on a wedding garment.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> And he saith to him: Friend, how camest
thou in hither not having a wedding garment? But he was silent.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> Then the king said to the waiters: Bind
his hands and feet, and cast him into the exterior darkness: there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> For many are called, but few are
chosen.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Then the Pharisees going, consulted
among themselves how to insnare him in his speech.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> And they sent to him their disciples
with the Herodians, saying: Master, we know that thou art a true
speaker, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for
any man: for thou dost not regard the person of men.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Tell us therefore what dost thou think,
is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not?

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> But Jesus knowing their wickedness,
said: Why do you tempt me, ye hypocrites?

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> Shew me the coin of the tribute. And
they offered him a penny.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> And Jesus saith to them: Whose image
and inscription is this?

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> They say to him: Caesar's. Then he
saith to them: Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's;
and to God, the things that are God's.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> And hearing this they wondered, and
leaving him, went their ways.

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> That day there came to him the
Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection; and asked him,

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Saying: Master, Moses said: If a man
die having no son, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up issue
to his brother.

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Now there were with us seven brethren:
and the first having married a wife, died; and not having issue, left
his wife to his brother.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> In like manner the second, and the
third, and so on to the seventh.

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> And last of all the woman died also.

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> At the resurrection therefore whose
wife of the seven shall she be? for they all had her.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> And Jesus answering, said to them: You
err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

<span id="an_22:30">22:30</span> For in the resurrection they shall
neither marry nor be married; but shall be as the angels of God in
heaven.

<span id="an_22:31">22:31</span> And concerning the resurrection of the
dead, have you not read that which was spoken by God, saying to you:

<span id="an_22:32">22:32</span> I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but of the
living.

<span id="an_22:33">22:33</span> And the multitudes hearing it, were in
admiration at his doctrine.

<span id="an_22:34">22:34</span> But the Pharisees hearing that he had
silenced the Sadducees, came together:

<span id="an_22:35">22:35</span> And one of them, a doctor of the law,
asking him, tempting him:

<span id="an_22:36">22:36</span> Master, which is the greatest
commandment in the law?

<span id="an_22:37">22:37</span> Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy
whole mind.

<span id="an_22:38">22:38</span> This is the greatest and the first
commandment.

<span id="an_22:39">22:39</span> And the second is like to this: Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.

<span id="an_22:40">22:40</span> On these two commandments dependeth the
whole law and the prophets.

<span id="an_22:41">22:41</span> And the Pharisees being gathered
together, Jesus asked them,

<span id="an_22:42">22:42</span> Saying: What think you of Christ? whose
son is he? They say to him: David's.

<span id="an_22:43">22:43</span> He saith to them: How then doth David
in spirit call him Lord, saying:

<span id="an_22:44">22:44</span> The Lord said to my Lord, Sit on my
right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool?

<span id="an_22:45">22:45</span> If David then call him Lord, how is he
his son?

<span id="an_22:46">22:46</span> And no man was able to answer him a
word; neither durst any man from that day forth ask him any more
questions.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> THEN Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to
his disciples,

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> Saying: The scribes and the Pharisees
have sitten on the chair of Moses.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> All things therefore whatsoever they
shall say to you, observe and do: but according to their works do ye
not; for they say, and do not.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> For they bind heavy and insupportable
burdens, and lay them on men's shoulders; but with a finger of their own
they will not move them.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> And all their works they do for to be
seen of men. For they make their phylacteries broad, and enlarge their
fringes.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> And they love the first places at feasts,
and the first chairs in the synagogues,

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> And salutations in the market place, and
to be called by men, Rabbi.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> But be not you called Rabbi. For one is
your master; and all you are brethren.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> And call none your father upon earth; for
one is your father, who is in heaven.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Neither be ye called masters; for one
is you master, Christ.

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> He that is the greatest among you shall
be your servant.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> And whosoever shall exalt himself shall
be humbled: and he that shall humble himself shall be exalted.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> But woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites; because you shut the kingdom of heaven against men, for you
yourselves do not enter in; and those that are going in, you suffer not
to enter.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites: because you devour the houses of widows, praying long
prayers. For this you shall receive the greater judgment.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites; because you go round about the sea and the land to make one
proselyte; and when he is made, you make him the child of hell twofold
more than yourselves.

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> Woe to you blind guides, that say,
Whosoever shall swear by the temple, it is nothing; but he that shall
swear by the gold of the temple, is a debtor.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Ye foolish and blind; for whether is
greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> And whosoever shall swear by the altar,
it is nothing; but whosoever shall swear by the gift that is upon it, is
a debtor.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Ye blind: for whether is greater, the
gift, or the altar that sanctifieth the gift?

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> He therefore that sweareth by the
altar, sweareth by it, and by all things that are upon it:

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> And whosoever shall swear by temple,
sweareth by it, and by him that dwelleth in it:

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> And he that sweareth by heaven,
sweareth by the throne of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites; because you tithe mint, and anise, and cummin, and have left
the weightier things of the law; judgment, and mercy, and faith. These
things you ought to have done, and not to leave those undone.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> Blind guides, who strain out a gnat,
and swallow a camel.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites; because you make clean the outside of the cup and of the
dish, but within you are full of rapine and uncleanness.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> Thou blind Pharisee, first make clean
the inside of the cup and of the dish, that the outside may become
clean.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites; because you are like to whited sepulchres, which outwardly
appear to men beautiful, but within are full of dead men's bones, and of
all filthiness.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> So you also outwardly indeed appear to
men just; but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Woe to you scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites; that build the sepulchres of the prophets, and adorn the
monuments of the just,

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> And say: If we had been in the days of
our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of
the prophets.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Wherefore you are witnesses against
yourselves, that you are the sons of them that killed the prophets.

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> Fill ye up then the measure of your
fathers.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> You serpents, generation of vipers, how
will you flee from the judgment of hell?

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> Therefore behold I send to you
prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and some of them you will put to
death and crucify, and some you will scourge in your synagogues, and
persecute from city to city:

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> That upon you may come all the just
blood that hath been shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel the
just, even unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom you
killed between the temple and the altar.

<span id="an_23:36">23:36</span> Amen I say to you, all these things
shall come upon this generation.

<span id="an_23:37">23:37</span> Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest
the prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would
I have gathered together thy children, as the hen doth gather her
chickens under her wings, and thou wouldest not?

<span id="an_23:38">23:38</span> Behold, you house shall be left to you,
desolate.

<span id="an_23:39">23:39</span> For I say to you, you shall not see me
henceforth till you say: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the
Lord.

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> AND Jesus being come out of the temple,
went away. And his disciples came to shew him the buildings of the
temple.

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> And he answering, said to them: Do you
see all these things? Amen I say to you there shall not be left here a
stone upon a stone that shall not be destroyed.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> And when he was sitting on mount Olivet,
the disciples came to him privately, saying: Tell us when shall these
things be? and what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the
consummation of the world?

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> And Jesus answering, said to them: Take
heed that no man seduce you:

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> For many will come in my name saying, I
am Christ: and they will seduce many.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> And you shall hear of wars and rumours of
wars. See that ye be not troubled. For these things must come to pass,
but the end is not yet.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> For nation shall rise against nation, and
kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be pestilences, and famines,
and earthquakes in places:

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> Now all these are the beginnings of
sorrows.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> Then shall they deliver you up to be
afflicted, and shall put you to death: and you shall be hated by all
nations for my name's sake.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> And then shall many be scandalized: and
shall betray one another: and shall hate one another.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> And many false prophets shall rise, and
shall seduce many.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> And because iniquity hath abounded, the
charity of many shall grow cold.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> But he that shall persevere to the end,
he shall be saved.

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> And this gospel of the kingdom, shall
be preached in the whole world, for a testimony to all nations, and then
shall the consummation come.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> When therefore you shall see the
abomination of desolation, which was spoken of by Daniel the prophet,
standing in the holy place: he that readeth let him understand.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> Then they that are in Judea, let them
flee to the mountains:

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> And he that is on the housetop, let him
not come down to take any thing out of his house:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> And he that is in the field, let him
not go back to take his coat.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> And woe to them that are with child,
and that give suck in those days.

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> But pray that your flight be not in the
winter, or on the sabbath.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> For there shall be then great
tribulation, such as hath not been from the beginning of the world until
now, neither shall be.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> And unless those days had been
shortened, no flesh should be saved: but for the sake of the elect those
days shall be shortened.

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> Then if any man shall say to you: Lo
here is Christ, or there, do not believe him.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> For there shall arise false Christs and
false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch as to
deceive (if possible) even the elect.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> Behold I have told it to you,
beforehand.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> If therefore they shall say to you:
Behold he is in the desert, go ye not out: Behold he is in the closets,
believe it not.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> For as lightning cometh out of the
east, and appeareth even into the west: so shall the coming of the Son
of man be.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Wheresoever the body shall be, there
shall the eagles also be gathered together.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> And immediately after the tribulation
of those days, the sun shall be darkened and the moon shall not give her
light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven
shall be moved:

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> And then shall appear the sign of the
Son of man in heaven: and then shall all tribes of the earth mourn: and
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with much
power and majesty.

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And he shall send his angels with a
trumpet, and a great voice: and they shall gather together his elect
from the four winds, from the farthest parts of the heavens to the
utmost bounds of them.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> And from the fig tree learn a parable:
When the branch thereof is now tender, and the leaves come forth, you
know that summer is nigh.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> So you also, when you shall see all
these things, know ye that it is nigh, even at the doors.

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> Amen I say to you, that this generation
shall not pass, till all these things be done.

<span id="an_24:35">24:35</span> Heaven and earth shall pass, but my
words shall not pass.

<span id="an_24:36">24:36</span> But of that day and hour no one
knoweth, not the angels of heaven, but the Father alone.

<span id="an_24:37">24:37</span> And as in the days of Noe, so shall
also the coming of the Son of man be.

<span id="an_24:38">24:38</span> For as in the days before the flood,
they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, even
till that day in which Noe entered into the ark,

<span id="an_24:39">24:39</span> And they knew not till the flood came,
and took them all away; so also shall the coming of the Son of man be.

<span id="an_24:40">24:40</span> Then two shall be in the field: one
shall be taken, and one shall be left.

<span id="an_24:41">24:41</span> Two women shall be grinding at the
mill: one shall be taken, and one shall be left.

<span id="an_24:42">24:42</span> Watch ye therefore, because ye know not
what hour your Lord will come.

<span id="an_24:43">24:43</span> But know this ye, that if the goodman
of the house knew at what hour the thief would come, he would certainly
watch, and would not suffer his house to be broken open.

<span id="an_24:44">24:44</span> Wherefore be you also ready, because at
what hour you know not the Son of man will come.

<span id="an_24:45">24:45</span> Who, thinkest thou, is a faithful and
wise servant, whom his lord hath appointed over his family, to give them
meat in season.

<span id="an_24:46">24:46</span> Blessed is that servant, whom when his
lord shall come he shall find so doing.

<span id="an_24:47">24:47</span> Amen I say to you, he shall place him
over all his goods.

<span id="an_24:48">24:48</span> But if that evil servant shall say in
his heart: My lord is long a coming:

<span id="an_24:49">24:49</span> And shall begin to strike his fellow
servants, and shall eat and drink with drunkards:

<span id="an_24:50">24:50</span> The lord of that servant shall come in
a day that he hopeth not, and at an hour that he knoweth not:

<span id="an_24:51">24:51</span> And shall separate him, and appoint his
portion with the hypocrites. There shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> THEN shall the kingdom of heaven be like
to ten virgins, who taking their lamps went out to meet the bridegroom
and the bride.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> And five of them were foolish, and five
wise.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> But the five foolish, having taken their
lamps, did not take oil with them:

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> But the wise took oil in their vessels
with the lamps.

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> And the bridegroom tarrying, they all
slumbered and slept.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> And at midnight there was a cry made:
Behold the bridegroom cometh, go ye forth to meet him.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> Then all those virgins arose and trimmed
their lamps.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> And the foolish said to the wise: Give us
of your oil, for our lamps are gone out.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> The wise answered, saying: Lest perhaps
there be not enough for us and for you, go ye rather to them that sell,
and buy for yourselves.

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Now whilst they went to buy, the
bridegroom came: and they that were ready, went in with him to the
marriage, and the door was shut.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> But at last come also the other
virgins, saying: Lord, Lord, open to us.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> But he answering said: Amen I say to
you, I know you not.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> Watch ye therefore, because you know
not the day nor the hour.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> For even as a man going into a far
country, called his servants, and delivered to them his goods;

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> And to one he gave five talents, and to
another two, and to another one, to every one according to his proper
ability: and immediately he took his journey.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> And he that had received the five
talents, went his way, and traded with the same, and gained other five.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> And in like manner he that had received
the two, gained other two.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> But he that had received the one, going
his way digged into the earth, and hid his lord's money.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> But after a long time the lord of those
servants came, and reckoned with them.

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And he that had received the five
talents coming, brought other five talents, saying: Lord, thou didst
deliver to me five talents, behold I have gained other five over and
above.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> His lord said to him: Well done, good
and faithful servant, because thou hast been faithful over a few things,
I will place thee over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> And he also that had received the two
talents came and said: Lord, thou deliveredst two talents to me: behold
I have gained other two.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> His lord said to him: Well done, good
and faithful servant: because thou hast been faithful over a few things,
I will place thee over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> But he that had received the one
talent, came and said: Lord, I know that thou art a hard man; thou
reapest where thou hast not sown, and gatherest where thou hast not
strewed.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> And being afraid I went and hid thy
talent in the earth: behold here thou hast that which is thine.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> And his lord answering, said to him:
Wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I reap where I sow not,
and gather where I have not strewed:

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> Thou oughtest therefore to have
committed my money to the bankers, and at my coming I should have
received my own with usury.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> Take ye away therefore the talent from
him, and give it to him that hath ten talents.

<span id="an_25:29">25:29</span> For to every one that hath shall be
given, and he shall abound: but from him that hath not, that also which
he seemeth to have shall be taken away.

<span id="an_25:30">25:30</span> And the unprofitable servant cast ye
out into the exterior darkness. There shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

<span id="an_25:31">25:31</span> And when the Son of man shall come in
his majesty, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit upon the
seat of his majesty.

<span id="an_25:32">25:32</span> And all nations shall be gathered
together before him, and he shall separate them one from another, as the
shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats:

<span id="an_25:33">25:33</span> And he shall set the sheep on his right
hand, but the goats on his left.

<span id="an_25:34">25:34</span> Then shall the king say to them that
shall be on his right hand: Come, ye blessed of my Father, possess you
the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

<span id="an_25:35">25:35</span> For I was hungry, and you gave me to
eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me to drink; I was a stranger, and you
took me in:

<span id="an_25:36">25:36</span> Naked, and you covered me: sick, and
you visited me: I was in prison, and you came to me.

<span id="an_25:37">25:37</span> Then shall the just answer him, saying:
Lord, when did we see thee hungry, and fed thee; thirsty, and gave thee
drink?

<span id="an_25:38">25:38</span> And when did we see thee a stranger,
and took thee in? or naked, and covered thee?

<span id="an_25:39">25:39</span> Or when did we see thee sick or in
prison, and came to thee?

<span id="an_25:40">25:40</span> And the king answering, shall say to
them: Amen I say to you, as long as you did it to one of these my least
brethren, you did it to me.

<span id="an_25:41">25:41</span> Then he shall say to them also that
shall be on his left hand: Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting
fire which was prepared for the devil and his angels.

<span id="an_25:42">25:42</span> For I was hungry, and you gave me not
to eat: I was thirsty, and you gave me not to drink.

<span id="an_25:43">25:43</span> I was a stranger, and you took me not
in: naked, and you covered me not: sick and in prison, and you did not
visit me.

<span id="an_25:44">25:44</span> Then they also shall answer him,
saying: Lord, when did we see thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister to thee?

<span id="an_25:45">25:45</span> Then he shall answer them, saying: Amen
I say to you, as long as you did it not to one of these least, neither
did you do it to me.

<span id="an_25:46">25:46</span> And these shall go into everlasting
punishment: but the just, into life everlasting.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> AND it came to pass, when Jesus had ended
all these words, he said to his disciples:

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> You know that after two days shall be the
pasch, and the son of man shall be delivered up to be crucified:

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> Then were gathered together the chief
priests and ancients of the people into the court of the high priest,
who was called Caiphas:

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> And they consulted together, that by
subtilty they might apprehend Jesus, and put him to death.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> But they said: Not on the festival day,
lest perhaps there should be a tumult among the people.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> And when Jesus was in Bethania, in the
house of Simon the leper,

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> There came to him a woman having an
alabaster box of precious ointment, and poured it on his head as he was
at table.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> And the disciples seeing it, had
indignation, saying: To what purpose is this waste?

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> For this might have been sold for much,
and given to the poor.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> And Jesus knowing it, said to them: Why
do you trouble this woman? for she hath wrought a good work upon me.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> For the poor you have always with you:
but me you have not always.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> For she in pouring this ointment upon
my body, hath done it for my burial.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> Amen I say to you, wheresoever this
gospel shall be preached in the whole world, that also which she hath
done, shall be told for a memory of her.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> Then went one of the twelve, who was
called Judas Iscariot, to the chief priests,

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> And said to them: What will you give
me, and I will deliver him unto you? But they appointed him thirty
pieces of silver.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> And from thenceforth he sought
opportunity to betray him.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> And on the first day of the Azymes, the
disciples came to Jesus, saying: Where wilt thou that we prepare for
thee to eat the pasch?

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> But Jesus said: Go ye into the city to
a certain man, and say to him: the master saith, My time is near at
hand, with thee I make the pasch with my disciples.

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> And the disciples did as Jesus
appointed to them, and they prepared the pasch.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> But when it was evening, he sat down
with his twelve disciples.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> And whilst they were eating, he said:
Amen I say to you, that one of you is about to betray me.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> And they being very much troubled,
began every one to say: Is it I, Lord?

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> But he answering, said: He that dippeth
his hand with me in the dish, he shall betray me.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is
written of him: but woe to that man by whom the Son of man shall be
betrayed: it were better for him, if that man had not been born.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> And Judas that betrayed him, answering,
said: Is it I, Rabbi? He saith to him: Thou hast said it.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> And whilst they were at supper, Jesus
took bread, and blessed, and broke: and gave to his disciples, and said:
Take ye, and eat. This is my body.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> And taking the chalice, he gave thanks,
and gave to them, saying: Drink ye all of this.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> For this is my blood of the new
testament, which shall be shed for many unto remission of sins.

<span id="an_26:29">26:29</span> And I say to you, I will not drink from
henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I shall drink
it with you new in the kingdom of my Father.

<span id="an_26:30">26:30</span> And a hymn being said, they went out
unto mount Olivet.

<span id="an_26:31">26:31</span> Then Jesus said to them: All you shall
be scandalized in me this night. For it is written: I will strike the
shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be dispersed.

<span id="an_26:32">26:32</span> But after I shall be risen again, I
will go before you into Galilee.

<span id="an_26:33">26:33</span> And Peter answering, said to him:
Although all shall be scandalized in thee, I will never be scandalized.

<span id="an_26:34">26:34</span> Jesus said to him: Amen I say to thee,
that in this night before the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice.

<span id="an_26:35">26:35</span> Peter saith to him: Yea, though I
should die with thee, I will not deny thee. And in like manner said all
the disciples.

<span id="an_26:36">26:36</span> Then Jesus came with them into a
country place which is called Gethsemani; and he said to his disciples:
Sit you here, till I go yonder and pray.

<span id="an_26:37">26:37</span> And taking with him Peter and the two
sons of Zebedee, he began to grow sorrowful and to be sad.

<span id="an_26:38">26:38</span> Then he saith to them: My soul is
sorrowful even unto death: stay you here, and watch with me.

<span id="an_26:39">26:39</span> And going a little further, he fell
upon his face, praying, and saying: My Father, if it be possible, let
this chalice pass from me. Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt.

<span id="an_26:40">26:40</span> And he cometh to his disciples, and
findeth them asleep, and he saith to Peter: What? Could you not watch
one hour with me?

<span id="an_26:41">26:41</span> Watch ye, and pray that ye enter not
into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh weak.

<span id="an_26:42">26:42</span> Again the second time, he went and
prayed, saying: My Father, if this chalice may not pass away, but I must
drink it, thy will be done.

<span id="an_26:43">26:43</span> And he cometh again and findeth them
sleeping: for their eyes were heavy.

<span id="an_26:44">26:44</span> And leaving them, he went again: and he
prayed the third time, saying the selfsame word.

<span id="an_26:45">26:45</span> Then he cometh to his disciples, and
saith to them: Sleep ye now and take your rest; behold the hour is at
hand, and the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners.

<span id="an_26:46">26:46</span> Rise, let us go: behold he is at hand
that will betray me.

<span id="an_26:47">26:47</span> As he yet spoke, behold Judas, one of
the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs,
sent from the chief priests and the ancients of the people.

<span id="an_26:48">26:48</span> And he that betrayed him, gave them a
sign, saying: Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, hold him fast.

<span id="an_26:49">26:49</span> And forthwith coming to Jesus, he said:
Hail, Rabbi. And he kissed him.

<span id="an_26:50">26:50</span> And Jesus said to him: Friend, whereto
art thou come? Then they came up, and laid hands on Jesus, and held him.

<span id="an_26:51">26:51</span> And behold one of them that were with
Jesus, stretching forth his hand, drew out his sword: and striking the
servant of the high priest, cut off his ear.

<span id="an_26:52">26:52</span> Then Jesus saith to him: Put up again
thy sword into its place: for all that take the sword shall perish with
the sword.

<span id="an_26:53">26:53</span> Thinkest thou that I cannot ask my
Father, and he will give me presently more than twelve legions of
angels?

<span id="an_26:54">26:54</span> How then shall the scriptures be
fulfilled, that so it must be done?

<span id="an_26:55">26:55</span> In that same hour Jesus said to the
multitudes: You are come out as it were to a robber with swords and
clubs to apprehend me. I sat daily with you, teaching in the temple, and
you laid not hands on me.

<span id="an_26:56">26:56</span> Now all this was done, that the
scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then the disciples all
leaving him, fled.

<span id="an_26:57">26:57</span> But they holding Jesus led him to
Caiphas the high priest, where the scribes and the ancients were
assembled.

<span id="an_26:58">26:58</span> And Peter followed him afar off, even
to the court of the high priest. And going in, he sat with the servants,
that he might see the end.

<span id="an_26:59">26:59</span> And the chief priests and the whole
council sought false witness against Jesus, that they might put him to
death:

<span id="an_26:60">26:60</span> And they found not, whereas many false
witnesses had come in. And last of all there came two false witnesses:

<span id="an_26:61">26:61</span> And they said: This man said, I am able
to destroy the temple of God, and after three days to rebuild it.

<span id="an_26:62">26:62</span> And the high priest rising up, said to
him: Answerest thou nothing to the things which these witness against
thee?

<span id="an_26:63">26:63</span> But Jesus held his peace. And the high
priest said to him: I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us
if thou be the Christ the Son of God.

<span id="an_26:64">26:64</span> Jesus saith to him: Thou hast said it.
Nevertheless I say to you, hereafter you shall see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds
of heaven.

<span id="an_26:65">26:65</span> Then the high priests rent his
garments, saying: He hath blasphemed; what further need have we of
witnesses? Behold, now you have heard the blasphemy:

<span id="an_26:66">26:66</span> What think you? But they answering,
said: He is guilty of death.

<span id="an_26:67">26:67</span> Then did they spit in his face, and
buffeted him: and others struck his face with the palms of their hands,

<span id="an_26:68">26:68</span> Saying: Prophesy unto us, O Christ, who
is he that struck thee?

<span id="an_26:69">26:69</span> But Peter sat without in the court: and
there came to him a servant maid, saying: Thou also wast with Jesus the
Galilean.

<span id="an_26:70">26:70</span> But he denied before them all, saying:
I know not what thou sayest.

<span id="an_26:71">26:71</span> And as he went out of the gate, another
maid saw him, and she saith to them that were there: This man also was
with Jesus of Nazareth.

<span id="an_26:72">26:72</span> And again he denied with an oath, I
know not the man.

<span id="an_26:73">26:73</span> And after a little while they came that
stood by, and said to Peter: Surely thou also art one of them; for even
thy speech doth discover thee.

<span id="an_26:74">26:74</span> Then he began to curse and to swear
that he knew not the man. And immediately the cock crew.

<span id="an_26:75">26:75</span> And Peter remembered the word of Jesus
which he had said: Before the cock crow, thou wilt deny me thrice. And
going forth, he wept bitterly.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> AND when morning was come, all the chief
priests and ancients of the people took counsel against Jesus, that they
might put him to death.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> And they brought him bound, and delivered
him to Pontius Pilate the governor.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> Then Judas, who betrayed him, seeing that
he was condemned, repenting himself, brought back the thirty pieces of
silver to the chief priests and ancients,

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Saying: I have sinned in betraying
innocent blood. But they said: What is that to us? look thou to it.

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> And casting down the pieces of silver in
the temple, he departed: and went and hanged himself with an halter.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> But the chief priests having taken the
pieces of silver, said: It is not lawful to put them into the corbona,
because it is the price of blood.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> And after they had consulted together,
they bought with them the potter's field, to be a burying place for
strangers.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> For this cause the field was called
Haceldama, that is, The field of blood, even to this day.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Then was fulfilled that which was spoken
by Jeremias the prophet, saying: And they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of him that was prized, whom they prized of the
children of Israel.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> And they gave them unto the potter's
field, as the Lord appointed to me.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> And Jesus stood before the governor,
and the governor asked him, saying: Art thou the king of the Jews? Jesus
saith to him: Thou sayest it.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> And when he was accused by the chief
priests and ancients, he answered nothing.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Then Pilate saith to him: Dost not thou
hear how great testimonies they allege against thee?

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> And he answered him to never a word; so
that the governor wondered exceedingly.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Now upon the solemn day the governor
was accustomed to release to the people one prisoner, whom they would.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> And he had then a notorious prisoner,
that was called Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> They therefore being gathered together,
Pilate said: Whom will you that I release to you, Barabbas, or Jesus
that is called Christ?

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> For he knew that for envy they had
delivered him.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> And as he was sitting in the place of
judgment, his wife sent to him, saying: Have thou nothing to do with
that just man; for I have suffered many things this day in a dream
because of him.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> But the chief priests and ancients
persuaded the people, that they should ask Barabbas, and make Jesus
away.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> And the governor answering, said to
them: Whether will you of the two to be released unto you? But they
said, Barabbas.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Pilate saith to them: What shall I do
then with Jesus that is called Christ? They say all: Let him be
crucified.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> The governor said to them: Why, what
evil hath he done? But they cried out the more, saying: Let him be
crucified.

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> And Pilate seeing that he prevailed
nothing, but that rather a tumult was made; taking water washed his
hands before the people, saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just
man; look you to it.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> And the whole people answering, said:
His blood be upon us and our children.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Then he released to them Barabbas, and
having scourged Jesus, delivered him unto them to be crucified.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Then the soldiers of the governor
taking Jesus into the hall, gathered together unto him the whole band;

<span id="an_27:28">27:28</span> And stripping him, they put a scarlet
cloak about him.

<span id="an_27:29">27:29</span> And platting a crown of thorns, they
put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand. And bowing the knee
before him, they mocked him, saying: Hail, king of the Jews.

<span id="an_27:30">27:30</span> And spitting upon him, they took the
reed, and struck his head.

<span id="an_27:31">27:31</span> And after they had mocked him, they
took off the cloak from him, and put on him his own garments, and led
him away to crucify him.

<span id="an_27:32">27:32</span> And going out, they found a man of
Cyrene, named Simon: him they forced to take up his cross.

<span id="an_27:33">27:33</span> And they came to the place that is
called Golgotha, which is the place of Calvary.

<span id="an_27:34">27:34</span> And they gave him wine to drink mingled
with gall. And when he had tasted, he would not drink.

<span id="an_27:35">27:35</span> And after they had crucified him, they
divided his garments, casting lots; that it might be fulfilled which was
spoken by the prophet, saying: They divided my garments among them; and
upon my vesture they cast lots.

<span id="an_27:36">27:36</span> And they sat and watched him.

<span id="an_27:37">27:37</span> And they put over his head his cause
written: THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.

<span id="an_27:38">27:38</span> Then were crucified with him two
thieves: one on the right hand, and one on the left.

<span id="an_27:39">27:39</span> And they that passed by, blasphemed
him, wagging their heads,

<span id="an_27:40">27:40</span> And saying: Vah, thou that destroyest
the temple of God, and in three days dost rebuild it: save thy own self:
if thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.

<span id="an_27:41">27:41</span> In like manner also the chief priests,
with the scribes and ancients, mocking, said:

<span id="an_27:42">27:42</span> He saved others; himself he cannot
save. If he be the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross,
and we will believe him.

<span id="an_27:43">27:43</span> He trusted in God; let him now deliver
him if he will have him; for he said: I am the Son of God.

<span id="an_27:44">27:44</span> And the selfsame thing the thieves
also, that were crucified with him, reproached him with.

<span id="an_27:45">27:45</span> Now from the sixth hour there was
darkness over the whole earth, until the ninth hour.

<span id="an_27:46">27:46</span> And about the ninth hour Jesus cried
with a loud voice, saying: Eli, Eli, lamma sabacthani? that is, My God,
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?

<span id="an_27:47">27:47</span> And some that stood there and heard,
said: This man calleth Elias.

<span id="an_27:48">27:48</span> And immediately one of them running
took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar; and put it on a reed, and
gave him to drink.

<span id="an_27:49">27:49</span> And the others said: Let be, let us see
whether Elias will come to deliver him.

<span id="an_27:50">27:50</span> And Jesus again crying with a loud
voice, yielded up the ghost.

<span id="an_27:51">27:51</span> And behold the veil of the temple was
rent in two from the top even to the bottom, and the earth quaked, and
the rocks were rent.

<span id="an_27:52">27:52</span> And the graves were opened: and many
bodies of the saints that had slept arose,

<span id="an_27:53">27:53</span> And coming out of the tombs after his
resurrection, came into the holy city, and appeared to many.

<span id="an_27:54">27:54</span> Now the centurion and they that were
with him watching Jesus, having seen the earthquake, and the things that
were done, were sore afraid, saying: Indeed this was the Son of God.

<span id="an_27:55">27:55</span> And there were there many women afar
off, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him:

<span id="an_27:56">27:56</span> Among whom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary
the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

<span id="an_27:57">27:57</span> And when it was evening, there came a
certain rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who also himself was a
disciple of Jesus.

<span id="an_27:58">27:58</span> He went to Pilate, and asked the body
of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded that the body should be delivered.

<span id="an_27:59">27:59</span> And Joseph taking the body, wrapped it
up in a clean linen cloth.

<span id="an_27:60">27:60</span> And laid it in his own new monument,
which he had hewed out in a rock. And he rolled a great stone to the
door of the monument, and went his way.

<span id="an_27:61">27:61</span> And there was there Mary Magdalen, and
the other Mary sitting over against the sepulchre.

<span id="an_27:62">27:62</span> And the next day, which followed the
day of preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees came together to
Pilate,

<span id="an_27:63">27:63</span> Saying: Sir, we have remembered, that
that seducer said, while he was yet alive: After three days I will rise
again.

<span id="an_27:64">27:64</span> Command therefore the sepulchre to be
guarded until the third day: lest perhaps his disciples come and steal
him away, and say to the people: He is risen from the dead; and the last
error shall be worse than the first.

<span id="an_27:65">27:65</span> Pilate saith to them: You have a guard;
go, guard it as you know.

<span id="an_27:66">27:66</span> And they departing, made the sepulchre
sure, sealing the stone, and setting guards.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> AND in the end of the sabbath, when it
began to dawn towards the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalen and
the other Mary, to see the sepulchre.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> And behold there was a great earthquake.
For an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and coming, rolled back
the stone, and sat upon it.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> And his countenance was as lightning, and
his raiment as snow.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> And for fear of him, the guards were
struck with terror, and became as dead men.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> And the angel answering, said to the
women: Fear not you; for I know that you seek Jesus who was crucified.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> He is not here, for he is risen, as he
said. Come, and see the place where the Lord was laid.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> And going quickly, tell ye his disciples
that he is risen: and behold he will go before you into Galilee; there
you shall see him. Lo, I have foretold it to you.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> And they went out quickly from the
sepulchre with fear and great joy, running to tell his disciples.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> And behold Jesus met them, saying: All
hail. But they came up and took hold of his feet, and adored him.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> Then Jesus said to them: Fear not. Go,
tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, there they shall see me.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> Who when they were departed, behold
some of the guards came into the city, and told the chief priests all
things that had been done.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> And they being assembled together with
the ancients, taking counsel, gave a great sum of money to the soldiers,

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> Saying: Say you, His disciples came by
night, and stole him away when we were asleep.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> And if the governor shall hear this, we
will persuade him, and secure you.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> So they taking the money, did as they
were taught: and this word was spread abroad among the Jews even unto
this day.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> And the eleven disciples went into
Galilee, unto the mountain where Jesus had appointed them.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> And seeing them they adored: but some
doubted.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> And Jesus coming, spoke to them,
saying: All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> Going therefore, teach ye all nations;
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you: and behold I am with you all days, even
to the consummation of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark](mar)
