[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jon)  [Next](nah) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Micah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The word of the Lord that came to Micheas
the Morasthite, in the days of Joathan, Achaz, and Ezechias, kings of
Juda: which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Hear, all ye people: and let the earth give
ear, and all that is therein: and let the Lord God be a witness to you,
the Lord from his holy temple.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> For behold the Lord will come forth out of
his place: and he will come down, and will tread upon the high places of
the earth.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And the mountains shall be melted under
him: and the valleys shall be cleft, as wax before the fire, and as
waters that run down a steep place.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> For the wickedness of Jacob is all this,
and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the wickedness of
Jacob? is it not Samaria? and what are the high places of Juda? are they
not Jerusalem ?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And I will make Samaria as a heap of stones
in the field when a vineyard is planted: and I will bring down the
stones thereof into the valley, and will lay her foundations bare.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And all her graven things shall be cut in
pieces, and all her wages shall be burnt with fire, and I will bring to
destruction all her idols: for they were gathered together of the hire
of a harlot, and unto the hire of a harlot they shall return.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Therefore will I lament and howl: I will go
stripped and naked: I will make a wailing like the dragons, and a
mourning like the ostriches.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Because her wound is desperate, because it
is come even to Juda, it hath touched the gate of my people even to
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Declare ye it not in Geth, weep ya not
with tears: in the house of Dust sprinkle yourselves with dust.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And pass away, O thou that dwellest in
the Beautiful place, covered with thy shame: she went not forth that
dwelleth in the confines: the House adjoining shall receive mourning
from you, which stood by herself.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For she is become weak unto good that
dwelleth in bitterness: for evil is come down from the Lord into the
gate of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> A tumult of chariots hath astonished the
inhabitants of Lachis: it is the beginning of sin to the daughter of
Sion, for in thee were found the crimes of Israel.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Therefore shall she send messengers to
the inheritance of Geth : the houses of lying to deceive the kings of
Israel.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Yet will I bring an heir to thee that
dwellest in Maresa: even to Odollam shall the glory of Israel come.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> Make thee bald, and be polled for thy
delicate children: enlarge thy baldness as the eagle: for they are
carried into captivity from thee.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Woe to you that devise that which is
unprofitable, and work evil in your beds: in the morning light they
execute it, because their hand is against God.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And they have coveted fields, and taken
them by violence, and houses they have forcibly taken away: and
oppressed a man and his house, a man and his inheritance.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Therefore thus saith the Lord : Behold, I
devise an evil against this family: from which you shall not withdraw
your necks, and you shall not walk haughtily, for this is a very evil
time.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> In that day a parable shall be taken up
upon you, and a song shall be sung with melody by them that say: We are
laid waste and spoiled: the portion of my people is changed: how shall
he depart from me, whereas he is returning that will divide our land?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Therefore thou shalt have none that shall
cast the cord of a lot in the assembly of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Speak ye not, saying: It shall not drop
upon these, confusion shall not take them.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> The house of Jacob saith: Is the spirit of
the Lord straitened, or are these his thoughts? Are not my words good to
him that walketh uprightly?

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But my people, on the contrary, are risen
up as an enemy: you have taken away the cloak off from the coat: and
them that passed harmless you have turned to war.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> You have cast out the women of my people
from their houses, in which they took delight: you have taken my praise
for ever from their children.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Arise ye, and depart, for there is no
rest here for you. For that uncleanness of the land, it shall be
corrupted with a grievous corruption.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Would God I were not a man that hath the
spirit, and that I rather spoke a lie: I will let drop to thee of wine,
and of drunkenness: and it shall be this people upon whom it shall drop.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> I will assemble and gather together all
of thee, O Jacob: I will bring together the remnant of Israel, I will
put them together as a flock in the fold, as the sheep in the midst of
the sheepcotes, they shall make a tumult by reason of the multitude of
men.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For he shall go up that shall open the
way before them: they shall divide, and pass through the gate, and shall
come in by it: and their king shall pass before them, and the Lord at
the head of them.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> And I said: Hear, O ye princes of Jacob,
and ye chiefs of the house of Israel: Is it not your part to know
judgment,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> You that hate good, and love evil: that
violently pluck off their skins from them, and their flesh from their
bones?

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Who have eaten the flesh of my people, and
have flayed their skin from off them: and have broken, and chopped their
bones as for the kettle, and as flesh in the midst of the pot.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Then shall they cry to the Lord, and he
will not hear them: and he will hide his face from them at that time, as
they have behaved wickedly in their devices.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Thus saith the Lord concerning the prophets
that make my people err: that bite with their teeth, and preach peace:
and if a man give not something into their mouth, they prepare war
against him.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Therefore night shall be to you instead of
vision, and darkness to you instead of divination; and the sun shall go
down upon the prophets, and the day shall be darkened over them.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And they shall be confounded that see
visions, and the diviners shall be confounded: and they shall all cover
their faces, because there is no answer of God.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But yet I am filled with the strength of
the spirit of the Lord, with judgment, and power: to declare unto Jacob
his wickedness, and to Israel his sin.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Hear this, ye princes of the house of
Jacob, and ye judges of the house of Israel: you that abhor judgment,
and pervert all that is right.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> You that build up Sion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Her princes have judged for bribes, and
her priests have taught for hire, and her prophets divined for money:
and they leaned upon the Lord, saying: Is not the Lord in the midst of
us? no evil shall come upon us.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Therefore, because of you, Sion shall be
ploughed as a field, and Jerusalem shall be as a heap of stones, and the
mountain of the temple as the high places of the forests.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> And it shall come to pass in the last days,
that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top
of mountains, and high above the hills: and people shall flow to it.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And many nations shall come in haste, and
say: Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of
the God of Jacob: and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in
his paths: for the law shall go forth out of Sion, and the word of the
Lord out of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> And he shall judge among many people, and
rebuke strong nations afar off: and they shall beat their swords into
ploughshares, and their spears into spades: nation shall not take sword
against nation: neither shall they learn war any more.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And every man shall sit under his vine, and
under his fig tree, and there shall be none to make them afraid: for the
mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For all people will walk every one in the
name of his god: but we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for
ever and ever.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> In that day, saith the Lord, I will gather
up her that halteth: and her that I had cast out, I will gather up: and
her whom I had afflicted.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> And I will make her that halted, a remnant:
and her that hath been afflicted, a mighty nation: and the Lord will
reign over them in mount Sion, from this time now and for ever.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> And thou, O cloudy tower of the flock, of
the daughter of Sion, unto thee shall it come: yea the first power shall
come, the kingdom to the daughter of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Now, why art thou drawn together with
grief? Hast thou no king in thee, or is thy counsellor perished, because
sorrow hath taken thee as a woman in labour?

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Be in pain and labour, O daughter of
Sion, as a woman that bringeth forth: for now shalt thou go out of the
city, and shalt dwell in the country, and shalt come even to Babylon,
there thou shalt be delivered: there the Lord will redeem thee out of
the hand of thy enemies.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And now many nations are gathered
together against thee, and they say: Let her be stoned: and let our eye
look upon Sion.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But they have not known the thoughts of
the Lord, and have not understood his counsel: because he hath gathered
them together as the hay of the floor.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Arise, and tread, O daughter of Sion: for
I will make thy horn iron, and thy hoofs I will make brass: and thou
shalt beat in pieces many peoples, and shalt immolate the spoils of them
to the Lord, and their strength to the Lord of the whole earth.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Now shalt thou be laid waste, O daughter of
the robber: they have laid siege against us, with a rod shall they
strike the cheek of the judge of Israel.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> AND THOU, BETHLEHEM Ephrata, art a little
one among the thousands of Juda: out of thee shall he come forth unto me
that is to be the ruler in Israel: and his going forth is from the
beginning, from the days of eternity.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Therefore will he give them up even till
the time wherein she that travaileth shall bring forth: and the remnant
of his brethren shall be converted to the children of Israel.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And he shall stand, and feed in the
strength of the Lord, in the height of the name of the Lord his God: and
they shall be converted, for now shall he be magnified even to the ends
of the earth.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And this man shall be our peace, when the
Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall set his foot in our
houses: and we shall raise against him seven shepherds, and eight
principal men.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And they shall feed the land of Assyria
with the sword, and the land of Nemrod with the spears thereof: and he
shall deliver us from the Assyrian, when he shall come into our land,
and when he shall tread in our borders.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the
midst of many peoples as a dew from the Lord, and as drops upon the
grass, which waiteth not for man, nor tarrieth for the children of men.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the
Gentiles in the midst of many peoples as a lion among the beasts of the
forests, and as a young lion among the docks of sheep: who when he shall
go through and tread down, and take, there is none to deliver.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Thy hand shall be lifted up over thy
enemies, and all thy enemies shall be cut off.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> And it shall come to pass in that day,
saith the Lord, that I will take away thy horses out of the midst of
thee, and will destroy thy chariots.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And I will destroy the cities of thy
land, and will throw down all thy strong holds, and I will take away
sorceries out of thy hand, and there shall be no divinations in thee.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And I will destroy thy graven things, and
thy statues out of the midst of thee: and thou shalt no more adore the
works of thy hands.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And I will pluck up thy groves out of the
midst of thee: and will crush thy cities.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And I will execute vengeance in wrath and
in indignation among all the nations that have not given ear.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Hear ye what the Lord saith: Arise, contend
thou in judgment against the mountains, and let the hills hear thy
voice.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Let the mountains hear the judgment of the
Lord, and the strong foundations of the earth: for the Lord will enter
into judgment with his people, and he will plead against Israel.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> O my people, what have I done to thee, or
in what have I molested thee? answer thou me.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For I brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt, and delivered thee out of the house of slaves: and I sent before
thy face Moses, and Aaron, and Mary.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> O my people, remember, I pray thee, what
Balach the king of Moab purposed: and what Balaam the son of Beor
answered him, from Setim to Galgal, that thou mightest know the justices
of the Lord.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> What shall I offer to the Lord that is
worthy? wherewith shall I kneel before the high God? shall I offer
holocausts unto him, and calves of a year old?

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> May the Lord be appeased with thousands of
rams, or with many thousands of fat he goats? shall I give my firstborn
for my wickedness, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> I will shew thee, O man, what is good, and
what the Lord requireth of thee: Verily, to do judgment, and to love
mercy, and to walk solicitous with thy God.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> The voice of the Lord crieth to the city,
and salvation shall be to them that fear thy name: hear, O ye tribes,
and who shall approve it?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> As yet there is a fire in the house of
the wicked, the treasures of iniquity, and a scant measure full of
wrath.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> Shall I justify wicked balances, and the
deceitful weights of the bag?

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> By which her rich men were filled with
iniquity, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and their tongue
was deceitful in their mouth.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> And I therefore began to strike thee with
desolation for thy sins.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Thou shalt eat, but shalt not be filled:
and thy humiliation shall be in the midst of thee: and thou shalt take
hold, but shalt not save: and those whom thou shalt save, I will give up
to the sword.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Thou shalt sow, but shalt not reap: thou
shalt tread the olives, but shalt not be anointed with the oil: and the
new wine, but shalt not drink the wine.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> For thou hast kept the statutes of Amri,
and all the works of the house of Achab: and thou hast walked according
to their wills, that I should make thee a desolation, and the
inhabitants thereof a hissing, and you shall bear the reproach of my
people.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> Woe is me, for I am become as one that
gleaneth in autumn the grapes of the vintage: there is no cluster to
eat, my soul desired the firstripe figs.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> The holy man is perished out of the earth,
and there is none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood,
every one hunteth his brother to death.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> The evil of their hands they call good: the
prince requireth, and the judge is for giving: and the great man hath
uttered the desire of his soul, and they have troubled it.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> He that is best among them, is as a brier:
and he that is righteous, as the thorn of the hedge. The day of thy
inspection, thy visitation cometh: now shall be their destruction.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Believe not a friend, and trust not in a
prince: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that sleepeth in thy bosom.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For the son dishonoureth the father, and
the daughter riseth up against her mother, the daughter in law against
her mother in law: and a man's enemies are they of his own household.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> But I will look towards the Lord, I will
wait for God my Saviour: my God will hear me.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Rejoice not, thou, my enemy, over me,
because I am fallen: I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord is
my light.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because
I have sinned against him; until he judge my cause and execute judgment
for me: he will bring me forth into the light, I shall behold his
justice.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And my enemy shall behold, and she shall
be covered with shame, who saith to me: Where is the Lord thy God? My
eyes shall look down upon her: now shall she be trodden under foot as
the mire of the streets.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> The day shall come, that thy walls may be
built up: in that day shall the law be far removed.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> In that day they shall come even from
Assyria to thee, and to the fortified cities: and from the fortified
cities even to the river, and from sea to sea, and from mountain to
mountain.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And the land shall be made desolate,
because of the inhabitants thereof, and for the fruit of their devices.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock
of thy inheritance, them that dwell alone in the forest, in the midst of
Carmel: they shall feed in Basan and Galaad according to the days of
old.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> According to the days of thy coming out
of the land of Egypt I will shew him wonders.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> The nations shall see, and shall be
confounded at all their strength: they shall put the hand upon the
mouth, their ears shall be deaf.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> They shall lick the dust like serpents,
as the creeping things of the earth, they shall be disturbed in their
houses: they shall dread the Lord our God, and shall fear thee.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Who is a God like to thee, who takest
away iniquity, and passest by the sin of the remnant of thy inheritance?
he will send his fury in no more, because he delighteth in mercy.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> He will turn again, and have mercy on us:
he will put away our iniquities: and he will cast all our sins into the
bottom of the sea.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Thou wilt perform the truth of Jacob, the
mercy to Abraham: which thou hast sworn to our fathers from the days of
old.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum](nah)
