[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](amo)  [Next](jon) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Obadiah

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The vision of Abdias. Thus saith the Lord
God to Edom: We have heard a rumour from the Lord, and he hath sent an
ambassador to the nations: Arise, and let us rise up to battle against
him.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Behold I have made thee small among the
nations: thou art exceeding contemptible.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> The pride of thy heart hath lifted thee up,
who dwellest in the clefts of the rocks, and settest up thy throne on
high: who sayest in thy heart: Who shall bring me down to the ground ?

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Though thou be exalted as an eagle, and
though thou set thy nest among the stars: thence will I bring thee down,
saith the Lord.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> If thieves had gone in to thee, if robbers
by night, how wouldst thou have held thy peace? would they not have
stolen till they had enough ? if the grapegatherers had come in to thee,
would they not have left thee at the least a cluster?

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> How have they searched Esau, how have they
sought out his hidden things?

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> They have sent thee out even to the border:
all the men of thy confederacy have deceived thee: the men of thy peace
have prevailed against thee: they that eat with thee shall lay snares
under thee: there is no wisdom in him.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Shall not I in that day, saith the Lord,
destroy the wise out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau
?

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> And thy valiant men of the south shall be
afraid, that man may be cut off from the mount of Esau.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For the slaughter, and for the iniquity
against thy brother Jacob, confusion shall cover thee, and thou shalt
perish for ever.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> In the day when thou stoodest against
him, when strangers carried away his army captive, and foreigners
entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem: thou also wast as
one of them.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> But thou shalt not look on in the day of
thy brother, in the day of his leaving his country: and thou shalt not
rejoice over the children of Juda, in the day of their destruction: and
thou shalt not magnify thy mouth in the day of distress.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Neither shalt thou enter into the gate of
my people in the day of their ruin: neither shalt thou also look on in
his evils in the day of his calamity: and thou shalt not be sent out
against his army in the day of his desolation.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Neither shalt thou stand in the crossways
to kill them that flee: and thou shalt not shut up them that remain of
him in the day of tribulation.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> For the day of the Lord is at hand upon
all nations: as thou hast done, so shall it be done to thee: he will
turn thy reward upon thy own head.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For as you have drunk upon my holy
mountain, so all nations shall drink continually: and they shall drink,
and sup up, and they shall be as though they were not.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And in mount Sion shall be salvation, and
it shall be holy, and the house of Jacob shall possess those that
possessed them.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And the house of Jacob shall be a fire,
and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau stubble: and they
shall be kindled in them, and shall devour them: and there shall be no
remains of the house of Esau, for the Lord hath spoken it.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And they that are toward the south, shall
inherit the mount of Esau, and they that are in the plains, the
Philistines: and they shall possess the country of Ephraim, and the
country of Samaria: and Benjamin shall possess Galaad.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> And the captivity of this host of the
children of Israel, all the places of the Chanaanites even to Sarepta:
and the captivity of Jerusalem that is in Bospho- rus, shall possess the
cities of the south.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And saviours shall come up into mount
Sion to judge the mount of Esau: and the kingdom shall be for the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah](jon)
