[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pe1)  [Next](jo1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: 2 Peter

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Simon Peter, servant and apostle of Jesus
Christ, to them that have obtained equal faith with us in the justice of
our God and Saviour Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Grace to you and peace be accomplished in
the knowledge of God and of Christ Jesus our Lord:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> As all things of his divine power which
appertain to life and godliness, are given us, through the knowledge of
him who hath called us by his own proper glory and virtue.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> By whom he hath given us most great and
precious promises: that by these you may be made partakers of the divine
nature: flying the corruption of that concupiscence which is in the
world.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And you, employing all care, minister in
your faith, virtue; and in virtue, knowledge;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And in knowledge, abstinence; and in
abstinence, patience; and in patience, godliness;

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> And in godliness, love of brotherhood; and
in love of brotherhood, charity.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> For if these things be with you and abound,
they will make you to be neither empty nor unfruitful in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For he that hath not these things with him,
is blind, and groping, having forgotten that he was purged from his old
sins.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Wherefore, brethren, labour the more,
that by good works you may make sure your calling and election. For
doing these things, you shall not sin at any time.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For so an entrance shall be ministered to
you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For which cause I will begin to put you
always in remembrance of these things: though indeed you know them, and
are confirmed in the present truth.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> But I think it meet as long as I am in
this tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Being assured that the laying away of
this my tabernacle is at hand, according as our Lord Jesus Christ also
hath signified to me.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And I will endeavour, that you frequently
have after my decease, whereby you may keep a memory of these things.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For we have not by following artificial
fables, made known to you the power, and presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ; but we were eyewitnesses of his greatness.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For he received from God the Father,
honour and glory: this voice coming down to him from the excellent
glory: This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And this voice we heard brought from
heaven, when we were with him in the holy mount.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> And we have the more firm prophetical
word: whereunto you do well to attend, as to a light that shineth in a
dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Understanding this first, that no
prophecy of scripture is made by private interpretation.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> For prophecy came not by the will of man
at any time: but the holy men of God spoke, inspired by the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But there were also false prophets among
the people, even as there shall be among you lying teachers, who shall
bring in sects of perdition, and deny the Lord who bought them: bringing
upon themselves swift destruction.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And many shall follow their riotousnesses,
through whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And through covetousness shall they with
feigned words make merchandise of you. Whose judgment now of a long time
lingereth not, and their perdition slumbereth not.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> For if God spared not the angels that
sinned, but delivered them, drawn down by infernal ropes to the lower
hell, unto torments, to be reserved unto judgment:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And spared not the original world, but
preserved Noe, the eighth person, the preacher of justice, bringing in
the flood upon the world of the ungodly.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And reducing the cities of the Sodomites,
and of the Gomorrhites, into ashes, condemned them to be overthrown,
making them an example to those that should after act wickedly.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And delivered just Lot, oppressed by the
injustice and lewd conversation of the wicked.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> For in sight and hearing he was just:
dwelling among them, who from day to day vexed the just soul with unjust
works.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly
from temptation, but to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to
be tormented.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> And especially them who walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government, audacious,
self willed, they fear not to bring in sects, blaspheming.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Whereas angels who are greater in
strength and power, bring not against themselves a railing judgment.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But these men, as irrational beasts,
naturally tending to the snare and to destruction, blaspheming those
things which they know not, shall perish in their corruption,

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Receiving the reward of their injustice,
counting for a pleasure the delights of a day: stains and spots,
sporting themselves to excess, rioting in their feasts with you:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Having eyes full of adultery and of sin
that ceaseth not: alluring unstable souls, having their heart exercised
with covetousness, children of malediction:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Leaving the right way they have gone
astray, having followed the way of Balaam of Bosor, who loved the wages
of iniquity,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But had a check of his madness, the dumb
beast used to the yoke, which speaking with man's voice, forbade the
folly of the prophet.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> These are fountains without water, and
clouds tossed with whirlwinds, to whom the mist of darkness is reserved.

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For, speaking proud words of vanity, they
allure by the desires of fleshly riotousness, those who for a little
while escape, such as converse in error:

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Promising them liberty, whereas they
themselves are the slaves of corruption. For by whom a man is overcome,
of the same also he is the slave.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> For if, flying from the pollutions of the
world, through the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they
be again entangled in them and overcome: their latter state is become
unto them worse than the former.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For it had been better for them not to
have known the way of justice, than after they have known it, to turn
back from that holy commandment which was delivered to them.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> For, that of the true proverb has
happened to them: The dog is returned to his vomit: and, The sow that
was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Behold this second epistle I write to you,
my dearly beloved, in which I stir up by way of admonition your sincere
mind:

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> That you may be mindful of those words
which I told you before from the holy prophets, and of your apostles, of
the precepts of the Lord and Saviour.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Knowing this first, that in the last days
there shall come deceitful scoffers, walking after their own lusts,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Saying: Where is his promise or his coming?
for since the time that the fathers slept, all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the creation.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> For this they are wilfully ignorant of,
that the heavens were before, and the earth out of water, and through
water, consisting by the word of God.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Whereby the world that then was, being
overflowed with water, perished.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> But the heavens and the earth which are
now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the
day of judgment and perdition of the ungodly men.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> But of this one thing be not ignorant, my
beloved, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> The Lord delayeth not his promise, as some
imagine, but dealeth patiently for your sake, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should return to penance.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But the day of the Lord shall come as a
thief, in which the heavens shall pass away with great violence, and the
elements shall be melted with heat, and the earth and the works which
are in it, shall be burnt up.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Seeing then that all these things are to
be dissolved, what manner of people ought you to be in holy conversation
and godliness?

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Looking for and hasting unto the coming
of the day of the Lord, by which the heavens being on fire shall be
dissolved, and the elements shall melt with the burning heat?

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But we look for new heavens and a new
earth according to his promises, in which justice dwelleth.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Wherefore, dearly beloved, waiting for
these things, be diligent that you may be found before him unspotted and
blameless in peace.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And account the longsuffering of our
Lord, salvation; as also our most dear brother Paul, according to the
wisdom given him, hath written to you:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> As also in all his epistles, speaking in
them of these things; in which are certain things hard to be understood,
which the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
scriptures, to their own destruction.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> You therefore, brethren, knowing these
things before, take heed, lest being led aside by the error of the
unwise, you fall from your own steadfastness.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To him be glory both now and unto
the day of eternity. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John](jo1)
