[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](psa)  [Next](ecc.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Proverbs

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> The parables of Solomon, the son of David,
king of Israel.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To know wisdom, and instruction:

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> To understand the words of prudence: and to
receive the instruction of doctrine, justice, and judgment, and equity:

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> To give subtilty to little ones, to the
young man knowledge and understanding.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> A wise man shall hear and shall be wiser:
and he that understandeth, shall possess governments.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> He shall understand a parable, and the
interpretation, the words of the wise, and their mysterious sayings.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom. Fools despise wisdom and instruction.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> My son, hear the instruction of thy father,
and forsake not the law of thy mother :

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> That grace may be added to thy head, and a
chain of gold to thy neck.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> My son, if sinners shall entice thee,
consent not to them.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> If they shall say: Come with us, let us
lie in wait for blood, let us hide snares for the innocent without
cause:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Let us swallow him up alive like hell,
and whole as one that goeth down into the pit.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> We shall find all precious substance, we
shall fill our houses with spoils.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Cast in thy lot with us, let us all have
one purse.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> My son, walk not thou with them, restrain
thy foot from their paths.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For their feet run to evil, and make
haste to shed blood.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But a net is spread in vain before the
eyes of them that have wings.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> And they themselves lie in wait for their
own blood, and practise deceits against their own souls.

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So the wage of every covetous man destroy
the souls of the possessors.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Wisdom preacheth abroad, she uttereth her
voice in the streets:

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> At the head of multitudes she crieth out,
in the entrance of the gates of the city she uttereth her words, saying:

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> O children, how long will you love
childishness, and fools covet those things which are hurtful to
themselves, and the unwise hate knowledge?

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> Turn ye at my reproof: behold I will
utter my spirit to you, and will shew you my words.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Because I called, and you refused: I
stretched out my hand, and there was none that regarded.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> You have despised all my counsel, and
have neglected my reprehensions.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> I also will laugh in your destruction,
and will mock when that shall come to you which you feared.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> When sudden calamity shall fall on you,
and destruction, as a tempest, shall be at hand: when tribulation and
distress shall come upon you:

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> Then shall they call upon me, and I will
not hear: they shall rise in the morning and shall not find me:

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Because they have hated instruction and
received not the fear of the Lord,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Nor consented to my counsel, but despised
all my reproof.

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Therefore they shall eat the fruit of
their own way, and shall be filled with their own devices.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> The turning away of little ones shall
kill them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

<span id="an_1:33">1:33</span> But he that shall hear me, shall rest
without terror, and shall enjoy abundance, without fear of evils.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and
wilt hide my commandments with thee,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> That thy ear may hearken to wisdom: Incline
thy heart to know prudence:

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For if thou shalt call for wisdom, and
incline thy heart to prudence:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> If thou shalt seek her as money, and shalt
dig for her as for a treasure:

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Then shalt thou understand the fear of the
Lord, and shalt find the knowledge of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Because the Lord giveth wisdom: and out of
his mouth cometh prudence and knowledge.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> He will keep the salvation of the
righteous, and protect them that walk in simplicity.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Keeping the paths of justice, and guarding
the ways of saints.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Then shalt thou understand justice, and
judgment, and equity, and every good path.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> If wisdom shall enter into thy heart, and
knowledge please thy soul:

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Counsel shall keep thee, and prudence
shall preserve thee,

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> That thou mayst be delivered from the
evil way, and from the man that speaketh perverse things:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> Who leave the right way, and walk by dark
ways:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Who are glad when they have done evil,
and rejoice in most wicked things:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Whose ways are perverse, and their steps
infamous.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> That thou mayst be delivered from the
strange women, and from the stranger, who softeneth her words:

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And forsaketh the guide of her youth,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And hath forgotten the covenant of her
God: for her house inclineth unto death, and her paths to hell.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> None that go in unto her shall return
again, neither shall they take hold of the paths of life,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> That thou mayst walk in a good way: and
mayst keep the paths of the just.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> For they that are upright shall dwell in
the earth, and the simple shall continue in it.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But the wicked shall be destroyed from
the earth: and they that do unjustly shall be taken away from it.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> My son, forget not my law, and let thy
heart keep my commandments.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> For they shall add to thee length of days,
and years of life and peace.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Let not mercy and truth leave thee, put
them about thy neck, and write them in the tables of thy heart:

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And thou shalt And grace and good
understanding before God and men.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Have confidence in the Lord with all thy
heart, and lean not upon thy own prudence.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> In all thy ways think on him, and he will
direct thy steps.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Be not wise in thy own conceit: fear God,
and depart from evil:

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> For it shall be health to thy navel, and
moistening to thy bones.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Honour the Lord with thy substance, and
give him of the first of all thy fruits :

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And thy barns shall be filled with
abundance, and thy presses shall run over with wine.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> My son, reject not the correction of the
Lord: and do not faint when thou art chastised by him:

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> For whom the Lord loveth, he chastiseth:
and as a father in the son he pleaseth himself.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom
and is rich in prudence:

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> The purchasing thereof is better than the
merchandise of silver, and her fruit than the chiefest and purest gold:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> She is more precious than all riches :
and all the things that are desired, are not to be compared with her.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Length of days is in her right hand, and
in her left hand riches and glory.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Her ways are beautiful ways, and all her
paths are peaceable.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> She is a tree of life to them that lay
hold on her: and he that shall retain her is blessed.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> The Lord by wisdom hath founded the
earth, hath established the heavens by prudence.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> By his wisdom the depths have broken out,
and the clouds grow thick with dew

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> My son, let not these things depart from
thy eyes: keep the law and counsel:

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> And there shall be life to thy soul, and
grace to thy mouth.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Then shalt thou walk confidently in thy
way, and thy foot shall not stumble:

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> If thou sleep, thou shalt not fear: thou
shalt rest, and thy sleep shall be sweet.

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Be not afraid of sudden fear, nor of the
power of the wicked falling upon thee.

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> For the Lord will be at thy side, and
will keep thy foot that thou be not taken.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Do not withhold him from doing good, who
is able: if thou art able, do good thyself also.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> Say not to thy friend: Go, and come
again: and to morrow I will give to thee: when thou canst give at
present.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Practise not evil against thy friend,
when he hath confidence in thee.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> Strive not against a man without cause,
when he hath done thee no evil.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Envy not the unjust man, and do not
follow his ways:

<span id="an_3:32">3:32</span> For every mocker is an abomination to the
Lord, and his communication is with the simple.

<span id="an_3:33">3:33</span> Want is from the Lord in the house of the
wicked: but the habitations of the just shall be blessed.

<span id="an_3:34">3:34</span> He shall scorn the scorners, and to the
meek he will give grace.

<span id="an_3:35">3:35</span> The wise shall possess glory: the
promotion of fools is disgrace.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Hear, ye children, the instruction of a
father, and attend that you may know prudence.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> I will give you a good gift, forsake not my
law.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For I also was my father's son, tender and
as an only son in the sight of my mother:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And he taught me, and said: Let thy heart
receive my words, keep my commandments, and thou shalt live.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Get wisdom, get prudence: forget not,
neither decline from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Forsake her not, and she shall keep thee:
love her, and she shall preserve thee.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> The beginning of wisdom, get wisdom, and
with all thy possession purchase prudence.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Take hold on her, and she shall exalt thee:
thou shalt be glorified by her, when thou shalt embrace her.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> She shall give to thy head increase of
graces, and protect thee with a noble crown.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Hear, O my son, and receive my words,
that years of life may be multiplied to thee.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> I will shew thee the way of wisdom, I
will lead thee by the paths of equity:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Which when thou shalt have entered, thy
steps shall not be straitened, and when thou runnest thou shalt not meet
a stumblingblock.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Take hold on instruction, leave it not:
keep it, because it is thy life.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Be not delighted in the paths of the
wicked, neither let the way of evil men please thee.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Flee from it, pass not by it: go aside,
and forsake it.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> For they sleep not except they have done
evil: and their sleep is taken away unless they have made some to fall.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> They eat the bread of wickedness, and
drink the wine of iniquity.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> But the path of the just, as a shining
light, goeth forwards and increaseth even to perfect day.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> The way of the wicked is darksome: they
know not where they fall.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> My son, hearken to my words, and incline
thy ear to my sayings.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Let them not depart from thy eyes, keep
them in the midst of thy heart:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> For they are life to those that find
them, and health to all flesh.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> With all watchfulness keep thy heart,
because life issueth out from it.

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> Remove from thee a froward mouth, and let
detracting lips be far from thee.

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Let thy eyes look straight on, and let
thy eyelids go before thy steps.

<span id="an_4:26">4:26</span> Make straight the path for thy feet, and
all thy ways shall be established.

<span id="an_4:27">4:27</span> Decline not to the right hand, nor to the
left: turn away thy foot from evil. For the Lord knoweth the ways that
are on the right hand: but those are perverse which are on the left
hand. But he will make thy courses straight, he will bring forward thy
ways in peace.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> My son, attend to my wisdom, and incline
thy ear to my prudence.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> That thou mayst keep thoughts, and thy lips
may preserve instruction. Mind not the deceit of a woman.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> For the lips of a harlot are like a
honeycomb dropping, and her throat is smoother than oil.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But her end is bitter as wormwood, and
sharp as a two-edged sword.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Her feet go down into death, and her steps
go in as far as hell.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> They walk not by the path of life, her
steps are wandering, and unaccountable.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> Now therefore, my son, hear me, and depart
not from the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> Remove thy way far from her, and come not
nigh the doors of her house.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Give not thy honour to strangers, and thy
years to the cruel.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Lest strangers be filled with thy
strength, and thy labours be in another man's house,

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And thou mourn it the last, when thou
shalt have spent thy flesh and thy body, and say:

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Why have I hated instruction, and my
heart consented not to reproof,

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And have not heard the voice of them that
taught me, and have not in- dined my ear to masters?

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I have almost been in all evil, in the
midst of the church and of the congregation.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> Drink water out of thy own cistern, and
the streams of thy own well:

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> Let thy fountains be conveyed abroad, and
in the streets divide thy waters.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Keep them to thyself alone, neither let
strangers be partakers with thee.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Let thy vein be blessed, and rejoice with
the wife of thy youth:

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Let her be thy dearest hind, and most
agreeable fawn: let her breasts inebriate thee at all times; he thou
delighted continually with her love.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Why art thou seduced, my son, by a
strange woman, and art cherished in the bosom of another ?

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> The Lord beholdeth the ways of man, and
considereth all his steps.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> His own iniquities catch the wicked, and
he is fast bound with the ropes of his own sins.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> He shall die, because he hath not
received instruction, and in the multitude of his folly he shall be
deceived.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> My son, if thou be surety for thy friend,
thou hast engaged fast thy hand to a stranger.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> Thou art ensnared with the words of thy
mouth, and caught with thy own words.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Do therefore, my son, what I say, and
deliver thyself: because thou art fallen into the hand of thy neighbour.
Run about, make haste, stir up thy friend:

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Give not sleep to thy eyes, neither let thy
eyelids slumber.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Deliver thyself as a doe from the hand, and
as a bird from the hand of the fowler.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Go to the ant, O sluggard, and consider her
ways, and learn wisdom:

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Which, although she hath no guide, nor
master, nor captain,

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Provideth her meat for herself in the
summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when
wilt thou rise out of thy sleep?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> Thou wilt sleep a little, thou wilt
slumber a little, thou wilt fold thy hands a little to sleep:

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And want shall come upon thee, as a
traveller, and poverty as a man armed. But if thou be diligent, thy
harvest shall come as a fountain, and want shall flee far from thee.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> A man that is an apostate, an
unprofitable man, walketh with a perverse mouth,

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> He winketh with the eyes, presseth with
the foot, speaketh with the finger.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> With a wicked heart he deviseth evil, and
at all times he soweth discord.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> To such a one his destruction shall
presently come, and he shall suddenly be destroyed, and shall no longer
have any remedy.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Six things there are, which the Lord
hateth, and the seventh his soul detesteth:

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Haughty eyes, a lying tongue, hands that
shed innocent blood,

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> A heart that deviseth wicked plots, feet
that are swift to run into mischief,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> A deceitful witness that uttereth lies,
and him that soweth discord among brethren.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> My son, beep the commandments of thy
father, and forsake not the law of thy mother.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Bind them in thy heart continually, and
put them about thy neck.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> When thou walkest, let them go with thee:
when thou sleepest, let them keep thee; and when thou awakest, talk with
them.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> Because the commandment is a lamp, and
the law a light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life:

<span id="an_6:24">6:24</span> That they may keep thee from the evil
woman, and from the flattering tongue of the stranger.

<span id="an_6:25">6:25</span> Let not thy heart covet her beauty, be
not caught with her winks:

<span id="an_6:26">6:26</span> For the price of a harlot is scarce one
loaf: but the woman catcheth the precious soul of a man.

<span id="an_6:27">6:27</span> Can a man hide fire in his bosom, and his
garments not burn?

<span id="an_6:28">6:28</span> Or can he walk upon hot coals, and his
feet not be burnt?

<span id="an_6:29">6:29</span> So he that goeth in to his neighbour's
wife, shall not be clean when he shall touch her.

<span id="an_6:30">6:30</span> The fault is not so great when a man hath
stolen: for he stealeth to fill his hungry soul:

<span id="an_6:31">6:31</span> And if he be taken he shall restore
sevenfold, and shall give up all the substance of his house.

<span id="an_6:32">6:32</span> But he that is an adulterer, for the
folly of his heart shall destroy his own soul:

<span id="an_6:33">6:33</span> He gathereth to himself shame and
dishonour, and his reproach shall not be blotted out:

<span id="an_6:34">6:34</span> Because the jealousy and rage of the
husband will not spare in the day of revenge,

<span id="an_6:35">6:35</span> Nor will he yield to any man's prayers,
nor will he accept for satisfaction ever so many gifts.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> My son, keep my words, and lay up my
precepts with thee. Son,

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Keep my commandments, and thou shalt live:
and my law as the apple of thy eye:

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Bind it upon thy fingers, write it upon the
tables of thy heart.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Say to wisdom: Thou art my sister: and call
prudence thy friend,

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> That she may keep thee from the woman that
is not thine, and from the stranger who sweeteneth her words.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> For I look out of the window of my house
through the lattice,

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And I see little ones, I behold a foolish
young man,

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> Who passeth through the street by the
corner, and goeth nigh the way of her house.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> In the dark, when it grows late, in the
darkness and obscurity of the night,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And behold a woman meeteth him in
harlot's attire prepared to deceive souls; talkative and wandering,

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Not bearing to be quiet, not able to
abide still at home,

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Now abroad, now in the streets, now lying
in wait near the corners.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> And catching the young man, she kisseth
him, and with an impudent face, flattereth, saying:

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> I vowed victims for prosperity, this day
I have paid my vows.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> Therefore I am come out to meet thee,
desirous to see thee, and I have found thee.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> I have woven my bed with cords, I have
covered it with painted tapestry, brought from Egypt.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes,
and cinnamon.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> Come, let us be inebriated with the
breasts, and let us enjoy the desired embraces, till the day appear.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For my husband is not at home, he is gone
a very long journey.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> He took with him a bag of money: he mill
return home the day of the full moon.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> She entangled him with many words, and
drew him away with the flattery of her lips.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> Immediately he followeth her as an ox led
to be a victim, and as a lamb playing the wanton, and not knowing that
he is drawn like a fool to bonds,

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> Till the arrow pierce his liver: as if a
bird should make haste to the snare, and knoweth not that his life is in
danger.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Now therefore, my son, hear me, and
attend to the words of my mouth.

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> Let not thy mind be drawn away in her
ways: neither be thou deceived with her paths.

<span id="an_7:26">7:26</span> For she hath cast down many wounded, and
the strongest have been slain by her.

<span id="an_7:27">7:27</span> Her house is the way to hell, reaching
even to the inner chambers of death.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Doth not wisdom cry aloud, and prudence put
forth her voice ?

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> Standing in the top of the highest places
by the way, in the midst of the paths.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Beside the gates of the city, in the very
doors she speaketh, saying:

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> O ye men, to you I call, and my voice is to
the sons of men.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> O little ones, understand subtilty, and ye
unwise, take notice.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Hear, for I will speak of great things: and
my lips shall be opened to preach right things.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> My mouth shall meditate truth, and my lips
shall hate wickedness.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> All my words are just, there is nothing
wicked nor perverse in them.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> They are right to them that understand, and
just to them that find knowledge.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Receive my instruction, and not money:
choose knowledge rather than gold.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> 11For wisdom is better than all the most
precious things: and whatsoever may be desired cannot be compared to

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> I wisdom dwell in counsel, and am present
in learned thoughts.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> The fear of the Lord hateth evil: I hate
arrogance, and pride, and every wicked way, and a mouth with a double
tongue.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Counsel and equity is mine, prudence is
mine, strength is mine.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> By me kings reign, and lawgivers decree
just things,

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> By me princes rule, and the mighty decree
justice.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> I love them that love me: and they that
in the morning early watch for me, shall find me.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> With me are riches and glory, glorious
riches and justice.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For my fruit is better than gold and the
precious stone, and my blossoms than choice silver.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> I walk in the way of justice, in the
midst of the paths of judgment,

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> That I may enrich them that love me, and
may fill their treasures.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> The Lord possessed me in the beginning of
his ways, before he made any thing from the beginning.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> I was set up from eternity, and of old
before the earth was made.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> The depths were not as yet, and I was
already conceived. neither had the fountains of waters as yet sprung
out:

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> The mountains with their huge bulk had
not as yet been established: before the hills I was brought forth:

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> He had not yet made the earth, nor the
rivers, nor the poles of the world.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> When he prepared the heavens, I was
present: when with a certain law and compass he enclosed the depths:

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> When he established the sky above, and
poised the fountains of waters:

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> When he compassed the sea with its
bounds, and set a law to the waters that they should not pass their
limits: when be balanced the foundations of the earth;

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> I was with him forming all things: and
was delighted every day, playing before him at all times;

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> Playing in the world: and my delights
were to be with the children of men.

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> Now therefore, ye children, hear me:
Blessed are they that keep my ways.

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Hear instruction and be wise, and refuse
it not.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Blessed is the man that heareth me, and
that watcheth daily at my gates, and waiteth at the posts of my doors.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> He that shall find me, shall find life,
and shall have salvation from the Lord:

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> But he that shall sin against me, shall
hurt his own soul. All that hate me love death.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Wisdom hath built herself a house, she hath
hewn her out seven pillars.

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> She hath slain her victims, mingled her
wine, and set forth her table.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> She hath sent her maids to invite to the
tower, and to the walls of the city:

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Whosoever is a little one, let him come to
me. And to the unwise she said:

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Come, eat my bread, and drink the wine
which I have mingled for you.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Forsake childishness, and live, and walk by
the ways of prudence.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> He that teacheth a scorner, doth an injury
to himself: and he that rebuketh a wicked man, getteth himself a blot.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> Rebuke not a scorner lest he hate thee.
Rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> Give an occasion to a wise man, and wisdom
shall be added to him. Teach a just man, and he shall make haste to
receive it.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy is prudence.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For by me shall thy days be multiplied,
and years of life shall be added to thee.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> If thou be wise, thou shalt be so to
thyself: and if a scorner, thou alone shalt bear the evil.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> A foolish woman and clamorous, and full
of allurements, and knowing nothing at all,

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> Sat at the door of her house, upon a
seat, in a high place of the city,

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> To call them that pass by the way, and go
on their journey:

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> He that is a little one, let him turn to
me. And to the fool she said:

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> Stolen waters are sweeter, and hid den
bread is more pleasant.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> And he did not know that giants are
there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell. The Parables of
Solomon

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> A wise son maketh the father glad: but a
foolish son is the sorrow of his mother.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Treasures of wickedness shall profit
nothing: but justice shall deliver from death.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> The Lord will not afflict the soul of the
just with famine, and he will disappoint the deceitful practices of the
wicked.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> The slothful hand hath wrought poverty:
but the hand of the industrious getteth riches. He that trusteth to lies
feedeth the winds: and the same runneth after birds that fly away.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> He that gathered in the harvest is a wise
son: but he that snorteth in the summer, is the son of confusion.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> The blessing of the Lord is upon the head
of the just: but iniquity covereth the mouth of the wicked.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> The memory of the just is with praises:
and the name of the wicked shall rot.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> The wise of heart receiveth precepts: a
fool is beaten with lips.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> He that walketh sincerely, walketh
confidently: but he that perverteth his ways, shall be manifest.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> He that winketh with the eye shall
cause sorrow: and the foolish in lips shall be beaten.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> The mouth of the just is a vein of
life: and the mouth of the wicked covereth iniquity.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> Hatred stirreth up strifes: and charity
covereth all sins.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> In the lips of the wise is wisdom
found: and a rod on the back of him that wanteth sense.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> Wise men lay up knowledge: but the
mouth of the fool is next to confusion.

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> The substance of a rich man is the city
of his strength: the fear of the poor is their poverty.

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> The work of the just is unto life: but
the fruit of the wicked, unto sin.

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> The way of life, to him that observeth
correction: but he that forsaketh reproofs goeth astray.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> Lying lips hide hatred: he that
uttereth reproach is foolish.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> In the multitude of words there shall
not want sin: but he that refraineth his lips is most wise.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> The tongue of the just is as choice
silver: but the heart of the wicked is nothing worth.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> The lips of the just teach many: but
they that are ignorant, shall die in the want of understanding.

<span id="an_10:22">10:22</span> The blessing of the Lord maketh men
rich: neither shall affliction be joined to them.

<span id="an_10:23">10:23</span> A fool worketh mischief as it were for
sport: but wisdom is prudence to a man.

<span id="an_10:24">10:24</span> That which the wicked feareth, shall
come upon him: to the just their desire shall be given.

<span id="an_10:25">10:25</span> As a tempest that passeth, so the
wicked shall be no more: but the just is as an everlasting foundation.

<span id="an_10:26">10:26</span> As vinegar to the teeth, and smoke to
the eyes, so is the sluggard to them that sent him.

<span id="an_10:27">10:27</span> The fear of the Lord shall prolong
days: and the years of the wicked shall be shortened.

<span id="an_10:28">10:28</span> The expectation of the just is joy; but
the hope of the wicked shall perish.

<span id="an_10:29">10:29</span> The strength of the upright is the way
of the Lord: and fear to them that work evil.

<span id="an_10:30">10:30</span> The just shall never be moved: but the
wicked shall not dwell on the earth.

<span id="an_10:31">10:31</span> The mouth of the just shall bring forth
wisdom: the tongue of the perverse shall perish.

<span id="an_10:32">10:32</span> The lips of the just consider what is
acceptable: and the mouth of the wicked uttereth perverse things.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> A deceitful balance is an abomination
before the Lord: and a just weight is his will.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> Where pride is, there also shall be
reproach: but where humility is, there also is wisdom.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> The simplicity of the just shall guide
them: and the deceitfulness of the wicked shall destroy them.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> Riches shall not profit in the day of
revenge: but justice shall deliver from death.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> The justice of the upright shall make his
way prosperous: and the wicked man shall fall by his own wickedness.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> The justice of the righteous shall
deliver them: and the unjust shall be caught in their own snares.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> When the wicked man is dead, there shall
be no hope any more: and the expectation of the solicitous shall perish.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> The just is delivered out of distress:
and the wicked shall be given up for him.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> The dissembler with his mouth deceiveth
his friend: but the just shall be delivered by knowledge.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> When it goeth well with the just the
city shall rejoice: and when the wicked perish there shall be praise.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> By the blessing of the just the city
shall be exalted: and by the mouth of the wicked it shall be overthrown.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> He that despiseth his friend, is mean
of heart: but the wise man will hold his peace.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> He that walketh deceitfully, revealeth
secrets: but he that is faithful, concealeth the thing committed to him
by his friend.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> Where there is no governor, the people
shall fall: but there is safety where there is much counsel.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> He shall be afflicted with evil, that
is surety for a stranger: but he that is aware of the snares, shall be
secure.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> A gracious woman shall find glory: and
the strong shall have riches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> A merciful man doth good to his own
soul: but he that is cruel casteth off even his own kindred.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> The wicked maketh an unsteady work: but
to him that soweth justice, there is a faithful reward.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Clemency prepareth life: and the
pursuing of evil things, death.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> A perverse heart is abominable to the
Lord: and his will is in them that walk sincerely.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> Hand in hand the evil man shall not be
innocent: but the seed of the just shall be saved.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> A golden ring in a swine's snout, a
woman fair and foolish.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> The desire of the just is all good: the
expectation of the wicked is indignation.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> Some distribute their own goods, and
grow richer: others take away what is not their own, and are always in
want.

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> The soul which blesseth, shall be made
fat: and he that inebriateth, shall be inebriated also himself.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> He that hideth up corn, shall be cursed
among the people: but a blessing upon the head of them that sell.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> Well doth he rise early who seeketh
good things; but he that seeketh after evil things shall be oppressed by
them.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> He that trusteth in his riches shall
fall: but the just shall spring up as a green leaf.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> He that troubleth his own house, shall
inherit the winds: and the fool shall serve the wise.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> The fruit of the just man is a tree of
life: and he that gaineth souls, is wise.

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> If the just man receive in the earth,
how much more the wicked and the sinner.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> He that loveth correction, loveth
knowledge: but he that hateth reproof is foolish.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> He that is good, shall draw grace from
the Lord : but he that trusteth in his own devices doth wickedly.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> Men shall not be strengthened by
wickedness: and the root of the just shall not be moved.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> A diligent woman is a crown to her
husband: and she that doth things worthy of confusion, is a rottenness
in his bones.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> The thoughts of the just are judgments:
and the counsels of the wicked are deceitful.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> The words of the wicked lie in wait for
blood: the mouth of the just shall deliver them.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Turn the wicked, and they shall not be:
but the house of the just shall stand firm.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> A man shall be known by his learning: but
he that is vain and foolish, shall be exposed to contempt.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Better is the poor man that provideth for
himself, than he that is glorious and wanteth bread.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> The just regardeth the lives of his
beasts: but the bowels of the wicked are cruel.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> He that tilleth his land shall be
satisfied with bread: but he that pursueth idleness is very foolish. He
that is delighted in passing his time over wine, leaveth a reproach in
his strong holds.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> The desire of the wicked is the
fortification of evil men: but the root of the just shall prosper.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> For the sins of the lips ruin draweth
nigh to the evil mall: but the just shall escape out of distress.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> By the fruit of his own mouth shall a
man be filled with good things, and according to the works of his hands
it shall be repaid him.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> The way of a fool is right in his own
eyes: but he that is wise hearkeneth unto counsels.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> A fool immediately sheweth his anger:
but he that dissembleth injuries is wise.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> He that speaketh that which he knoweth,
sheweth forth justice: but he that lieth, is a deceitful witness.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> There is that promiseth, and is pricked
as it were with a sword of conscience: but the tongue of the wise is
health.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> The lip of truth shall be steadfast for
ever: but he that is a hasty witness, frameth a lying tongue.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> Deceit is in the heart of them that
think evil things: but joy followeth them that take counsels of peace.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Whatsoever shall befall the just man.
it shall not make him sad: but the wicked shall be filled with mischief.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Lying lips are an abomination to the
Lord: but they that deal faithfully please him.

<span id="an_12:23">12:23</span> A cautious man concealeth knowledge:
and the heart of fools publisheth folly.

<span id="an_12:24">12:24</span> The hand of the valiant shall bear
rule: but that which is slothful, shall be under tribute.

<span id="an_12:25">12:25</span> Grief in the heart of a man shall bring
him low, but with a good word he shall be made glad.

<span id="an_12:26">12:26</span> He that neglecteth a loss for the sake
of a friend, is just: but the way of the wicked shall deceive them.

<span id="an_12:27">12:27</span> The deceitful man shall not find gain:
but the substance of a just man shall be precious gold.

<span id="an_12:28">12:28</span> In the path of justice is life: but the
by-way leadeth to death.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> A wise son heareth the doctrine of his
father: but he that is a scorner, beareth not when he is reproved.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Of the fruit of his own mouth shall a man
be filled with good things: but the soul of transgressors is wicked.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> He that keepeth his mouth, keepeth his
soul: but he that hath no guard on his speech shall meet with evils.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> The sluggard willeth and willeth not: but
the soul of them that work, shall be made fat.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> The just shall hate a lying word: but the
wicked confoundeth, and shall be confounded.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> Justice keepeth the way of the innocent:
but wickedness overthroweth the sinner.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> One is as it were rich, when he hath
nothing: and another is as it were poor, when he hath great riches.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> The ransom of a man's life are his
riches: but he that is poor beareth not reprehension.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> The light of the just giveth joy: but the
lamp of the wicked shall be put out.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Among the proud there are always
contentions: but they that do all things with counsel, are ruled by
wisdom.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Substance got in haste shall be
diminished: but that which by little and little is gathered with the
hand shall increase.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Hope that is deferred afflicteth the
soul: desire when it cometh is a tree of life.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Whosoever speaketh ill of any thing,
bindeth himself for the time to come: but he that feareth the
commandment, shall dwell in peace. Deceitful souls go astray in sins:
the just are merciful, and shew mercy.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> The law of the wise is a fountain of
life, that he may decline from the ruin of death.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> Good instruction shall give grace: in
the way of scorners is a deep pit.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> The prudent mall doth all things with
counsel: but he that is a fool, layeth open his folly.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> The messenger of the wicked shall fall
into mischief: but a faithful ambassador is health.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Poverty and shame to him that refuseth
instruction: but he that yieldeth to reproof, shall be glorified.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> The desire that is accomplished,
delighteth the soul: fools hate them that flee from evil things.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> He that walketh with the wise, shall be
wise: a friend of fools shall become like to them.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> 21Evil pursueth sinners: and to the
just good shall be repaid.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> The good man leaveth heirs, sons, and
grandsons: and the substance of the sinner is kept for the just.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Much food is in the tillage of fathers:
but for others it is gathered with out judgment.

<span id="an_13:24">13:24</span> He that spareth the rod hateth his son:
but he that loveth him correcteth him betimes.

<span id="an_13:25">13:25</span> The just eateth and filleth his soul:
but the belly of the wicked is never to be filled.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> A wise woman buildeth her house: but the
foolish will pull down with her hands that also which is built.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> He that walketh in the right way, and
feareth God, is despised by him that goeth by an infamous way.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> In the mouth of a fool is the rod of
pride: but the lips of the wise preserve them.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Where there are no oxen, the crib is
empty: but where there is much corn, there the strength of the ox is
manifest.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> A faithful witness will not lie: but a
deceitful witness uttereth a lie.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it
not: the learning of the wise is easy.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> Go against a foolish man, and he knoweth
not the lips of prudence.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> The wisdom of a. discreet man is to
understand his way: and the imprudence of fools erreth.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> A fool will laugh at sin, but among the
just grace shall abide.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> The heart that knoweth the bitterness
of his own soul, in his joy the stranger shall not intermeddle.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> The house of the wicked shall be
destroyed: but the tabernacles of the just shall flourish.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> There is a way which seemeth just to a
man: but the ends thereof lead to death.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Laughter shall be mingled with sorrow,
and mourning taketh hold of the end of joy.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> A fool shall be filled with his own
ways, and the good man shall be above him.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> The innocent believeth every word: the
discreet man considereth his steps. No good shall come to the deceitful
son: but the wise servant shall prosper in his dealings, and his way
shall be made straight.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> A wise man feareth and declineth from
evil: the fool leapeth over and is confident.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> The impatient man shall work folly: and
the crafty man is hateful.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> The childish shall possess folly, and
the prudent, shall look for knowledge.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> The evil shall fall down before the
good: and the wicked before the gates of the just.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> The poor man shall be hateful even to
his own neighbour: but the friends of the rich are many.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> He that despiseth his neighbour,
sinneth: but he that sheweth mercy to the poor, shall be blessed. He
that believeth in the Lord, loveth mercy.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> They err that work evil: but mercy and
truth prepare good things.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> In much work there shall be abundance:
but where there are many words, there is oftentimes want.

<span id="an_14:24">14:24</span> The crown of the wise is their riches:
the folly of fools, imprudence.

<span id="an_14:25">14:25</span> A faithful witness delivereth souls:
and the double dealer uttereth lies.

<span id="an_14:26">14:26</span> In the fear of the Lord is confidence
of strength, and there shall be hope for his children.

<span id="an_14:27">14:27</span> The fear of the Lord is a fountain of
life, to decline from the ruin of death.

<span id="an_14:28">14:28</span> In the multitude of people is the
dignity of the king: and in the small number of people the dishonour of
the prince.

<span id="an_14:29">14:29</span> He that is patient, is governed with
much wisdom: but he that is impatient, exalteth his folly.

<span id="an_14:30">14:30</span> Soundness of heart is the life of the
flesh: but envy is the rottenness of the bones.

<span id="an_14:31">14:31</span> He that oppresseth the poor, upbraideth
his Maker: but he that hath pity on the poor, honoureth him.

<span id="an_14:32">14:32</span> The wicked man shall be driven out in
his wickedness: but the just hath hope in his death.

<span id="an_14:33">14:33</span> In the heart of the prudent resteth
wisdom, and it shall instruct all the ignorant.

<span id="an_14:34">14:34</span> Justice exalteth a nation: but sin
maketh nations miserable.

<span id="an_14:35">14:35</span> A wise servant is acceptable to the
king: he that is good for nothing shall feel his anger.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> A mild answer breaketh wrath: but a harsh
word stirreth up fury.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> The tongue of the wise adorneth
knowledge: but the mouth of fools bubbleth out folly.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> The eyes of the Lord in every place
behold the good and the evil.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> A peaceable tongue is a tree of life: but
that which is immoderate, shall crush the spirit.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> A fool laugheth at the instruction of his
father: but he that regardeth reproofs shall become prudent. In abundant
justice there is the greatest strength: but the devices of the wicked
shall be rooted out.

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> The house of the just is very much
strength: and in the fruits of the wicked is trouble.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> The lips of the wise shall disperse
knowledge: the heart of fools shall be unlike.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> The victims of the wicked are abominable
to the Lord: the vows of the just are acceptable.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> The way of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord: he that followeth justice is beloved by him.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> Instruction is grievous to him that
forsaketh the way of life: he that hateth reproof shall die.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> Hell and destruction are before the
Lord: how much more the hearts of the children of men?

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> A corrupt man loveth not one that
reproveth him: nor will he go to the wise.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> A glad heart maketh a cheerful
countenance: but by grief of mind the spirit is cast down.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> The heart of the wise seeketh
instruction: and the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> All the days of the poor are evil: a
secure mind is like a continual feast.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> Better is a little with the fear of the
Lord, than great treasures without content,

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> It is better to be invited to herbs
with love, than to a fatted calf with hatred.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> A passionate man stirreth up strifes:
he that is patient appeaseth those that are stirred up.

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> The way of the slothful is as a hedge
of thorns; the way of the just is without offence.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> A wise son maketh a father joyful: but
the foolish man despiseth his mother.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> Folly is joy to the fool: and the wise
man maketh straight his steps.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> Designs are brought to nothing where
there is no counsel: but where there are many counsellors, they are
established.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> A man rejoiceth in the sentence of his
mouth: and a word in due time is best.

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> The path of life is above for the wise,
that he may decline from the lowest hell.

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> The Lord will destroy the house of the
proud: and will strengthen the borders of the widow.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> Evil thoughts are an abomination to the
Lord: and pure words most beautiful shall be confirmed by him.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> He that is greedy of gain troubleth his
own house: but he that hateth bribes shall live. By mercy and faith sins
are purged away: and by the fear of the Lord every one declineth from
evil.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> The mind of the just studieth
obedience: the mouth of the wicked over floweth with evils.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> The Lord is far from the wicked: and he
will hear the prayers of the just.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> The light of the eyes rejoiceth the
soul: a good name maketh the bones fat.

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> The ear that heareth the reproofs of
life, shall abide in the midst of the wise.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> He that rejecteth instruction,
despiseth his own soul: but he that yieldeth to reproof possesseth
understanding.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> The fear of the Lord is the lesson of
wisdom: and humility goeth before glory.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> It is the part of man to prepare the
soul: and of the Lord to govern the tongue.

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> All the ways of a man are open to his
eyes: the Lord is the weigher of spirits.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Lay open thy works to the Lord: and thy
thoughts shall be directed.

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> The Lord hath made all things for
himself: the wicked also for the evil day.

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> Every proud man is an abomination to the
Lord: though hand should be joined to hand, he is not innocent. The
beginning of a good way is to do justice; and this is more acceptable
with God, than to offer sacrifices.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> By mercy and truth iniquity is redeemed:
and by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> When the ways of man shall please the
Lord, he will convert even his enemies to peace.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Better is a little with justice, than
great revenues with iniquity.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> The heart of man disposeth his way: but
the Lord must direct his steps.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Divination is in the lips of the king,
his mouth shall not err in judgment.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Weight and balance are judgments of the
Lord: and his work all the weights of the bag.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> They that act wickedly are abominable
to the king: for the throne is established by justice.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Just lips are the delight of kings: he
that speaketh right things shall be loved.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> The wrath of a king is as messengers of
death : and the wise man will pacify it.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> In the cheerfulness of the king's
countenance is life: and his clemency is like the latter rain.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Get wisdom, because it is better than
gold: and purchase prudence, for it is more precious than silver.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> The path of the just departeth from
evils: he that keepeth his soul keepeth his way.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> Pride goeth before destruction: and the
spirit is lifted up before a fall.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> It is better to be humbled with the
meek, than to divide spoils with the proud.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> The learned in word shall find good
things: and he that trusteth in the Lord is blessed.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> The wise in heart shall be called
prudent: and he that is sweet in words shall attain to greater things.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> Knowledge is a fountain of life to him
that possesseth it: the instruction of fools is foolishness.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> The heart of the wise shall instruct
his mouth: and shall add grace to his lips.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> Well ordered words are as a honeycomb:
sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> There is a way that seemeth to a man
right: and the ends thereof lead to death.

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> The soul of him that laboureth,
laboureth for himself, because his mouth hath obliged him to it.

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> The wicked man diggeth evil, and in his
lips is a burning fire.

<span id="an_16:28">16:28</span> A perverse man stirreth up quarrels:
and one full of words separateth princes.

<span id="an_16:29">16:29</span> An unjust man allureth his friend: and
leadeth him into a way that is not good

<span id="an_16:30">16:30</span> He that with fixed eyes deviseth·
wicked things, biting his lips, bringeth: evil to pass.

<span id="an_16:31">16:31</span> Old age is a crown of dignity, when it
is found in the ways of justice.

<span id="an_16:32">16:32</span> The patient man is better than the
valiant: and he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh cities.

<span id="an_16:33">16:33</span> Lots are cast into the lap, but they
are disposed of by the Lord.

<span id="an_17:1">17:1</span> Better is a dry morsel with joy, than a
house full of victims with strife.

<span id="an_17:2">17:2</span> A wise servant shall rule over foolish
sons, and shall divide the inheritance among the brethren.

<span id="an_17:3">17:3</span> As silver is tried by fire, and gold in
the furnace: so the Lord trieth the hearts.

<span id="an_17:4">17:4</span> The evil man obeyeth an unjust tongue:
and the deceitful hearkeneth to lying lips.

<span id="an_17:5">17:5</span> He that despiseth the poor, reproacheth
his Maker; and he that rejoiceth at another man's ruin, shall not be
unpunished.

<span id="an_17:6">17:6</span> Children's children are the crown of old
men: and the glory of children are their fathers.

<span id="an_17:7">17:7</span> Eloquent words do not become a fool, nor
lying lips a prince.

<span id="an_17:8">17:8</span> The expectation of him that expecteth, is
a most acceptable jewel: whithersoever he turneth himself, he
understandeth wisely.

<span id="an_17:9">17:9</span> He that concealeth a transgression.
seeketh friendships: he that repeateth it again, separateth friends.

<span id="an_17:10">17:10</span> A reproof availeth more with a wise
man, than a hundred stripes with a fool.

<span id="an_17:11">17:11</span> An evil man always seeketh quarrels:
but a cruel angel shall be sent against him.

<span id="an_17:12">17:12</span> It is better to meet a bear robbed of
her whelps, than a fool trusting in his own folly.

<span id="an_17:13">17:13</span> He that rendereth evil for good, evil
shall not depart from his house.

<span id="an_17:14">17:14</span> The beginning of quarrels is as when
one letteth out water: before he suffereth reproach he forsaketh
judgment.

<span id="an_17:15">17:15</span> He that justifieth the wicked, and he
that condemneth the just, both are abominable before God.

<span id="an_17:16">17:16</span> What doth it avail a fool to have
riches, seeing he cannot buy wisdom? He that maketh his house high,
seeketh a downfall: and he that refuseth to learn, shall fall into
evils.

<span id="an_17:17">17:17</span> He that is a friend loveth at all
times: and a brother is proved in distress.

<span id="an_17:18">17:18</span> A foolish man will clap hands, when he
is surety for his friend.

<span id="an_17:19">17:19</span> He that studieth discords, loveth
quarrels: and he that exalteth his door, seeketh ruin.

<span id="an_17:20">17:20</span> He that is of a perverse heart, shall
not find good: and he that perverteth his tongue, shall fall into evil.

<span id="an_17:21">17:21</span> A fool is born to his own disgrace: and
even his father shall not rejoice in a fool.

<span id="an_17:22">17:22</span> A joyful mind maketh age flourishing: a
sorrowful spirit drieth up the bones.

<span id="an_17:23">17:23</span> The wicked man taketh gifts out of the
bosom, that he may pervert the paths of judgment.

<span id="an_17:24">17:24</span> Wisdom shineth in the face of the wise:
the eyes of fools are in the ends of the earth.

<span id="an_17:25">17:25</span> A foolish son is the anger of the
father: and the sorrow of the mother that bore him.

<span id="an_17:26">17:26</span> It is no good thing to do hurt to the
just: nor to strike the prince, who judgeth right.

<span id="an_17:27">17:27</span> He that setteth bounds to his words. is
knowing and wise: and the man of understanding is of a precious spirit.

<span id="an_17:28">17:28</span> Even a fool, if he will hold his peace
shall be counted wise: and if he close his lips, a man of understanding.

<span id="an_18:1">18:1</span> He that hath a mind to depart from a
friend seeketh occasions: he shall ever be subject to reproach.

<span id="an_18:2">18:2</span> A fool receiveth not the words of
prudence: unless thou say those things which are in his heart.

<span id="an_18:3">18:3</span> The wicked man when he is come into the
depth of sine, contemneth: but ignominy and reproach follow him.

<span id="an_18:4">18:4</span> Words from the mouth of a men are as deep
water: and the fountain of wisdom as an overflowing stream.

<span id="an_18:5">18:5</span> It is not good to accept the person of
the wicked, to decline from the truth of judgment.

<span id="an_18:6">18:6</span> The lips of a fool intermeddle with
strife: and his mouth provoketh quarrels.

<span id="an_18:7">18:7</span> The mouth of a fool is his destruction:
and his lips are the ruin of his soul.

<span id="an_18:8">18:8</span> The words of the double tongued are as if
they were harmless: and they reach even to the inner parts of the
bowels. Fear casteth down the slothful: and the souls of the effeminate
shall be hungry.

<span id="an_18:9">18:9</span> He that is loose and slack in his work,
is the brother of him that wasteth his own works.

<span id="an_18:10">18:10</span> The name of the Lord is a strong tower:
the just runneth to it, and shall be exalted.

<span id="an_18:11">18:11</span> The substance of the rich man is the
city of his strength, and as a strong wall compassing him about.

<span id="an_18:12">18:12</span> Before destruction, the heart of a man
is exalted: and before he be glorified, it is humbled.

<span id="an_18:13">18:13</span> He that answereth before he heareth
sheweth himself to be a fool, and worthy of confusion.

<span id="an_18:14">18:14</span> The spirit of a man upholdeth his
infirmity: but a spirit that is easily angered, who can bear?

<span id="an_18:15">18:15</span> A wise heart shall acquire knowledge:
and the ear of the wise seeketh instruction.

<span id="an_18:16">18:16</span> A man's gift enlargeth his may, and
maketh him room before princes.

<span id="an_18:17">18:17</span> The just is first accuser of himself:
his friend cometh, and shall search him.

<span id="an_18:18">18:18</span> The lot suppresseth contentions, and
determineth even between the mighty.

<span id="an_18:19">18:19</span> A brother that is helped by his
brother, is like a strong city: and judgments are like the bars of
cities.

<span id="an_18:20">18:20</span> Of the fruit of a man's mouth shall his
belly be satisfied: and the offspring of his lips shall fill him.

<span id="an_18:21">18:21</span> Death and life are in the power of the
tongue: they that love it, shall eat the fruits thereof.

<span id="an_18:22">18:22</span> He that hath found a good wife, hath
found a good thing, and shall receive a pleasure from the Lord. He that
driveth away a good wife, driveth away a good thing: but he that keepeth
an adulteress, is foolish and wicked.

<span id="an_18:23">18:23</span> The poor will speak with supplications,
and the rich will speak roughly.

<span id="an_18:24">18:24</span> A man amiable in society, shall be more
friendly than a brother.

<span id="an_19:1">19:1</span> Better is the poor man, that walketh in
his simplicity, than a rich man that is perverse in his lips, and
unwise.

<span id="an_19:2">19:2</span> Where there is no knowledge of the soul,
there is no good: and he that is hasty with his feet shall stumble.

<span id="an_19:3">19:3</span> The folly of a man supplanteth his seeps:
and he fretteth in his mind against God.

<span id="an_19:4">19:4</span> Riches make many friends: but from the
poor man, even they whom he had, depart.

<span id="an_19:5">19:5</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished:
and he that speaketh lies shall not escape.

<span id="an_19:6">19:6</span> Many honour the person of him that is
mighty, and are friends of him that giveth gifts.

<span id="an_19:7">19:7</span> The brethren of the poor man hate him:
moreover also his friends have departed far from him. He that followeth
after words only, shall have nothing.

<span id="an_19:8">19:8</span> But he that possesseth a mind, loveth his
own soul, and he that keepeth prudence shall find good things.

<span id="an_19:9">19:9</span> A false witness shall not be unpunished:
and he that speaketh lies, shall perish.

<span id="an_19:10">19:10</span> Delicacies are not seemly for a fool:
nor for a servant to have rule over princes.

<span id="an_19:11">19:11</span> The learning of a man is known by
patience and his glory is to pass over wrongs.

<span id="an_19:12">19:12</span> As the roaring of a lion, so also is
the anger of a king: and his cheerfulness as the dew upon the grass.

<span id="an_19:13">19:13</span> A foolish son is the grief of his
father: and a wrangling wife is like a roof continually dropping
through.

<span id="an_19:14">19:14</span> House and riches are given by parents:
but a prudent wife is properly from the Lord.

<span id="an_19:15">19:15</span> Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep,
and an idle soul shall suffer hunger.

<span id="an_19:16">19:16</span> He that keepeth the commandment,
keepeth his own soul: but he that neglecteth his own way, shall die.

<span id="an_19:17">19:17</span> He that hath mercy on the poor, lendeth
to the Lord: and he will repay him.

<span id="an_19:18">19:18</span> Chastise thy son, despair not: but to
the killing of him set not thy soul.

<span id="an_19:19">19:19</span> He that is impatient, shall suffer
damage: and when he shall take away he shall add another thing.

<span id="an_19:20">19:20</span> Hear counsel, and receive instruction,
that thou mayst be wise in thy latter end.

<span id="an_19:21">19:21</span> There are many thoughts in the heart of
a man: but the will of the Lord shall stand firm.

<span id="an_19:22">19:22</span> A needy man is merciful: and better is
the poor than the lying man.

<span id="an_19:23">19:23</span> The fear of the Lord is unto life: and
he shall abide in fulness without being visited with evil.

<span id="an_19:24">19:24</span> The slothful hideth his hand under his
armpit, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth.

<span id="an_19:25">19:25</span> The wicked man being; scourged, the
fool shall be wiser: but if thou rebuke a wise man he will understand
discipline.

<span id="an_19:26">19:26</span> He that afflicteth his father, and
chaseth away his mother, is infamous and unhappy.

<span id="an_19:27">19:27</span> Cease not, O my son, to hear
instruction, and be not ignorant of the words of knowledge.

<span id="an_19:28">19:28</span> An unjust witness scorneth judgment:
and the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity.

<span id="an_19:29">19:29</span> Judgments are prepared for scorners:
and striking hammers for the bodies of fools.

<span id="an_20:1">20:1</span> Wine is a luxurious thing, and
drunkenness riotous: whosoever is delighted therewith shell not be wise.

<span id="an_20:2">20:2</span> As the roaring of a lion, so also is the
dread of a king: he that provoketh him, sinneth against his own soul.

<span id="an_20:3">20:3</span> It is an honour for a man to separate
himself from quarrels: but all fools are meddling with reproaches.

<span id="an_20:4">20:4</span> Because of the cold the sluggard would
not plough: he shall beg therefore in the summer, and it shall not be
given him.

<span id="an_20:5">20:5</span> Counsel in the heart of a man is like
deep water: but a wise man will draw it out.

<span id="an_20:6">20:6</span> Many men are called merciful: but who
shall find a faithful man?

<span id="an_20:7">20:7</span> The just that walketh in his simplicity,
shall leave behind him blessed children.

<span id="an_20:8">20:8</span> The king, that sitteth on the throne of
judgment, scattereth away all evil with his look.

<span id="an_20:9">20:9</span> Who can say: My heart is clean, I am pure
from sin?

<span id="an_20:10">20:10</span> Diverse weights and diverse measures,
both are abominable before God.

<span id="an_20:11">20:11</span> By his inclinations a child is known,
if his works be clean and right.

<span id="an_20:12">20:12</span> The hearing ear, and the seeing eye,
the Lord hath made them both.

<span id="an_20:13">20:13</span> Love not sleep, lest poverty oppress
thee: open thy eyes, and be filled with bread.

<span id="an_20:14">20:14</span> It is nought, it is nought, saith every
buyer: and when he is gone away, then he will boast.

<span id="an_20:15">20:15</span> There is gold, and a multitude of
jewels: but the lips of knowledge are a precious vessel.

<span id="an_20:16">20:16</span> Take away the garment of him that is
surety for a stranger, and take a pledge from him for strangers.

<span id="an_20:17">20:17</span> The bread of lying is sweet to a man:
but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.

<span id="an_20:18">20:18</span> Designs are strengthened by counsels:
and wars are to be managed by governments.

<span id="an_20:19">20:19</span> Meddle not with him that revealeth
secrets, and walketh deceitfully, and openeth wide his lips.

<span id="an_20:20">20:20</span> He that curseth his father, and mother,
his lamp shall be put out in the midst of darkness.

<span id="an_20:21">20:21</span> The inheritance gotten hastily in the
beginning, in the end shall be without a blessing.

<span id="an_20:22">20:22</span> Say not: I will return evil: wait for
the Lord and he will deliver thee.

<span id="an_20:23">20:23</span> Diverse weights are an abomination
before the Lord: a deceitful balance is not good.

<span id="an_20:24">20:24</span> The steps of man are guided by the
Lord: but who is the man that can understand his own way?

<span id="an_20:25">20:25</span> It is ruin to a man to devour holy
ones, and after vows to retract.

<span id="an_20:26">20:26</span> A wise king scattereth the wicked, and
bringeth over them the wheel.

<span id="an_20:27">20:27</span> The spirit of a man is the lamp of the
Lord, which searcheth all the hidden things of the bowels.

<span id="an_20:28">20:28</span> Mercy and truth preserve the king, and
his throne is strengthened by clemency.

<span id="an_20:29">20:29</span> The joy of young men is their strength:
and the dignity of old men, their grey hairs.

<span id="an_20:30">20:30</span> The blueness of a wound shall wipe away
evils: and stripes in the more in- ward parts of the belly.

<span id="an_21:1">21:1</span> As the divisions of waters, so the heart
of the king is in the hand of the Lord: whithersoever he will he shall
turn it.

<span id="an_21:2">21:2</span> Every way of a man seemeth right to
himself: but the Lord weigheth the hearts.

<span id="an_21:3">21:3</span> To do mercy and judgment, pleaseth the
Lord more than victims.

<span id="an_21:4">21:4</span> Haughtiness of the eyes is the enlarging
of the heart: the lamp of the wicked is sin.

<span id="an_21:5">21:5</span> The thoughts of the industrious al- ways
bring forth abundance: but every sluggard is always in want.

<span id="an_21:6">21:6</span> He that gathereth treasures by a lying
tongue, is vain and foolish, and shall stumble upon the snares of death.

<span id="an_21:7">21:7</span> The robberies of the wicked shall be
their downfall, because they would not do judgment.

<span id="an_21:8">21:8</span> The perverse way of a man is strange: but
as for him that is pure, his work is right.

<span id="an_21:9">21:9</span> It is better to sit in a corner of the
housetop, than with a brawling women, and in a common house.

<span id="an_21:10">21:10</span> The soul of the wicked desireth evil,
he will not have pity on his neighbour.

<span id="an_21:11">21:11</span> When a pestilent man is punished, the
little one will be wiser: and if he follow the wise, he will receive
knowledge.

<span id="an_21:12">21:12</span> The just considereth seriously the
house of the wicked, that he may withdraw the wicked from evil.

<span id="an_21:13">21:13</span> He that stoppeth his ear against the
cry of the poor, shall also cry himself and shall not be heard.

<span id="an_21:14">21:14</span> A secret present quencheth anger: and a
gift in the bosom the greatest wrath.

<span id="an_21:15">21:15</span> It is joy to the just to do judgment:
and dread to them that work iniquity.

<span id="an_21:16">21:16</span> A man that shall wander out of the way
of doctrine, shall abide in the company of the giants.

<span id="an_21:17">21:17</span> He that loveth good cheer, shall be in
want: he that loveth wine, and fat things, shall not be rich.

<span id="an_21:18">21:18</span> The wicked is delivered up for the
just: and the unjust for the righteous.

<span id="an_21:19">21:19</span> It is better to dwell in a wilderness,
than with a quarrelsome and passionate woman.

<span id="an_21:20">21:20</span> There is a treasure to be desired, and
oil in the dwelling of the just: and the foolish man shall spend it.

<span id="an_21:21">21:21</span> He that followeth justice and mercy,
shall find life, justice, and glory.

<span id="an_21:22">21:22</span> The wise man hath scaled the city of
the strong, and hath cast down the strength of the confidence thereof.

<span id="an_21:23">21:23</span> He that keepeth his mouth and his
tongue, keepeth his soul from distress.

<span id="an_21:24">21:24</span> The proud and the arrogant is called
ignorant, who in anger worketh pride.

<span id="an_21:25">21:25</span> Desires kill the slothful: for his
hands have refused to work at all.

<span id="an_21:26">21:26</span> He longeth and desireth all the day :
but he that is just, will give, and will not cease.

<span id="an_21:27">21:27</span> The sacrifices of the wicked are
abominable, because they are offered of wickedness.

<span id="an_21:28">21:28</span> A lying witness shall perish: an
obedient man shall speak of victory.

<span id="an_21:29">21:29</span> The wicked man impudently hardeneth his
face: but he that is righteous, correcteth his way.

<span id="an_21:30">21:30</span> There is no wisdom, there is no
prudence, there is no counsel against the Lord.

<span id="an_21:31">21:31</span> The horse is prepared for the day of
battle: but the Lord giveth safety.

<span id="an_22:1">22:1</span> A good name is better than great riches:
and good favour is above silver and gold.

<span id="an_22:2">22:2</span> The rich and poor have met one another:
the Lord is the maker of them both.

<span id="an_22:3">22:3</span> The prudent man saw the evil, and hid
himself: the simple passed on, and suffered loss.

<span id="an_22:4">22:4</span> The fruit of humility is the fear of the
Lord, riches and glory and life.

<span id="an_22:5">22:5</span> Arms and swords are in the way of the
perverse: but he that keepeth his own soul departeth far from them.

<span id="an_22:6">22:6</span> It is a proverb: A young man according to
his way, even when he is old he will not depart from it.

<span id="an_22:7">22:7</span> The rich ruleth over the poor: and the
borrower is servant to him that lendeth.

<span id="an_22:8">22:8</span> He that soweth iniquity shall reap evils,
and with the rod of his anger he shall be consumed.

<span id="an_22:9">22:9</span> He that is inclined to mercy shall be
blessed: for of his bread he hath given to the poor. He that maketh
presents shall purchase victory and honour: but he carrieth away the
souls of the receivers.

<span id="an_22:10">22:10</span> Cast out the scoffer, and contention
shall go out with him, and quarrels and reproaches shall cease.

<span id="an_22:11">22:11</span> He that loveth cleanness of heart, for
the grace of his lips shall have the king for his friend.

<span id="an_22:12">22:12</span> The eyes of the Lord preserve
knowledge: and the words of the unjust are overthrown.

<span id="an_22:13">22:13</span> The slothful man saith: There is a lion
without, I shall be slain in the midst of the streets.

<span id="an_22:14">22:14</span> The mouth of a strange woman is a deep
pit: he whom the Lord is angry with, shall fall into it.

<span id="an_22:15">22:15</span> Folly is bound up in the heart of a
child, and the rod of correction shall drive it away.

<span id="an_22:16">22:16</span> He that oppresseth the poor, to in-
crease his own riches, shall himself give to one that is richer, and
shall be in need.

<span id="an_22:17">22:17</span> Incline thy ear, and hear the words of
the wise: and apply thy heart to my doctrine :

<span id="an_22:18">22:18</span> Which shall be beautiful for thee, if
thou keep it in thy bowels, and it shall flow in thy lips:

<span id="an_22:19">22:19</span> That thy trust may be in the Lord,
wherefore I have also shewn it to thee this day.

<span id="an_22:20">22:20</span> Behold I have described it to thee
three manner of ways, in thoughts and knowledge :

<span id="an_22:21">22:21</span> That I might shew thee the certainty,
and the words of truth, to answer out of these to them that sent thee.

<span id="an_22:22">22:22</span> Do no violence to the poor, because he
is poor: and do not oppress the needy in the gate:

<span id="an_22:23">22:23</span> Because the Lord will judge his cause,
and will afflict them that have afflicted his soul.

<span id="an_22:24">22:24</span> Be not a friend to an angry man, and do
not walk with a furious man:

<span id="an_22:25">22:25</span> Lest perhaps thou learn his ways, and
take scandal to thy soul.

<span id="an_22:26">22:26</span> Be not with them that fasten down their
hands, and that offer themselves sureties for debts:

<span id="an_22:27">22:27</span> For if thou have not wherewith to
restore, what cause is there, that he should take the covering from thy
bed?

<span id="an_22:28">22:28</span> Pass not beyond the ancient bounds
which thy fathers have set.

<span id="an_22:29">22:29</span> Hast thou seen a man swift in his work?
he shall stand before kings, and shall not be before those that are
obscure.

<span id="an_23:1">23:1</span> When thou shalt sit to eat with a prince,
consider diligently what is set before thy face.

<span id="an_23:2">23:2</span> And put a knife to thy throat, if it be
so that thou have thy soul in thy own power.

<span id="an_23:3">23:3</span> Be not desirous of his meats, in which is
the bread of deceit.

<span id="an_23:4">23:4</span> Labour not to be rich: but set bounds to
thy prudence.

<span id="an_23:5">23:5</span> Lift not up thy eyes to riches which thou
canst not have: because they shall make themselves wings like those of
an eagle, and shall fly towards heaven.

<span id="an_23:6">23:6</span> Eat not with an envious man, and desire
not his meats:

<span id="an_23:7">23:7</span> Because like a soothsayer, and diviner,
he thinketh that which he knoweth not. Eat and drink, will he say to
thee: and his mind is not with thee.

<span id="an_23:8">23:8</span> The meats which thou hadst eaten, thou
shalt vomit up: and shalt loose thy beautiful words.

<span id="an_23:9">23:9</span> Speak not in the ears of fools: because
they will despise the instruction of thy speech.

<span id="an_23:10">23:10</span> Touch not the bounds of little ones:
and enter not into the field of the fatherless:

<span id="an_23:11">23:11</span> For their near kinsman is strong: and
he will judge their cause against thee.

<span id="an_23:12">23:12</span> Let thy heart apply itself to
instruction: and thy ears to words of knowledge.

<span id="an_23:13">23:13</span> Withhold not correction from a child:
for if thou strike him with the rod, he shall not die.

<span id="an_23:14">23:14</span> Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and
deliver his soul from hell.

<span id="an_23:15">23:15</span> My son, if thy mind be wise, my heart
shall rejoice with thee:

<span id="an_23:16">23:16</span> And my reins shall rejoice, when thy
lips shall speak what is right.

<span id="an_23:17">23:17</span> Let not thy heart envy sinners: but be
thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long:

<span id="an_23:18">23:18</span> Because thou shalt have hope in the
latter end, and thy expectation shall not be taken away.

<span id="an_23:19">23:19</span> Hear thou, my son, and be wise: and
guide thy mind in the way.

<span id="an_23:20">23:20</span> Be not in the feasts of great drinkers,
nor in their revellings, who contribute flesh to eat:

<span id="an_23:21">23:21</span> Because they that give themselves to
drinking, and that club together shall be consumed; and drowsiness shall
be clothed with rags.

<span id="an_23:22">23:22</span> Hearken to thy father, that beget thee:
and despise not thy mother when she is old.

<span id="an_23:23">23:23</span> Buy truth, and do not sell wisdom, and
instruction, and understanding.

<span id="an_23:24">23:24</span> The father of the just rejoiceth
greatly: he that hath begotten a wise son, shall have joy in him.

<span id="an_23:25">23:25</span> Let thy father, and thy mother be
joyful, and let her rejoice that bore thee.

<span id="an_23:26">23:26</span> My son, give me thy heart: and let thy
eyes keep my ways.

<span id="an_23:27">23:27</span> For a harlot is a deep ditch: and a
strange woman is a narrow pit.

<span id="an_23:28">23:28</span> She lieth in wait in the way as a
robber, and him whom she shall see unwary, she will kill.

<span id="an_23:29">23:29</span> Who hath woe? whose father hath woe?
who hath contentions? who falls into pits? who hath wounds without
cause? who hath redness of eyes?

<span id="an_23:30">23:30</span> Surely they that pass their time in
wine, and study to drink of their cups.

<span id="an_23:31">23:31</span> Look not upon the wine when it is
yellow, when the colour thereof shineth in the glass: it goeth in
pleasantly,

<span id="an_23:32">23:32</span> But in the end, it will bite like a
snake, and will spread abroad poison like a basilisk.

<span id="an_23:33">23:33</span> Thy eyes shall behold strange women,
and thy heart shall utter perverse things.

<span id="an_23:34">23:34</span> And thou shalt be as one sleeping in
the midst of the sea, and as a pilot fast asleep, when the stern is
lost.

<span id="an_23:35">23:35</span> And thou shalt say: They have beaten
me, but I was not sensible of pain: they drew me, and I felt not: when
shall I awake, and find wine again?

<span id="an_24:1">24:1</span> Seek not to be like evil men, neither
desire to be with them:

<span id="an_24:2">24:2</span> Because their mind studieth robberies,
and their lips speak deceits.

<span id="an_24:3">24:3</span> By wisdom the house shall be built, and
by prudence it shall be strengthened.

<span id="an_24:4">24:4</span> By instruction the storerooms shall be
filled with all precious and most beautiful wealth.

<span id="an_24:5">24:5</span> A wise man is strong: and a knowing man,
stout and valiant.

<span id="an_24:6">24:6</span> Because war is managed by due ordering:
and there shall be safety where there are many counsels.

<span id="an_24:7">24:7</span> Wisdom is too high for a fool, in the
gate he shall not open his mouth.

<span id="an_24:8">24:8</span> He that deviseth to do evils, shall be
called a fool.

<span id="an_24:9">24:9</span> The thought of a fool is sin: and the
detracter is the abomination of men.

<span id="an_24:10">24:10</span> If thou lose hope being weary in the
day of distress, thy strength shall be diminished.

<span id="an_24:11">24:11</span> Deliver them that are led to death: and
those that are drawn to death forbear not to deliver.

<span id="an_24:12">24:12</span> If thou say: I have not strength
enough: he that seeth into the heart, he understandeth, and nothing
deceiveth the keeper of thy soul, end he shall render to a man according
to his works.

<span id="an_24:13">24:13</span> Fat honey, my son, because it is good,
and the honeycomb most sweet to thy throat:

<span id="an_24:14">24:14</span> So also is the doctrine of wisdom to
thy soul: which when thou hast found, thou shalt have hope in the end,
and thy hope shall not perish.

<span id="an_24:15">24:15</span> Lie not in wait, nor seek after
wickedness in the house of the just, nor spoil his rest.

<span id="an_24:16">24:16</span> For a just mall shall fall seven times
and shall rise again: but the wicked shall fall down into evil.

<span id="an_24:17">24:17</span> When thy enemy shall fall, be not glad,
and in his ruin let not thy heart rejoice:

<span id="an_24:18">24:18</span> Lest the Lord see, and it displease
him, and he turn away his wrath from him.

<span id="an_24:19">24:19</span> Contend not with the wicked, nor seek
to be like the ungodly:

<span id="an_24:20">24:20</span> For evil men have no hope of things to
come, and the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.

<span id="an_24:21">24:21</span> My son, fear the Lord and the king: and
have nothing to do with detracters.

<span id="an_24:22">24:22</span> For their destruction shall rise
suddenly: and who knoweth the ruin of both?

<span id="an_24:23">24:23</span> These things also to the wise: It is
not good to have respect to persons in judgment.

<span id="an_24:24">24:24</span> They that say to the wicked man: Thou
art just: shall be cursed by the people, and the tribes shall abhor
them.

<span id="an_24:25">24:25</span> They that rebuke him, shall be praised:
and a blessing shall come upon them.

<span id="an_24:26">24:26</span> He shall kiss the lips, who answereth
right words.

<span id="an_24:27">24:27</span> Prepare thy work without, and
diligently till thy ground: that afterward thou mayst build thy house.

<span id="an_24:28">24:28</span> Be not witness without cause against
thy neighbour: and deceive not any man with thy lips.

<span id="an_24:29">24:29</span> Say not: I will do to him as he hath
done to me: I will render to every one according to his work.

<span id="an_24:30">24:30</span> I passed by the field of the slothful
man, and by the vineyard of the foolish man:

<span id="an_24:31">24:31</span> And behold it was all filled with
nettles, and thorns had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall was
broken down.

<span id="an_24:32">24:32</span> Which when I had seen, I laid it up in
my heart, and by the example I received instruction.

<span id="an_24:33">24:33</span> Thou wilt sleep a little, said I, thou
wilt slumber a little, thou wilt fold thy hands a little to rest:

<span id="an_24:34">24:34</span> And poverty shall come to thee as a
runner, and beggary as an armed man.

<span id="an_25:1">25:1</span> These are also parables of Solomon, which
the men of Ezechias king of Juda copied out.

<span id="an_25:2">25:2</span> It is the glory of God to conceal the
word, and the glory of kings to search out the speech.

<span id="an_25:3">25:3</span> The heaven above, and the earth beneath,
and the heart of kings is unsearchable.

<span id="an_25:4">25:4</span> Take away the rust from silver, and there
shall come forth a most pure vessel:

<span id="an_25:5">25:5</span> Take away wickedness from the face of the
king, and his throne shall be established with justice.

<span id="an_25:6">25:6</span> Appear not glorious before the king, and
stand not in the place of great men.

<span id="an_25:7">25:7</span> For it is better that it should be said
to thee: Come up hither; than that thou shouldst be humbled before the
prince.

<span id="an_25:8">25:8</span> The things which thy eyes have seen,
utter not hastily in a quarrel: lest after- ward thou mayst not be able
to make amends, when thou hast dishonoured thy friend.

<span id="an_25:9">25:9</span> Treat thy cause with thy friend, and
discover not the secret to a stranger:

<span id="an_25:10">25:10</span> Lest he insult over thee, when he hath
heard it, and cease not to upbraid thee. Grace and friendship deliver a
man: keep these for thyself, lest thou fall under reproach.

<span id="an_25:11">25:11</span> To speak a word in due time, is like
apples of gold on beds of silver.

<span id="an_25:12">25:12</span> As an earring of gold and a bright
pearl, so is he that reproveth the wise, and the obedient ear.

<span id="an_25:13">25:13</span> As the cold of snow in the time of
harvest, so is a faithful messenger to him that sent him, for he
refresheth his soul.

<span id="an_25:14">25:14</span> As clouds, and wind, when no rain
followeth, so is the man that boasteth, and doth not fulfil his
promises.

<span id="an_25:15">25:15</span> By patience a prince shall be appeased,
and a soft tongue shall break hardness.

<span id="an_25:16">25:16</span> Thou hast found honey, eat what is
sufficient for thee, lest being glutted therewith thou vomit it up.

<span id="an_25:17">25:17</span> Withdraw thy foot from the house of thy
neighbour, lest having his fill he hate thee.

<span id="an_25:18">25:18</span> A man that beareth false witness
against his neighbour, is like a dart and a sword and a sharp arrow.

<span id="an_25:19">25:19</span> To trust to an unfaithful man in the
time of trouble, is like a rotten tooth, and weary foot,

<span id="an_25:20">25:20</span> And one that looseth his garment in
cold weather. As vinegar upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to a
very evil heart. As a moth doth by a garment, and a worm by the wood: so
the sadness of a man consumeth the heart.

<span id="an_25:21">25:21</span> If thy enemy be hungry, give him to
eat: if he thirst, give him water to drink:

<span id="an_25:22">25:22</span> For thou shalt heap hot coals upon his
head, and the Lord will reward thee.

<span id="an_25:23">25:23</span> The north wind driveth away rain, as
doth a sad countenance a backbiting tongue.

<span id="an_25:24">25:24</span> It is better to sit m a corner of the
housetop, than with a brawling woman, and in a common house.

<span id="an_25:25">25:25</span> As cold water to a thirsty soul, so is
good tidings from a far country.

<span id="an_25:26">25:26</span> A just man falling down before the
wicked, is as a fountain troubled with the foot, and a corrupted spring.

<span id="an_25:27">25:27</span> As it is not good for a man to eat much
honey, so he that is a searcher of majesty, shall be overwhelmed by
glory.

<span id="an_25:28">25:28</span> As a city that lieth open and is not
compassed with walls, so is a man that cannot refrain his own spirit in
speaking.

<span id="an_26:1">26:1</span> As snow in summer, and rain in harvest,
so glory is not seemly for a fool.

<span id="an_26:2">26:2</span> As a bird flying to other places, and a
sparrow going here or there: so a curse uttered without cause shall come
upon a man.

<span id="an_26:3">26:3</span> A whip for a horse, and a snaffle for an
ass, and a rod for the back of fools.

<span id="an_26:4">26:4</span> Answer not a fool according to his folly,
lest thou be made like him.

<span id="an_26:5">26:5</span> Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he imagine himself to be wise.

<span id="an_26:6">26:6</span> He that sendeth words by a foolish
messenger, is lame of feet and drinketh iniquity.

<span id="an_26:7">26:7</span> As a lame man hath fair legs in vain: so
a parable is unseemly in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:8">26:8</span> As he that casteth a stone into the heap
of Mercury: so is he that giveth honour to a fool.

<span id="an_26:9">26:9</span> As if a thorn should grow in the hand of
a drunkard: so is a parable in the mouth of fools.

<span id="an_26:10">26:10</span> Judgment determineth causes: and he
that putteth a fool to silence, appeaseth anger.

<span id="an_26:11">26:11</span> As a dog that returneth to his vomit,
so is the fool that repeateth his folly.

<span id="an_26:12">26:12</span> Hast thou seen a man wise in his own
conceit? there shall be more hope of a fool than of him.

<span id="an_26:13">26:13</span> The slothful man saith: There is a lion
in the way, and a lioness in the roads.

<span id="an_26:14">26:14</span> As the door turneth upon its hinges, so
doth the slothful upon his bed.

<span id="an_26:15">26:15</span> The slothful hideth his hand under his
armpit, and it grieveth him to turn it to his mouth.

<span id="an_26:16">26:16</span> The sluggard is wiser in his own
conceit, than seven men that speak sentences.

<span id="an_26:17">26:17</span> As he that taketh a dog by the ears, so
is he that passeth by in anger, and meddleth with another man's quarrel.

<span id="an_26:18">26:18</span> As he is guilty that shooteth arrows,
and lances unto death :

<span id="an_26:19">26:19</span> So is the man that hurteth his friend
deceitfully: and when he is taken, saith: I did it in jest.

<span id="an_26:20">26:20</span> When the wood faileth, the fire shall
go out: and when the talebearer is taken away, contentions shall cease.

<span id="an_26:21">26:21</span> As coals are to burning coals, and wood
to fire, so an angry man stirreth up strife.

<span id="an_26:22">26:22</span> The words of a talebearer are as it
were simple, but they reach to the innermost parts of the belly.

<span id="an_26:23">26:23</span> Swelling lips joined with a corrupt
heart, are like an earthen vessel adorned with silver dross.

<span id="an_26:24">26:24</span> An enemy is known by his lips, when in
his heart he entertaineth deceit.

<span id="an_26:25">26:25</span> When he shall speak low, trust him not:
because there are seven mischiefs in his heart.

<span id="an_26:26">26:26</span> He that covereth hatred deceitfully,
his malice shall be laid open in the public assembly.

<span id="an_26:27">26:27</span> He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into
it: and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return to him.

<span id="an_26:28">26:28</span> A deceitful tongue loveth not truth:
and a slippery mouth worketh ruin.

<span id="an_27:1">27:1</span> Boast not for to morrow, for thou knowest
not what the day to come may bring forth.

<span id="an_27:2">27:2</span> Let another praise thee, and not thy own
mouth: a stranger, and not thy own lips.

<span id="an_27:3">27:3</span> A stone is heavy, and sand weighty: but
the anger of a fool is heavier than them both.

<span id="an_27:4">27:4</span> Anger hath no mercy, nor fury when it
breaketh forth: and who can bear the violence of one provoked?

<span id="an_27:5">27:5</span> Open rebuke is better than hidden love.

<span id="an_27:6">27:6</span> Better are the wounds of a friend, than
the deceitful kisses of an enemy.

<span id="an_27:7">27:7</span> A soul that is full shall tread upon the
honeycomb : and a soul that is hungry shall take even bitter for sweet.

<span id="an_27:8">27:8</span> As a bird that wandereth from her nest,
so is a man that leaveth his place.

<span id="an_27:9">27:9</span> Ointment and perfumes rejoice the heart:
and the good counsels of a friend are sweet to the soul.

<span id="an_27:10">27:10</span> Thy own friend, and thy father's friend
forsake not: and go not into thy brother's house in the day of thy
affliction. Better is a neighbour that is near, than a brother afar off.

<span id="an_27:11">27:11</span> Study wisdom, my son, and make my heart
joyful, that thou mayst give an answer to him that reproacheth.

<span id="an_27:12">27:12</span> The prudent man seeing evil hideth
himself: little ones passing on have suffered losses.

<span id="an_27:13">27:13</span> Take away his garment that hath been
surety for a stranger: and take from him a pledge for strangers.

<span id="an_27:14">27:14</span> He that blesseth his neighbour with a
loud voice, rising in the night, shall be like to him that curseth.

<span id="an_27:15">27:15</span> Roofs dropping through in a cold day,
and a contentious woman are alike.

<span id="an_27:16">27:16</span> He that retaineth her, is as he that
would hold the wind, and shall call in the oil of his right hand.

<span id="an_27:17">27:17</span> Iron sharpeneth iron, so a man
sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.

<span id="an_27:18">27:18</span> He that keepeth the fig tree, shall eat
the fruit thereof: and he that is the keeper of his master, shall be
glorified.

<span id="an_27:19">27:19</span> As the faces of them that look therein,
shine in the water, so the hearts of men are laid open to the wise.

<span id="an_27:20">27:20</span> Hell and destruction are never filled:
so the eyes of men are never satisfied.

<span id="an_27:21">27:21</span> As silver is tried in the fining-pot
and gold in the furnace: so a man is tried by the mouth of him that
praiseth. The heart of the wicked seeketh after evils, but the righteous
heart seeketh after knowledge.

<span id="an_27:22">27:22</span> Though thou shouldst bray a fool in the
mortar, as when a pestle striketh upon sodden barley, his folly would
not be taken from him.

<span id="an_27:23">27:23</span> Be diligent to know the countenance of
thy cattle, and consider thy own flocks :

<span id="an_27:24">27:24</span> For thou shalt not always have power:
but a crown shall be given to generation and generation.

<span id="an_27:25">27:25</span> The meadows are open, and the green
herbs have appeared, and the hay is gathered out of the mountains.

<span id="an_27:26">27:26</span> Lambs are for thy clothing: and kids
for the price of the field.

<span id="an_27:27">27:27</span> Let the milk of the goats be enough for
thy food, and for the necessities of thy house, and for maintenance for
thy handmaids.

<span id="an_28:1">28:1</span> The wicked man fleeth, when no man
pursueth: but the just, bold as a lion, shall be without dread.

<span id="an_28:2">28:2</span> For the sine of the land many are the
princes thereof: and for the wisdom of a man, and the knowledge of those
things that are said, the life of the prince shall be prolonged.

<span id="an_28:3">28:3</span> A poor man that oppresseth the poor, is
like a violent shower, which bringeth a famine.

<span id="an_28:4">28:4</span> They that forsake the law, praise the
wicked man: they that keep it, are incensed against him.

<span id="an_28:5">28:5</span> Evil men think not on judgment: but they
that seek after the Lord, take notice of all things.

<span id="an_28:6">28:6</span> Better is the poor man walking in his
simplicity, than the rich in crooked ways.

<span id="an_28:7">28:7</span> He that keepeth the law is a wise son:
but he that feedeth gluttons, shameth his father.

<span id="an_28:8">28:8</span> He that heapeth together riches by usury
and loan, gathereth them for him that will be bountiful to the poor.

<span id="an_28:9">28:9</span> He that turneth away his ears from
hearing the law, his prayer shall be as abomination.

<span id="an_28:10">28:10</span> He that deceiveth the just in a wicked
way, shall fall in his own destruction: and the upright shall possess
his goods.

<span id="an_28:11">28:11</span> The rich man seemeth to himself wise:
but the poor man that is prudent shall search him out.

<span id="an_28:12">28:12</span> In the joy of the just there is great
glory: when the wicked reign, men are ruined.

<span id="an_28:13">28:13</span> He that hideth his sins, shall not
prosper: but he that shall confess, and forsake them, shall obtain
mercy.

<span id="an_28:14">28:14</span> Blessed is the man that is always
fearful: but he that is hardened in mind, shall fall into evil.

<span id="an_28:15">28:15</span> As a roaring lion, and a hungry bear,
so is a wicked prince over the poor people.

<span id="an_28:16">28:16</span> A prince void of prudence shall oppress
many by calumny: but he that hateth covetousness, shall prolong his
days.

<span id="an_28:17">28:17</span> A man that doth violence to the blood
of a person, if he flee even to the pit, no man will stay him.

<span id="an_28:18">28:18</span> He that walketh uprightly, shall be
saved: he that is perverse in his ways shall fall at once.

<span id="an_28:19">28:19</span> He that tilleth his ground, shall be
filled with bread: but he that followeth idleness shall be filled with
poverty.

<span id="an_28:20">28:20</span> A faithful man shall be much praised:
but he that maketh haste to be rich, shall not be innocent.

<span id="an_28:21">28:21</span> He that hath respect to a person in
judgment, doth not well: such a man even for a morsel of bread forsaketh
the truth.

<span id="an_28:22">28:22</span> A man, that maketh haste to be rich,
and envieth others, is ignorant that poverty shall come upon him.

<span id="an_28:23">28:23</span> He that rebuketh a man, shall afterward
find favour with him, more than he that by a flattering tongue deceiveth
him.

<span id="an_28:24">28:24</span> He that stealeth any thing from his
father, or from his mother: and saith, This is no sin, is the partner of
a murderer.

<span id="an_28:25">28:25</span> He that boasteth, and puffeth up
himself, stirreth up quarrels: but he that trusteth in the Lord, shall
be healed.

<span id="an_28:26">28:26</span> He that trusteth in his own heart, is a
fool: but he that walketh wisely, he shall be saved.

<span id="an_28:27">28:27</span> He that giveth to the poor, shall not
want: he that despiseth his entreaty, shall suffer indigence.

<span id="an_28:28">28:28</span> When the wicked rise up, men shall hide
themselves: when they perish, the lust shall be multiplied.

<span id="an_29:1">29:1</span> The man that with a stiff neck despiseth
him that reproveth him, shall suddenly be destroyed: and health shall
not follow him.

<span id="an_29:2">29:2</span> When just men increase, the people shall
rejoice: when the wicked shall bear rule, the people shall mourn.

<span id="an_29:3">29:3</span> A man that loveth wisdom, rejoiceth his
father: but he that maintaineth bar lots, shall squander away his
substance.

<span id="an_29:4">29:4</span> A just king setteth up the land: a
covetous man shall destroy it.

<span id="an_29:5">29:5</span> A man that speaketh to his friend with
flattering and dissembling words, spreadeth a net for his feet.

<span id="an_29:6">29:6</span> A snare shall entangle the wicked man
when he sinneth: and the just shall praise and rejoice.

<span id="an_29:7">29:7</span> The just taketh notice of the cause of
the poor: the wicked is void of knowledge.

<span id="an_29:8">29:8</span> Corrupt men bring a city to ruin: but
wise men turn away wrath.

<span id="an_29:9">29:9</span> If a wise man contend with a fool,
whether he be angry or laugh, he shall find no rest.

<span id="an_29:10">29:10</span> Bloodthirsty men hate the upright: but
just men seek his soul.

<span id="an_29:11">29:11</span> A fool uttereth all his mind: a wise
man deferreth, and keepeth it till afterwards.

<span id="an_29:12">29:12</span> A prince that gladly heareth lying
words, hath all his servants wicked.

<span id="an_29:13">29:13</span> The poor man and the creditor have met
one another: the Lord is the enlightener of them both.

<span id="an_29:14">29:14</span> The king that judgeth the poor in
truth, his throne shall be established for ever.

<span id="an_29:15">29:15</span> The rod and reproof give wisdom: but
the child that is left to his own will bringeth his mother to shame.

<span id="an_29:16">29:16</span> When the wicked are multiplied, crimes
shall be multiplied: but the just shall see their downfall.

<span id="an_29:17">29:17</span> Instruct thy son, and he shall refresh
thee, and shall give delight to thy soul.

<span id="an_29:18">29:18</span> When prophecy shall fail, the people
shall be scattered abroad: but he that keepeth the law is blessed.

<span id="an_29:19">29:19</span> A slave will not be corrected by words:
because he understandeth what thou sayest, and will not answer.

<span id="an_29:20">29:20</span> Hast thou seen a man hasty to speak?
folly is rather to be looked for, than his amendment.

<span id="an_29:21">29:21</span> He that nourisheth his servant
delicately from his childhood, afterwards shall find him stubborn.

<span id="an_29:22">29:22</span> A passionate man provoketh quarrels:
and he that is easily stirred up to wrath, shall be more prone to sin.

<span id="an_29:23">29:23</span> Humiliation followeth the proud: and
glory shall uphold the humble of spirit.

<span id="an_29:24">29:24</span> He that is partaker with a thief,
hateth his own soul: he heareth one putting him to his oath, and
discovereth not.

<span id="an_29:25">29:25</span> He that feareth man, shall quickly
fall: he that trusteth in the Lord, shall be set on high.

<span id="an_29:26">29:26</span> Many seek the face of the prince: but
the judgment of every one cometh forth from the Lord.

<span id="an_29:27">29:27</span> The just abhor the wicked man: and the
wicked loathe them that are in the right way. The son that keepeth the
word, shall be free from destruction.

<span id="an_30:1">30:1</span> The words of Gatherer the son of Vomiter.
The vision which the man spoke with whom God is, and who being
strengthened by God, abiding with him, said:

<span id="an_30:2">30:2</span> I am the most foolish of men, and the
wisdom of men is not with me.

<span id="an_30:3">30:3</span> I have not learned wisdom, and have not
known the science of saints.

<span id="an_30:4">30:4</span> Who hath ascended up into heaven, and
descended? who hath held the wind in his hands? who hath bound up the
waters together as in a garment? who hath raised up all the borders of
the earth? what is his name, and what is the name of his son, if thou
knowest?

<span id="an_30:5">30:5</span> Every word of God is fire tried: he is a
buckler to them that hope in him.

<span id="an_30:6">30:6</span> Add not any thing to his words, lest thou
be reproved, and found a liar:

<span id="an_30:7">30:7</span> Two things I have asked of thee, deny
them not to me before I die.

<span id="an_30:8">30:8</span> Remove far from me vanity, and lying
words. Give me neither beggary, nor riches: give me only the necessaries
of life:

<span id="an_30:9">30:9</span> Lest perhaps being filled, I should be
tempted to deny, and say: Who is the Lord? or being compelled by
poverty, I should steal, and forswear the name of my God.

<span id="an_30:10">30:10</span> Accuse not a servant to his master,
lest he curse thee, and thou fall.

<span id="an_30:11">30:11</span> There is a generation that curseth
their father, and doth not bless their mother.

<span id="an_30:12">30:12</span> A generation that are pure in their own
eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness.

<span id="an_30:13">30:13</span> A generation, whose eyes are lofty, and
their eyelids lifted up on high.

<span id="an_30:14">30:14</span> A generation, that for teeth hath
swords, and grindeth with their jaw teeth, to devour the needy from off
the earth, and the poor from among men.

<span id="an_30:15">30:15</span> The horseleech hath two daughters that
say: Bring, bring. There are three things that never are satisfied, and
the fourth never saith: It is enough.

<span id="an_30:16">30:16</span> Hell, and the mouth of the womb, and
the earth which is not satisfied with water: and the fire never saith:
It is enough.

<span id="an_30:17">30:17</span> The eye that mocketh at his father, and
that despiseth the labour of his mother in bearing him, let the ravens
of the brooks pick it out, and the young eagles eat it.

<span id="an_30:18">30:18</span> Three things are hard to me, and the
fourth I am utterly ignorant of.

<span id="an_30:19">30:19</span> The way of an eagle in the air, the way
of a serpent upon a rock, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea, and
the way of a man in youth.

<span id="an_30:20">30:20</span> Such is also the way of an adulterous
woman, who eateth, and wipeth her mouth, and saith: I have done no evil.

<span id="an_30:21">30:21</span> By three things the earth is disturbed,
and the fourth it cannot bear:

<span id="an_30:22">30:22</span> By a slave when he reigneth: by a fool
when he is filled with meat:

<span id="an_30:23">30:23</span> By an odious woman when she is married:
and by a bondwoman when she is heir to her mistress.

<span id="an_30:24">30:24</span> There are four very little things of
the earth, and they are wiser than the wise:

<span id="an_30:25">30:25</span> The ants, a feeble people, which
provide themselves food in the harvest:

<span id="an_30:26">30:26</span> The rabbit, a weak people, which maketh
its bed in the rock:

<span id="an_30:27">30:27</span> The locust hath no king, yet they all
go out by their bands.

<span id="an_30:28">30:28</span> The stellio supporteth itself on hands,
and dwelleth in kings' houses.

<span id="an_30:29">30:29</span> There are three things, which go well,
and the fourth that walketh happily:

<span id="an_30:30">30:30</span> A lion, the strongest of beasts, who
hath no fear of any thing he meeteth:

<span id="an_30:31">30:31</span> A cock girded about the loins: and a
ram: and a king, whom none can resist.

<span id="an_30:32">30:32</span> There is that hath appeared a fool
after he was lifted up on high: for if he had understood, he would have
laid his hand upon his mouth.

<span id="an_30:33">30:33</span> And he that strongly squeezeth the papa
to bring out milk, straineth out butter: and he that violently bloweth
his nose, bringeth out blood: and he that provoketh wrath bringeth forth
strife.

<span id="an_31:1">31:1</span> The words of king Lamuel. The vision
wherewith his mother instructed him.

<span id="an_31:2">31:2</span> What, O my beloved, what, O the beloved
of my womb, what, O the beloved of my vows?

<span id="an_31:3">31:3</span> Give not thy substance to women, and thy
riches to destroy kings.

<span id="an_31:4">31:4</span> Give not to kings, O Lamuel, give not
wine to kings: because there is no secret where drunkenness reigneth:

<span id="an_31:5">31:5</span> And lest they drink and forget judgments,
and pervert the cause of the children of the poor.

<span id="an_31:6">31:6</span> Give strong drink to them that are sad:
and wine to them that are grieved in mind:

<span id="an_31:7">31:7</span> Let them drink, and forget their want,
and remember their sorrow no more.

<span id="an_31:8">31:8</span> Open thy mouth for the dumb, and for the
causes of all the children that pass.

<span id="an_31:9">31:9</span> Open thy mouth, decree that which is
just, and do justice to the needy and poor.

<span id="an_31:10">31:10</span> Who shall find a valiant woman? far and
from the uttermost coasts is the price of her.

<span id="an_31:11">31:11</span> The heart of her husband trusteth in
her, and he shall have no need of spoils.

<span id="an_31:12">31:12</span> She will render him good, and not evil,
all the days of her life.

<span id="an_31:13">31:13</span> She hath sought wool and flax, and hath
wrought by the counsel of her hands.

<span id="an_31:14">31:14</span> She is like the merchant's ship, she
bringeth her bread from afar.

<span id="an_31:15">31:15</span> And she hath risen in the night, and
given a prey to her household, and victuals to her maidens.

<span id="an_31:16">31:16</span> She hath considered a field, and bought
it: with the fruit of her hands she hath planted a vineyard.

<span id="an_31:17">31:17</span> She hath girded her loins with
strength, and hath strengthened her arm.

<span id="an_31:18">31:18</span> She hath tasted and seen that her
traffic is good: her lamp shall not be put out in the night.

<span id="an_31:19">31:19</span> She hath put out her hand to strong
things, and her fingers have taken hold of the spindle.

<span id="an_31:20">31:20</span> She hath opened her hand to the needy,
and stretched out her hands to the poor.

<span id="an_31:21">31:21</span> She shall not fear for her house in the
cold of snow: for dl her domestics are clothed with double garments.

<span id="an_31:22">31:22</span> She hath made for herself clothing of
tapestry: fine linen, and purple is her covering.

<span id="an_31:23">31:23</span> Her husband is honourable in the gates,
when he sitteth among the senators of the land.

<span id="an_31:24">31:24</span> She made fine linen, and sold it, end
delivered a girdle to the Chanaanite.

<span id="an_31:25">31:25</span> Strength and beauty are her clothing,
and she shall laugh in the latter day.

<span id="an_31:26">31:26</span> She hath opened her mouth to wisdom,
and the law of clemency is on her tongue.

<span id="an_31:27">31:27</span> She hath looked well to the paths of
her house, and hath not eaten her bread idle.

<span id="an_31:28">31:28</span> Her children rose up, and called her
blessed: her husband, and he praised her.

<span id="an_31:29">31:29</span> Many daughters have gathered together
riches: thou hast surpassed them all.

<span id="an_31:30">31:30</span> Favour is deceitful, and beauty is
vain: the woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised.

<span id="an_31:31">31:31</span> Give her of the fruit of her hands: and
let her works praise her in the gates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes](ecc.md)
