[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](act)  [Next](co1.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Romans

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> PAUL, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to
be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Which he had promised before, by his
prophets, in the holy scriptures,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Concerning his Son, who was made to him of
the seed of David, according to the flesh,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Who was predestinated the Son of God in
power, according to the spirit of sanctification, by the resurrection of
our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead;

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> By whom we have received grace and
apostleship for obedience to the faith, in all nations, for his name;

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Among whom are you also the called of Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> To all that are at Rome, the beloved of
God, called to be saints. Grace to you, and peace from God our Father,
and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> First I give thanks to my God, through
Jesus Christ, for you all, because your faith is spoken of in the whole
world.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> For God is my witness, whom I serve in my
spirit in the gospel of his Son, that without ceasing I make a
commemoration of you;

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> Always in my prayers making request, if
by any means now at length I may have a prosperous journey, by the will
of God, to come unto you.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> For I long to see you, that I may impart
unto you some spiritual grace, to strengthen you:

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> That is to say, that I may be comforted
together in you, by that which is common to us both, your faith and
mine.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, that I have often purposed to come unto you, (and have been
hindered hitherto,) that I might have some fruit among you also, even as
among other Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> To the Greeks and to the barbarians, to
the wise and to the unwise, I am a debtor;

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> So (as much as is in me) I am ready to
preach the gospel to you also that are at Rome.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> For I am not ashamed of the gospel. For
it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth, to
the Jew first, and to the Greek.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> For the justice of God is revealed
therein, from faith unto faith, as it is written: The just man liveth by
faith.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and injustice of those men that detain
the truth of God in injustice:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Because that which is known of God is
manifest in them. For God hath manifested it unto them.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> For the invisible things of him, from the
creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made; his eternal power also, and divinity: so that they are
inexcusable.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> Because that, when they knew God, they
have not glorified him as God, or given thanks; but became vain in their
thoughts, and their foolish heart was darkened.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> For professing themselves to be wise,
they became fools.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> And they changed the glory of the
incorruptible God into the likeness of the image of a corruptible man,
and of birds, and of fourfooted beasts, and of creeping things.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> Wherefore God gave them up to the desires
of their heart, unto uncleanness, to dishonour their own bodies among
themselves.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> Who changed the truth of God into a lie;
and worshipped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is
blessed for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:26">1:26</span> For this cause God delivered them up to
shameful affections. For their women have changed the natural use into
that use which is against nature.

<span id="an_1:27">1:27</span> And, in like manner, the men also,
leaving the natural use of the women, have burned in their lusts one
towards another, men with men working that which is filthy, and
receiving in themselves the recompense which was due to their error.

<span id="an_1:28">1:28</span> And as they liked not to have God in
their knowledge, God delivered them up to a reprobate sense, to do those
things which are not convenient;

<span id="an_1:29">1:29</span> Being filled with all iniquity, malice,
fornication, avarice, wickedness, full of envy, murder, contention,
deceit, malignity, whisperers,

<span id="an_1:30">1:30</span> Detractors, hateful to God, contumelious,
proud, haughty, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,

<span id="an_1:31">1:31</span> Foolish, dissolute, without affection,
without fidelity, without mercy.

<span id="an_1:32">1:32</span> Who, having known the justice of God, did
not understand that they who do such things, are worthy of death; and
not only they that do them, but they also that consent to them that do
them.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> WHEREFORE thou art inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art that judgest. For wherein thou judgest another, thou
condemnest thyself. For thou dost the same things which thou judgest.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For we know that the judgment of God is,
according to truth, against them that do such things.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest
them who do such things, and dost the same, that thou shalt escape the
judgment of God?

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and patience, and longsuffering? Knowest thou not, that the
benignity of God leadeth thee to penance?

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> But according to thy hardness and
impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to thyself wrath, against the day
of wrath, and revelation of the just judgment of God.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Who will render to every man according to
his works.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> To them indeed, who according to patience
in good work, seek glory and honour and incorruption, eternal life:

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> But to them that are contentious, and who
obey not the truth, but give credit to iniquity, wrath and indignation.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of
man that worketh evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Greek.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But glory, and honour, and peace to every
one that worketh good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For there is no respect of persons with
God.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> For whosoever have sinned without the
law, shall perish without the law; and whosoever have sinned in the law,
shall be judged by the law.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For not the hearers of the law are just
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> For when the Gentiles, who have not the
law, do by nature those things that are of the law; these having not the
law are a law to themselves:

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Who shew the work of the law written in
their hearts, their conscience bearing witness to them, and their
thoughts between themselves accusing, or also defending one another,

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> In the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my gospel.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But if thou art called a Jew and restest
in the law, and makest thy boast of God,

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> And knowest his will, and approvest the
more profitable things, being instructed by the law,

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Art confident that thou thyself art a
guide of the blind, a light of them that are in darkness,

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> An instructor of the foolish, a teacher
of infants, having the form of knowledge and of truth in the law.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> Thou therefore that teachest another,
teachest not thyself: thou that preachest that men should not steal,
stealest:

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> Thou that sayest, men should not commit
adultery, committest adultery: thou that abhorrest idols, committest
sacrilege:

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> Thou that makest thy boast of the law, by
transgression of the law dishonourest God.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> (For the name of God through you is
blasphemed among the Gentiles, as it is written.)

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> Circumcision profiteth indeed, if thou
keep the law; but if thou be a transgressor of the law, thy circumcision
is made uncircumcision.

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> If, then, the uncircumcised keep the
justices of the law, shall not this uncircumcision be counted for
circumcision?

<span id="an_2:27">2:27</span> And shall not that which by nature is
uncircumcision, if it fulfil the law, judge thee, who by the letter and
circumcision art a transgressor of the law?

<span id="an_2:28">2:28</span> For it is not he is a Jew, who is so
outwardly; nor is that circumcision which is outwardly in the flesh:

<span id="an_2:29">2:29</span> But he is a Jew, that is one inwardly;
and the circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, not in the
letter; whose praise is not of men, but of God.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> WHAT advantage then hath the Jew, or what
is the profit of circumcision?

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Much every way. First indeed, because the
words of God were committed to them.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> For what if some of them have not believed?
shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God forbid.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> But God is true; and every man a liar, as
it is written, That thou mayest be justified in thy words, and mayest
overcome when thou art judged.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But if our injustice commend the justice of
God, what shall we say? Is God unjust, who executeth wrath?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> (I speak according to man.) God forbid:
otherwise how shall God judge this world?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> For if the truth of God hath more abounded
through my lie, unto his glory, why am I also yet judged as a sinner?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And not rather (as we are slandered, and as
some affirm that we say) let us do evil, that there may come good? whose
damnation is just.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> What then? Do we excel them? No, not so.
For we have charged both Jews, and Greeks, that they are all under sin.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> As it is written: There is not any man
just.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> There is none that understandeth, there
is none that seeketh after God.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> All have turned out of the way; they are
become unprofitable together: there is none that doth good, there is not
so much as one.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Their throat is an open sepulchre; with
their tongues they have dealt deceitfully. The venom of asps is under
their lips.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness:

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> Their feet swift to shed blood:

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Destruction and misery in their ways:

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And the way of peace they have not known:

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> There is no fear of God before their
eyes.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> Now we know, that what things soever the
law speaketh, it speaketh to them that are in the law; that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world may be made subject to God.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> Because by the works of the law no flesh
shall be justified before him. For by the law is the knowledge of sin.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But now without the law the justice of
God is made manifest, being witnessed by the law and the prophets.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> Even the justice of God, by faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe in him: for there
is no distinction:

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> For all have sinned, and do need the
glory of God.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> Being justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption, that is in Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> Whom God hath proposed to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to the shewing of his justice,
for the remission of former sins,

<span id="an_3:26">3:26</span> Through the forbearance of God, for the
shewing of his justice in this time; that he himself may be just, and
the justifier of him, who is of the faith of Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_3:27">3:27</span> Where is then thy boasting? It is
excluded. By what law? Of works? No, but by the law of faith.

<span id="an_3:28">3:28</span> For we account a man to be justified by
faith, without the works of the law.

<span id="an_3:29">3:29</span> Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not
also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also.

<span id="an_3:30">3:30</span> For it is one God, that justifieth
circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through faith.

<span id="an_3:31">3:31</span> Do we, then, destroy the law through
faith? God forbid: but we establish the law.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> WHAT shall we say then that Abraham hath
found, who is our father according to the flesh.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> For if Abraham were justified by works, he
hath whereof to glory, but not before God.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For what saith the scripture? Abraham
believed God, and it was reputed to him unto justice.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Now to him that worketh, the reward is not
reckoned according to grace, but according to debt.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But to him that worketh not, yet believeth
in him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is reputed to justice,
according to the purpose of the grace of God.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> As David also termeth the blessedness of a
man, to whom God reputeth justice without works:

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Blessed is the man to whom the Lord hath
not imputed sin.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> This blessedness then, doth it remain in
the circumcision only, or in the uncircumcision also? For we say that
unto Abraham faith was reputed to justice.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How then was it reputed? When he was in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in
uncircumcision.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> And he received the sign of circumcision,
a seal of the justice of the faith, which he had, being uncircumcised;
that he might be the father of all them that believe, being
uncircumcised, that unto them also it may be reputed to justice:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And might be the father of circumcision;
not to them only, that are of the circumcision, but to them also that
follow the steps of the faithful, that is in the uncircumcision of our
father Abraham.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> For not through the law was the promise
to Abraham, or to his seed, that he should be heir of the world; but
through the justice of faith.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> For if they who are of the law be heirs,
faith is made void, the promise is made of no effect.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> For the law worketh wrath. For where
there is no law, neither is there transgression.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Therefore is it of faith, that according
to grace the promise might be firm to all the seed; not to that only
which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham,
who is the father of us all,

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> (As it is written: I have made thee a
father of many nations,) before God, whom he believed, who quickeneth
the dead; and calleth those things that are not, as those that are.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Who against hope believed in hope; that
he might be made the father of many nations, according to that which was
said to him: So shall thy seed be.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> And he was not weak in faith; neither did
he consider his own body now dead, whereas he was almost an hundred
years old, nor the dead womb of Sara.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> In the promise also of God he staggered
not by distrust; but was strengthened in faith, giving glory to God:

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Most fully knowing, that whatsoever he
has promised, he is able also to perform.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> And therefore it was reputed to him unto
justice.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Now it is not written only for him, that
it was reputed to him unto justice,

<span id="an_4:24">4:24</span> But also for us, to whom it shall be
reputed, if we believe in him, that raised up Jesus Christ, our Lord,
from the dead,

<span id="an_4:25">4:25</span> Who was delivered up for our sins, and
rose again for our justification.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> BEING justified therefore by faith, let us
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> By whom also we have access through faith
into this grace, wherein we stand, and glory in the hope of the glory of
the sons of God.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> And not only so; but we glory also in
tribulations, knowing that tribulation worketh patience;

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> And patience trial; and trial hope;

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> And hope confoundeth not: because the
charity of God is poured forth in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, who is
given to us.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For why did Christ, when as yet we were
weak, according to the time, die for the ungodly?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> For scarce for a just man will one die; yet
perhaps for a good man some one would dare to die.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But God commendeth his charity towards us;
because when as yet we were sinners, according to the time,

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Christ died for us; much more therefore,
being now justified by his blood, shall we be saved from wrath through
him.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> For if, when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son; much more, being reconciled,
shall we be saved by his life.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> And not only so; but also we glory in
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received
reconciliation.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Wherefore as by one man sin entered into
this world, and by sin death; and so death passed upon all men, in whom
all have sinned.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> For until the law sin was in the world;
but sin was not imputed, when the law was not.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> But death reigned from Adam unto Moses,
even over them also who have not sinned after the similitude of the
transgression of Adam, who is a figure of him who was to come.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> But not as the offence, so also the gift.
For if by the offence of one, many died; much more the grace of God, and
the gift, by the grace of one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto
many.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And not as it was by one sin, so also is
the gift. For judgment indeed was by one unto condemnation; but grace is
of many offences, unto justification.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> For if by one man's offence death reigned
through one; much more they who receive abundance of grace, and of the
gift, and of justice, shall reign in life through one, Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> Therefore, as by the offence of one, unto
all men to condemnation; so also by the justice of one, unto all men to
justification of life.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> For as by the disobedience of one man,
many were made sinners; so also by the obedience of one, many shall be
made just.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Now the law entered in, that sin might
abound. And where sin abounded, grace did more abound.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> That as sin hath reigned to death; so
also grace might reign by justice unto life everlasting, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> WHAT shall we say, then? shall we continue
in sin, that grace may abound?

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> God forbid. For we that are dead to sin,
how shall we live any longer therein?

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Know you not that all we, who are baptized
in Christ Jesus, are baptized in his death?

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> For we are buried together with him by
baptism into death; that as Christ is risen from the dead by the glory
of the Father, so we also may walk in newness of life.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> For if we have been planted together in the
likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Knowing this, that our old man is crucified
with him, that the body of sin may be destroyed, to the end that we may
serve sin no longer.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For he that is dead is justified from sin.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe
that we shall live also together with Christ:

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Knowing that Christ rising again from the
dead, dieth now no more, death shall no more have dominion over him.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For in that he died to sin, he died once;
but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God:

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> So do you also reckon, that you are dead
to sin, but alive unto God, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Let no sin therefore reign in your mortal
body, so as to obey the lusts thereof.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Neither yield ye your members as
instruments of iniquity unto sin; but present yourselves to God, as
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
justice unto God.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> For sin shall not have dominion over you;
for you are not under the law, but under grace.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> What then? Shall we sin, because we are
not under the law, but under grace? God forbid.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Know you not, that to whom you yield
yourselves servants to obey, his servants you are whom you obey, whether
it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto justice.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> But thanks be to God, that you were the
servants of sin, but have obeyed from the heart, unto that form of
doctrine, into which you have been delivered.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> Being then freed from sin, we have been
made servants of justice.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> I speak an human thing, because of the
infirmity of your flesh. For as you have yielded your members to serve
uncleanness and iniquity, unto iniquity; so now yield your members to
serve justice, unto sanctification.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> For when you were the servants of sin,
you were free men to justice.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> What fruit therefore had you then in
those things, of which you are now ashamed? For the end of them is
death.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> But now being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, you have your fruit unto sanctification, and the
end life everlasting.

<span id="an_6:23">6:23</span> For the wages of sin is death. But the
grace of God, life everlasting, in Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> KNOW you not, brethren, (for I speak to
them that know the law,) that the law hath dominion over a man, as long
as it liveth?

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> For the woman that hath an husband, whilst
her husband liveth is bound to the law. But if her husband be dead, she
is loosed from the law of her husband.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Therefore, whilst her husband liveth, she
shall be called an adulteress, if she be with another man: but if her
husband be dead, she is delivered from the law of her husband; so that
she is not an adulteress, if she be with another man.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Therefore, my brethren, you also are become
dead to the law, by the body of Christ; that you may belong to another,
who is risen again from the dead, that we may bring forth fruit to God.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> For when we were in the flesh, the passions
of sins, which were by the law, did work in our members, to bring forth
fruit unto death.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> But now we are loosed from the law of
death, wherein we were detained; so that we should serve in newness of
spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> What shall we say, then? Is the law sin?
God forbid. But I do not know sin, but by the law; for I had not known
concupiscence, if the law did not say: Thou shalt not covet.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> But sin taking occasion by the commandment,
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For without the law sin was
dead.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And I lived some time without the law. But
when the commandment came, sin revived,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> And I died. And the commandment that was
ordained to life, the same was found to be unto death to me.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> For sin, taking occasion by the
commandment, seduced me, and by it killed me.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Wherefore the law indeed is holy, and the
commandment holy, and just, and good.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Was that then which is good, made death
unto me? God forbid. But sin, that it may appear sin, by that which is
good, wrought death in me; that sin, by the commandment, might become
sinful above measure.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> For we know that the law is spiritual;
but I am carnal, sold under sin.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> For that which I work, I understand not.
For I do not that good which I will; but the evil which I hate, that I
do.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> If then I do that which I will not, I
consent to the law, that it is good.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> Now then it is no more I that do it, but
sin that dwelleth in me.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> For I know that there dwelleth not in me,
that is to say, in my flesh, that which is good. For to will, is present
with me; but to accomplish that which is good, I find not.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> For the good which I will, I do not; but
the evil which I will not, that I do.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> Now if I do that which I will not, it is
no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.

<span id="an_7:21">7:21</span> I find then a law, that when I have a
will to do good, evil is present with me.

<span id="an_7:22">7:22</span> For I am delighted with the law of God,
according to the inward man:

<span id="an_7:23">7:23</span> But I see another law in my members,
fighting against the law of my mind, and captivating me in the law of
sin, that is in my members.

<span id="an_7:24">7:24</span> Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death?

<span id="an_7:25">7:25</span> The grace of God, by Jesus Christ our
Lord. Therefore, I myself, with the mind serve the law of God; but with
the flesh, the law of sin.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> THERE is now therefore no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> For the law of the spirit of life, in
Christ Jesus, hath delivered me from the law of sin and of death.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> For what the law could not do, in that it
was weak through the flesh; God sending his own Son, in the likeness of
sinful flesh and of sin, hath condemned sin in the flesh;

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> That the justification of the law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to
the spirit.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For they that are according to the flesh,
mind the things that are of the flesh; but they that are according to
the spirit, mind the things that are of the spirit.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> For the wisdom of the flesh is death; but
the wisdom of the spirit is life and peace.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Because the wisdom of the flesh is an enemy
to God; for it is not subject to the law of God, neither can it be.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> And they who are in the flesh, cannot
please God.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> But you are not in the flesh, but in the
spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> And if Christ be in you, the body indeed
is dead, because of sin; but the spirit liveth, because of
justification.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And if the Spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Jesus Christ from
the dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies, because of his Spirit
that dwelleth in you.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> Therefore, brethren, we are debtors, not
to the flesh, to live according to the flesh.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> For if you live according to the flesh,
you shall die: but if by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh,
you shall live.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> For whosoever are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> For you have not received the spirit of
bondage again in fear; but you have received the spirit of adoption of
sons, whereby we cry: Abba (Father).

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> For the Spirit himself giveth testimony
to our spirit, that we are the sons of God.

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And if sons, heirs also; heirs indeed of
God, and joint heirs with Christ: yet so, if we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorified with him.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For I reckon that the sufferings of this
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come, that shall be
revealed in us.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> For the expectation of the creature
waiteth for the revelation of the sons of God.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> For the creature was made subject to
vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that made it subject, in
hope:

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> Because the creature also itself shall be
delivered from the servitude of corruption, into the liberty of the
glory of the children of God.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> For we know that every creature groaneth
and travaileth in pain, even till now.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And not only it, but ourselves also, who
have the firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within
ourselves, waiting for the adoption of the sons of God, the redemption
of our body.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> For we are saved by hope. But hope that
is seen, is not hope. For what a man seeth, why doth he hope for?

<span id="an_8:25">8:25</span> But if we hope for that which we see not,
we wait for it with patience.

<span id="an_8:26">8:26</span> Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our
infirmity. For we know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the
Spirit himself asketh for us with unspeakable groanings.

<span id="an_8:27">8:27</span> And he that searcheth the hearts, knoweth
what the Spirit desireth; because he asketh for the saints according to
God.

<span id="an_8:28">8:28</span> And we know that to them that love God,
all things work together unto good, to such as, according to his
purpose, are called to be saints.

<span id="an_8:29">8:29</span> For whom he foreknew, he also
predestinated to be made conformable to the image of his Son; that he
might be the firstborn amongst many brethren.

<span id="an_8:30">8:30</span> And whom he predestinated, them he also
called. And whom he called, them he also justified. And whom he
justified, them he also glorified.

<span id="an_8:31">8:31</span> What shall we then say to these things?
If God be for us, who is against us?

<span id="an_8:32">8:32</span> He that spared not even his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how hath he not also, with him, given us
all things?

<span id="an_8:33">8:33</span> Who shall accuse against the elect of
God? God that justifieth.

<span id="an_8:34">8:34</span> Who is he that shall condemn? Christ
Jesus that died, yea that is risen also again; who is at the right hand
of God, who also maketh intercession for us.

<span id="an_8:35">8:35</span> Who then shall separate us from the love
of Christ? Shall tribulation? or distress? or famine? or nakedness? or
danger? or persecution? or the sword?

<span id="an_8:36">8:36</span> (As it is written: For thy sake we are
put to death all the day long. We are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter.)

<span id="an_8:37">8:37</span> But in all these things we overcome,
because of him that hath loved us.

<span id="an_8:38">8:38</span> For I am sure that neither death, nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor might,

<span id="an_8:39">8:39</span> Nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> I SPEAK the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> That I have great sadness, and continual
sorrow in my heart.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> For I wished myself to be an anathema from
Christ, for my brethren, who are my kinsmen according to the flesh,

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> Who are Israelites, to whom belongeth the
adoption as of children, and the glory, and the testament, and the
giving of the law, and the service of God, and the promises:

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> Whose are the fathers, and of whom is
Christ, according to the flesh, who is over all things, God blessed for
ever. Amen.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Not as though the word of God hath
miscarried. For all are not Israelites that are of Israel:

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> Neither are all they that are the seed of
Abraham, children; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called:

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> That is to say, not they that are the
children of the flesh, are the children of God; but they, that are the
children of the promise, are accounted for the seed.

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> For this is the word of promise: According
to this time will I come; and Sara shall have a son.

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And not only she. But when Rebecca also
had conceived at once, of Isaac our father.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> For when the children were not yet born,
nor had done any good or evil (that the purpose of God, according to
election, might stand,)

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> Not of works, but of him that calleth, it
was said to her: The elder shall serve the younger.

<span id="an_9:13">9:13</span> As it is written: Jacob I have loved, but
Esau I have hated.

<span id="an_9:14">9:14</span> What shall we say then? Is there
injustice with God? God forbid.

<span id="an_9:15">9:15</span> For he saith to Moses: I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy; and I will shew mercy to whom I will shew
mercy.

<span id="an_9:16">9:16</span> So then it is not of him that willeth,
nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth mercy.

<span id="an_9:17">9:17</span> For the scripture saith to Pharao: To
this purpose have I raised thee, that I may shew my power in thee, and
that my name may be declared throughout all the earth.

<span id="an_9:18">9:18</span> Therefore he hath mercy on whom he will;
and whom he will, he hardeneth.

<span id="an_9:19">9:19</span> Thou wilt say therefore to me: Why doth
he then find fault? for who resisteth his will?

<span id="an_9:20">9:20</span> O man, who art thou that repliest against
God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it: Why hast thou
made me thus?

<span id="an_9:21">9:21</span> Or hath not the potter power over the
clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honour, and another unto
dishonour?

<span id="an_9:22">9:22</span> What if God, willing to shew his wrath,
and to make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of
wrath, fitted for destruction,

<span id="an_9:23">9:23</span> That he might shew the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy, which he hath prepared unto glory?

<span id="an_9:24">9:24</span> Even us, whom also he hath called, nor
only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_9:25">9:25</span> As in Osee he saith: I will call that
which was not my people, my people; and her that was not beloved,
beloved; and her that had not obtained mercy, one that hath obtained
mercy.

<span id="an_9:26">9:26</span> And it shall be, in the place where it
was said unto them, You are not my people; there they shall be called
the sons of the living God.

<span id="an_9:27">9:27</span> And Isaias crieth out concerning Israel:
If the number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a
remnant shall be saved.

<span id="an_9:28">9:28</span> For he shall finish his word, and cut it
short in justice; because a short word shall the Lord make upon the
earth.

<span id="an_9:29">9:29</span> And as Isaias foretold: Unless the Lord
of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been made as Sodom, and we had
been like unto Gomorrha.

<span id="an_9:30">9:30</span> What then shall we say? That the
Gentiles, who followed not after justice, have attained to justice, even
the justice that is of faith.

<span id="an_9:31">9:31</span> But Israel, by following after the law of
justice, is not come unto the law of justice.

<span id="an_9:32">9:32</span> Why so? Because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were of works. For they stumbled at the stumblingstone.

<span id="an_9:33">9:33</span> As it is written: Behold I lay in Sion a
stumblingstone and a rock of scandal; and whosoever believeth in him
shall not be confounded.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> BRETHREN, the will of my heart, indeed,
and my prayer to God, is for them unto salvation.

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> For I bear them witness, that they have a
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> For they, not knowing the justice of God,
and seeking to establish their own, have not submitted themselves to the
justice of God.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> For the end of the law is Christ, unto
justice to every one that believeth.

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> For Moses wrote, that the justice which
is of the law, the man that shall do it, shall live by it.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> But the justice which is of faith,
speaketh thus: Say not in thy heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? that
is, to bring Christ down;

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> Or who shall descend into the deep? that
is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But what saith the scripture? The word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. This is the word of
faith, which we preach.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> For if thou confess with thy mouth the
Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God hath raised him up from
the dead, thou shalt be saved.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> For, with the heart, we believe unto
justice; but, with the mouth, confession is made unto salvation.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> For the scripture saith: Whosoever
believeth in him, shall not be confounded.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> For there is no distinction of the Jew
and the Greek: for the same is Lord over all, rich unto all that call
upon him.

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> For whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord, shall be saved.

<span id="an_10:14">10:14</span> How then shall they call on him, in
whom they have not believed? Or how shall they believe him, of whom they
have not heard? And how shall they hear, without a preacher?

<span id="an_10:15">10:15</span> And how shall they preach unless they
be sent, as it is written: How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the gospel of peace, of them that bring glad tidings of good
things!

<span id="an_10:16">10:16</span> But all do not obey the gospel. For
Isaias saith: Lord, who hath believed our report?

<span id="an_10:17">10:17</span> Faith then cometh by hearing; and
hearing by the word of Christ.

<span id="an_10:18">10:18</span> But I say: Have they not heard? Yes,
verily, their sound hath gone forth into all the earth, and their words
unto the ends of the whole world.

<span id="an_10:19">10:19</span> But I say: Hath not Israel known?
First, Moses saith: I will provoke you to jealousy by that which is not
a nation; by a foolish nation I will anger you.

<span id="an_10:20">10:20</span> But Isaias is bold, and saith: I was
found by them that did not seek me: I appeared openly to them that asked
not after me.

<span id="an_10:21">10:21</span> But to Israel he saith: All the day
long have I spread my hands to a people that believeth not, and
contradicteth me.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> I SAY then: Hath God cast away his
people? God forbid. For I also am an Israelite of the seed of Abraham,
of the tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> God hath not cast away his people, which
he foreknew. Know you not what the scripture saith of Elias; how he
calleth on God against Israel?

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> Lord, they have slain thy prophets, they
have dug down thy altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> But what saith the divine answer to him?
I have left me seven thousand men, that have not bowed their knees to
Baal.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> Even so then at this present time also,
there is a remnant saved according to the election of grace.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And if by grace, it is not now by works:
otherwise grace is no more grace.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> What then? That which Israel sought, he
hath not obtained: but the election hath obtained it; and the rest have
been blinded.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> As it is written: God hath given them the
spirit of insensibility; eyes that they should not see; and ears that
they should not hear, until this present day.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> And David saith: Let their table be made
a snare, and a trap, and a stumblingblock, and a recompense unto them.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> Let their eyes be darkened, that they
may not see: and bow down their back always.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> I say then, have they so stumbled, that
they should fall? God forbid. But by their offence, salvation is come to
the Gentiles, that they may be emulous of them.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> Now if the offence of them be the
riches of the world, and the diminution of them, the riches of the
Gentiles; how much more the fulness of them?

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> For I say to you, Gentiles: as long
indeed as I am the apostle of the Gentiles, I will honour my ministry,

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> If, by any means, I may provoke to
emulation them who are my flesh, and may save some of them.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> For if the loss of them be the
reconciliation of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but
life from the dead?

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> For if the firstfruit be holy, so is
the lump also: and if the root be holy, so are the branches.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And if some of the branches be broken,
and thou, being a wild olive, art ingrafted in them, and art made
partaker of the root, and of the fatness of the olive tree,

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> Boast not against the branches. But if
thou boast, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee.

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> Thou wilt say then: The branches were
broken off, that I might be grafted in.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> Well: because of unbelief they were
broken off. But thou standest by faith: be not highminded, but fear.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> For if God hath not spared the natural
branches, fear lest perhaps he also spare not thee.

<span id="an_11:22">11:22</span> See then the goodness and the severity
of God: towards them indeed that are fallen, the severity; but towards
thee, the goodness of God, if thou abide in goodness, otherwise thou
also shalt be cut off.

<span id="an_11:23">11:23</span> And they also, if they abide not still
in unbelief, shall be grafted in: for God is able to graft them in
again.

<span id="an_11:24">11:24</span> For if thou wert cut out of the wild
olive tree, which is natural to thee; and, contrary to nature, were
grafted into the good olive tree; how much more shall they that are the
natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree?

<span id="an_11:25">11:25</span> For I would not have you ignorant,
brethren, of this mystery, (lest you should be wise in your own
conceits), that blindness in part has happened in Israel, until the
fulness of the Gentiles should come in.

<span id="an_11:26">11:26</span> And so all Israel should be saved, as
it is written: There shall come out of Sion, he that shall deliver, and
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob.

<span id="an_11:27">11:27</span> And this is to them my covenant: when I
shall take away their sins.

<span id="an_11:28">11:28</span> As concerning the gospel, indeed, they
are enemies for your sake: but as touching the election, they are most
dear for the sake of the fathers.

<span id="an_11:29">11:29</span> For the gifts and the calling of God
are without repentance.

<span id="an_11:30">11:30</span> For as you also in times past did not
believe God, but now have obtained mercy, through their unbelief;

<span id="an_11:31">11:31</span> So these also now have not believed,
for your mercy, that they also may obtain mercy.

<span id="an_11:32">11:32</span> For God hath concluded all in unbelief,
that he may have mercy on all.

<span id="an_11:33">11:33</span> O the depth of the riches of the wisdom
and of the knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are his judgments, and
how unsearchable his ways!

<span id="an_11:34">11:34</span> For who hath known the mind of the
Lord? Or who hath been his counsellor?

<span id="an_11:35">11:35</span> Or who hath first given to him, and
recompense shall be made him?

<span id="an_11:36">11:36</span> For of him, and by him, and in him, are
all things: to him be glory for ever. Amen.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> I BESEECH you therefore, brethren, by the
mercy of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
pleasing unto God, your reasonable service.

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> And be not conformed to this world; but
be reformed in the newness of your mind, that you may prove what is the
good, and the acceptable, and the perfect will of God.

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> For I say, by the grace that is given me,
to all that are among you, not to be more wise than it behoveth to be
wise, but to be wise unto sobriety, and according as God hath divided to
every one the measure of faith.

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> For as in one body we have many members,
but all the members have not the same office:

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> So we being many, are one body in Christ,
and every one members one of another.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> And having different gifts, according to
the grace that is given us, either prophecy, to be used according to the
rule of faith;

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> Or ministry, in ministering; or he that
teacheth, in doctrine;

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> He that exhorteth, in exhorting; he that
giveth, with simplicity; he that ruleth, with carefulness; he that
sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness.

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> Let love be without dissimulation. Hating
that which is evil, cleaving to that which is good.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> Loving one another with the charity of
brotherhood, with honour preventing one another.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> In carefulness not slothful. In spirit
fervent. Serving the Lord.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> Rejoicing in hope. Patient in
tribulation. Instant in prayer.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> Communicating to the necessities of the
saints. Pursuing hospitality.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> Bless them that persecute you: bless,
and curse not.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> Rejoice with them that rejoice; weep
with them that weep.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> Being of one mind one towards another.
Not minding high things, but consenting to the humble. Be not wise in
your own conceits.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> To no man rendering evil for evil.
Providing good things, not only in the sight of God, but also in the
sight of all men.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> If it be possible, as much as is in
you, have peace with all men.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> Revenge not yourselves, my dearly
beloved; but give place unto wrath, for it is written: Revenge is mine,
I will repay, saith the Lord.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> But if thy enemy be hungry, give him to
eat; if he thirst, give him to drink. For, doing this, thou shalt heap
coals of fire upon his head.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> Be not overcome by evil, but overcome
evil by good.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> LET every soul be subject to higher
powers: for there is no power but from God: and those that are, are
ordained of God.

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> Therefore he that resisteth the power,
resisteth the ordinance of God. And they that resist, purchase to
themselves damnation.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> For princes are not a terror to the good
work, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the power? Do
that which is good: and thou shalt have praise from the same.

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> For he is God's minister to thee, for
good. But if thou do that which is evil, fear: for he beareth not the
sword in vain. For he is God's minister: an avenger to execute wrath
upon him that doth evil.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> Wherefore be subject of necessity, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience' sake.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> For therefore also you pay tribute. For
they are the ministers of God, serving unto this purpose.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> Render therefore to all men their dues.
Tribute, to whom tribute is due: custom, to whom custom: fear, to whom
fear: honour, to whom honour.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Owe no man any thing, but to love one
another. For he that loveth his neighbour, hath fulfilled the law.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> For Thou shalt not commit adultery: Thou
shalt not kill: Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness:
Thou shalt not covet: and if there be any other commandment, it is
comprised in this word, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> The love of our neighbour worketh no
evil. Love therefore is the fulfilling of the law.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> And that knowing the season; that it is
now the hour for us to rise from sleep. For now our salvation is nearer
than when we believed.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> The night is passed, and the day is at
hand. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armour of light.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Let us walk honestly, as in the day:
not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and impurities, not in
contention and envy:

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make not provision for the flesh in its concupiscences.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> NOW him that is weak in faith, take unto
you: not in disputes about thoughts.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> For one believeth that he may eat all
things: but he that is weak, let him eat herbs.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> Let not him that eateth, despise him that
eateth not: and he that eateth not, let him not judge him that eateth.
For God hath taken him to him.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> Who art thou that judgest another man's
servant? To his own lord he standeth or falleth. And he shall stand: for
God is able to make him stand.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> For one judgeth between day and day: and
another judgeth every day: let every man abound in his own sense.

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> He that regardeth the day, regardeth it
unto the Lord. And he that eateth, eateth to the Lord: for he giveth
thanks to God. And he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and
giveth thanks to God.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> For none of us liveth to himself; and no
man dieth to himself.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> For whether we live, we live unto the
Lord; or whether we die, we die unto the Lord. Therefore, whether we
live, or whether we die, we are the Lord's.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> For to this end Christ died and rose
again; that he might be Lord both of the dead and of the living.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> But thou, why judgest thou thy brother?
or thou, why dost thou despise thy brother? For we shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ.

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> For it is written: As I live, saith the
Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> Therefore every one of us shall render
account to God for himself.

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> Let us not therefore judge one another
any more. But judge this rather, that you put not a stumblingblock or a
scandal in your brother's way.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> I know, and am confident in the Lord
Jesus, that nothing is unclean of itself; but to him that esteemeth any
thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> For if, because of thy meat, thy
brother be grieved, thou walkest not now according to charity. Destroy
not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> Let not then our good be evil spoken
of.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> For the kingdom of God is not meat and
drink; but justice, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_14:18">14:18</span> For he that in this serveth Christ,
pleaseth God, and is approved of men.

<span id="an_14:19">14:19</span> Therefore let us follow after the
things that are of peace; and keep the things that are of edification
one towards another.

<span id="an_14:20">14:20</span> Destroy not the work of God for meat.
All things indeed are clean: but it is evil for that man who eateth with
offence.

<span id="an_14:21">14:21</span> It is good not to eat flesh, and not to
drink wine, nor any thing whereby thy brother is offended, or
scandalized, or made weak.

<span id="an_14:22">14:22</span> Hast thou faith? Have it to thyself
before God. Blessed is he that condemneth not himself in that which he
alloweth.

<span id="an_14:23">14:23</span> But he that discerneth, if he eat, is
condemned; because not of faith. For all that is not of faith is sin.

<span id="an_15:1">15:1</span> NOW we that are stronger, ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves.

<span id="an_15:2">15:2</span> Let every one of you please his neighbour
unto good, to edification.

<span id="an_15:3">15:3</span> For Christ did not please himself, but as
it is written: The reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell upon
me.

<span id="an_15:4">15:4</span> For what things soever were written, were
written for our learning: that through patience and the comfort of the
scriptures, we might have hope.

<span id="an_15:5">15:5</span> Now the God of patience and of comfort
grant you to be of one mind one towards another, according to Jesus
Christ:

<span id="an_15:6">15:6</span> That with one mind, and with one mouth,
you may glorify God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="an_15:7">15:7</span> Wherefore receive one another, as Christ
also hath received you unto the honour of God.

<span id="an_15:8">15:8</span> For I say that Christ Jesus was minister
of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made
unto the fathers.

<span id="an_15:9">15:9</span> But that the Gentiles are to glorify God
for his mercy, as it is written: Therefore will I confess to thee, O
Lord, among the Gentiles, and will sing to thy name.

<span id="an_15:10">15:10</span> And again he saith: Rejoice, ye
Gentiles, with his people.

<span id="an_15:11">15:11</span> And again: Praise the Lord, all ye
Gentiles; and magnify him, all ye people.

<span id="an_15:12">15:12</span> And again Isaias saith: There shall be
a root of Jesse; and he that shall rise up to rule the Gentiles, in him
the Gentiles shall hope.

<span id="an_15:13">15:13</span> Now the God of hope fill you with all
joy and peace in believing; that you may abound in hope, and in the
power of the Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_15:14">15:14</span> And I myself also, my brethren, am
assured of you, that you also are full of love, replenished with all
knowledge, so that you are able to admonish one another.

<span id="an_15:15">15:15</span> But I have written to you, brethren,
more boldly in some sort, as it were putting you in mind: because of the
grace which is given me from God.

<span id="an_15:16">15:16</span> That I should be the minister of Christ
Jesus among the Gentiles; sanctifying the gospel of God, that the
oblation of the Gentiles may be made acceptable and sanctified in the
Holy Ghost.

<span id="an_15:17">15:17</span> I have therefore glory in Christ Jesus
towards God.

<span id="an_15:18">15:18</span> For I dare not to speak of any of those
things which Christ worketh not by me, for the obedience of the
Gentiles, by word and deed,

<span id="an_15:19">15:19</span> By the virtue of signs and wonders, in
the power of the Holy Ghost, so that from Jerusalem round about as far
as unto Illyricum, I have replenished the gospel of Christ.

<span id="an_15:20">15:20</span> And I have so preached this gospel, not
where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's
foundation.

<span id="an_15:21">15:21</span> But as it is written: They to whom he
was not spoken of, shall see, and they that have not heard shall
understand.

<span id="an_15:22">15:22</span> For which cause also I was hindered
very much from coming to you, and have been kept away till now.

<span id="an_15:23">15:23</span> But now having no more place in these
countries, and having a great desire these many years past to come unto
you,

<span id="an_15:24">15:24</span> When I shall begin to take my journey
into Spain, I hope that as I pass, I shall see you, and be brought on my
way thither by you, if first, in part, I shall have enjoyed you:

<span id="an_15:25">15:25</span> But now I shall go to Jerusalem, to
minister unto the saints.

<span id="an_15:26">15:26</span> For it hath pleased them of Macedonia
and Achaia to make a contribution for the poor of the saints that are in
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_15:27">15:27</span> For it hath pleased them; and they are
their debtors. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their
spiritual things, they ought also in carnal things to minister to them.

<span id="an_15:28">15:28</span> When therefore I shall have
accomplished this, and consigned to them this fruit, I will come by you
into Spain.

<span id="an_15:29">15:29</span> And I know, that when I come to you, I
shall come in the abundance of the blessing of the gospel of Christ.

<span id="an_15:30">15:30</span> I beseech you therefore, brethren,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the charity of the Holy Ghost,
that you help me in your prayers for me to God,

<span id="an_15:31">15:31</span> That I may be delivered from the
unbelievers that are in Judea, and that the oblation of my service may
be acceptable in Jerusalem to the saints.

<span id="an_15:32">15:32</span> That I may come to you with joy, by the
will of God, and may be refreshed with you.

<span id="an_15:33">15:33</span> Now the God of peace be with you all.
Amen.

<span id="an_16:1">16:1</span> AND I commend to you Phebe, our sister,
who is in the ministry of the church, that is in Cenchrae:

<span id="an_16:2">16:2</span> That you receive her in the Lord as
becometh saints; and that you assist her in whatsoever business she
shall have need of you. For she also hath assisted many, and myself
also.

<span id="an_16:3">16:3</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila, my helpers in
Christ Jesus,

<span id="an_16:4">16:4</span> (Who have for my life laid down their own
necks: to whom not I only give thanks, but also all the churches of the
Gentiles,)

<span id="an_16:5">16:5</span> And the church which is in their house.
Salute Epenetus, my beloved: who is the firstfruits of Asia in Christ.

<span id="an_16:6">16:6</span> Salute Mary, who hath laboured much among
you.

<span id="an_16:7">16:7</span> Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen
and fellow prisoners: who are of note among the apostles, who also were
in Christ before me.

<span id="an_16:8">16:8</span> Salute Ampliatus, most beloved to me in
the Lord.

<span id="an_16:9">16:9</span> Salute Urbanus, our helper in Christ
Jesus, and Stachys, my beloved.

<span id="an_16:10">16:10</span> Salute Apelles, approved in Christ.

<span id="an_16:11">16:11</span> Salute them that are of Aristobulus'
household. Salute Herodian, my kinsman. Salute them that are of
Narcissus' household, who are in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:12">16:12</span> Salute Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who
labour in the Lord. Salute Persis, the dearly beloved, who hath much
laboured in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:13">16:13</span> Salute Rufus, elect in the Lord, and
his mother and mine.

<span id="an_16:14">16:14</span> Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren that are with them.

<span id="an_16:15">16:15</span> Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and
his sister, and Olympias; and all the saints that are with them.

<span id="an_16:16">16:16</span> Salute one another with an holy kiss.
All the churches of Christ salute you.

<span id="an_16:17">16:17</span> Now I beseech you, brethren, to mark
them who make dissensions and offences contrary to the doctrine which
you have learned, and avoid them.

<span id="an_16:18">16:18</span> For they that are such, serve not
Christ our Lord, but their own belly; and by pleasing speeches and good
words, seduce the hearts of the innocent.

<span id="an_16:19">16:19</span> For your obedience is published in
every place. I rejoice therefore in you. But I would have you to be wise
in good, and simple in evil.

<span id="an_16:20">16:20</span> And the God of peace crush Satan under
your feet speedily. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

<span id="an_16:21">16:21</span> Timothy, my fellow labourer, saluteth
you, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen.

<span id="an_16:22">16:22</span> I Tertius, who wrote this epistle,
salute you in the Lord.

<span id="an_16:23">16:23</span> Caius, my host, and the whole church,
saluteth you. Erastus, the treasurer of the city, saluteth you, and
Quartus, a brother.

<span id="an_16:24">16:24</span> The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with you all. Amen.

<span id="an_16:25">16:25</span> Now to him that is able to establish
you, according to my gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret from
eternity,

<span id="an_16:26">16:26</span> (Which now is made manifest by the
scriptures of the prophets, according to the precept of the eternal God,
for the obedience of faith,) known among all nations;

<span id="an_16:27">16:27</span> To God the only wise, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians](co1.md)
