[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](jdg)  [Next](sa1) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Ruth

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> In the days of one of the judges, when the
judges ruled, there came a famine in the land. And a certain man of
Bethlehem Juda, went to sojourn in the land of Moab with his wife and
his two sons.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> He was named Elimelech, and his wife,
Noemi: and his two sons, the one Mahalon, and the other Chelion,
Ephrathites of Bethlehem Juda. And entering into the country of Moab,
they abode there.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> And Elimelech the husband of Noemi died:
and she remained with her sons.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And they took wives of the women of Moab,
of which one was called Orpha, and the other Ruth. And they dwelt there
ten years.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> And they both died, to wit, Mahalon and
Chelion: and the woman was left alone, having lost both her sons and her
husband.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And she arose to go from the land of Moab
to her own country with both her daughters in law: for she had heard
that the Lord had looked upon his people, and had given them food.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Wherefore she went forth out of the place
of her sojournment, with both her daughters in law: and being now in the
way to return into the land of Juda,

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> She said to them: Go ye home to your
mothers: the Lord deal mercifully with you, as you have dealt with the
dead and with me.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> May he grant you to find rest in the houses
of the husbands which you shall take. And she kissed them. And they
lifted up their voice and began to weep,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And to say: We will go on with thee to
thy people.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> But she answered them: Return, my
daughters: why come ye with me? have I any more sons in my womb, that
you may hope for husbands of me?

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> Return again, my daughters, and go your
ways: for I am now spent with age, and not fit for wedlock. Although I
might conceive this night, and bear children,

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> If you would wait till they were grown
up, and come to man's estate, you would be old women before you marry.
Do not so, my daughters, I beseech you: for I am grieved the more for
your distress, and the hand of the Lord is gone out against me.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And they lifted up their voice, and began
to weep again: Orpha kissed her mother in law and returned: Ruth stuck
close to her mother in law.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> And Noemi said to her: Behold thy
kinswoman is returned to her people, and to her gods, go thou with her.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> She answered: Be not against me, to
desire that I should leave thee and depart: for whithersoever thou shalt
go, I will go: and where thou shalt dwell, I also will dwell. Thy people
shall be my people, and thy God my God.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> The land that shall receive thee dying,
in the same will I die: and there will I be buried. The Lord do so and
so to me, and add more also, if aught but death part me and thee.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> Then Noemi, seeing that Ruth was
steadfastly determined to go with her, would not be against it, nor
persuade her any more to return to her friends:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> So they went together and came to
Bethlehem. And when they were come into the city, the report was quickly
spread among all: and the women said: This is that Noemi.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> But she said to them: Call me not Noemi,
(that is, beautiful,) but call me Mara, (that is, bitter,) for the
Almighty hath quite filled me with bitterness.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> I went out full, and the Lord hath
brought me back empty. Why then do you call me Noemi, whom the Lord hath
humbled and the Almighty hath afflicted?

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> So Noemi came with Ruth the Moabitess her
daughter in law, from the land of her sojournment: and returned into
Bethlehem, in the beginning of the barley harvest.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Now her husband Elimelech had a kinsman, a
powerful man, and very rich, whose name was Booz.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And Ruth the Moabitess said to her mother
in law: If thou wilt, I will go into the field, and glean the ears of
corn that escape the hands of the reapers, wheresoever I shall find
grace with a householder that will be favourable to me. And she answered
her: Go, my daughter.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> She went therefore and gleaned the ears of
corn after the reapers. And it happened that the owner of that field was
Booz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And behold, he came out of Bethlehem, and
said to the reapers: The Lord be with you. And they answered him: The
Lord bless thee.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And Booz said to the young man that was set
over the reapers: Whose maid is this?

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> And he answered him: This is the Moabitess
who came with Noemi, from the land of Moab,

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> And she desired leave to glean the ears of
corn that remain, following the steps of the reapers: and she hath been
in the field from morning till now, and hath not gone home for one
moment.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> And Booz said to Ruth: Hear me, daughter,
do not go to glean in any other field, and do not depart from this
place: but keep with my maids,

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> And follow where they reap. For I have
charged my young men, not to molest thee: and if thou art thirsty, go to
the vessels, and drink of the waters whereof the servants drink.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> She fell on her face and worshipping upon
the ground, said to him: Whence cometh this to me, that I should find
grace before thy eyes, and that thou shouldst vouchsafe to take notice
of me a woman of another country?

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And he answered her: All hath been told
me, that thou hast done to thy mother in law after the death of thy
husband: and how thou hast left thy parents, and the land wherein thou
wast born, and art come to a people which thou knewest not heretofore.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The Lord render unto thee for thy work,
and mayest thou receive a full reward of the Lord the God of Israel, to
whom thou art come, and under whose wings thou art fled.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> And she said: I have found grace in thy
eyes, my lord, who hast comforted me and hast spoken to the heart of thy
handmaid, who am not like to one of thy maids.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Booz said to her: At mealtime come
thou hither, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. So
she sat at the side of the reapers, and she heaped to herself frumenty,
and ate and was filled, and took the leavings.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> And she arose from thence, to glean the
ears of corn as before. And Booz commanded his servants, saying: If she
would even reap with you, hinder her not:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> And let fall some of your handfuls of
purpose, and leave them, that she may gather them without shame, and let
no man rebuke her when she gathereth them.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> She gleaned therefore in the field till
evening: and beating out with a rod and threshing what she had gleaned,
she found about the measure of an ephi of barley, that is, three
bushels:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Which she took up and returned into the
city, and shewed it to her mother in law: moreover she brought out, and
gave her of the remains of her meat, wherewith she had been filled.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> And her mother in law said to her: Where
hast thou gleaned to day, and where hast thou wrought? blessed be he
that hath had pity on thee. And she told her with whom she had wrought:
and she told the man's name, that he was called Booz.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> And Noemi answered her: Blessed be he of
the Lord: because the same kindness which he shewed to the living, he
hath kept also to the dead. And again she said: The man is our kinsman.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And Ruth said, He also charged me, that I
should keep close to his reapers, till all the corn should be reaped.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> And her mother in law said to her: It is
better for thee, my daughter, to go out to reap with his maids, lest in
another man's field some one may resist thee.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> So she kept close to the maids of Booz:
and continued to glean with them, till all the barley and the wheat were
laid up in the barns.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> After she was returned to her mother in
law, Noemi said to her: My daughter, I will seek rest for thee, and will
provide that it may be well with thee.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> This Booz, with whose maids thou wast
joined in the field, is our near kinsman, and behold this night he
winnoweth barley in the threshingfloor.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Wash thyself therefore and anoint thee, and
put on thy best garments, and go down to the barnfloor: but let not the
man see thee, till he shall have done eating and drinking.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> And when he shall go to sleep, mark the
place wherein he sleepeth: and thou shalt go in, and lift up the clothes
wherewith he is covered towards his feet, and shalt lay thyself down
there: and he will tell thee what thou must do.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> She answered: Whatsoever thou shalt
command, I will do.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And she went down to the barnfloor, and did
all that her mother in law had bid her.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> And when Booz had eaten, and drunk, and was
merry, he went to sleep by the heap of sheaves, and she came softly and
uncovering his feet, laid herself down.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> And behold, when it was now midnight the
man was afraid, and troubled: and he saw a woman lying at his feet,

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> And he said to her: Who art thou? And she
answered: I am Ruth thy handmaid: spread thy coverlet over thy servant,
for thou art a near kinsman.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And he said: Blessed art thou of the
Lord, my daughter, and thy latter kindness has surpassed the former:
because thou hast not followed young men either poor or rich.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Fear not therefore, but whatsoever thou
shalt say to me I will do to thee. For all the people that dwell within
the gates of my city, know that thou art a virtuous woman.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Neither do I deny myself to be near of
kin, but there is another nearer than I.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> Rest thou this night: and when morning is
come, if he will take thee by the right of kindred, all is well: but if
he will not, I will undoubtedly take thee, as the Lord liveth: sleep
till the morning.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> So she slept at his feet till the night
was going off. And she arose before men could know one another, and Booz
said: Beware lest any man know that thou camest hither.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And again he said: Spread thy mantle,
wherewith thou art covered, and hold it with both hands. And when she
spread it and held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it
upon her. And she carried it and went into the city,

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And came to her mother in law; who said
to her: What hast thou done, daughter? And she told her all that the man
had done to her.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> And she said: Behold he hath given me six
measures of barley: for he said: I will not have thee return empty to
thy mother in law.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> And Noemi said: Wait my daughter, till we
see what end the thing will have. For the man will not rest until he
have accomplished what he hath said.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Then Booz went up to the gate, and sat
there. And when he had seen the kinsman going by, of whom he had spoken
before, he said to him, calling him by his name: Turn aside for a little
while, and sit down here. He turned aside, and sat down.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And Booz taking ten men of the ancients of
the city, said to them: Sit ye down here.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> They sat down, and he spoke to the kinsman:
Noemi, who is returned from the country of Moab, will sell a parcel of
land that belonged to our brother Elimelech.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> I would have thee to understand this, and
would tell thee before all that sit here, and before the ancients of my
people. If thou wilt take possession of it by the right of kindred: buy
it and possess it: but if it please thee not, tell me so, that I may
know what I have to do. For there is no near kinsman besides thee, who
art first, and me, who am second. But he answered: I will buy the field.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And Booz said to him: When thou shalt buy
the field at the woman's hand, thou must take also Ruth the Moabitess,
who was the wife of the deceased: to raise up the name of thy kinsman in
his inheritance.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> He answered: I yield up my right of next
akin: for I must not cut off the posterity of my own family. Do thou
make use of my privilege, which I profess I do willingly forego.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Now this in former times was the manner in
Israel between kinsmen, that if at any time one yielded his right to
another: that the grant might be sure, the man put off his shoe, and
gave it to his neighhour; this was a testimony of cession of right in
Israel.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> So Booz said to his kinsman: Put off thy
shoe. And immediately he took it off from his foot.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> And he said to the ancients and to all the
people: You are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was
Elimelech's, and Chelion's, and Mahalon's, of the hand of Noemi:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> And have taken to wife Ruth the
Moabitess, the wife of Mahalon, to raise up the name of the deceased in
his inheritance lest his name be cut off, from among his family and his
brethren and his people. You, I say, are witnesses of this thing.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Then all the people that were in the
gate, and the ancients answered: We are witnesses: The Lord make this
woman who cometh into thy house, like Rachel, and Lia, who built up the
house of Israel: that she may be an example of virtue in Ephrata, and
may have a famous name in Bethlehem:

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> And that the house may be, as the house
of Phares, whom Thamar bore unto Juda, of the seed which the Lord shall
give thee of this young woman.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Booz therefore took Ruth, and married
her: and went in unto her, and the Lord gave her to conceive and to bear
a son.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> And the women said to Noemi: Blessed be
the Lord, who hath not suffered thy family to want a successor, that his
name should be preserved in Israel.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> And thou shouldst have one to comfort thy
soul, and cherish thy old age. For he is born of thy daughter in law:
who loveth thee: and is much better to thee, than if thou hadst seven
sons.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> And Noemi taking the child laid it in her
bosom, and she carried it, and was a nurse unto it.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> And the women her neighbours,
congratulating with her and saying: There is a son born to Noemi: called
his name Obed: he is the father of Isai, the father of David.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> These are the generations of Phares:
Phares begot Esron,

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Esron begot Aram, Aram begot Aminadab,

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Aminadab begot Nahasson, Nahasson begot
Salmon,

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Salmon begot Booz, Booz begot Obed,

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Obed begot Isai, Isai begot David.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Samuel](sa1)
