[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ecc)  [Next](isa.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Song of Solomon

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Let him kiss me with the kiss of his mouth:
for thy breasts are better than wine,

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> Smelling sweet of the best ointments. Thy
name is as oil poured out: therefore young maidens have loved thee.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> Draw me: we will run after thee to the
odour of thy ointments. The king hath brought me into his storerooms: we
will be glad and rejoice in thee, remembering thy breasts more than
wine: the righteous love thee.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> I am black but beautiful, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, as the tents of Cedar, as the curtains of Solomon.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Do not consider me that I am brown, because
the sun hath altered my colour: the sons of my mother have fought
against me, they have made me the keeper in the vineyards: my vineyard I
have not kept.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> Shew me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where
thou feedest, where thou liest in the midday, lest I begin to wander
after the flocks of thy companions.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> If thou know not thyself, O fairest among
women, go forth, and follow after the steps of the flocks, and feed thy
kids beside the tents of the shepherds.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> To my company of horsemen, in Pharao's
chariots, have I likened thee, O my love.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Thy cheeks are beautiful as the
turtledove's, thy neck as jewels.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> We will make thee chains of gold, inlaid
with silver.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> While the king was at his repose, my
spikenard sent forth the odour thereof.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> A bundle of myrrh is my beloved to me, he
shall abide between my breasts.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> A cluster of cypress my love is to me, in
the vineyards of Engaddi.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Behold thou art fair, O my love, behold
thou art fair, thy eyes are as those of doves.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Behold thou art fair, my beloved, and
comely. Our bed is flourishing.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The beams of our houses are of cedar, our
rafters of cypress trees.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I am the flower of the field, and the lily
of the valleys.

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> As the lily among thorns, so is my love
among the daughters.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> As the apple tree among the trees of the
woods, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow,
whom I desired: and his fruit was sweet to my palate.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> He brought me into the cellar of wine, he
set in order charity in me.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> Stay me up with flowers, compass me about
with apples: because I languish with love.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> His left hand is under my head, and his
right hand shall embrace me.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> I adjure you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,
by the roes, and the harts of the, fields, that you stir not up, nor
make the beloved to awake, till she please.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> The voice of my beloved, behold he cometh
leaping upon the mountains, skipping over the hills.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> My beloved is like a roe, or a young hart.
Behold he standeth behind our wall, looking through the windows, looking
through the lattices.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Behold my beloved speaketh to me: Arise,
make haste, my love, my dove, my beautiful one, and come.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> For winter is now past, the rain is over
and gone.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> The flowers have appeared in our land,
the time of pruning is come: the voice of the turtle is heard in our
land:

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> The fig tree hath put forth her green
figs: the vines in flower yield their sweet smell. Arise, my love, my
beautiful one, and come:

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> My dove in the clefts of the rock, in the
hollow places of the wall, shew me thy face, let thy voice sound in my
ears: for thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Catch us the little foxes that destroy
the vines: for our vineyard hath flourished.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> My beloved to me, and I to him who
feedeth among the lilies,

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> Till the day break, and the shadows
retire. Return: be like, my beloved, to a roe, or to a young hart upon
the mountains of Bether.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> In my bed by night I sought him whom my
soul loveth: I sought him, and found him not.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> I will rise, and will go about the city: in
the streets and the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I
sought him, and I found him not.

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> The watchmen who keep the city, found me:
Have you seen him, whom my soul loveth?

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> When I had a little passed by them, I found
him whom my soul loveth: I held him: and I will not let him go, till I
bring him into my mother's house, and into the chamber of her that bore
me.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by
the roes and the harts of the fields, that you stir not up, nor awake my
beloved, till she please.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Who is she that goeth up by the desert, as
a pillar of smoke of aromatical spices, of myrrh, and frankincense, and
of all the powders of the perfumer?

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Behold threescore valiant ones of the most
valiant of Israel, surrounded the bed of Solomon?

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> All holding swords, and most expert in war
: every man's sword upon his thigh, because of fears in the night.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> King Solomon hath made him a litter of the
wood of Libanus:

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> The pillars thereof he made of silver,
the seat of gold, the going up of purple : the midst he covered with
charity for the daughters of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Go forth, ye daughters of Sion, and see
king Solomon in the diadem, wherewith his mother crowned him in the day
of his espousals, and in the day of the joy of his heart.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> How beautiful art thou, my love, how
beautiful art thou! thy eyes are doves' eyes, besides what is hid
within. Thy hair is as flocks of goats, which Come up from mount Galaad.

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Thy teeth as flocks of sheep, that are
shorn which come up from the washing, all with twins, and there is none
barren among them.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Thy lips are as a scarlet lace: and thy
speech sweet. Thy cheeks are as a piece of a pomegranate, besides that
which lieth hid within.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> Thy neck, is as the tower of David, which
is built with bulwarks: a thousand bucklers hang upon it, all the armour
of valiant men.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> Thy two breasts like two young roes that
are twins, which feed among the lilies.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> Till the day break, and the shadows retire,
I will go to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Thou art all fair, O my love, and there is
not a spot in thee.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> Come from Libanus, my spouse, come from
Libanus, come: thou shalt be crowned from the top of Amana, from the top
of Sanir and Hermon, from the dens of the lions, from the mountains of
the leopards.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> Thou hast wounded my heart, my sister, my
spouse, thou hast wounded my heart with one of thy eyes, and with one
hair of thy neck.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> How beautiful are thy breasts, my sister,
my spouse! thy breasts are more beautiful than wine, and the sweet smell
of thy ointments above all aromatical spices.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Thy lips, my spouse, are as a dropping
honeycomb, honey and milk are under thy tongue; and the smell of thy
garments, as the smell of frankincense.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> My sister, my spouse, is a garden
enclosed, a garden enclosed, a fountain sealed up.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Thy plants are a paradise of pomegranates
with the fruits of the orchard. Cypress with spikenard.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Spikenard and saffron, sweet cane and
cinnamon, with all the trees of Libanus, myrrh and aloes with all the
chief perfumes.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> The fountain of gardens: the well of
living waters, which run with a strong stream from Libanus.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Arise, O north wind, and come, O south
wind, blow through my garden, and let the aromatical spices thereof
flow.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Let my beloved come into his garden, and
eat the fruit of his apple trees. I am come into my garden, O my sister,
my spouse, I have gathered my myrrh, with my aromatical spices: I have
eaten the honeycomb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk:
eat, O friends, and drink, and be inebriated, my dearly beloved.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> I sleep, and my heart watcheth; the voice
of my beloved knocking: Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled: for my head is full of dew, and my locks of the drops of the
nights.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> I have put off my garment, how shall I put
it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> My beloved put his hand through the key
hole, and my bowels were moved at his touch.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> I arose up to open to my beloved: my hands
dropped with myrrh, and my fingers were full of the choicest myrrh.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> I opened the bolt of my door to my beloved:
but he had turned aside, and was gone. My soul melted when he spoke: I
sought him, and found him not: I called, and he did not answer me.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> The keepers that go about the city found
me: they struck me: and wounded me: the keepers of the walls took away
my veil from me.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if
you find my beloved, that you tell him that I languish with love.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> What manner of one is thy beloved of the
beloved, O thou most beautiful among women? what manner of one is thy
beloved of the beloved, that thou hast so adjured us?

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> My beloved is white and ruddy, chosen out
of thousands.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> His head is as the finest gold: his locks
as branches of palm trees, black as a raven.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> His eyes as doves upon brooks of waters,
which are washed with milk, and sit beside the plentiful streams.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> His cheeks are as beds of aromatical
spices set by the perfumers. His lips are as lilies dropping choice
myrrb.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> His hands are turned and as of gold, full
of hyacinths. His belly as of ivory, set with sapphires.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> His legs as pillars of marble, that are
set upon bases of gold. His form as of Libanus, excellent as the cedars.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> His throat most sweet, and he is all
lovely: such is my beloved, and he is my friend, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou most
beautiful among women? whither is thy beloved turned aside, and we will
seek him with thee?

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> My beloved is gone down into his garden, to
the bed of aromatical spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather
lilies.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> I to my beloved, and my beloved to me, who
feedeth among the lilies.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> Thou art beautiful, O my love, sweet and
comely as Jerusalem: terrible as an army set in array.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> Turn away thy eyes from me, for they have
made me flee away. Thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear from
Galaad.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Thy teeth as a flock of sheep, which come
up from the washing, all with twins, and there is none barren among
them.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> Thy cheeks are as the bark of a
pomegranate, beside what is hidden within thee.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> There are threescore queens, and fourscore
concubines, and young maidens without number.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> One is my dove, my perfect one is but one,
she is the only one of her mother, the chosen of her that bore her. The
daughters saw her, and declared her most blessed: the queens and
concubines, and they praised her.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> Who is she that cometh forth as the morning
rising, fair as the moon, bright as the sun, terrible as an army set in
array?

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> I went down into the garden of nuts, to
see the fruits of the valleys, and to look if the vineyard had
flourished, and the pomegranates budded.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> I knew not: my soul troubled me for the
chariots of Aminadab.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Return, return, O Sulamitess : return,
return that we may behold thee.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> What shalt thou see in the Sulamitess but
the companies of camps? How beautiful are thy steps in shoes, O prince's
daughter! The joints of thy thighs are like jewels, that are made by the
hand of a skilful workman.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> Thy navel is like a round bowl never
wanting cups. Thy belly is like a heap of wheat, set about with lilies.

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> Thy two breasts are like two young roes
that are twins.

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> Thy neck as a tower of ivory. Thy eyes like
the fishpools in Hesebon, which are in the gate of the daughter of the
multitude. Thy nose is as the tower of Libanus, that looketh toward
Damascus.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> Thy head is like Carmel: and the hairs of
thy head as the purple of the king bound in the channels.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> How beautiful art thou, and how comely, my
dearest, in delights!

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> Thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy
breasts to clusters of grapes.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> I said: I will go up into the palm tree,
and will take hold of the fruit thereof: and thy breasts shall be as the
clusters of the vine: and the odour of thy mouth like apples.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> Thy throat like the best wine, worthy for
my beloved to drink, and for his lips and his teeth to ruminate.

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> I to my beloved, and his turning is
towards me.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Come, my beloved, let us go forth into
the field, let us abide in the villages.

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> Let us get up early to the vineyards, let
us see if the vineyard flourish, if the flowers be ready to bring forth
fruits, if the pomegranates flourish: there will I give thee my breasts.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> The mandrakes give a smell. In our gates
are all fruits: the new and the old, my beloved, I have kept for thee.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> Who shall give thee to me for my brother,
sucking the breasts of my mother, that I may find thee without, and kiss
thee, and now no man may despise me?

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> I will take hold of thee, and bring thee
Into my mother's house: there thou shalt teach me, and I will give thee
a cup of spiced wine and new wine of my pomegranates.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> His left hand under my head, and his right
hand shall embrace me.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
that you stir not up, nor awake my love till she please.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> Who is this that cometh up from the desert,
flowing with delights, leaning upon her beloved? Under the apple tree I
raised thee up: there thy mother was corrupted, there she was defloured
that bore thee.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> Put me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal
upon thy arm, for love is strong as death, jealousy as hard as hell, the
lamps thereof are fire and flames.

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> Many waters cannot quench charity, neither
can the floods drown it: if a man should give all the substance of his
house for love, he shall despise it as nothing.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Our sister is little, and hath no breasts.
What shall we do to our sister in the day when she is to be spoken to?

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> If she be a wall: let us build upon it
bulwarks of silver: if she be a door, let us join it together with
boards or cedar.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> I am a wall: and my breasts are as a
tower since I am become in his presence as one finding peace.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> The peaceable had a vineyard, in that
which hath people: he let out the same to keepers, every man bringeth
for the fruit thereof a thousand pieces of silver.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> My vineyard is before me. A thousand are
for thee, the peaceable, and two hundred for them that keep the fruit
thereof.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the
friends hearken: make me hear thy voice.

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Flee away, O my beloved, and be like to
the roe, and to the young hart upon the mountains of aromatical spices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah](isa.md)
