[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th2)  [Next](ti2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: 1 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, according
to the commandment of God our Savior, and of Christ Jesus our hope:

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To Timothy, his beloved son in faith.
Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father, and from Christ Jesus our
Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> As I desired thee to remain at Ephesus when
I went into Macedonia, that thou mightest charge some not to teach
otherwise,

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Not to give heed to fables and endless
genealogies: which furnish questions rather than the edification of God,
which is in faith.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Now the end of the commandment is charity,
from a pure heart, and a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> From which things some going astray, are
turned aside unto vain babbling:

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> Desiring to be teachers of the law,
understanding neither the things they say, nor whereof they affirm.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> But we know that the law is good, if a man
use it lawfully:

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Knowing this, that the law is not made for
the just man, but for the unjust and disobedient, for the ungodly, and
for sinners, for the wicked and defiled, for murderers of fathers, and
murderers of mothers, for manslayers,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> For fornicators, for them who defile
themselves with mankind, for menstealers, for liars, for perjured
persons, and whatever other thing is contrary to sound doctrine,

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Which is according to the gospel of the
glory of the blessed God, which hath been committed to my trust.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> I give thanks who hath strengthened me,
even to Christ Jesus our Lord, for that he hath counted me faithful,
putting me in the ministry;

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Who before was a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and contumelious. But I obtained the mercy of God, because I
did it ignorantly in unbelief.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Now the grace of our Lord hath abounded
exceedingly with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> A faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into this world to save sinners, of
whom I am the chief.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> But for this cause have I obtained mercy:
that in me first Christ Jesus might shew forth all patience, for the
information of them that shall believe in him unto life everlasting.

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> Now to the king of ages, immortal,
invisible, the only God, be honour and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> This precept I commend to thee, O son
Timothy; according to the prophecies going before on thee, that thou war
in them a good warfare,

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Having faith and a good conscience, which
some rejecting have made shipwreck concerning the faith.

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> Of whom is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I
have delivered up to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> I desire therefore, first of all, that
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all
men:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> For kings, and for all that are in high
station: that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all piety and
chastity.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Saviour,

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> Who will have all men to be saved, and to
come to the knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For there is one God, and one mediator of
God and men, the man Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Who gave himself a redemption for all, a
testimony in due times.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Whereunto I am appointed a preacher and an
apostle, (I say the truth, I lie not,) a doctor of the Gentiles in faith
and truth.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> I will therefore that men pray in every
place, lifting up pure hands, without anger and contention.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> In like manner women also in decent
apparel: adorning themselves with modesty and sobriety, not with plaited
hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly attire,

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> But as it becometh women professing
godliness, with good works.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> Let the woman learn in silence, with all
subjection.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to
use authority over the man: but to be in silence.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For Adam was first formed; then Eve.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> And Adam was not seduced; but the woman
being seduced, was in the transgression.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Yet she shall be saved through
childbearing; if she continue in faith, and love, and sanctification,
with sobriety.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> A faithful saying: if a man desire the
office of a bishop, he desireth a good work.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> It behoveth therefore a bishop to be
blameless, the husband of one wife, sober, prudent, of good behaviour,
chaste, given to hospitality, a teacher,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Not given to wine, no striker, but modest,
not quarrelsome, not covetous, but

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> One that ruleth well his own house, having
his children in subjection with all chastity.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> But if a man know not how to rule his own
house, how shall he take care of the church of God?

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> Not a neophyte: lest being puffed up with
pride, he fall into the judgment of the devil.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Moreover he must have a good testimony of
them who are without: lest he fall into reproach and the snare of the
devil.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Deacons in like manner chaste, not double
tongued, not given to much wine, not greedy of filthy lucre:

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> Holding the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> And let these also first be proved: and
so let them minister, having no crime.

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> The women in like manner chaste, not
slanderers, but sober, faithful in all things.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> Let deacons be the husbands of one wife:
who rule well their children, and their own houses.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> For they that have ministered well, shall
purchase to themselves a good degree, and much confidence in the faith
which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> These things I write to thee, hoping that
I shall come to thee shortly.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> But if I tarry long, that thou mayest
know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is
the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> And evidently great is the mystery of
godliness, which was manifested in the flesh, was justified in the
spirit, appeared unto angels, hath been preached unto the Gentiles, is
believed in the world, is taken up in glory.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Now the Spirit manifestly saith, that in
the last times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to spirits
of error, and doctrines of devils,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Speaking lies in hypocrisy, and having
their conscience seared,

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> Forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats,
which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving by the faithful,
and by them that have known the truth.

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For every creature of God is good, and
nothing to be rejected that is received with thanksgiving:

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> For it is sanctified by the word of God and
prayer.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> These things proposing to the brethren,
thou shalt be a good minister of Christ Jesus, nourished up in the words
of faith, and of the good doctrine which thou hast attained unto.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> But avoid foolish and old wives' fables:
and exercise thyself unto godliness.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> For bodily exercise is profitable to
little: but godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> A faithful saying and worthy of all
acceptation.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For therefore we labor and are reviled,
because we hope in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men,
especially of the faithful.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> These things command and teach.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Let no man despise thy youth: but be thou
an example of the faithful in word, in conversation, in charity, in
faith, in chastity.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Till I come, attend unto reading, to
exhortation, and to doctrine.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Neglect not the grace that is in thee,
which was given thee by prophesy, with imposition of the hands of the
priesthood.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Meditate upon these things, be wholly in
these things: that thy profiting may be manifest to all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> Take heed to thyself and to doctrine: be
earnest in them. For in doing this thou shalt both save thyself and them
that hear thee.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> An ancient man rebuke not, but entreat him
as a father: young men, as brethren:

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> Old women, as mothers: young women, as
sisters, in all chastity.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Honour widows, that are widows indeed.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But if any widow have children, or
grandchildren, let her learn first to govern her own house, and to make
a return of duty to her parents: for this is acceptable before God.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> But she that is a widow indeed, and
desolate, let her trust in God, and continue in supplications and
prayers night and day.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> For she that liveth in pleasures, is dead
while she is living.

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> And this give in charge, that they may be
blameless.

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> But if any man have not care of his own,
and especially of those of his house, he hath denied the faith, and is
worse than an infidel.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> Let a widow be chosen of no less than
threescore years of age, who hath been the wife of one husband.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Having testimony for her good works, if
she have brought up children, if she have received to harbour, if she
have washed the saints' feet, if she have ministered to them that suffer
tribulation, if she have diligently followed every good work.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> But the younger widows avoid. For when
they have grown wanton in Christ, they will marry:

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> Having damnation, because they have made
void their first faith.

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And withal being idle they learn to go
about from house to house: and are not only idle, but tattlers also, and
busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> I will therefore that the younger should
marry, bear children, be mistresses of families, give no occasion to the
adversary to speak evil.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> For some are already turned aside after
Satan.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> If any of the faithful have widows, let
him minister to them, and let not the church be charged: that there may
be sufficient for them that are widows indeed.

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> Let the priests that rule well, be
esteemed worthy of double honour: especially they who labour in the word
and doctrine:

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> For the scripture saith: Thou shalt not
muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn: and, The labourer is worthy of
his reward.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> Against a priest receive not an
accusation, but under two or three witnesses.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> Them that sin reprove before all: that
the rest also may have fear.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> I charge thee before God, and Christ
Jesus, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things without
prejudice, doing nothing by declining to either side.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Impose not hands lightly upon any man,
neither be partaker of other men's sins. Keep thyself chaste.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> Do not still drink water, but use a
little wine for thy stomach's sake, and thy frequent infirmities.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> Some men's sins are manifest, going
before to judgment: and some men they follow after.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> In like manner also good deeds are
manifest: and they that are otherwise, cannot be hid.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> Whosoever are servants under the yoke, let
them count their masters worthy of all honour; lest the name of the Lord
and his doctrine be blasphemed.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> But they that have believing masters, let
them not despise them, because they are brethren; but serve them the
rather, because they are faithful and beloved, who are partakers of the
benefit. These things teach and exhort.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> If any man teach otherwise, and consent not
to the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to that doctrine which
is according to godliness,

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> He is proud, knowing nothing, but sick
about questions and strifes of words; from which arise envies,
contentions, blasphemies, evil suspicions,

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Conflicts of men corrupted in mind, and who
are destitute of the truth, supposing gain to be godliness.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> But godliness with contentment is great
gain.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> For we brought nothing into this world: and
certainly we can carry nothing out.

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> But having food, and wherewith to be
covered, with these we are content.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> For they that will become rich, fall into
temptation, and into the snare of the devil, and into many unprofitable
and hurtful desires, which drown men into destruction and perdition.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> For the desire of money is the root of
all evils; which some coveting have erred from the faith, and have
entangled themselves in many sorrows.

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> But thou, O man of God, fly these things:
and pursue justice, godliness, faith, charity, patience, mildness.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> Fight the good fight of faith: lay hold
on eternal life, whereunto thou art called, and hast confessed a good
confession before many witnesses.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> I charge thee before God, who quickeneth
all things, and before Christ Jesus, who gave testimony under Pontius
Pilate, a good confession,

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> That thou keep the commandment without
spot, blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Which in his times he shall shew who is
the Blessed and only Mighty, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Who only hath immortality, and inhabiteth
light inaccessible, whom no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be
honour and empire everlasting. Amen.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> Charge the rich of this world not to be
highminded, nor to trust in the uncertainty of riches, but in the living
God, (who giveth us abundantly all things to enjoy,)

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> To do good, to be rich in good works, to
give easily, to communicate to others,

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> To lay up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on the true
life.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> O Timothy, keep that which is committed
to thy trust, avoiding the profane novelties of words, and oppositions
of knowledge falsely so called.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> Which some promising, have erred
concerning the faith. Grace be with thee. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy](ti2)
