[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ti1)  [Next](tit) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: 2 Timothy

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ, by the
will of God, according to the promise of life, which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> To Timothy my dearly beloved son, grace,
mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from Christ Jesus our Lord.

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> I give thanks to God, whom I serve from my
forefathers with a pure conscience, that without ceasing, I have a
remembrance of thee in my prayers, night and day.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> Desiring to see thee, being mindful of thy
tears, that I may be filled with joy,

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Calling to mind that faith which is in thee
unfeigned, which also dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and in thy
mother Eunice, and I am certain that in thee also.

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> For which cause I admonish thee, that thou
stir up the grace of God which is in thee, by the imposition of my
hands.

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> For God hath not given us the spirit of
fear: but of power, and of love, and of sobriety.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> Be not thou therefore ashamed of the
testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner: but labour with the
gospel, according to the power of God,

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> Who hath delivered us and called us by his
holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the times
of the world.

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> But is now made manifest by the
illumination of our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath destroyed death, and
hath brought to light life and incorruption by the gospel:

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> Wherein I am appointed a preacher, and an
apostle, and teacher of the Gentiles.

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> For which cause I also suffer these
things: but I am not ashamed. For I know whom I have believed, and I am
certain that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him,
against that day.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> Hold the form of sound words, which thou
hast heard of me in faith, and in the love which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> Keep the good thing committed to thy
trust by the Holy Ghost, who dwelleth in us.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> Thou knowest this, that all they who are
in Asia, are turned away from me: of whom are Phigellus and Hermogenes.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> The Lord give mercy to the house of
Onesiphorus: because he hath often refreshed me, and hath not been
ashamed of my chain:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> But when he was come to Rome, he
carefully sought me, and found me.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> The Lord grant unto him to find mercy of
the Lord in that day: and in how many things he ministered unto me at
Ephesus, thou very well knowest.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the
grace which is in Christ Jesus:

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> And the things which thou hast heard of me
by many witnesses, the same commend to faithful men, who shall be fit to
teach others also.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> Labour as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> No man, being a soldier to God, entangleth
himself with secular businesses; that he may please him to whom he hath
engaged himself.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> For he also that striveth for the mastery,
is not crowned, except he strive lawfully.

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> The husbandman, that laboureth, must first
partake of the fruits.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> Understand what I say: for the Lord will
give thee in all things understanding.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Be mindful that the Lord Jesus Christ is
risen again from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my gospel.

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> Wherein I labour even unto bands, as an
evildoer; but the word of God is not bound.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Therefore I endure all things for the
sake of the elect, that they also may obtain the salvation, which is in
Christ Jesus, with heavenly glory.

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> A faithful saying: for if we be dead with
him, we shall live also with him.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> If we suffer, we shall also reign with
him. If we deny him, he will also deny us.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> If we believe not, he continueth
faithful, he can not deny himself.

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> Of these things put them in mind,
charging them before the Lord. Contend not in words, for it is to no
profit, but to the subverting of the hearers.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> Carefully study to present thyself
approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly
handling the word of truth.

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> But shun profane and vain babblings: for
they grow much towards ungodliness.

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> And their speech spreadeth like a canker:
of whom are Hymeneus and Philetus:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> Who have erred from the truth, saying,
that the resurrection is past already, and have subverted the faith of
some.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> But the sure foundation of God standeth
firm, having this seal: the Lord knoweth who are his; and let every one
depart from iniquity who nameth the name of the Lord.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> But in a great house there are not only
vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and earth: and some indeed
unto honour, but some unto dishonour.

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> If any man therefore shall cleanse
himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified and
profitable to the Lord, prepared unto every good work.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> But flee thou youthful desires, and
pursue justice, faith, charity, and peace, with them that call on the
Lord out of a pure heart.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And avoid foolish and unlearned
questions, knowing that they beget strifes.

<span id="an_2:24">2:24</span> But the servant of the Lord must not
wrangle: but be mild towards all men, apt to teach, patient,

<span id="an_2:25">2:25</span> With modesty admonishing them that resist
the truth: if peradventure God may give them repentance to know the
truth,

<span id="an_2:26">2:26</span> And they may recover themselves from the
snares of the devil, by whom they are held captive at his will.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Know also this, that, in the last days,
shall come dangerous times.

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Men shall be lovers of themselves,
covetous, haughty, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
ungrateful, wicked,

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> Without affection, without peace,
slanderers, incontinent, unmerciful, without kindness,

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> Traitors, stubborn, puffed up, and lovers
of pleasures more than of God:

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> Having an appearance indeed of godliness,
but denying the power thereof. Now these avoid.

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> For of these sort are they who creep into
houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, who are led away
with divers desires:

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Ever learning, and never attaining to the
knowledge of the truth.

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Now as Jannes and Mambres resisted Moses,
so these also resist the truth, men corrupted in mind, reprobate
concerning the faith.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> But they shall proceed no farther; for
their folly shall be manifest to all men, as theirs also was.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> But thou hast fully known my doctrine,
manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, patience,

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> Persecutions, afflictions: such as came
upon me at Antioch, at Iconium, and at Lystra: what persecutions I
endured, and out of them all the Lord delivered me.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> But evil men and seducers shall grow
worse and worse: erring, and driving into error.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> But continue thou in those things which
thou hast learned, and which have been committed to thee: knowing of
whom thou hast learned them;

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> And because from thy infancy thou hast
known the holy scriptures, which can instruct thee to salvation, by the
faith which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> All scripture, inspired of God, is
profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct in justice,

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> That the man of God may be perfect,
furnished to every good work.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> I charge thee, before God and Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the living and the dead, by his coming, and his kingdom:

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> Preach the word: be instant in season, out
of season: reprove, entreat, rebuke in all patience and doctrine.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> For there shall be a time, when they will
not endure sound doctrine; but, according to their own desires, they
will heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> And will indeed turn away their hearing
from the truth, but will be turned unto fables.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> But be thou vigilant, labour in all things,
do the work of an evangelist, fulfil thy ministry. Be sober.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> For I am even now ready to be sacrificed:
and the time of my dissolution is at hand.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> As to the rest, there is laid up for me a
crown of justice, which the Lord the just judge will render to me in
that day: and not only to me, but to them also that love his coming.
Make haste to come to me quickly.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> For Demas hath left me, loving this world,
and is gone to Thessalonica:

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> Crescens into Galatia, Titus into
Dalmatia.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and
bring him with thee: for he is profitable to me for the ministry.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> But Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> The cloak that I left at Troas, with
Carpus, when thou comest, bring with thee, and the books, especially the
parchments.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Alexander the coppersmith hath done me
much evil: the Lord will reward him according to his works:

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> Whom do thou also avoid, for he hath
greatly withstood our words.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> At my first answer no man stood with me,
but all forsook me: may it not be laid to their charge.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> But the Lord stood by me, and
strengthened me, that by me the preaching may be accomplished, and that
all the Gentiles may hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the
lion.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> The Lord hath delivered me from every
evil work: and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom, to whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the
household of Onesiphorus.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Erastus remained at Corinth. And
Trophimus I left sick at Miletus.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> Make haste to come before winter Eubulus
and Pudens, and Linus and Claudia, and all the brethren, salute thee.

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit.
Grace be with you. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus](tit)
