[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index.md)  [English
Bibles](../eb)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rev)  [Next](jdt.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Douay-Rheims Bible: Tobias

<span id="an_1:1">1:1</span> Tobias of the tribe and city of Nephtali,
(which is in the upper parts of Galilee above Naasson, beyond the way
that leadeth to the west, having on the right hand the city of Sephet,)

<span id="an_1:2">1:2</span> When he was made captive in the days of
Salmanasar king of the Assyrians, even in his captivity, forsook not the
way of truth,

<span id="an_1:3">1:3</span> But every day gave all he could get to his
brethren his fellow captives, that were of his kindred.

<span id="an_1:4">1:4</span> And when he was younger than any of the
tribe of Nephtali, yet did he no childish thing in his work.

<span id="an_1:5">1:5</span> Moreover when all went to the golden calves
which Jeroboam king of Israel had made, he alone fled the company of
all,

<span id="an_1:6">1:6</span> And went to Jerusalem to the temple of the
Lord, and there adored the Lord God of Israel, offering faithfully all
his firstfruits, and his tithes,

<span id="an_1:7">1:7</span> So that in the third year he gave all his
tithes to the proselytes, and strangers.

<span id="an_1:8">1:8</span> These and such like things did he observe
when but a boy according to the law of God.

<span id="an_1:9">1:9</span> But when he was a man, he took to wife Anna
of his own tribe, and had a son by her, whom he called after his own
name,

<span id="an_1:10">1:10</span> And from his infancy he taught him to
fear God, and to abstain from all sin.

<span id="an_1:11">1:11</span> And when by the captivity he with his
wife and his son and all his tribe was come to the city of Ninive,

<span id="an_1:12">1:12</span> (When all ate of the meats of the
Gentiles) he kept his soul and never was defiled with their meats.

<span id="an_1:13">1:13</span> And because he was mindful of the Lord
with all his heart, God gave him favour in the sight of Salmanasar the
king.

<span id="an_1:14">1:14</span> And he gave him leave to go whithersoever
he would, with liberty to do whatever he had a mind.

<span id="an_1:15">1:15</span> He therefore went to all that were in
captivity, and gave them wholesome admonitions.

<span id="an_1:16">1:16</span> And when he was come to Rages a city of
the Medes, and had ten talents of silver of that with which he had been
honoured by the king:

<span id="an_1:17">1:17</span> And when amongst a great multitude of his
kindred, he saw Gabelus in want, who was one of his tribe, taking a note
of his hand he gave him the aforesaid sum of money.

<span id="an_1:18">1:18</span> But after a long time, Salmanasar the
king being dead, when Sennacherib his son, who reigned in his place, had
a hatred for the children of Israel:

<span id="an_1:19">1:19</span> Tobias daily went among all his kindred,
and comforted them, and distributed to every one as he was able, out of
his goods:

<span id="an_1:20">1:20</span> He fed the hungry, and gave clothes to
the naked, and was careful to bury the dead, and they that were slain.

<span id="an_1:21">1:21</span> And when king Sennacherib was come back,
fleeing from Judea by reason of the slaughter that God had made about
him for his blasphemy, and being angry slew many of the children of
Israel, Tobias buried their bodies.

<span id="an_1:22">1:22</span> But when it was told the king, he
commanded him to be slain, and took away all his substance.

<span id="an_1:23">1:23</span> But Tobias fleeing naked away with his
son and with his wife, lay concealed, for many loved him.

<span id="an_1:24">1:24</span> But after forty-five days, the king was
killed by his own sons.

<span id="an_1:25">1:25</span> And Tobias returned to his house, and all
his substance was restored to him.

<span id="an_2:1">2:1</span> But after this, when there was a festival
of the Lord, and a good dinner was prepared in Tobias's house,

<span id="an_2:2">2:2</span> He said to his son: Go, and bring some of
our tribe that fear God, to feast with us.

<span id="an_2:3">2:3</span> And when he had gone, returning he told
him, that one of the children of Israel lay slain in the street. And he
forthwith leaped up from his place at the table, and left his dinner,
and came fasting to the body:

<span id="an_2:4">2:4</span> And taking it up carried it privately to
his house, that after the sun was down, he might bury him cautiously.

<span id="an_2:5">2:5</span> And when he had hid the body, he ate bread
with mourning and fear,

<span id="an_2:6">2:6</span> Remembering the word which the Lord spoke
by Amos the prophet: Your festival days shall be turned into lamentation
and mourning.

<span id="an_2:7">2:7</span> So when the sun was down, he went and
buried him.

<span id="an_2:8">2:8</span> Now all his neighbours blamed him, saying:
Once already commandment was given for thee to be slain because of this
matter, and thou didst scarce escape the sentence of death, and dost
thou again bury the dead?

<span id="an_2:9">2:9</span> But Tobias fearing God more than the king,
carried off the bodies of them that were slain, and hid them in his
house, and at midnight buried them.

<span id="an_2:10">2:10</span> Now it happened one day, that being
wearied with burying, he came to his house, and cast himself down by the
wall and slept,

<span id="an_2:11">2:11</span> And as he was sleeping, hot dung out of a
swallow's nest fell upon his eyes, and he was made blind.

<span id="an_2:12">2:12</span> Now this trial the Lord therefore
permitted to happen to him, that an example might be given to posterity
of his patience, as also of holy Job.

<span id="an_2:13">2:13</span> For whereas he had always feared God from
his infancy, and kept his commandments, he repined not against God
because the evil of blindness had befallen him,

<span id="an_2:14">2:14</span> But continued immoveable in the fear of
God, giving thanks to God all the days of his life.

<span id="an_2:15">2:15</span> For as the kings insulted over holy Job:
so his relations and kinsmen mocked at his life, saying:

<span id="an_2:16">2:16</span> Where is thy hope, for which thou gavest
alms, and buriedst the dead?

<span id="an_2:17">2:17</span> But Tobias rebuked them, saying: Speak
not so:

<span id="an_2:18">2:18</span> For we are the children of the saints,
and look for that life which God will give to those that never change
their faith from him.

<span id="an_2:19">2:19</span> Now Anna his wife went daily to weaving
work, and she brought home what she could get for their living by the
labour of her hands.

<span id="an_2:20">2:20</span> Whereby it came to pass, that she
received a young kid, and brought it home:

<span id="an_2:21">2:21</span> And when her husband heard it bleating,
he said: Take heed, lest perhaps it be stolen: restore ye it to its
owners, for it is not lawful for us either to eat or to touch any thing
that cometh by theft.

<span id="an_2:22">2:22</span> At these words his wife being angry
answered: It is evident thy hope is come to nothing, and thy alms now
appear.

<span id="an_2:23">2:23</span> And with these, and other such like words
she upbraided him.

<span id="an_3:1">3:1</span> Then Tobias sighed, and began to pray with
tears,

<span id="an_3:2">3:2</span> Saying: Thou art just, O Lord, and all thy
judgments are just, and all thy ways mercy, and truth, and judgment:

<span id="an_3:3">3:3</span> And now, O Lord, think of me, and take not
revenge of my sins, neither remember my offenses, nor those of my
parents.

<span id="an_3:4">3:4</span> For we have not obeyed thy commandments,
therefore are we delivered to spoil and to captivity, and death, and are
made a fable, and a reproach to all nations, amongst which thou hast
scattered us.

<span id="an_3:5">3:5</span> And now, O Lord, great are thy judgments,
because we have not done according to thy precepts, and have not walked
sincerely before thee:

<span id="an_3:6">3:6</span> And now, O Lord, do with me according to
thy will, and command my spirit to be received in peace: for it is
better for me to die, than to live.

<span id="an_3:7">3:7</span> Now it happened on the same day, that Sara
daughter of Raguel, in Rages a city of the Medes, received a reproach
from one of her father's servant maids,

<span id="an_3:8">3:8</span> Because she had been given to seven
husbands, and a devil named Asmodeus had killed them, at their first
going in unto her.

<span id="an_3:9">3:9</span> So when she reproved the maid for her
fault, she answered her, saying: May we never see son, or daughter of
thee upon the earth, thou murderer of thy husbands.

<span id="an_3:10">3:10</span> Wilt thou kill me also, as thou hast
already killed seven husbands? At these words she went into an upper
chamber of her house: and for three days and three nights did neither
eat nor drink:

<span id="an_3:11">3:11</span> But continuing in prayer with tears
besought God, that he would deliver her from this reproach.

<span id="an_3:12">3:12</span> And it came to pass on the third day,
when she was making an end of her prayer, blessing the Lord,

<span id="an_3:13">3:13</span> She said: Blessed is thy name, O God of
our fathers: who when thou hast been angry, wilt shew mercy, and in the
time of tribulation forgivest the sins of them that call upon thee.

<span id="an_3:14">3:14</span> To thee, O Lord, I turn my face, to thee
I direct my eyes.

<span id="an_3:15">3:15</span> I beg, O Lord, that thou loose me from
the bond of this reproach, or else take me away from the earth.

<span id="an_3:16">3:16</span> Thou knowest, O Lord, that I never
coveted a husband, and have kept my soul clean from all lust.

<span id="an_3:17">3:17</span> Never have I joined myself with them that
play: neither have I made myself partaker with them that walk in
lightness.

<span id="an_3:18">3:18</span> But a husband I consented to take, with
thy fear, not with my lust.

<span id="an_3:19">3:19</span> And either I was unworthy of them, or
they perhaps were not worthy of me: because perhaps thou hast kept me
for another man.

<span id="an_3:20">3:20</span> For thy counsel is not in man's power.

<span id="an_3:21">3:21</span> But this every one is sure of that
worshippeth thee, that his life, if it be under trial, shall be crowned:
and if it be under tribulation, it shall be delivered: and if it be
under correction, it shall be allowed to come to thy mercy.

<span id="an_3:22">3:22</span> For thou art not delighted in our being
lost: because after a storm thou makest a calm, and after tears and
weeping thou pourest in joyfulness.

<span id="an_3:23">3:23</span> Be thy name, O God of Israel, blessed for
ever.

<span id="an_3:24">3:24</span> At that time the prayers of them both
were heard in the sight of the glory of the most high God:

<span id="an_3:25">3:25</span> And the holy angel of the Lord, Raphael
was sent to heal them both, whose prayers at one time were rehearsed in
the sight of the Lord.

<span id="an_4:1">4:1</span> Therefore when Tobias thought that his
prayer was heard that he might die, he called to him Tobias his son,

<span id="an_4:2">4:2</span> And said to him: Hear, my son, the words of
my mouth, and lay them as a foundation in thy heart.

<span id="an_4:3">4:3</span> When God shall take my soul, thou shalt
bury my body: and thou shalt honour thy mother all the days of her life:

<span id="an_4:4">4:4</span> For thou must be mindful what and how great
perils she suffered for thee in her womb.

<span id="an_4:5">4:5</span> And when she also shall have ended the time
of her life, bury her by me.

<span id="an_4:6">4:6</span> And all the days of thy life have God in
thy mind: and take heed thou never consent to sin, nor transgress the
commandments of the Lord our God.

<span id="an_4:7">4:7</span> Give alms out of thy substance, and turn
not away thy face from any poor person: for so it shall come to pass
that the face of the Lord shall not be turned from thee.

<span id="an_4:8">4:8</span> According to thy ability be merciful.

<span id="an_4:9">4:9</span> If thou have much give abundantly: if thou
have a little, take care even so to bestow willingly a little.

<span id="an_4:10">4:10</span> For thus thou storest up to thyself a
good reward for the day of necessity.

<span id="an_4:11">4:11</span> For alms deliver from all sin, and from
death, and will not suffer the soul to go into darkness.

<span id="an_4:12">4:12</span> Alms shall be a great confidence before
the most high God, to all them that give it.

<span id="an_4:13">4:13</span> Take heed to keep thyself, my son, from
all fornication, and beside thy wife never endure to know a crime.

<span id="an_4:14">4:14</span> Never suffer pride to reign in thy mind,
or in thy words: for from it all perdition took its beginning.

<span id="an_4:15">4:15</span> If any man hath done any work for thee,
immediately pay him his hire, and let not the wages of thy hired servant
stay with thee at all.

<span id="an_4:16">4:16</span> See thou never do to another what thou
wouldst hate to have done to thee by another.

<span id="an_4:17">4:17</span> Eat thy bread with the hungry and the
needy, and with thy garments cover the naked.

<span id="an_4:18">4:18</span> Lay out thy bread, and thy wine upon the
burial of a just man, and do not eat and drink thereof with the wicked.

<span id="an_4:19">4:19</span> Seek counsel always of a wise man.

<span id="an_4:20">4:20</span> Bless God at all times: and desire of him
to direct thy ways, and that all thy counsels may abide in him.

<span id="an_4:21">4:21</span> I tell thee also, my son, that I lent ten
talents of silver, while thou wast yet a child, to Gabelus, in Rages a
city of the Medes, and I have a note of his hand with me:

<span id="an_4:22">4:22</span> Now therefore inquire how thou mayst go
to him, and receive of him the foresaid sum of money, and restore to him
the note of his hand.

<span id="an_4:23">4:23</span> Fear not, my son: we lead indeed a poor
life, but we shall have many good things if we fear God, and depart from
all sin, and do that which is good.

<span id="an_5:1">5:1</span> Then Tobias answered his father, and said:
I will do all things, father, which thou hast commanded me.

<span id="an_5:2">5:2</span> But how I shall get this money, I cannot
tell; he knoweth me not, and I know not him: what token shall I give
him? nor did I ever know the way which leadeth thither.

<span id="an_5:3">5:3</span> Then his father answered him, and said: I
have a note of his hand with me, which when thou shalt shew him, he will
presently pay it.

<span id="an_5:4">5:4</span> But go now, and seek thee out some faithful
man, to go with thee for his hire: that thou mayst receive it, while I
yet live.

<span id="an_5:5">5:5</span> Then Tobias going forth, found a beautiful
young man, standing girded, and as it were ready to walk.

<span id="an_5:6">5:6</span> And not knowing that he was an angel of
God, he saluted him, and said: From whence art thou, good young man?

<span id="an_5:7">5:7</span> But he answered: Of the children of Israel.
And Tobias said to him: Knowest thou the way that leadeth to the country
of the Medes?

<span id="an_5:8">5:8</span> And he answered: I know it: and I have
often walked through all the ways thereof, and I have abode with Gabelus
our brother, who dwelleth at Rages a city of the Medes, which is situate
in the mount of Ecbatana.

<span id="an_5:9">5:9</span> And Tobias said to him: Stay for me, I
beseech thee, till I tell these same things to my father.

<span id="an_5:10">5:10</span> Then Tobias going in told all these
things to his father. Upon which his father being in admiration, desired
that he would come in unto him.

<span id="an_5:11">5:11</span> So going in he saluted him, and said: Joy
be to thee always.

<span id="an_5:12">5:12</span> And Tobias said: What manner of joy shall
be to me, who sit in darkness, and see not the light of heaven?

<span id="an_5:13">5:13</span> And the young man said to him: Be of good
courage, thy cure from God is at hand.

<span id="an_5:14">5:14</span> And Tobias said to him: Canst thou
conduct my son to Gabelus at Rages, a city of the Medes? and when thou
shalt return, I will pay thee thy hire.

<span id="an_5:15">5:15</span> And the angel said to him: I will conduct
him thither, and bring him back to thee.

<span id="an_5:16">5:16</span> And Tobias said to him: I pray thee, tell
me, of what family, or what tribe art thou?

<span id="an_5:17">5:17</span> And Raphael the angel answered: Dost thou
seek the family of him thou hirest, or the hired servant himself to go
with thy son?

<span id="an_5:18">5:18</span> But lest I should make thee uneasy, I am
Azarias the son of the great Ananias.

<span id="an_5:19">5:19</span> And Tobias answered: Thou art of a great
family. But I pray thee be not angry that I desired to know thy family.

<span id="an_5:20">5:20</span> And the angel said to him: I will lead
thy son safe, and bring him to thee again safe.

<span id="an_5:21">5:21</span> And Tobias answering, said: May you have
a good journey, and God be with you in your way, and his angel accompany
you.

<span id="an_5:22">5:22</span> Then all things being ready, that were to
be carried in their journey, Tobias bade his father and his mother
farewell, and they set out both together.

<span id="an_5:23">5:23</span> And when they were departed, his mother
began to weep, and to say: Thou hast taken the staff of our old age, and
sent him away from us.

<span id="an_5:24">5:24</span> I wish the money for which thou hast sent
him, had never been.

<span id="an_5:25">5:25</span> For poverty was sufficient for us, that
we might account it as riches, that we saw our son.

<span id="an_5:26">5:26</span> And Tobias said to her: Weep not, our son
will arrive thither safe, and will return safe to us, and thy eyes shall
see him.

<span id="an_5:27">5:27</span> For I believe that the good angel of God
doth accompany him, and doth order all things well that are done about
him, so that he shall return to us with joy.

<span id="an_5:28">5:28</span> At these words his mother ceased weeping,
and held her peace.

<span id="an_6:1">6:1</span> And Tobias went forward, and the dog
followed him, and he lodged the first night by the river of Tigris.

<span id="an_6:2">6:2</span> And he went out to wash his feet, and
behold a monstrous fish came up to devour him.

<span id="an_6:3">6:3</span> And Tobias being afraid of him, cried out
with a loud voice, saying: Sir, he cometh upon me.

<span id="an_6:4">6:4</span> And the angel said to him: Take him by the
gill, and draw him to thee. And when he had done so, he drew him out
upon the land, and he began to pant before his feet.

<span id="an_6:5">6:5</span> Then the angel said to him: Take out the
entrails of the fish, and lay up his heart, and his gall, and his liver
for thee: for these are necessary for useful medicines.

<span id="an_6:6">6:6</span> And when he had done so, he roasted the
flesh thereof, and they took it with them in the way: the rest they
salted as much as might serve them, till they came to Rages the city of
the Medes.

<span id="an_6:7">6:7</span> Then Tobias asked the angel, and said to
him: I beseech thee, brother Azarias, tell me what remedies are these
things good for, which thou hast bid me keep of the fish?

<span id="an_6:8">6:8</span> And the angel, answering, said to him: If
thou put a little piece of its heart upon coals, the smoke thereof
driveth away all kind of devils, either from man or from woman, so that
they come no more to them.

<span id="an_6:9">6:9</span> And the gall is good for anointing the
eyes, in which there is a white speck, and they shall be cured.

<span id="an_6:10">6:10</span> And Tobias said to him: Where wilt thou
that we lodge?

<span id="an_6:11">6:11</span> And the angel answering, said: Here is
one whose name is Raguel, a near kinsman of thy tribe, and he hath a
daughter named Sara, but he hath no son nor any other daughter beside
her.

<span id="an_6:12">6:12</span> All his substance is due to thee, and
thou must take her to wife.

<span id="an_6:13">6:13</span> Ask her therefore of her father, and he
will give her thee to wife.

<span id="an_6:14">6:14</span> Then Tobias answered, and said: I hear
that she hath been given to seven husbands, and they all died: moreover
I have heard, that a devil killed them.

<span id="an_6:15">6:15</span> Now I am afraid, lest the same thing
should happen to me also: and whereas I am the only child of my parents,
I should bring down their old age with sorrow to hell.

<span id="an_6:16">6:16</span> Then the angel Raphael said to him: Hear
me, and I will shew thee who they are, over whom the devil can prevail.

<span id="an_6:17">6:17</span> For they who in such manner receive
matrimony, as to shut out God from themselves, and from their mind, and
to give themselves to their lust, as the horse and mule, which have not
understanding, over them the devil hath power.

<span id="an_6:18">6:18</span> But thou when thou shalt take her, go
into the chamber, and for three days keep thyself continent from her,
and give thyself to nothing else but to prayers with her.

<span id="an_6:19">6:19</span> And on that night lay the liver of the
fish on the fire, and the devil shall be driven away.

<span id="an_6:20">6:20</span> But the second night thou shalt be
admitted into the society of the holy Patriarchs.

<span id="an_6:21">6:21</span> And the third night thou shalt obtain a
blessing that sound children may be born of you.

<span id="an_6:22">6:22</span> And when the third night is past, thou
shalt take the virgin with the fear of the Lord, moved rather for love
of children than for lust, that in the seed of Abraham thou mayst obtain
a blessing in children.

<span id="an_7:1">7:1</span> And they went in to Raguel, and Raguel
received them with joy.

<span id="an_7:2">7:2</span> And Raguel looking upon Tobias, said to
Anna his wife: How like is this young man to my cousin?

<span id="an_7:3">7:3</span> And when he had spoken these words, he
said: Whence are ye young men our brethren?

<span id="an_7:4">7:4</span> But they said: We are of the tribe of
Nephtali, of the captiveof Ninive.

<span id="an_7:5">7:5</span> And Raguel said to them: Do you know Tobias
my brother? And they said: We know him.

<span id="an_7:6">7:6</span> And when he was speaking many good things
of him, the angel said to Raguel: Tobias concerning whom thou inquirest
is this young man's father.

<span id="an_7:7">7:7</span> And Raguel went to him, and kissed him with
tears, and weeping upon his neck, said: A blessing be upon thee, my son,
because thou art the son of a good and most virtuous man.

<span id="an_7:8">7:8</span> And Anna his wife, and Sara their daughter
wept.

<span id="an_7:9">7:9</span> And after they had spoken, Raguel commanded
a sheep to be killed, and a feast to be prepared. And when he desired
them to sit down to dinner,

<span id="an_7:10">7:10</span> Tobias said: I will not eat nor drink
here this day, unless thou first grant me my petition, and promise to
give me Sara thy daughter.

<span id="an_7:11">7:11</span> Now when Raguel heard this he was afraid,
knowing what had happened to those seven husbands, that went in unto
her: and he began to fear lest it might happen to him also in like
manner: and as he was in suspense, and gave no answer to his petition,

<span id="an_7:12">7:12</span> The angel said to him: Be not afraid to
give her to this man, for to him who feareth God is thy daughter due to
be his wife: therefore another could not have her.

<span id="an_7:13">7:13</span> Then Raguel said: I doubt not but God
hath regarded my prayers and tears in his sight.

<span id="an_7:14">7:14</span> And I believe he hath therefore made you
come to me, that this maid might be married to one of her own kindred,
according to the law of Moses: and now doubt not but I will give her to
thee.

<span id="an_7:15">7:15</span> And taking the right hand of his
daughter, he gave it into the right hand of Tobias, saying: The God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob be with you, and may
he join you together, and fulfil his blessing in you.

<span id="an_7:16">7:16</span> And taking paper they made a writing of
the marriage.

<span id="an_7:17">7:17</span> And afterwards they made merry, blessing
God.

<span id="an_7:18">7:18</span> And Raguel called to him Anna his wife,
and bade her prepare another chamber.

<span id="an_7:19">7:19</span> And she brought Sara her daughter in
thither, and she wept.

<span id="an_7:20">7:20</span> And she said to her: Be of good cheer, my
daughter: the Lord of heaven give thee joy for the trouble thou hast
undergone.

<span id="an_8:1">8:1</span> And after they had supped, they brought in
the young man to her.

<span id="an_8:2">8:2</span> And Tobias remembering the angel's word,
took out of his bag part of the liver, and laid it upon burning coals.

<span id="an_8:3">8:3</span> Then the angel Raphael took the devil, and
bound him in the desert of upper Egypt.

<span id="an_8:4">8:4</span> Then Tobias exhorted the virgin, and said
to her: Sara, arise, and let us pray to God to day, and to morrow, and
the next day: because for these three nights we are joined to God: and
when the third night is over, we will be in our own wedlock.

<span id="an_8:5">8:5</span> For we are the children of saints, and we
must not be joined together like heathens that know not God.

<span id="an_8:6">8:6</span> So they both arose, and prayed earnestly
both together that health might be given them,

<span id="an_8:7">8:7</span> And Tobias said: Lord God of our father,
may the heavens and the earth, and the sea, and the fountains, and the
rivers, and all thy creatures that are in them, bless thee.

<span id="an_8:8">8:8</span> Thou madest Adam of the slime of the earth,
and gavest him Eve for a helper.

<span id="an_8:9">8:9</span> And now, Lord, thou knowest, that not for
fleshly lust do I take my sister to wife, but only for the love of
posterity, in which thy name may be blessed for ever and ever.

<span id="an_8:10">8:10</span> Sara also said: Have mercy on us, O Lord,
have mercy on us, and let us grow old both together in health.

<span id="an_8:11">8:11</span> And it came to pass about the
cockcrowing, Raguel ordered his servants to be called for, and they went
with him together to dig a grave.

<span id="an_8:12">8:12</span> For he said: Lest perhaps it may have
happened to him, in like manner as it did to the other seven husbands,
that went in unto her.

<span id="an_8:13">8:13</span> And when they had prepared the pit,
Raguel went back to his wife, and said to her:

<span id="an_8:14">8:14</span> Send one of thy maids, and let her see if
he be dead, that I may bury him before it be day.

<span id="an_8:15">8:15</span> So she sent one of her maidservants, who
went into the chamber, and found them safe and sound, sleeping both
together.

<span id="an_8:16">8:16</span> And returning she brought the good news:
and Raguel and Anna his wife blessed the Lord,

<span id="an_8:17">8:17</span> And said: We bless thee, O Lord God of
Israel, because it hath not happened as we suspected.

<span id="an_8:18">8:18</span> For thou hast shewn thy mercy to us, and
hast shut out from us the enemy that persecuted us.

<span id="an_8:19">8:19</span> And thou hast taken pity upon two only
children. Make them, O Lord, bless thee more fully: and to offer up to
thee a sacrifice of thy praise, and of their health, that all nations
may know, that thou alone art God in all the earth.

<span id="an_8:20">8:20</span> And immediately Raguel commanded his
servants, to fill up the pit they had made, before it was day.

<span id="an_8:21">8:21</span> And he spoke to his wife to make ready a
feast, and prepare all kind of provisions that are necessary for such as
go a journey.

<span id="an_8:22">8:22</span> He caused also two fat kine, and four
wethers to be killed, and a banquet to be prepared for all his
neighbours, and all his friends.

<span id="an_8:23">8:23</span> And Raguel adjured Tobias, to abide with
him two weeks.

<span id="an_8:24">8:24</span> And of all things which Raguel possessed,
he gave one half to Tobias, and made him a writing, that the half that
remained should after their decease come also to Tobias.

<span id="an_9:1">9:1</span> Then Tobias called the angel to him, whom
he took to be a man, and said to him: Brother Azarias, I pray thee
hearken to my words:

<span id="an_9:2">9:2</span> If I should give myself to be thy servant I
should not make a worthy return for thy care.

<span id="an_9:3">9:3</span> However, I beseech thee, to take with thee
beasts and servants, and to go to Gabelus to Rages the city of the
Medes: and to restore to him his note of hand, and receive of him the
money, and desire him to come to my wedding.

<span id="an_9:4">9:4</span> For thou knowest that my father numbereth
the days: and if I stay one day more, his soul will be afflicted.

<span id="an_9:5">9:5</span> And indeed thou seest how Raguel hath
adjured me, whose adjuring I cannot despise.

<span id="an_9:6">9:6</span> Then Raphael took four of Raguel's
servants, and two camels, and went to Rages the city of the Medes: and
finding Gabelus, gave him his note of hand, and received of him all the
money.

<span id="an_9:7">9:7</span> And he told him concerning Tobias the son
of Tobias, all that had been done: and made him come with him to the
wedding.

<span id="an_9:8">9:8</span> And when he was come into Raguel's house he
found Tobias sitting at the table: and he leaped up, and they kissed
each other: and Gabelus wept, and blessed God,

<span id="an_9:9">9:9</span> And said: The God of Israel bless thee,
because thou art the son of a very good and just man, and that feareth
God, and doth almsdeeds:

<span id="an_9:10">9:10</span> And may a blessing come upon thy wife and
upon your parents.

<span id="an_9:11">9:11</span> And may you see your children, and your
children's children, unto the third and fourth generation: and may your
seed be blessed by the God of Israel, who reigneth for ever and ever.

<span id="an_9:12">9:12</span> And when all had said, Amen, they went to
the feast: but the marriage feast they celebrated also with the fear of
the Lord.

<span id="an_10:1">10:1</span> But as Tobias made longer stay upon
occasion of the marriage, Tobias his father was solicitous, saying: Why
thinkest thou doth my son tarry, or why is he detained there?

<span id="an_10:2">10:2</span> Is Gabelus dead, thinkest thou, and no
man will pay him the money?

<span id="an_10:3">10:3</span> And he began to be exceeding sad, both he
and Anna his wife with him: and they began both to weep together:
because their son did not return to them on the day appointed.

<span id="an_10:4">10:4</span> But his mother wept and was quite
disconsolate, and said: Woe, woe is me, my son; why did we send thee to
go to a strange country, the light of our eyes, the staff of our old
age, the comfort of our life, the hope of our posterity?

<span id="an_10:5">10:5</span> We having all things together in thee
alone, ought not to have let thee go from us.

<span id="an_10:6">10:6</span> And Tobias said to her: Hold thy peace,
and be not troubled, our son is safe: that man with whom we sent him is
very trusty.

<span id="an_10:7">10:7</span> But she could by no means be comforted,
but daily running out looked round about, and went into all the ways by
which there seemed any hope he might return, that she might if possible
see him coming afar off.

<span id="an_10:8">10:8</span> But Raguel said to his son in law: Stay
here, and I will send a messenger to Tobias thy father, that thou art in
health.

<span id="an_10:9">10:9</span> And Tobias said to him: I know that my
father and mother now count the days, and their spirit is grievously
afflicted within them.

<span id="an_10:10">10:10</span> And when Raguel had pressed Tobias with
many words, and he by no means would hearken to him, he delivered Sara
unto him, and half of all his substance in menservants, and
womenservants, in cattle, in camels, and in kine, and in much money, and
sent him away safe and joyful from him.

<span id="an_10:11">10:11</span> Saying: The holy angel of the Lord be
with you in your journey, and bring you through safe, and that you may
find all things well about your parents, and my eyes see your children
before I die.

<span id="an_10:12">10:12</span> And the parents taking their daughter
kissed her, and let her go:

<span id="an_10:13">10:13</span> Admonishing her to honour her father
and mother in law, to love her husband, to take care of the family, to
govern the house, and to behave herself irreprehensibly.

<span id="an_11:1">11:1</span> And as they were returning they came to
Charan, which is in the midway to Ninive, the eleventh day.

<span id="an_11:2">11:2</span> And the angel said: Brother Tobias, thou
knowest how thou didst leave thy father.

<span id="an_11:3">11:3</span> If it please thee therefore, let us go
before, and let the family follow softly after us, together with thy
wife, and with the beasts.

<span id="an_11:4">11:4</span> And as this their going pleased him,
Raphael said to Tobias: Take with thee of the gall of the fish, for it
will be necessary. So Tobias took some of that gall and departed.

<span id="an_11:5">11:5</span> But Anna sat beside the way daily, on the
top of a hill, from whence she might see afar off.

<span id="an_11:6">11:6</span> And while she watched his coming from
that place, she saw him afar off, and presently perceived it was her son
coming: and returning she told her husband, saying: Behold thy son
cometh.

<span id="an_11:7">11:7</span> And Raphael said to Tobias: As soon as
thou shalt come into thy house, forthwith adore the Lord thy God: and
giving thanks to him, go to thy father, and kiss him.

<span id="an_11:8">11:8</span> And immediately anoint his eyes with this
gall of the fish, which thou carriest with thee. For be assured that his
eyes shall be presently opened, and thy father shall see the light of
heaven, and shall rejoice in the sight of thee.

<span id="an_11:9">11:9</span> Then the dog, which had been with them in
the way, ran before, and coming as if he had brought the news, shewed
his joy by his fawning and wagging his tail.

<span id="an_11:10">11:10</span> And his father that was blind, rising
up, began to run stumbling with his feet: and giving a servant his hand,
went to meet his son.

<span id="an_11:11">11:11</span> And receiving him kissed him, as did
also his wife, and they began to weep for joy.

<span id="an_11:12">11:12</span> And when they had adored God, and given
him thanks, they sat down together.

<span id="an_11:13">11:13</span> Then Tobias taking of the gall of the
fish, anointed his father's eyes.

<span id="an_11:14">11:14</span> And he stayed about half an hour: and a
white skin began to come out of his eyes, like the skin of an egg.

<span id="an_11:15">11:15</span> And Tobias took hold of it, and drew it
from his eyes, and immediately he recovered his sight.

<span id="an_11:16">11:16</span> And they glorified God, both he and his
wife and all that knew them.

<span id="an_11:17">11:17</span> And Tobias said: I bless thee, O Lord
God of Israel, because thou hast chastised me, and thou hast saved me:
and behold I see Tobias my son.

<span id="an_11:18">11:18</span> And after seven days Sara his son's
wife, and all the family arrived safe, and the cattle, and the camels,
and an abundance of money of his wife's: and that money also which he
had received of Gabelus:

<span id="an_11:19">11:19</span> And he told his parents all the
benefits of God, which he had done to him by the man that conducted him.

<span id="an_11:20">11:20</span> And Achior and Nabath the kinsmen of
Tobias came, rejoicing for Tobias, and congratulating with him for all
the good things that God had done for him.

<span id="an_11:21">11:21</span> And for seven days they feasted and
rejoiced all with great joy.

<span id="an_12:1">12:1</span> Then Tobias called to him his son, and
said to him: What can we give to this holy man, that is come with thee?

<span id="an_12:2">12:2</span> Tobias answering, said to his father:
Father, what wages shall we give him? or what can be worthy of his
benefits?

<span id="an_12:3">12:3</span> He conducted me and brought me safe
again, he received the money of Gabelus, he caused me to have my wife,
and he chased from her the evil spirit, he gave joy to her parents,
myself he delivered from being devoured by the fish, thee also he hath
made to see the light of heaven, and we are filled with all good things
through him. What can we give him sufficient for these things?

<span id="an_12:4">12:4</span> But I beseech thee, my father, to desire
him, that he would vouchsafe to accept one half of all things that have
been brought.

<span id="an_12:5">12:5</span> So the father and the son, calling him,
took him aside: and began to desire him that he would vouchsafe to
accept of half of all things that they had brought.

<span id="an_12:6">12:6</span> Then he said to them secretly: Bless ye
the God of heaven, give glory to him in the sight of all that live,
because he hath shewn his mercy to you.

<span id="an_12:7">12:7</span> For it is good to hide the secret of a
king: but honourable to reveal and confess the works of God.

<span id="an_12:8">12:8</span> Prayer is good with fasting and alms more
than to lay up treasures of gold:

<span id="an_12:9">12:9</span> For alms delivereth from death, and the
same is that which purgeth away sins, and maketh to find mercy and life
everlasting.

<span id="an_12:10">12:10</span> But they that commit sin and iniquity,
are enemies to their own soul.

<span id="an_12:11">12:11</span> I discover then the truth unto you, and
I will not hide the secret from you.

<span id="an_12:12">12:12</span> When thou didst pray with tears, and
didst bury the dead, and didst leave thy dinner, and hide the dead by
day in thy house, and bury them by night, I offered thy prayer to the
Lord.

<span id="an_12:13">12:13</span> And because thou wast acceptable to
God, it was necessary that temptation should prove thee.

<span id="an_12:14">12:14</span> And now the Lord hath sent me to heal
thee, and to deliver Sara thy son's wife from the devil.

<span id="an_12:15">12:15</span> For I am the angel Raphael, one of the
seven, who stand before the Lord.

<span id="an_12:16">12:16</span> And when they had heard these things,
they were troubled, and being seized with fear they fell upon the ground
on their face.

<span id="an_12:17">12:17</span> And the angel said to them: Peace be to
you, fear not.

<span id="an_12:18">12:18</span> For when I was with you, I was there by
the will of God: bless ye him, and sing praises to him.

<span id="an_12:19">12:19</span> I seemed indeed to eat and to drink
with you: but I use an invisible meat and drink, which cannot be seen by
men.

<span id="an_12:20">12:20</span> It is time therefore that I return to
him that sent me: but bless ye God, and publish all his wonderful works.

<span id="an_12:21">12:21</span> And when he had said these things, he
was taken from their sight, and they could see him no more.

<span id="an_12:22">12:22</span> Then they lying prostrate for three
hours upon their face, blessed God: and rising up, they told all his
wonderful works.

<span id="an_13:1">13:1</span> And Tobias the elder opening his mouth,
blessed the Lord, and said: Thou art great, O Lord, for ever, and thy
kingdom is unto all ages:

<span id="an_13:2">13:2</span> For thou scourgest, and thou savest: thou
leadest down to hell, and bringest up again: and there is none that can
escape thy hand.

<span id="an_13:3">13:3</span> Give glory to the Lord, ye children of
Israel, and praise him in the sight of the Gentiles:

<span id="an_13:4">13:4</span> Because he hath therefore scattered you
among the Gentiles, who know not him, that you may declare his wonderful
works, and make them know that there is no other almighty God besides
him.

<span id="an_13:5">13:5</span> He hath chastised us for our iniquities:
and he will save us for his own mercy.

<span id="an_13:6">13:6</span> See then what he hath done with us, and
with fear and trembling give ye glory to him: and extol the eternal King
of worlds in your works.

<span id="an_13:7">13:7</span> As for me, I will praise him in the land
of my captivity: because he hath shewn his majesty toward a sinful
nation.

<span id="an_13:8">13:8</span> Be converted therefore, ye sinners, and
do justice before God, believing that he will shew his mercy to you.

<span id="an_13:9">13:9</span> And I and my soul will rejoice in him.

<span id="an_13:10">13:10</span> Bless ye the Lord, all his elect, keep
days of joy, and give glory to him.

<span id="an_13:11">13:11</span> Jerusalem, city of God, the Lord hath
chastised thee for the works of thy hands.

<span id="an_13:12">13:12</span> Give glory to the Lord for thy good
things, and bless the God eternal, that he may rebuild his tabernacle in
thee, and may call back all the captives to thee, and thou mayst rejoice
for ever and ever.

<span id="an_13:13">13:13</span> Thou shalt shine with a glorious light:
and all the ends of the earth shall worship thee.

<span id="an_13:14">13:14</span> Nations from afar shall come to thee:
and shall bring gifts, and shall adore the Lord in thee, and shall
esteem thy land as holy.

<span id="an_13:15">13:15</span> For they shall call upon the great name
in thee.

<span id="an_13:16">13:16</span> They shall be cursed that shall despise
thee: and they shall be condemned that shall blaspheme thee: and blessed
shall they be that shall build thee up.

<span id="an_13:17">13:17</span> But thou shalt rejoice in thy children,
because they shall all be blessed, and shall be gathered together to the
Lord.

<span id="an_13:18">13:18</span> Blessed are all they that love thee,
and that rejoice in thy peace.

<span id="an_13:19">13:19</span> My soul, bless thou the Lord, because
the Lord our God hath delivered Jerusalem his city from all her
troubles.

<span id="an_13:20">13:20</span> Happy shall I be if there shall remain
of my seed, to see the glory of Jerusalem.

<span id="an_13:21">13:21</span> The gates of Jerusalem shall be built
of sapphire, and of emerald, and all the walls thereof round about of
precious stones.

<span id="an_13:22">13:22</span> All its streets shall be paved with
white and clean stones: and Alleluia shall be sung in its streets.

<span id="an_13:23">13:23</span> Blessed be the Lord, who hath exalted
it, and may he reign over it for ever and ever, Amen.

<span id="an_14:1">14:1</span> And the words of Tobias were ended. And
after Tobias was restored to his sight, he lived two and forty years,
and saw the children of his grandchildren.

<span id="an_14:2">14:2</span> And after he had lived a hundred and two
years, he was buried honourably in Ninive.

<span id="an_14:3">14:3</span> For he was six and fifty years old when
he lost the sight of his eyes, and sixty when he recovered it again.

<span id="an_14:4">14:4</span> And the rest of his life was in joy, and
with great increase of the fear of God he departed in peace.

<span id="an_14:5">14:5</span> And at the hour of his death he called
unto him his son Tobias and his children, seven young men, his
grandsons, and said to them:

<span id="an_14:6">14:6</span> The destruction of Ninive is at hand: for
the word of the Lord must be fulfilled: and our brethren, that are
scattered abroad from the land of Israel, shall return to it.

<span id="an_14:7">14:7</span> And all the land thereof that is desert
shall be filled with people, and the house of God which is burnt in it,
shall again be rebuilt: and all that fear God shall return thither.

<span id="an_14:8">14:8</span> And the Gentiles shall leave their idols,
and shall come into Jerusalem, and shall dwell in it.

<span id="an_14:9">14:9</span> And all the kings of the earth shall
rejoice in it, adoring the King of Israel.

<span id="an_14:10">14:10</span> Hearken therefore, my children, to your
father: serve the Lord in truth, and seek to do the things that please
him:

<span id="an_14:11">14:11</span> And command your children that they do
justice and almsdeeds, and that they be mindful of God, and bless him at
all times in truth, and with all their power.

<span id="an_14:12">14:12</span> And now, children, hear me, and do not
stay here: but as soon as you shall bury your mother by me in one
sepulchre, without delay direct your steps to depart hence:

<span id="an_14:13">14:13</span> For I see that its iniquity will bring
it to destruction.

<span id="an_14:14">14:14</span> And it came to pass that after the
death of his mother, Tobias departed out of Ninive with his wife, and
children, and children's children, and returned to his father and mother
in law.

<span id="an_14:15">14:15</span> And he found them in health in a good
old age: and he took care of them, and he closed their eyes: and all the
inheritance of Raguel's house came to him: and he saw his children's
children to the fifth generation.

<span id="an_14:16">14:16</span> And after he had lived ninety-nine
years in the fear of the Lord, with joy they buried him.

<span id="an_14:17">14:17</span> And all his kindred, and all his
generation continued in good life, and in holy conversation, so that
they were acceptable both to God, and to men, and to all that dwelt in
the land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judith](jdt.md)
