[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vrb09)  [Next](vrb11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vampire Ritual Book*, © by Michelle Belanger, \[2003\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage. Material can be reproduced for personal use on an
individual basis in private spellbooks, books of shadows, and the like.
Reproduction for distribution in any media or format is not allowed. To
reprint material that appears in this book in a book, magazine, or
website, please contact the author at the official House Kheperu
website. For more information, consult www.kheperu.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter Eight:

### Rites of Passage

 

Every society has its rites of passage, rituals which acknowledge the
crossing over from one state of being to the next.  Here in America,
going out and buying alcohol on your 21<sup>st</sup> birthday has become
a widespread tradition.  When people do this, they are celebrating a
rite of passage that marks their transition from childhood to adulthood.

Rites of passage help us to structure out lives.  They help us set up
the parameters that define one state of being from another.  As the
above example attests, rites of passage do not always have to be
religiously connected.  So long as the symbolism of the ritual resonates
with its purpose, it will suffice for those involved. 

There are some rites of passage experienced by all communities,
regardless of religion or culture; these are birth, marriage, and
death.  These three transitions are experienced by practically everyone
on the planet.  But depending on the society, there can be other
transitions as well, such as a boy’s entering into manhood, or a
priest’s ordination into his order.  These transitions deserve to be
formally recognized as well, and ritual adds both solemnity and meaning
to the experience. 

Within our community, there are quite a few rites of passage to be
celebrated.  There is the initial acceptance into the community, and
after that, there are different levels of knowledge and understanding to
be attained within the community.  As a member learns and grows, he or
she passes through a kind of spiritual childhood to a spiritual
adulthood.  This transition is important and should be recognized with a
rite.  Acceptance into a household is another transition unique to our
community that can be solemnized with a rite of passage.  Marriage is
important to many members of our community, but the relationship between
a vampire and a donor, while not always a marriage, should be solemnized
as well.  And these are just a few of the rites that have special
significance to our unique community.

All of the following ceremonies use language and symbolism that make
them uniquely ours.  They are designed to help establish the stages of
growth and the significant life transitions that are special to our
community.  As with all the ceremonies and rituals in this book, please
feel free to alter and add to these rituals to tailor them for your own
particular group or family.

 

# The Rite of Dedication

     This is the most basic initiation, one that simply acknowledges
that the initiate wishes to become a part of the community.  The person
who takes this initiation is formally acknowledged as a student or
fledgling, but he or she is still in the outer circle.  This is not a
ritual of transformation.  That comes later, when the initiate knows a
little more about the community. Most groups require that an initiate
have a sponsor from within the community even to get this far.  After
this initiation, the sponsor is allowed to teach the initiate the basics
of the community, and a rite of transformation (or death and rebirth)
may be performed when the initiate is deemed ready. 

*** ***

 

*(Begin with a Charge or Opening Prayer)*

 

**Priest:** We gather together this night because there is one among us
seeking answers. This new seeker has glimpsed the greater reality of
what we are, and yearns to know more.  Now it is time to take the first
few steps on the journey toward understanding.

*     (Seeker)*, come forward. You stand now in a sacred place, before
all those who have gone before you on this path, so be certainly that
you speak truly. Tell me, *(Seeker)*, what do you come seeking?

 

**Seeker:** I come seeking understanding.

 

**Priest:** And why do you seek this?

 

**Seeker:** To better know myself and my place in the world.

 

**Priest:** And how do you seek this?

 

**Seeker:** With pure intentions and an open heart.

 

**Priest:** Very well, then.  We accept your sincerity. *(Seeker)*. 
Look around you here at our gathering.  These are your fellow seekers,
those who have passed this way before.  Our paths are many, but the
journey we have undertaken is the same.

     Ours is a journey toward understanding.  In accepting our natures,
we accept a responsibility our souls took up many millennia ago.  Ours
also is a journey of transformation.  In changing ourselves, we seek to
change the very world in which we live. 

     Ours is a solitary journey, often misunderstood.  It is a long and
arduous path we walk, and the way is not always clear.  This is a
journey of many lifetimes, and in undertaking it, you are undertaking a
great responsibility.  The burden you seek to take up here, you will
carry with you for many years.

     Do you still seek to walk beside us?

 

**Seeker:** I do.

 

**Priest: ** Very well.  Before you embark upon this transformative
journey, there are certain vows you must make to us.  I charge you by
all you hold sacred to carry these vows in your heart.  If it is found
that you have broken any one of these, you will be expelled from our
company, and all that you have gained will be stripped away.

     Answer me, *“So do I swear.”*

 

**Priest:** Do you swear to accept the burden of responsibility for your
thoughts and actions as you follow this path?

 

**Seeker:** So do I swear.

 

**Priest:** Do you swear that you shall always seek with a pure heart
and an honest desire and that you will never abuse the knowledge that
you gain as you walk this path?

 

**Seeker:** So do I swear.

 

**Priest:** Do you swear that you will guard this knowledge from those
who would abuse it, never revealing those of our number to any who might
bring them harm?

 

**Seeker:** So do I swear.

 

**Priest:** And do you swear to dedicate yourself to change, taking up
the burden of transformation which is our birthright?

 

**Seeker:** So do I swear.

 

**Priest:** It has been witnessed.

     Initiate.  Always look within yourself first for the answers that
you seek.  Others may offer guidance, but only you can walk your path.

     Before you leave this circle, I have five gifts to give to you. 
Each is a lesson and a revelation.  Carry them with you as your strength
on this path.

 

*(The Priest goes to the altar where a chalice of water, a burning
candle, a bowl of ash, and some burning incense are waiting.  The Priest
takes the chalice of water first, and dipping her fingers into it,
anoints the forehead of the Initiate.)*

* *

*(Seeker’s name)*,  I do consecrate you with water, so you may be fluid
and change as the tides of the world change.

 

*(The Priest takes the candle and passes it under the Initiate’s face,
taking care not to burn him.)*

* *

*(Seeker’s name)*, I do consecrate you with fire that you may know your
passions and the spirit which drives you.

 

*(The Priest takes the ash and, dipping her fingers into it, marks the
forehead of the Initiate with a single, short line.)*

* *

*(Seeker’s name)*, I do consecrate you with earth, so you may balance
your spiritual pursuits with feet firmly planted here in the material
realm.

 

*(The Priest takes the lit incense and passes it in front of the
Initiate, wafting the smoke toward him.)*

* *

*(Seeker’s name)*, I do consecrate you with air, that you may aspire to
the heavens with an intellect and imagination capable of transforming
the world.

 

*(The Priest cups her hands and channels energy into them, then lays
these over the initiate’s heart.)*

 

(*Seeker’s Name*) And I do consecrate you with spirit so you may never
forget what it is we are.

 

Now, *(Seeker)*.  Step forward and be reborn.

 

*(The Priest embraces the Initiate, often giving a personal blessing as
she does so.  The Priest takes the Initiate’s hand and has him stand
beside her, presenting him to the group.)*

* *

**Priest:** Everyone, welcome *(Seeker)* into our number.  Give him your
blessings and your love.

 

*(Each of those present embrace the Initiate, offering words of welcome
or personal blessings.)*

* *

This ceremony is ended, and your journey just begun.

Go forth to walk in darkness and in light.

 

**All:** Forever.

 

 

The Sanguine Initiation

Within the Sanguinarian aspect of the community, blood plays an integral
role in exchanges between mentor and student as well as between vampire
and donor.  In the mythology of vampirism, the power of the vampire is
passed from mentor to student, and it is through such an exchange that
one becomes a vampire or is “turned.” Most members of the community
accept that you cannot be “turned” into a vampire – vampiric qualities
are with us all along. However, potent exchanges can help to bring these
to the forefront, and the passing of power from a teacher to an initiate
is an ancient tradition that underscores a number of magickal systems.

While among Pranic vampires, the initiatory exchange is often one of
energy, among Sanguinarians, the initiation of a new member into the
community often involves a symbolic sharing of blood.  This rite is an
example of a Sanguine initiation, and should be used only by consenting
adults in a safe and responsible manner.  Both persons involved in such
a rite should study the safe practices of bloodletting beforehand, so
they understand all aspects of this exchange and all risks involved.

This rite can very effectively be turned into a Pranic rite of
initiation simply by substituting an energy exchange for the exchange of
blood.

** **

**Preparation:**

You will need two new lancets, two cups of red wine, and alcohol swabs
(and possibly band-aids) for aftercare.  Set these out somewhere on an
altar or small table near where the ceremony is going to be held.  For
most people, this rite is intensely personal and should be celebrated
privately between mentor and student.  For a few groups, this is an
event the whole community celebrates, and therefore the mentor and
student perform their exchange at the center of a circle formed by the
members of the entire household.  The actual form the ritual takes can
vary from person to person and from household to household, but the
exchange of blood between mentor and student is pretty universal in any
Sanguine initiation. *Be certain that both mentor and student have
recent paperwork verifying that they are free from blood-borne diseases.
Be aware of safety first whenever working with blood.*

 

**The Rite:**

** **

**Mentor:** I have brought you here tonight because I wish to share with
you the most precious gift I have to give:  my nature.  You have been
with me for some time now, learning and sharing in my life, and now I
feel it is time to pass that life on to you.

     We are creatures of darkness, but we are also creatures of life. 
Life empowers us and sustains us.  It is our most precious possession,
and the greatest gift we can share.  By sharing my blood with you this
night, I am sharing with you my life, my vitality, my very soul.

     Do you understand the importance of what I am offering you?  After
tonight, we two will be connected in a way that goes beyond words.  More
than brother (sister), more than friend, you will be the child of my
heart and my soul.  Neither you nor I can break the bond that is forged
tonight.  Are you willing to accept it?

 

**Student:** I am willing to accept your most precious gift.

 

**Mentor:** Very well, but before I give of myself to you, you must
first surrender yourself to me.  I will be your teacher, your parent and
your guide within this community, and in order for me to fulfill my role
to you, you must place your trust in me. Do you understand what that
means?

 

**Student:** I do, and I willingly offer myself to you.

 

*(The student should focus on his vital energy, gathering it into one
hand and focusing specifically on one finger. When ready, the student
then opens one of the lancets and taps the tip of this finger with the
sharp point. Continuing to focus vital energy and the essence of himself
into that finger, thus infusing the blood, the student then guides a
drop or two of blood to fall into the chalice of wine. Cupping the wine
in both hands, the student gently swirls it around, continuing to infuse
it with his essence and his energy. Reverently, the student hands the
chalice to the mentor. The mentor accepts the chalice and takes a drink,
without completely draining the chalice.)*

 

**Mentor:** Your sacrifice is appreciated.  With what you have given me,
I will be bound to you as much as you will be bound to me.  I will not
forget our bond or treat it carelessly.

 

*(The mentor then focuses on his own vital energy, gathering it into one
hand and focusing specifically on one finger. Beyond just focusing on
his essence and vital energy, the mentor should also focus on his
identity as a vampyre, what that means and everything that comes along
with it. When ready, the mentor then opens the other lancet and taps the
tip of this finger with the point. Continuing to focus vital energy and
the essential nature of his vampirism into that finger, the mentor then
guides a drop or two of blood to fall into the chalice of wine.)*

 

**Mentor:** This is my blood, my precious life.  It is the symbol of my
spirit and all that I am.  I shed this for you so that you may drink and
become one of our number.

 

*(Cupping the wine in both hands, the mentor gently swirls the wine
around, mingling not only his own essence and energy with the wine but
also mingling his own energy with that of the student’s. Reverently, he
hands the chalice to his student. The student accepts the chalice and
drinks the remainder. The student and mentor may embrace after this.)*

 

**Mentor:** You are now blood of my blood and soul of my soul. 
Everything that I am, you are as well.  Never fail to appreciate the
sanctity of this precious gift.  Let us be bound together, in darkness
and in light.

 

**Student:** Forever.

 

*(Mentor and student clasp hands, and may choose to press their wounds
together.  If either has anything further to say to the other, now is
the time.  The union should be solemnized with a moment of silence.  If
they are with a group, the mentor then presents the student to the
others after this moment of silent reflection.  If they have performed
the ceremony alone, at the next gathering, the student will be presented
around as a member of the community.)*

* *

**Note:** In the case of psi-vamps, this same rite can be used as an
initiation. Simply remove the blood aspect entirely and rely solely upon
an infusion of energy into the ritual wine. Any sanguine rite can be
tailored to psychic vampires in this way, and similarly, any rite
involving just energy can be used by sanguine vampires simply by
replacing any energetic offering with a safe offering of a few drops of
blood obtained with sterilized lancets.

 

First Degree Initiation

 

Some groups are very informal about their degrees of initiation.  Some
are very strict.  This is a basic ritual to recognize an initiate’s
passage from the Outer Circle to the first level of the Inner Circle. 
Depending on the system, the initiate may still not have gone through a
rite of transformation, although they most certainly have gone through a
formal Dedication Ceremony as described earlier.  To achieve this
degree, the initiate must have decided on the role they wish to fill
within the community.  In groups that use the caste system, this means
the initiate has decided what caste they belong to and how this affects
their relation to the rest of their household.  In order to “pass” this
ritual, the initiate must adequately respond to the questions that the
secondary priest and the High Priest will put to him during the course
of the ceremony.

 

Preparation:

The energy of the ritual space is established according to the group’s
tradition. Once the temple has been erected, the members of the Inner
Circle gather together with the High Priest.  They all form a circle and
join hands.  At the far end of the circle, opposite the High Priest, two
people do not join hands, leaving an opening in the circle. This
threshold is blocked by a Guardian, typically played by a member of the
Warrior caste, who stands facing out of the circle.  The Guardian may
have a blade or a staff to represent his or her office.

     The initiate and the initiate’s sponsor are not present for the
set-up, nor do they stand in the circle. Ideally, they should meet in a
separate room and wait for the Herald to retrieve them. The Herald is
the only one allowed to pass in and out of the sacred space
unchallenged. Those gathered in the circle discuss the initiate and how
each person present feels about that person achieving this degree. When
everyone is ready, the High Priest sends the Herald out to retrieve the
initiate and his or her sponsor. The Herald leads them back to the
circle, passing by the Guardian. The Guardian allows the Herald to pass
but blocks the initiate.

 

 

The Rite:

 

Guardian: What are you doing here?

 

Initiate: I have come seeking the Elders.

 

Guardian: (barring the way) You may not pass.

 

Initiate: I have prepared long and hard for this.

 

Guardian: You may not pass.

 

Initiate: There is nowhere else for me.

 

Guardian: You may not pass.

 

Sponsor: I will take responsibility for him. 

 

Guardian: Very well.

 

*(the Guardian moves aside, and the sponsor leads the initiate into the
circle.  The initiate is brought before the High Priest.)*

 

High Priest: (*Sponsor’s name*)  You have entered our Inner Circle with
a stranger who does not belong.  Who is this person and why do you bring
him here?

 

Sponsor: This is (*Initiate’s name*), my student.  I have taught him the
ways of our family, and now I feel it is time he be accepted among us. 
If you require, I will speak for him.

 

High Priest: Let him speak for himself.

 

*(The Sponsor nods, then steps aside, leaving the initiate to stand
alone in the center of the circle.)*

 

High Priest: Who are you?

 

Initiate: (*Name*) the student of (S*ponsor’s name*)

 

High Priest: Why do you come here?

 

Initiate:  This is where I belong.

 

High Priest: What do you seek to gain?

 

Initiate:  Knowledge of my Self and my community.

 

High Priest: What do you have to offer us?

 

Initiate: *(responds with the appropriate phrase)*

I am a Warrior, I offer my strength.

I am a Counselor, I offer my love.

I am a Priest, I offer my vision.

 

High Priest: Very well.  You stand before our inner community, and we
acknowledge your words.  (*Sponsor’s name*) speaks for you, and though
his recommendation goes far, it is not enough.  Many have come before
us, and it takes more than words to win our trust.  What are you willing
to sacrifice to prove you are sincere?

 

Initiate: I offer my very life-force to any of you here.

 

*(the initiate cups his hands before his heart and channels energy
there.  Anyone who wishes to share this from the circle goes and lays a
hand over the initiate’s heart.)*

 

High Priest: Your offering is accepted.  Your words are sincere.  You
claim a place among us.  Do any of the Elders object to this?

 

Everyone: We have no objection.

 

High Priest: Then let us welcome him in.  (*Sponsor’s name*), you are no
longer responsible for this person, for he has proven that he can walk
among us on his own.  From this moment onward, his actions are his own
actions, and any praise or blame those actions earn belongs to him.

 

* (The Priest places an ankh or other symbol of the household around the
initiate’s neck). *

 

High Pries: (*Initiate’s name*), take this ankh and wear it proudly.  It
is a symbol of our household, and by wearing it, you proclaim to all the
world that you are one of our number.  Let it remind you of this night
and the duties you have proclaimed.

 

*(The initiate can optionally say the Sanguine Ankh Consecration as the
ankh is placed over his head. Once it is done, the High Priest embraces
the initiate and presents him to the Elders.)*

 

High Priest: (*Initiate’s name*), you are given the title of Warrior
/Priest / Counselor *(choose the appropriate one; alternately use Mradu
/ Ramkht / Kitra).* You now stand at First Degree within our circle.
*(alternately, “Calmae”).* Use your knowledge responsibly, and respect
what you have earned.

 

*(Everyone welcomes the initiate by name and may at this time offer
specific blessings. The sponsor may also offer specific words of
encouragement or advice.)*

 

**High Priest:** This ceremony is ended.  Let us go forth now in
darkness and in light.

 

All: Forever.

 

Marriage: A Sharing of Life

 

     This basic wedding ceremony can be expanded upon to add elements of
Pagan handfastings, more traditional aspects such as giving away the
bride, and any number of alterations. It can also be altered to include
a sanguine exchange between the bride and groom if they so choose this. 
For a Sanguinarian wedding ceremony, when the bride and groom exchange
wine with one another, each of them should also make a small cut on one
finger with a new, sterilized lancet, and add a few drops of their own
blood to the wine they present to their partner.

     This ceremony requires wine to be exchanged, and therefore you will
need a bottle of wine and a chalice. The best man will handle the wine,
the maid of honor carries the chalice. There is a place left for an
exchange of personally-written vows between bride and groom, and an
exchange of rings can be inserted here as well.

 

**The Rite:**

** **

**Priest:** Friends.  When we come into this world, we have only our
selves, and most of our journey in life is walked alone.  Some of us are
content in our solitude, while others spend their whole lives searching
for someone else to share with them their passions, their sorrows, and
their joys.

     A very lucky few of us can find that person: someone who helps us
carry our burdens and achieve our dreams, just as we, in turn, help
them.  It is a rare and wondrous occasion when we realize that we have
found someone to build a life with; and such an occasion should be
celebrated, solemnly and joyfully, among friends.

     We are gathered here tonight because there are two souls among us
who cry out for union. They have walked together for a time now, and
they have realized that they no longer wish to walk alone.

     Would (*bride’s name*) and (*groom’s name*) please step forward?

 

*(The couple to be married steps forward. If a more traditional wedding
ceremony is desired, the groom may step forward and wait by the priest
while a friend or relative walks the bride forward to join them.)*

 

**Priest:** (*Groom’s name*) and (*bride’s name*).  By swearing
yourselves to one another this night, you help forge a bond that will be
with you in every time and in every place throughout the long journey of
years.  Marriage is not merely a bond of the flesh;  it is also a
binding of souls. 

     When we touch one another, when we kiss and make love, we do not
embrace only the body.  We touch the spirit as well.  The union of flesh
is sacred and beautiful, but the union of souls is forever.  Even when
death separates you, that bond will remain.  Nothing is more eternal
than a vampire's love. 

     Now that you understand this, are you still ready to swear
yourselves to one another and enter into a binding union?

 

**Bride & Groom**: Yes, we are.

 

**Priest:** Very well. Repeat after me:

* *

*(The priest takes the groom’s hand and looks him in the eye. The Priest
then says each line below, and the groom repeats it.)*

 

**Priest:** I, (*groom’s name*) promise (*bride’s name*) my
unconditional love.

 

**Groom:** I, *(groom’s name)* promise *(bride’s name)* my unconditional
love.

 

**Priest:** To be her strength when she is weak.

 

**Groom:** To be her strength when she is weak.

 

**Priest:** To be her comfort when she grieves.

 

**Groom:** To be her comfort when she grieves.

 

**Priest:** To provide for her in times of need.

 

**Groom: ** To provide for her in times of need.

 

**Priest:** And to laugh with her in times of joy.

 

**Groom:** And to laugh with her in times of joy.

 

**Priest:** Your vows have been witnessed.

 

*(The priest releases his hand and takes up the hand of the bride.)*

* *

**Priest:** Now, *(bride’s name),* repeat after me:

* *

*(The priest takes the bride’s hand and looks her in the eye. The Priest
then says each line below, and the bride repeats it.)*

 

**Priest:** I, (*bride’s name*) promise (*bride’s name*) my
unconditional love.

 

**Groom:** I, *(bride’s name)* promise *(groom’s name)* my unconditional
love.

 

**Priest:** To be his strength when he is weak.

 

**Groom:** To be his strength when he is weak.

 

**Priest:** To be his comfort when he grieves.

 

**Groom:** To be his comfort when he grieves.

 

**Priest:** To provide for him in times of need.

 

**Groom: ** To provide for him in times of need.

 

**Priest:** And to laugh with him in times of joy.

 

**Groom:** And to laugh with him in times of joy.

* *

*(Priest releases her hand)*

* *

*(The best man brings forth the wine. The maid of honor brings forth a
chalice. Red wine is preferred, for it represents blood.  The wine
should be uncorked before the ceremony to avoid any awkward
difficulties. Both the cup-bearer and the wine-bearer stand close to the
bride and groom.)*

 

**Priest:** (*Groom’s Name*), take up the wine and pour some into the
chalice.  As you do so, repeat after me: 

 

(*Bride’s name*)*,* I pour out my life for you, I offer up my precious
spirit.

 

**Groom:** (*Bride’s name*)*,* I pour out my life for you, I offer up my
precious spirit.

*** ***

**Priest:** Let this sacrifice bind us, spirit to spirit, flesh to
flesh.

 

**Groom:** Let this sacrifice bind us, spirit to spirit, flesh to flesh.

 

**Priest:** So that no earthly power may destroy our union.

 

**Groom:** So that no earthly power may destroy our union.

 

*(The Groom hands the bottle of wine back to the best man.  Then he 
takes the cup from the maid of honor and raises it to the Bride’s lips.
She drinks.  The cup is then handed back to the maid of honor.)*

 

**Priest:** (*Bride’s Name*), Take up the wine and pour your future
husband a portion.  As you do so, repeat after me:

 

(*Groom’s name*)*,* I pour out my life for you, I offer up my precious
spirit.

 

**Bride:** (*Groom’s name*)*,* I pour out my life for you, I offer up my
precious spirit.

*** ***

**Priest:** Let this sacrifice bind us, spirit to spirit, flesh to
flesh.

 

**Bride:** Let this sacrifice bind us, spirit to spirit, flesh to flesh.

 

**Priest:** So that no earthly power may destroy our union.

 

**Bride:** So that no earthly power may destroy our union.

 

 

*(The Bride hands the bottle back to the best man and takes up the
chalice.  She raises this to her future husband and holds it as he
drinks.  Then she hands the chalice back to the maid of honor.)*

 

**Personal Vows:**

** **

*(If the Bride and Groom have personal vows to make to one another, they
can say them here.)*

 

**Conclusion:**

** **

**Priest:** Everyone hear bears witness to this rite. Your hearts know
that you two are wed. Kiss and show us all your passion.

 

*(The Bride and Groom kiss. When they are finished, the Priest presents
them to the audience.)*

* *

**Priest:** Our thanks to everyone who has gathered here tonight to bear
witness to these vows. May I present to you (*Bride’s name and Groom’s
name*).  Please offer them your dark blessings for a long and joyous
union. Go forth in darkness and light

 

**All:**  Forever

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

#  

# Naming Ceremony

# (Dedication to the Child)

** **

**    ** Children are often a natural consequence of marriage and other
unions. This ritual is offered as an alternative to a Baptism or
Wiccaning, providing a rite that acknowledges both the child and the
responsibility of child-rearing. This rite can also be used to bind a
non-related care-giver to the child, as in the case of a step-parent or
other individual who is committed to helping raise the little one.

** **

**The Rite:**

** **

**Priest:** We are gathered tonight to welcome a new soul into our
community.  This child represents the greatest potential any of us can
achieve: the ability to affect the future.  By nurturing, guiding, and
gently instructing this new life, we can create positive change that
will be felt now and in succeeding generations.

 

(The parents and/or caregivers are called forth. If both parents cannot
be present, it is preferable that the mother lead the child through this
ceremony, but there is no restriction that prevents the father from
being the main supporter in the rite.)

 

**Priest:** *(Mother and Father)*.  This little soul has chosen you as
his parents.  There are things that he feels he can learn from you, and
undoubtedly there will be things that you can learn from him.

     Through your body, *Mother),* you provided him flesh.  It is thus
your duty to nurture that flesh.  As his parents and caregivers, you are
bound to feed him and to clothe him, to keep him safe, and to nurse him
through illness.  But your duties do not end there, for this child is
not simply a being of flesh and blood.  He is a being of mind and spirit
as well.

     As you must nurture his body, so must you nurture both his spirit
and his mind.  In this way, you will become not merely his caretakers,
but his guides, his guardians, and his friends as well.  Henceforth, it
will be your sacred duty to teach this child in the ways of the world,
to instruct him in his spiritual path, to help him explore and develop
his intellect and natural abilities, and to provide him with your
compassion, your support, your discipline and your love.

 

Being a parent is not just about giving birth.  In nurturing this little
life, you are committing yourselves to great burdens and rewards.  I ask
you both, do you understand the full measure of what you are committing
to?  Are you both willing and able to undertake this responsibility to
this child?

 

**Response:** Yes, we are.

 

**Priest:** Very well.  There are seven vows that you must swear to this
child.  These bind you to him, in spirit as well as blood.  I charge you
both, by all that you hold sacred, to keep these vows inscribed upon
your hearts, and to never forget them in all your dealings through this
child’s life. 

     After each, please respond, “So do I swear.”

 

**Priest:** Do you swear to care for him when he is sick and to provide
comfort for him when he is in pain?

 

**Parents:** So do I swear.

 

**Priest:** Do you swear to laugh with him and to teach him how to play
so you are a friend to him as well as a mentor?

 

**Parents:** So do I swear.

* *

**Priest:** Do you swear to be his emotional support when he is going
through hard times and to serve as his spiritual guide as well as you
are able?

* *

**Parents:** So do I swear.

* *

**Priest:** Do you swear to teach him about himself and the world around
him and to help him learn to lead a happy and centered life?

 

**Parents:** So do I swear.

 

**Priest:** Do you swear to encourage him to experiment and explore his
identity and his gifts, guiding him safely with an open mind?

 

**Parents:** So do I swear.

* *

**Priest:** Do you swear to provide discipline when it is needed, but
always to correct him with love and never with anger in your heart?

 

**Parents:** So do I swear.

* *

**Priest:** And finally, to love him unconditionally, no matter what,
and to always welcome him back into your heart if he chooses to stray?

 

**Parents:** So do I swear.

 

*(The Priest weaves energy between all parties swearing the oath to bind
and witness the vow.)*

 

**Priest: ** It has been witnessed.  Now, place your hands over the
child’s heart.

 

(Those who are dedicating themselves to the child step forward and join
the mother, each placing a hand gently upon the child.  The priest lays
hands over the hands upon the child.)

 

**Priest:** I bind you to this child, not with ties of blood, but with
your own vows and dedication.  In heart as well as in spirit, this child
is now a part of you, to be treated as you would be treated yourself.

     *(Names of Mother and Caregivers),* may each of you become a mentor
to this child during his youth, and his friend once he has grown.  Keep
sacred the vows you have made tonight.  Remember that you do not have to
be a perfect parent, but you should strive to be perfect in your love.

 

(The Priest sends a warm wave of energy through all their hands,
blessing the Mother and Caregivers. There is a moment of silence as all
reflect on the ties sealed here this day.)

** **

 

**The Naming:**

** **

*(All step away but the mother.)*

* *

**Priest:** Now, Mother: you have borne this child from his first
moments.  You shared with him your body, and it is by your choice that
he was brought into this world.  By what name shall we call him?

 

**Mother:** I name this child *(Child’s name).*

 

**Priest.** Very well.

 

*(The Priest gathers energy into his left hand and touches the child on
the forehead, the lips, and the heart.)*

 

**Priest:** *(Child’s Name).*  I greet you.  I bless you.  I call you by
name.  May you meet the world with an open mind, a questing spirit, and
a loving heart. May the secrets of the world be clear to you, and may
you always find your way along your particular life’s path.

     Now, for all those who have gathered to witness this rite, I
present to you the child (*child’s name),* his mother, and his father.
 Please welcome this child into our community, and give everyone here
your blessings and your love.

 

(The family and caretakers are presented around and each person present
can greet them and offer blessings or advice. When all are finished, the
Priest draws the ceremony to a close.)

 

Priest:  This ceremony is ended.  Let us all go forth and celebrate, in
darkness and in light.

 

All: Forever.

** **

**Rite of Familial Bonds**

 

By the descriptions that appeared in the 1998 *Vampyre Almanac*, the
Sanguinarium tradition recognized several types and sizes of groups
within the vampire community. These ranged from clutches to courts,
differing both in size and in the nature of the connection between the
individuals involved. Ultimately, as things grew and changed, the
primary vampire unit became the House, a collection of individual bounds
by similar beliefs and practices that is comparable to a Wiccan coven.
However, a House is more of an organizational group, and many of us
within the vampire community feel closer bonds then even our shared
symbols and beliefs. The tight-knit groups founded by vampires who live
in close proximity to one another hearken back to the ancient tribe or
clan, establishing extended families that rely upon one another and
provide mutual support and love. When such a group is particularly
close, calling it a House does not seem quite enough. For those who feel
that their circle of friends have indeed became their Family, this rite
exists.

** **

**Preamble:**

** **

**Priest:** The world is changing, and with it, our definition of family
must change.  Sometimes the families we are born into do not suit us. We
may find that there are differences that cannot be surmounted. Our life
choices may be rejected, or we may simply feel nothing in common with
those to whom we are born. As we venture out into the world, we
sometimes find brothers, sisters, and even parents among those who have
no relation to us through blood.  Although the relationship thus shared
is something that the world might not recognize, we know the truth:
family is where you find it, and love does not adhere to those
boundaries imposed upon it by culture and society. 

In our community, especially, we often choose to redefine the boundaries
of family. We find new children in those that we teach; we find new
parents in those who guide us through the discovery of self. Over time,
such deep connections are built that we cannot avoid the fact that we
have become family to one another. Despite the opinions of the rest of
the world, we must feel free to accept our family where we find it, to
enjoy the love and support of those the world might consider strangers,
and to honor the connection we share with those who are our spiritual
flesh and blood.

This is a ritual to honor such found family, so that their bond may be
recognized and formalized by the community. For, whatever shape it may
take, the bonds of family are sacred, and it is through love and support
of others that many of us are able to make our way in the world. Would
those entering together into this ritual please step forward?

 

*(The family steps forward and stands in a semi-circle in front of the
Priest.)*

 

**Priest:** We gather this day to formally acknowledge the bonds that
nature and birthright did not supply.  You who gather here before me,
(*name, and name, and name:)* you have come together in support of one
another.  Your connection has gone far beyond that of just friends. 
Yet, as you are not all lovers, and you are not blood related, the world
still recognizes you only as friends.

     There is a word for a group of people that help of one another
grow, who support one another, financially, spiritually, and
emotionally, who share a bond that will remain in their hearts
throughout their lives.  That word is family.

     You *(insert number of people entering into the group)* have come
before me this night to declare your devotion and to make it clear to
the world that, even though you bear no connection through birth or
through blood, you are a family nevertheless.

     Is this truly your intention?

 

**Family** (as one): Yes it is.

 

**Priest:** Very well, but before we proceed, let me caution you.  This
bond is not to be undertaken lightly.  You are about to pledge to me and
all that you hold sacred that the *(number)* of you will hence forward
be connected, that you will love one another and support one another
through all of life's trials, working together to provide a healthy
living space, where all of you can grow and flourish.  Once forged, this
bond should not be broken, so be certain that this is what you want --
and that you are willing to work to nurture it and to protect it. Is
this still your intention?

 

**Family** (as one): yes it is.

 

**Priest:** Very well.  You will make your vows together, and then
individually so that your duty to one another is perfectly clear. 
First, place your hands together before me. I will bind you by the ties
of spirit and flesh as you swear to me these vows. I will speak each
vow, and you will all, as a unit, repeat it back to me.

 

*(Everyone extends a hand to the center of the semi-circle, clasping
hands so that they are all touching. The priest then lays his hand over
theirs, weaving them together with threads of energy.)*

 

**Priest:** I pledge you my love, my devotion, and my support.

 

**All:** I pledge you my love, my devotion, and my support.

 

**Priest:** In the weak times and in the hard times,

 

**All:** In the weak times and in the hard times,

 

**Priest:** When you cannot bear up alone,

 

**All:** When you cannot bear up alone,

 

**Priest:** I will be there, I will try to be strong.

 

**All:** I will be there, I will try to be strong.

 

**Priest:** When you need an ear to listen,

 

**All:** When you need an ear to listen,

 

**Priest:** a shoulder to cry on, or an extra pair of hands,

 

**All:** a shoulder to cry on, or an extra pair of hands,

 

**Priest:** I will try to help, I will do what I can.

 

**All:** I will try to help, I will do what I can.

 

**Priest:** as brother to sister, as parent to child,

 

**All:** as brother to sister, as parent to child,

 

**Priest:** I will be there for you,

 

**All:** I will be there for you,

 

**Priest:** so we can weather the storms of life together,

 

**All:** so we can weather the storms of life together,

* *

**Priest:** as a family strengthened for unity and love.

 

**Priest:** as a family strengthened for unity and love.

 

**Priest:** These things, you swear, and as a family, you swear them
together.  Now, a family is a group that is made up by individual parts,
so you must each take individual vows and swear before one another to
solidify this union.

 

*(The priest approaches each member in turn, starting with the mother or
father figure, and proceeding through each member in turn, finishing
with the newest member of the family. When he approaches each person,
the Priest holds his hand over their head, gathering energy.)*

* *

**Priest:** As you swear these vows, you open your mind to thinking as a
family. You open your lips to speaking as a family. And you open your
heart to loving as a family. 

 

*(The Priest touches forehead, lips, and heart, in turn, connecting with
the individual’s energy and opening these points to the energy of
everyone else in the family group. This is done for each person in turn
before they take their individual vows. As the Priest continues to
speak, he holds his hand over the individual’s heart, binding their
energy with the power and intent of the vow.)*

* *

**Priest:** The vows that you swear should be written upon your soul, so
that you carry them with you always. You are bound by these oaths, and
your place in this family relies upon your loyalty to these oaths. Never
fail to appreciate the power and sanctity of what you swear here this
night.  After each vow, swear to your new family: “I will be there.”

 

**Priest:** In times of weakness and emotional need:

 

**Family Member:** I will be there.

 

**Priest:** In times of joy and celebration:

 

**Family Member:** I will be there.

* *

**Priest:** For the simple things, those day-to-day tasks so often
overlooked:

 

**Family Member:** I will be there.

* *

**Priest:** When the family grows together, when the family fights, and
when the family makes amends:

 

**Family Member:** I will be there.

* *

**Priest:** In love, in devotion, and in mutual support, now and all the
days of my life:

 

**Family Member:** I will be there.

* *

*(These vows are repeated for each member.  When each member has sworn
these vows to every other member of the family, the priest takes all of
their hands and holds them collectively together. The priest then holds
his hands over their hands, weaving energy between them, forging a
blessing that solidifies the bonds that they have sworn.)*

** **

**Priest:** Spirit to spirit, flesh to flesh, I seal this sacred bond.
May you be strong together, may you prosper together, and may you always
know love. If any of you have any additional vows or statements to make
to one another, please do so now.

 

*(Insert optional declarations from the family members.)*

* *

**Priest:** Embrace, and be one.

 

*(All the family members engage in a group hug.)*

 

**Priest:** This ceremony is ended. Got forth as a Family in darkness
and light.

 

**All:**  Forever.

 

 

The Promising of a Donor

 

There are many kinds of relationships, and sometimes marriage does not
quite fit the connection which exists between two people.  Within our
community, a unique form of relationship has developed:  that of a
vampire and his or her donor.  A donor can be a Kitra (Counselor caste),
drawn from within the vampire community, or a donor may be a non-vampire
who has nevertheless chosen to offer him or herself up to a vampire
companion.  The relationship between the vampire and donor is something
sacred, and it should be treated as such.  Promises should be made on
the part of both parties, and the occasion of this promising deserves a
celebration all its own.

 

The Rite:

 

Priest:  Friends, we are gathered on this night to solemnize a very
special union.  Many within our community cannot exist wholly on their
own.  Our power, our spirit, and sometimes our very health depends upon
the offerings of others.  Our Counselors, our donors, our Kitra, and our
beloved black swans give of themselves to sustain us, and the
relationships we forge with such providers can be as lasting and
profound as any marriage.

     Tonight we gather to celebrate the promising of a vampire and a
provider.  They have come together to formalize their relationship and
to swear solemn vows.  Would *(donor’s name)* please step forward?

 

*(The donor approaches the priest.)*

 

Priest*:* *(Donor’s name),* you have offered yourself body and spirit to
your vampire.  This is not something to be undertaken lightly. The very
nature of a vampire is to transform and change. You cannot be touched
deeply by one of our number without being altered in some aspect of your
being. It is important, before you proceed, that you understand the
risks of this relationship. Do you understand that, as a donor, you are
offering your own vitality to strengthen your vampire’s vital force?

 

Donor: I do.

 

Priest: Do you understand that, by swearing these vows, you are
promising to take responsibility for your vampire’s health, providing
for him when he is in need whenever this does not endanger your own
health and well-being?

 

Donor: I do.

 

Priest: Do you understand that you are responsible not only for the
health of the one you would swear to, but also for your own health,
caring for yourself so the vampire’s demands do not overtax you, and
keeping your body free of poison and disease?

 

Donor: I do.

 

Priest: Do you understand that when the one you would swear to feeds, he
is touching not only your body but deep into your soul so that a
connection will linger between you even when your physical bodies are
distant?

 

Donor: I do.

 

Priest: And do you understand that his kiss may change you in ways no
one can predict, opening potential abilities and resurrecting memories
that may complicate your life?

 

Donor: I do.

 

Priest: Knowing these things, and having been advised of both the joys
and the risks by the one you would swear to, are you still willing to
proceed?

 

Donor: I am.

 

Priest: Very well. Would *(Vampire's name)* please step forward and
stand before me?

 

*(The vampire entering into the relationship steps forward.)*

 

Priest: *(Vampire’s name),* you have offered to accept *(Donor’s name)*
as your donor.  Do you understand that *(Donor’s name)* is bestowing
upon you a sacred trust and that this relationship is not meant to
benefit only you?

 

Vampire: I do.

 

Priest: Do you understand that in taking these vows today,  you take up
a responsibility toward the one you would swear to, helping her, guiding
her, and protecting her?

 

Vampire: I do.

 

Priest: Do you understand that you are obligated to guard her health as
if it were your own, to never overfeed, and to only take with her
permission?

 

Vampire: I do.

 

Priest: Do you understand that you both share responsibility for looking
after your needs, communicating openly with one another about your
health and your energy?

 

Vampire: I do.

 

Priest: And do you understand that the interactions you propose will
forge a link the goes deeper than flesh between the two of you, and that
you are not to abuse this link to abuse or control her?

 

Vampire: I do.

 

Priest: Very well.  Before I solemnize this union before the eyes of our
community, it is required that you each make vows to one another*. 
(Donor’s name),* you will repeat after me:

 

Priest: I promise to give of myself to *(Vampire’s name),* so that my
life may strengthen his life, and my soul may strengthen his soul*.*

* *

Donor: I promise to give of myself to *(Vampire’s name),* so that my
life may strengthen his life, and my soul may strengthen his soul*.*

 

Priest: I promise to always be discrete about our exchanges and to never
talk about them with others without his knowledge and his permission.

* *

Donor: I promise to always be discrete about our exchanges and to never
talk about them with others without his knowledge and his permission.

 

Priest: I promise to offer myself freely and to never try to manipulate
or control *(Vampire’s name)* through his reliance on me.

 

Donor: I promise to offer myself freely and to never try to manipulate
or control *(Vampire’s name)* through his reliance on me.

* *

Priest: I promise to respect *(Vampire’s name)* and to be mindful of his
hunger, so that when he is in need, I am there to provide.

 

Donor: I promise to respect *(Vampire’s name)* and to be mindful of his
hunger, so that when he is in need, I am there to provide.

* *

Priest: And I promise never to turn on *(Vampire’s name),* even if our
relationship ends, but to always hold him fondly in my heart.

 

Donor: And I promise never to turn on *(Vampire’s name),* even if our
relationship ends, but to always hold him fondly in my heart.

 

Priest: Very well.  It has been witnessed. And you, *(Vampire’s name).* 
There are vows you must swear as well.  Repeat after me:

 

Priest: I promise to care for *(Donor’s name)* and to cherish the gift
she provides for me, so that she never feels I have taken her for
granted.

 

Vampire: I promise to care for *(Donor’s name)* and to cherish the gift
she provides for me, so that she never feels I have taken her for
granted.

* *

Priest: I promise to provide what I can in return for what she offers
me, so that our exchange is never one-sided.

 

Vampire: I promise to provide what I can in return for what she offers
me, so that our exchange is never one-sided.

* *

Priest: I promise to be discrete about our exchanges, and to never talk
about them with others without her knowledge and her permission..

 

Vampire: I promise to be discrete about our exchanges, and to never
gossip or brag about them to others.

* *

Priest: I promise to protect *(Donor’s name)* and to never demand more
than she can safely give, for her life is as my life, and her soul is as
my soul.

 

Vampire: I promise to protect *(Donor’s name)* and to never demand more
than she can safely give, for her life is as my life, and her soul is as
my soul.

* *

Priest: And I promise to always hold *(Donor’s name)* in fond regard,
even if our relationship ceases, for the gift that she has provided for
me I will carry forever upon my soul.

 

Vampire: And I promise to always hold *(Donor’s name)* in fond regard,
even if our relationship ceases, for the gift that she has provided for
me I will carry forever upon my soul.

 

Priest: It has been witnessed.

 

*(The Priest seals the vows with energy, weaving it between the Vampire
and Donor, from forehead, to heart, to root.)*

 

Priest: Everyone!  *(Donor’s name)* has proven that she understands her
obligations to us, and she has sworn to be loyal and true.  *(Vampire’s
name)* has proven that he understands his responsibilities, and he has
sworn to treat his donor with respect and with care. 

     Until such time as this relationship is ended mutually by the both
of you, take care to be faithful to your vows.  Respect one another, and
make an effort to communicate.  Be mindful of one another’s feelings,
and never do anything without considering the consequences of your
actions, for this is not a worldly union of the flesh, but an agreement
to share an essential portion of your souls.  By giving of yourself, by
taking her life into you, you will forge an bond that will tie your two
spirits together for many lifetimes to come.  Do not take such a sharing
lightly.  No one outside our community can share a union such as this. 
Never fail to appreciate the sanctity what you have.

 

*(The vampire may choose to give the donor a token that will mark her as
his.  This will most likely be a necklace with his house sigil on it, or
a pendant of some other distinguishing symbol.  In rare instances, a
donor may choose to get a tattoo or piercing that represents this
union.)*

 

Priest: Everyone, I present to you *(Vampire’s name)* and his donor,
*(Donor’s name). * She is now his primary source of life, and his
cherished provider.  Let no one challenge the sharing between them. 

     Go forth in darkness and in light.

 

All: Forever. 

 

The Rite of the Dead:

Celebrating the Journey of the Soul

 

     In books and in movies, vampires are immortal, living a life that
does not end except through violent circumstances. As vampires, we do
not lay claim to the immortality of the physical body, but we do believe
in the immortality of the soul. Death is inevitable for us all, and at
the right point in life, it is often a welcome transition, leading us
from a life we have finished to a whole new set of opportunities and
possibilities. Although death should not be feared, there is no denying
that it can be traumatic, and no one is hurt more than those who are
left behind. The following rite is acknowledges both the new journey
undertaken by a soul that has transitioned from flesh to spirit and also
the pain and loss experience by those who remain behind.

** **

**Preparation:**

This rite should be performed either at the funeral home where the body
is being shown to family and friends or at the graveside, prior to
actual burial. Because so many members of the community see the body as
just a vessel that is necessarily mortal and finite, few may choose to
go to the trouble and expense of having their bodies embalmed.  In the
case of cremation, of course, no body is shown, and an urn, with a photo
and other mementos of the deceased will be the focus of the rite. 

     In some cases, the family of the deceased will not be sympathetic
to his beliefs, and a priest of a traditional religion will be present
for the “real” funeral.  In such cases, first attempt to get permission
from the family members to have a small memorial service of your own. 
If it is impossible to reason with the family, then a private service
among the community will have to be held without the actual presence of
the deceased.  In such a private rite, set up a small memorial altar to
the dead person, placing photos, items of special importance, and other
mementos at the center of the ritual space.

     Friends and family gather for the ritual.  A small group of those
who were closest to the deceased (lovers, immediate family, best
friends) is selected, and these individuals should have some token to
leave with their departed one.  These tokens are symbols of love,
promises, and well-wishing for the future, and they can take any form. 
Flowers are acceptable, or polished stones, hand-made cards or letters,
or even small statues or pieces of jewelry – these gifts represent one
final bond between the living and the dead, and they are very important
for the living to help them achieve closure with the deceased.  If the
rite occurs by the casket, these items are placed inside to be buried
with the deceased.  If the rite is held at the graveside, the tokens can
be thrown in on the coffin before the first spadefuls of earth or left
around the memorial stone.  If the rite had to be held privately, have
the immediate family and friends leave their tokens on the memorial
altar, and then gather these up to be placed at the gravesite at a later
time.

 

(The Priest opens the ceremony with the Charge or Opening Prayer)

** **

**Proclamation:**

** **

**Priest:** Friends!  This night marks a very somber occasion. 
*(Name),* our dear friend and a valued member of our community, has left
us and moved on to a new life and new beginnings. Tonight we gather in
honor of *(Name),* to remember his life with us, and to reflect upon the
meaning of his death.

     Death comes to all of us in our time.  Although our spirits are
immortal, the flesh is weak.  Our bodies are mere vessels for our
eternal Selves, and not only is it unavoidable that these bodies will
weaken and die, but that death is a necessary step for further growth
and change.  

     However we may understand these truths in our spirits and in our
minds, death is still a very difficult process for the heart to endure. 
We love what is familiar to us.  We grow accustomed to a particular face
or smile, the pleasing notes of a specific voice.  These things are
unique to each incarnation, and once they have faded they will never
occur in quite the same way again.  This is the true loss in death.  The
spirit has left a body that was failing and giving out in order to move
on to something vital and new.  But we, the living, must continue on
with the knowledge that, although the spirit lives, the particular
combination of body and soul that we have come to cherish and know as
*(Name)* will never be with us again.

 

**Reading:**

(an optional reading may be inserted here. More than one person can read
something they have prepared to honor the deceased. Many will probably
want this honor. To keep the length of the rite down, choose three who
were closest to the deceased. If many other members of the community
feel they must say something, have them write their sentiments on a
piece of parchment. These can be buried with the deceased or, if this is
impossible, all the parchments should be gathered and burned, then the
ashes scattered to the winds so the intent of the letters is carried to
the deceased.)

 

**Responsorial:**

** **

**Priest:** *(Name)!* You touched each and every one of us.  You changed
our lives, and none of us will be the same because of you.  The bonds
that we forged with you will not be erased with the passage of time, nor
the passing from one life to the next.  Even though you have moved on to
something different, we  will all remember what  we share with you.

     After each statement, please respond:  “We will not forget.”

 

*(The Priest can read the following statements or, alternately, various
members of the mourning party can each be assigned one statement to
read. This last works well especially if the mourning party is
sizable.)*

 

**Priest:**Your vision, your insight, the lessons you taught us:

 

**All:** We will not forget.

 

**Priest:** Your voice, your smile, the sound of your laughter:

 

**All:** We will not forget.

 

**Priest:** Your heart, your compassion, the way that you touched us:

 

**All:** We will not forget.

 

**Priest:** Your quirks, your hang-ups, all your endearing faults:

 

**All:** We will not forget.

 

**Priest:** And when next we see you, in another life:

 

**All:** We will not forget.

 

*(Everyone observes a moment of silence.)*

 

**Priest:** *(Name)!*  Along every journey there comes a parting, and
while we may meet again in the future, for now we must say “fare well”. 
No matter how much we will miss you, you must move on to your new life,
and we must carry on with our own.

     Never forget us, as we will never forget you.  Remember: lives may
come and go for us, but this family is forever.  We will always cherish
you in our hearts, and carry our memory of you in our eternal souls. Now
let us each make an offering to our departed friend, to strengthen him
along his new journey.

 

(The Priest leads everyone in making an offering of energy for the
deceased. Those with items to leave in the coffin or at the graveside
can charge these with the offering of energy. Others may simply hold out
their upturned hands. In single file, each should leave their offerings
at the memorial. If the rite is not being held at graveside or coffin,
then the memorial is likely to be a photo of the deceased or a simple
shrine set up to honor the dead person’s memory.  When everyone has had
a chance to leave their offering, the Priest closes the ceremony with
the Family Prayer.)

 

**Conclusion:**

 

**Priest:**

May we endure together peacefully.  
May we enjoy each lifetime as it comes.  
May we benefit each other as we better ourselves,  
And may we always find one another,  
In every time and in every place,  
To share this companionship and to celebrate this bond.

 

 

**Priest:** Go forth in darkness and light.

 

**All:** Forever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Nine: Community Rituals](vrb11)
