[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ulh06)  [Next](ulh08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAH3E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Unwritten Literature of Hawaii*, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

# III.--THE GODS OF THE HULA

Of what nature were the gods of the old times, and how did the ancient
Hawaiians conceive of them? As of beings having the form, the powers,
and the passions of humanity, yet standing above and somewhat apart from
men. One sees, as through a mist, darkly, a figure, standing, moving; in
shape a plant, a tree or vine-clad stump, a bird, a taloned monster, a
rock carved by the fire-queen, a human form, a puff of vapor--and now it
has given place to vacancy. It was a goddess, perhaps of the hula. In
the solitude of the wilderness one meets a youthful being of pleasing
address, of godlike wit, of elusive beauty; the charm of her countenance
unspoken authority, her gesture command. She seems one with nature, yet
commanding it. Food placed before her remains untasted; the oven,
*imu*, <span id="fr_22"></span>[a](#fn_21) in which the fascinated host
has heaped his abundance, preparing for a feast, when opened is found
empty; the guest of an hour has disappeared. Again it was a goddess,
perhaps of the hula. Or, again, a traveler meets a creature of divine
beauty, all smiles and loveliness. The infatuated mortal, smitten with
hopeless passion, offers blandishments; he finds himself by the roadside
embracing a rock. It was a goddess of the hula.

The gods, great and small, superior and inferior, whom the devotees and
practitioners of the hula worshiped and sought to placate were many; but
the goddess Laka was the one to whom they offered special prayers and
sacrifices and to whom they looked as the patron, the *au-makua*, <span
id="fr_23"></span>[b](#fn_22) of that institution. It was for her
benefit and in her honor that the kuahu was set up, and the wealth of
flower and leaf used in its decoration was emblematic of her beauty and
glory, a pledge of her bodily presence, the very forms that she, a
sylvan deity, was wont to assume when she pleased to manifest herself.

As an additional crutch to the imagination and to emphasize the fact of
her real presence on the altar which she had been invoked to occupy as
her abode, she was symbolized by an uncarved block of wood from the
sacred *lama* <span id="fr_24"></span>[c](#fn_23) tree. This was wrapped
in a robe of choice yellow tapa, scented with turmeric, and set
conspicuously upon the altar.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Laka was invoked as the god of the maile, the ie-ie, and other wildwood
growths before mentioned ([pl. II](ulh06.htm#img_pl02)). She was hailed
as the "sister, wife, of god Lono," as "the one who by striving attained
favor with the gods of the upper ether;" as "the kumu <span
id="fr_25"></span>[a](#fn_24) hula"--head teacher of the Terpsichorean
art; "the fount of joy;" "the prophet who brings health to the sick;"
"the one whose presence gives life." In one of the prayers to Laka she
is besought to come and take possession of the worshiper, to dwell in
him as in a temple, to inspire him in all his parts and
faculties--voice, hands, feet, the whole body.

Laka seems to have been a friend, but not a relative, of the numerous
Pele family. So far as the author has observed, the fiery goddess is
never invited to grace the altar with her presence, nor is her name so
much as mentioned in any prayer met with.

To compare the gods of the Hawaiian pantheon with those of classic
Greece, the sphere occupied by Laka corresponds most nearly to that
filled by Terpsichore and Euterpe, the muses, respectively, of dance and
of song. Lono, in one song spoken of as the husband of Laka, had
features in common with Apollo.

That other gods, Kane, Ku, Kanaloa, <span id="fr_26"></span>[b](#fn_25)
with Lono, Ku-pulupulu, <span id="fr_27"></span>[c](#fn_26) and the
whole swarm of godlings that peopled the wildwood, were also invited to
favor the performances with their presence can be satisfactorily
explained on the ground, first, that all the gods were in a sense
members of one family, related to each other by intermarriage, if not by
the ties of kinship; and, second, by the patent fact of that great
underlying cause of bitterness and strife among immortals as well as
mortals, jealousy. It would have been an eruptive occasion of
heart-burning and scandal if by any mischance a privileged one should
have had occasion to feel slighted; and to have failed in courtesy to
that countless host of wilderness imps and godlings, the *Kini
Akua*, <span id="fr_28"></span>[d](#fn_27) mischievous and irreverent as
the monkeys of India, would indeed have been to tempt a disaster.

While it is true that the testimony of the various *kumu-hula*, teachers
of the hula, and devotees of the art of the hula, so far as the author
has talked with them, has been overwhelmingly to the effect that Laka
was the one and only divine patron of the art known to them, there has
been a small number equally ready to assert that there were those who
observed the cult of the goddess Kapo and worshiped

 

<span id="img_pl03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE III&lt;br&gt;
HÁLA-PÉPE (DRACÆNA AUREA)](tn/pl03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl03.jpg)  
PLATE III  
HÁLA-PÉPE (DRACÆNA AUREA)  
</span>

 

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

her as the patron of the hula. The positive testimony of these witnesses
must be reckoned as of more weight than the negative testimony of a much
larger number, who either have not seen or will not look at the other
side of the shield. At any rate, among the prayers before the kuahu, of
which there are others yet to be presented, will be found several
addressed to Kapo as the divine patron of the hula.

Kapo was sister of Pele and the daughter of Haumea <span
id="fr_29"></span>[a](#fn_28). Among other rôles played by her, like
Laka she was at times a sylvan deity, and it was in the garb of woodland
representations that she, was worshiped by hula folk. Her forms of
activity, corresponding to her different metamorphoses, were numerous,
in one of which she was at times "employed by the *kahuna* <span
id="fr_30"></span>[b](#fn_29) as a messenger in their black arts, and
she is claimed by many as an *aumakua*," <span
id="fr_31"></span>[c](#fn_30) said to be the sister of Kalai-pahoa, the
poison god.

Unfortunately Kapo had an evil name on account of a propensity which led
her at times to commit actions that seem worthy only of a demon of
lewdness. This was, however, only the hysteria of a moment, not the
settled habit of her life. On one notable occasion, by diverting the
attention of the bestial pig-god Kama-pua’a, and by vividly presenting
to him a temptation well adapted to his gross nature, she succeeded in
enticing him away at a critical moment, and thus rescued her sister Pele
at a time when the latter's life was imperiled by an unclean and violent
assault from the swine-god.

Like Catherine of Russia, who in one mood was the patron of literature
and of the arts and sciences and in another mood a very satyr, so the
Hawaiian goddess Kapo seems to have lived a double life whose aims were
at cross purposes with one another--now an angel of grace and beauty,
now a demon of darkness and lust.

Do we not find in this the counterpart of nature's twofold aspect, who
presents herself to dependent humanity at one time as an alma mater, the
food-giver, a divinity of joy and comfort, at another time as the demon
of the storm and earthquake, a plowshare of fiery destruction?

The name of Hiiaka, the sister of Pele, is one often mentioned in the
prayers of the hula.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[23:a](ulh07.htm#fr_22) *Imu*. The Hawaiian
oven, which was a hole in the ground lined and arched over with stones.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23:b](ulh07.htm#fr_23) *Au-makua*. An ancestral
god.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23:c](ulh07.htm#fr_24) *Lama*. A beautiful tree
having firm, fine-grained, white wood; used in making sacred inclosures
and for other tabu purposes.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24:a](ulh07.htm#fr_25) *Kumu-hula*. The
teacher, a leader and priest of the hula. The modern school-master is
called *kumu-kula*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[24:b](ulh07.htm#fr_26) *Kanaloa*. Kane, Ku,
Kanaloa, and Lono were the major gods of the Hawaiian pantheon.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[24:c](ulh07.htm#fr_27) *Ku-pulupulu*. A god of
the canoe-makers.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[24:d](ulh07.htm#fr_28) *Kini Akua*. A general
expression--often used together with the ones that follow--meaning the
countless swarms of brownies, elfs, kobolds, sprites, and other godlings
(mischievous Imps) that peopled the wilderness. *Kini* means literally
40,000, *lehu* 400,000, and *mano* 4,000. See the *Pule
Kuahu*--altar-prayer--on page [21](ulh06.htm#page_21). The Hawaiians,
curiously enough, did not put the words *mano*, *kini*, and *lehu* in
the order of their numerical value.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[25:a](ulh07.htm#fr_29) *Haumea*. The ancient
goddess, or ancestor, the sixth in line of descent from Wakea.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[25:b](ulh07.htm#fr_30) *Kahuna*. A sorcerer;
with a qualifying adjective it meant a skilled craftsman;
*Kahuna-kalai-wa’a* was a canoe-builder; *kahuna lapaau* was a
medicine-man, a doctor, etc.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[25:c](ulh07.htm#fr_31) The Lesser Gods of
Hawaii, a paper by Joseph S. Emerson, read before the Hawaiian
Historical Society, April 7, 1892.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV.--Support and Organization of the Hula](ulh08)
