[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ulh07)  [Next](ulh09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAH3E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Unwritten Literature of Hawaii*, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

# IV.--SUPPORT AND ORGANIZATION OF THE HULA

In ancient times the hula to a large extent was a creature of royal
support, and for good reason. The actors in this institution were not
producers of life's necessaries. To the *alii* belonged the land and the
sea and all the useful products thereof. Even the jetsam whale-tooth and
wreckage scraps of iron that ocean cast up on the shore were claimed by
the lord of the land. Everything was the king's. Thus it followed of
necessity that the support of the hula must in the end rest upon the
alii. As in ancient Rome it was a senator or general, enriched by the
spoil of a province, who promoted the sports of the arena, so in ancient
Hawaii it was the chief, or headman of the district who took the
initiative in the promotion of the people's communistic sports and of
the hula.

We must not imagine that the hula was a thing only of kings' courts and
chiefish residences. It had another and democratic side. The passion for
the hula was broadspread. If other agencies failed to meet the demand,
there was nothing to prevent a company of enthusiasts from joining
themselves together in the pleasures and, it might be, the profits of
the hula. Their spokesman--designated as the *po’o-puaa*, from the fact
that a pig, or a boar's head, was required of him as an offering at the
kuahu--was authorized to secure the services of some expert to be their
kumu. But with the hula all roads lead to the king's court.

Let us imagine a scene at the king's residence. The alii, rousing from
his sloth and rubbing his eyes, rheumy with debauch and *awa*, overhears
remark on the doings of a new company of hula dancers who have come into
the neighborhood. He summons his chief steward.

"What is this new thing of which they babble?" he demands.

"It is nothing, son of heaven," answers the kneeling steward.

"They spoke of a hula. Tell me, what is it?"

"Ah, thou heaven-born (*lani*), it was but a trifle--a new company,
young graduates of the halau, have set themselves up as great ones; mere
rustics; they have no proper acquaintance with the traditions of the art
as taught by the bards of \* \* \* your majesty's father. They mouth and
twist the old songs all awry, thou son of heaven."

"Enough. I will hear them to-morrow. Send a messenger for this new kumu.
Fill again my bowl with awa."

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Thus it comes about that the new hula company gains audience at court
and walks the road that, perchance, leads to fortune. Success to the men
and women of the hula means not merely applause, in return for the
incense of flattery, it means also a shower of substantial favors--food,
garments, the smile of royalty, perhaps land--things that make life a
festival. If welcome grows cold and it becomes evident that the harvest
has been reaped, they move on to fresh woods and pastures new.

To return from this apparent digression, it was at the king's court--if
we may extend the courtesy of this phrase to a group of thatched
houses--that were gathered the bards and those skilled in song, those in
whose memories were stored the mythologies, traditions, genealogies,
proverbial wisdom, and poetry that, warmed by emotion, was the stuff
from which was spun the songs of the hula. As fire is produced by
friction, so it was often by the congress of wits rather than by the
flashing of genius that the songs of the hula were evolved.

The composition and criticism of a poetical passage were a matter of
high importance, often requiring many suggestions and much consultation.
If the poem was to be a *mele-inoa*, a name-song to eulogize some royal
or princely scion, it must contain no word of ill-omen. The
fate-compelling power of such a word, once shot from the mouth, was
beyond recall. Like the incantation of the sorcerer, the *kahuna
ánaaná*, it meant death to the eulogized one. If not, it recoiled on the
life of the singer.

The verbal form once settled, it remained only to stereotype it on the
memories of the men and women who constituted the literary court or
conclave. Think not that only thus were poems produced in ancient
Hawaii. The great majority of songs were probably the fruit of solitary
inspiration, in which the bard poured out his heart like a song-bird, or
uttered his lone vision as a seer. The method of poem production in
conclave may be termed the official method. It was often done at the
command of an alii. So much for the fabrication, the weaving, of a song.

If the composition was intended as a eulogy, it was cantillated
ceremoniously before the one it honored, if in anticipation of a prince
yet unborn, it was daily recited before the mother until the hour of
tier delivery; and this cantillation published it abroad. If the song
was for production in the hula, it lay warm in the mind of the kumu, the
master and teacher of the hula, until such time as he had organized his
company.

The court of the alii was a vortex that drew in not only the bards and
men of lore, but the gay and fashionable rout of pleasure-seekers, the
young men and women of shapely form and gracious presence, the sons and
daughters of the king's henchmen and favorites; among

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

them, perhaps, the offspring of the king's morganatic alliances and
amour--the flower and pick of Hawaii's youth. From these the kumu
selected those most fitted by beauty and grace of form, as well as
quickness of wit and liveliness of imagination, to take part in the
hula.

The performers in the hula were divided into two classes, the
*olapa*--agile ones-and the *ho’o-paa*--steadfast ones. The rôle of
olapa, as was fitting, was assigned to the young men and young women who
could best illustrate in their persons the grace and beauty of the human
form. It was theirs, sometimes while singing, to move and pose and
gesture in the dance; sometimes also to punctuate their song and action
with the lighter instruments of music. The rôle of ho’o-paa, on the
other hand, was given to men and women of greater experience and of more
maturity. They handled the heavier instruments and played their parts
mostly while sitting or kneeling, marking the time with their
instrumentation. They also lent their voices to swell the chorus or
utter the refrain of certain songs, sometimes taking the lead in the
song or bearing its whole burden, while the light-footed olapa gave
themselves entirely to the dance. The part of the ho’o-paa was indeed
the heavier, the more exacting duty.

Such was the personnel of a hula troupe when first gathered by the
hula-master for training and drill in the halau, now become a school for
the hula. Among the pupils the kumu was sure to find some old hands at
the business, whose presence, like that of veterans in a squad of
recruits, was a leaven to inspire the whole company with due respect for
the spirit and traditions of the historic institution and to breed in
the members the patience necessary to bring them to the highest
proficiency.

The instruction of the kumu, as we are informed, took a wide range. It
dealt in elaborate detail on such matters as accent, inflection, and all
that concerns utterance and vocalization. It naturally paid great
attention to gesture and pose, attitude and bodily action. That it
included comment on the meaning that lay back of the words may be
gravely doubted. The average hula dancer of modern times shows great
ignorance of the mele he recites, and this is true even of the
kumu-hula. His work too often is largely perfunctory, a matter of sound
and form, without appeal to the intellect.

It would not be legitimate, however, to conclude from this that
ignorance of the meaning was the rule in old times; those were the days
when the nation's traditional songs, myths, and lore formed the
equipment of every alert and receptive mind, chief or commoner. There
was no printed page to while away the hours of idleness. The library was
stored in one's memory. The language of the mele, which now has become
antiquated, then was familiar speech. For a

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

kumu-hula to have given instruction in the meaning of a song would have
been a superfluity, as if one at the present day were to inform a group
of well-educated actors and actresses who was Pompey or Julius Cæsar.

"Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you, trippingly on
the tongue." Hamlet's words to the players were, it may be supposed, the
substance of the kumu's instructions to the pupils in his halau.

The organization of a hula company was largely democratic. The kumu--in
modern sense, the teacher--was the leader and conductor, responsible for
the training and discipline of the company. He was the business manager
of the enterprise; the priest, *kahuna*, the leader in the religious
exercises, the one who interpreted the will of heaven, especially of the
gods whose favor determined success. He might be called to his position
by the choice of the company, appointed by the command of the alii who
promoted the enterprise, or self-elected in case the enterprise was his
own. He had under him a *kokua kumu*, a deputy, who took charge during
his absence.

The *po’o-puaa* was an officer chosen by the pupils to be their special
agent and mouthpiece. He saw to the execution of the kumu's judgments
and commands, collected the fines, and exacted the penalties imposed by
the kumu. It fell to him to convey to the altar the presents of
garlands, awa, and the like that were contributed to the halau.

The *paepae*, also chosen by the pupils, subject to confirmation by the
kumu, acted as an assistant of the po’o-puaa. During the construction of
the kuahu the po’o-puaa stood to the right, the paepae at his left. They
were in a general sense guardians of the kuahu.

The *ho’o-ulu* was the guard stationed at the door. He sprinkled with
sea-water mixed with turmeric everyone who entered the halau. He also
acted as sergeant-at-arms to keep order and remove anyone who made a
disturbance. It was his duty each day to place a fresh bowl of awa on
the altar of the goddess (*hanai kuahu*), literally to feed the altar.

In addition to these officials, a hula company naturally required the
services of a miscellaneous retinue of stewards, cooks, fishermen,
hewers of wood, and drawers of water.

### RULES OF CONDUCT AND TABUS

Without a body of rules, a strict penal code, and a firm hand to hold in
check the hot bloods of both sexes, it would have been impossible to
keep order and to accomplish the business purpose of the organization.
The explosive force of passion would have made the gathering a signal
for the breaking loose of pandemonium. That it did not always so result
is a compliment alike to the self-restraint of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the people and to the sway that artistic ideals held over their minds,
but, above all, to a peculiar system of discipline wisely adapted to the
necessities of human nature. It does not seem likely that a Thespian
band of our own race would have held their passions under equal check if
surrounded by the same temptations and given the same opportunities as
these Polynesians. It may well be doubted if the bare authority of the
kumu would have sufficed to maintain discipline and to keep order, had
it not been reenforced by the dread powers of the spirit world in the
shape of the *tabu*.

The awful grasp of this law, this repressive force, the tabu, held fast
the student from the moment of his entrance into the halau. It denied
this pleasure, shut off that innocent indulgence, curtailed liberty in
this direction and in that. The tabu waved before his imagination like a
flaming sword, barring approach to the Eden of his strongest propensity.

The rules and discipline of the halau, the school for the hula, from our
point of view, were a mixture of shrewd common sense and whimsical
superstition. Under the head of tabus certain articles of food were
denied; for instance, the sugar-cane--*ko*--was forbidden. The reason
assigned was that if one indulged in it his work as a practitioner would
amount to nothing; in the language of the kumu, *aohe e ko ana kana mau
hana*, his work will be a failure. The argument turned on the double
meaning of the word *ko*, the first meaning being sugar cane, the
second, accomplishment. The Hawaiians were much impressed by such
whimsical nominalisms. Yet there is a backing of good sense to the rule.
Anyone who has chewed the sweet stalk can testify that for some time
thereafter his voice is rough, ill-fitted for singing or elocution.

The strictest propriety and decorum were exacted of the pupils; there
must be no license whatever. Even married people during the weeks
preceding graduation must observe abstinence toward their partners. The
whole power of one's being must be devoted to the pursuit of art.

The rules demanded also the most punctilious personal cleanliness. Above
all things, one must avoid contact with a corpse. Such defilement barred
one from entrance to the halau until ceremonial cleansing had been
performed. The offender must bathe in the ocean; the kumu then aspersed
him with holy water, uttered a prayer, ordered a penalty, an offering to
the kuahu, and declared the offender clean. This done, he was again
received into fellowship at the halau.

The ordinary penalty for a breach of ceremony or an offense against
sexual morality was the offering of a baked porkling with awa. Since the
introduction of money the penalty has generally been reckoned on a
commercial basis; a money fine is imposed. The offering of pork and awa
is retained as a concession to tradition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V.--Ceremonies of Graduation; Début of a Hula Dancer](ulh09)
