[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odpr09)  [Next](odpr11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040450518X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Origins of the Druze People and Religion*, by Philip K. Hitti,
\[1924\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### CHAPTER VI

### DOGMAS AND PRECEPTS

#### I. TRANSMIGRATION OF SOULS

The Druze belief in metempsychosis is very popular and strong and, in
contrast to their other beliefs, is professed openly by the believers.
The writer's impression of stories told him by schoolmates in the
Lebanon regarding newly-born children who made utterances involving
memories of former incarnations is still vivid and clear in his mind. A
story that found great circulation in the local press of Syria in the
last few months relates how a Druze leader in one of the recent raids
against the French stood on a bridge at Wādi-al-Taym and declared to his
men that some fifty years ago he was killed on that same spot where he
was this time leading his men. <span id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150)

*Method of Operation:*—According to the learned Druze doctrine, the
principle of transmigration of souls operates only from one human body
to another. All souls were created at once from the "light of Ḥamzah"
and their actual number is "neither increased by births nor decreased by
deaths." <span id="fr_151"></span>[2](#fn_151) The ignorant among them,
however, hold popular beliefs involving reincarnation in animal forms,
and that probably explains the erroneous statements made by many
writers, including the statement in the *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, <span
id="fr_152"></span>[3](#fn_152) to the effect that they believe that the
wicked return in bodies of dogs.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

In his epistle refuting the arguments of the Nuṣayri, <span
id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153) Ḥamzah utterly rejects the doctrine of
transmigration, stating that "if anyone believes in it as the
Nuṣayriyyah do, he loses both this and the next world." The Druze
catechism, formulated long after the days of Bahā’-al-Dīn and Ḥamzah,
teaches that the infidels and apostates are metamorphosed into dogs and
swine <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_154) as well as menial servants.

Earlier Moslem Sects Believing in Transmigration:—That the Druzes had
within the fold of Islam various precursors in the doctrine of
metempsychosis is demonstrated by the fact that al-Baghdādi <span
id="fr_155"></span>[3](#fn_155) and ibn-al-Jawzi <span
id="fr_156"></span>[4](#fn_156) each devote a whole chapter to *Aṣḥāb
al-Tanāsukh*, i.e., the believers in transmigration. Ibn-Ḥazm, <span
id="fr_157"></span>[5](#fn_157) al-Shahrastāni, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[6](#fn_158) and al-Maqrīzi <span
id="fr_159"></span>[7](#fn_159) have many references to such sects,
chief among which stood al-Kaysāniyyah, and al-Ḥā’iṭiyyah. Stories
intended to show the amusing possibilities of return in form of animals
are recorded in various books of Arabic literature.

One of the most popular of these stories is that related of al-Sayyid
al-Ḥimyari who believed in transmigration. A certain man came and asked
him for a loan of money promising to repay it on his (debtor's) return
to life. "Well," said al-Sayyid, "but even more than that, you should
offer a guarantee that you will return in the form of a man." "How else
can I return?" asked the would-be debtor. "I am afraid," retorted the
shrewd Sayyid, "that you will return as a dog or pig, and my money will
then be lost!" <span id="fr_160"></span>[8](#fn_160)

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

The Manichaean doctrine of the soul, and of its lot hereafter,
recognized a division of mankind into three classes: Elect, Hearers and
Sinners; the Elect alone being exempt from retribution through rebirth
in some lower form. <span id="fr_161"></span>[1](#fn_161)

When carried to its logical conclusion, as in the case of the Druze
philosophy, the doctrine of transmigration dispenses altogether with the
necessity for paradise and hell and takes the place of a final judgment.
The time of the triumphal "return" of al-Ḥākim and the complete victory
of his Unitarian religion, resulting in awarding high worldly offices to
the faithful and punishing the renegades and unbelievers by assigning
them to hard and menial labor, corresponds to the resurrection day.

Relation to China:—Whether this Moslem belief is of Western Pythagorean
or of Eastern Indian origin is hard to ascertain, with the balance of
evidence in favor of the East. Ibn-al-Jawzi <span
id="fr_162"></span>[2](#fn_162) states that it appeared first "in the
days of the Pharaoh of Moses," which is correct if taken to mean that it
was of ultimate Egyptian origin. Al-Shahrastāni <span
id="fr_163"></span>[3](#fn_163) declares that the Moslem heterodoxies
received this teaching from the Mazdakian Magians, Brahman Indians, the
philosophers, and Mandaeans. <span id="fr_164"></span>[4](#fn_164)

In the case of the Druzes, to whom China seems to be a sort of a heaven,
the eastern source has evidently impressed itself strongly upon the
popular imagination. When a good Druze is dead in the Lebanon, he is
supposed to be reborn in China. The writer remembers hearing more than
once at Druze funerals the chorus of a song which ran as this: "Happy
are the people of China at the hour of your arrival!" (*Niyyāl ahl
al-Ṣīn sa‘at waṣltak*). The Druzes have always been conscious of the
fact

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

that people in the Far East hold the same views regarding the
transmigration of souls. <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_165)

It is interesting to note in this connection that Benjamin of
Tudela <span id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_166) calls the inhabitants of
Khandy (Ceylon) by the same name as the people around Sidon—Druzes. He
was probably impressed by the similarity of belief in transmigration
among the two peoples and concluded that they must have been the same.

#### II. PREDESTINATION AND DISSIMULATION

In the theory of predestination, the Druzes follow in the footsteps of
the Jabriyyah school of Islamic thought as opposed to the
Qadariyyah. <span id="fr_167"></span>[3](#fn_167) The problem of
reconciling the Almightiness of Allah with the free-will of man was the
very first rock over which dogmatic Islam split, these two sects
constituting the earliest dogmatic schism in Islam.

The Koran abounds in passages the interpretation of which favors a
predestination philosophy of life. Sūrah 3, verses 26-27 reads: "Say, O
God, master of the universe, thou bestowest the rule upon whom thou
wilt, and thou takest away the rule from whom thou wilt; thou exaltest
whomsoever thou wilt, and thou humblest whomsoever thou wilt. In thy
hand is all good, for thou art all-powerful. Thou causest the night to
succeed the day, and thou causest the day to succeed the night. Thou
bringest forth the living out of the dead, and thou bringest forth the
dead out of the living. And thou providest sustenance to whom thou wilt,
without measure."

*Shī‘ite Contribution:*—The ethical principle of dissimulation
(*taqiyyah*), practiced to the present day by the Druzes, was a
fundamental tenet of Shī‘ah, to which the partisans of ‘Ali had resort
as a result of the handicaps and persecutions to which they were
subjected by orthodox (Sunni) Islam during both the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Umayyad and
‘Abbāsid periods. The theory is an old one in Islam, based upon the
Koran, 3: 28-29: "Let not the believers choose the infidels for
protectors in preference to other believers. He who doth this bath no
claim upon Allah, unless he doth it in dissimulation (*taqiyyah*) and
for protection. . . Whether ye conceal what is in your breasts, or
whether ye proclaim it, Allah knoweth it, for he knoweth whatever is in
the heavens and whatever is on earth." The Khārijites, antedating the
Shī‘ah, recognized its legitimacy. The Shī‘ite contribution to it
consisted of the point that when a believer is in a place where his
adversaries are in the ascendancy, not only may he profess outwardly the
form of the prevailing religion but he must do so in order to protect
himself and his coreligionists. <span id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_168)

The historical illustration of this principle, as it worked out in the
case of the Druzes, took place in the thirties of the last century when
the Egyptian Ibrāhīm Pasha insisted on enforcing his conscription laws
and many Druzes, in order to evade the draft, began to patronize the
Christian churches of their Maronite neighbors. A few years ago when the
great Druze leader, al-Amīr Muṣṭafa Arislān, who had held many high
governmental positions under the Turks, died, his funeral services were
conducted according to the Sunni Moslem rites.

This principle must have attached itself to more than one of the secret
religions in pre-Islamic days. It has its modern applications in the
case of the Persian and Syrian Bahā’is, the Domneh Jews of Salonika (of
whom the famous Turkish minister Djevīd Bey is supposed to have been
one), and the Stavriote <span id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_169) Greeks of
Asia Minor who after the proclamation of the constitution in 1908 put
off the Moslem garb and reasserted their Christianity which they had
practiced in hiding.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

#### III. THE CULT OF THE CALF

*The Fact:*—Persistent local rumor continues to associate "calf worship"
with the Druze religion, but the Druzes themselves have with equal
persistence and vehemence denied it. No worse curse could even today be
levelled against a Druze in the Lebanon than to call him "calf
worshiper." Certain travelers like Pococke <span
id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_170) gave credence to the report; others
including Volney <span id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_171) rejected it. That
there is jealously guarded and hidden from the uninitiate eye, in one of
their leading places of seclusion (*khalwah*), of which there are about
forty in the Lebanon, <span id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_172) some gold
figure of a calf or bull inside of a silver box has been almost
ascertained beyond doubt. A high Druze sheikh has practically admitted
in a recent interview the existence of such a box. <span
id="fr_173"></span>[4](#fn_173) Paul Casanova reports in the *Revue
archéologique* <span id="fr_174"></span>[5](#fn_174) the discovery of a
baked clay figure of a ram or sheep with the name of al-Ḥakīm inscribed
on it. Passages in the tracts of Ḥamzah <span
id="fr_175"></span>[6](#fn_175) and Bahā’-al-Dīn <span
id="fr_176"></span>[7](#fn_176) referring in a derogatory manner to the
"calf" and the "worshipers of the calf" are not lacking, but one passage
in the epistle entitled *al-Asrār* (Secrets or Mysteries) has clear and
unmistakable reference to "the box in which is the figure of the
incarnation of our Lord." <span id="fr_177"></span>[8](#fn_177)

Its Interpretation:—The question, in view of the secrecy that surrounds
the cult and the ambiguity of some of the references, is one of
interpretation. De Sacy <span id="fr_178"></span>[9](#fn_178) explains
the calf as the emblem of *Iblīs* (devil), the enemy and rival of
al-Ḥākim. Colonel

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Churchill states
that Ḥamzah, indignant at the treachery of his emissary, Darazi,
denounced him as the "calf whom a deluded people had set up as their
idol." <span id="fr_179"></span>[1](#fn_179) Lieut.-Col. Conder
considers it "a relic of older paganism" which they keep in their
solitary meeting places "only to treat with insult and contempt." <span
id="fr_180"></span>[2](#fn_180)

If and when the calf cult is proved in the case of the Druze religion,
some connection will then be sought with earlier cognate Israelitish and
Egyptian cults. Animal worship has greatly figured in Oriental
religions, and Christianity bears traces of its survival.

#### IV. SEVEN PRECEPTS OF HAMZAH

*Eight Dogmas:*—The chief dogmas of Druze belief, which we have hitherto
tried to analyze and trace back to Moslem, Christian, Jewish,
Neo-Platonic and Manichaean ancestry can be summed up under eight main
formulas.

The first dogma is the confession of the unity of God. The second is the
belief in successive manifestations of the deity in human form. The
third is the acceptance of al-Ḥākim as the last and greatest of these
divine incarnations. The fourth is the recognition of the five superior
ministers who partake of the divine essence. The fifth is the
consideration of Ḥamzah, the first minister, as the supreme ruler of the
age (*Wali-al-Zamān*). The sixth is the belief in the philosophic
concept of predestination. The seventh is the belief in the
transmigration of souls. The eighth is the observance of the seven
precepts of Ḥamzah who, on behalf of al-Ḥākim, absolved his followers
from the obligations of Islam and instituted these new precepts for
them.

The obligations of Islam, the so-called "five pillars," are: the
testimony that God is one and that Muḥammad is his apostle, fasting,
prayer, pilgrimage, and almsgiving. No one who does not practice these
five can have any claim on orthodox Islam.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

*Ḥamzah's Precepts:*—The first precept of Ḥamzah enjoins veracity in
speech; the second, protection and mutual aid to the brethren in faith;
the third, renunciation of all forms of former worship and false belief;
the fourth, repudiation of the devil (*Iblīs*) and all forces of evil;
the fifth, confession of the unity of the Ḥākim-God; the sixth,
acquiescence in his acts no matter what they be; and the seventh,
absolute submission and resignation to his divine will in both secret
and public. <span id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_181)

*Sources and Operation:*—The first two precepts enunciated by the
founder of Druzism are ethical in their nature and therefore difficult
to trace back to their origin. The genealogy of the third and fourth is
likewise difficult to ascertain. The fifth is the dogma we treated
before, and the rest are corollaries from that dogma. The operation of
the first precept is, of course, circumscribed by the already
established law of dissimulation.

Of these principles the second has perhaps been the most potent force in
the life and history of the Druze people. It has made of the Druze
community one compact social body, presenting more the aspects of a
religious fraternal order than a sect. This fraternal feature is one of
the distinctive characteristics of the Druze people and has, in a large
measure, contributed to their survival to the present day. It has
enabled them at the time of crisis to act in unison and as one body
moved primarily by motives of self-interest and by the instinct of
self-preservation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_150"></span>[44:1](odpr10.htm#fr_150) *Al-Machriq*
(Beirūt), June, 1926. For another story see I. J. Nakhlah, *Ḥall
al-Rumūz fi Mu‘taqad al-Durūz* (Cairo, 1897), p. 38.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[44:2](odpr10.htm#fr_151) Bahā’-al-Dīn, *Tamyīz
al-Muwaḥḥidīn al-Ṭā’i‘īn*, MS.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[44:3](odpr10.htm#fr_152) Article "Druzes" by
Baron Carra de Vaux. The same mistake is made by William Ewing, *Arab
and Druze at Home* (London, 1907), p. 88. *Cf*. F. J. Bliss, *The
Religions of Modern Syria and Palestine* (New York, 1912), p. 308; and
J. T. Parfit, *Druzes and the Secret Sects of Syria* (Westminster,
1917), p. 26, *Among the Druzes of Lebanon and Bashan* (London, 1917),
pp. 235-236; Ḥanna abi-Rāshid, *Jabal al-Durūz* (Cairo, 1925), p. 44.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[45:1](odpr10.htm#fr_153) *Al-Radd ‘Ala
al-Risālah al-Dāmighah li-al-Fāsiq*, MS.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[45:2](odpr10.htm#fr_154) See the translation
of "A Catechism of the Druze Religion" in *Palestine Exploration Fund
Quarterly* Statement (London, 1886), pp. 39-40.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[45:3](odpr10.htm#fr_155) Ed. Hitti, pp.
164-165. See also al-Baghdādi, *al-Farq bayn al-Firaq* ed. Badr, pp.
253-259.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[45:4](odpr10.htm#fr_156) *Op. cit.*, pp.
85-86.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[45:5](odpr10.htm#fr_157) *Op. cit.*, IV, 182.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[45:6](odpr10.htm#fr_158) *Op. cit.*, II, 12.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[45:7](odpr10.htm#fr_159) *Al-Khiṭaṭ* (Cairo,
1853), II, 347 352, 354.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[45:8](odpr10.htm#fr_160) *Al-Aghāni*, VII, 8;
al-Kutubi, *Fawāt al-Wafayāt* (Cairo, 1866), I, 25. See also al-Jāḥiẓ,
*Kitāb al-Ḥayawān*, VI, 24; ibn-al-Jawzi, p. 86; *Alf Laylah wa-Laylah*
(Catholic Press, Beirūt), I, 41; al-Mā‘arri, "Risālatū’l-Ghufrān,'
*Journal Royal Asiatic Society* (1902), XXXIV, 354-355 and 840.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[46:1](odpr10.htm#fr_161) A. V. Williams
Jackson, "The Doctrine of Metempsychosis in Manichaeism," Journal
American Oriental Society, Sept., 1925, pp. 247 and 268; Burkitt, *op.
cit.*, pp. 63-65.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[46:2](odpr10.htm#fr_162) *Op. cit.*, p. 85.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[46:3](odpr10.htm#fr_163) *Op. cit.*, 11, 12.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[46:4](odpr10.htm#fr_164) *Al-Ṣābi’ah* in
Arabic mentioned in the Koran three times (2: 59, 5: 73, 22: 17) where
with the Jews and Christians they were assured religious tolerance. "The
philosophers" referred to are undoubtedly the Hellenistic philosophers.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[47:1](odpr10.htm#fr_165) Mr. Kisbāny suggests
the possibility that the use of "Ṣīn" in this connection is an esoteric
one of the ancient Babylonian word *sin* for moon.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[47:2](odpr10.htm#fr_166) *Travels* (London,
1848), p. 115.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[47:3](odpr10.htm#fr_167) D. B. Macdonald,
*Muslim Theology*, *op. cit.*, pp. 127-137.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[48:1](odpr10.htm#fr_168) Goldziher, *Le dogme
et la loi*, trans. Félix Arin (Paris, 1920), pp. 169-170. See also
*ZDMG*, *op. cit.*, LX, 213 *seq*.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[48:2](odpr10.htm#fr_169) These
crypto-Christian Greeks are called in the Levant "Mezzo-Mezzos." Leon
Dominian, *Frontiers of Language and Nationality in Europe* (New York,
1917), p. 277.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[49:1](odpr10.htm#fr_170) *A Description of the
East*, *op. cit.*, p. 94.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[49:2](odpr10.htm#fr_171) Volney, *Voyage en
Égypte et en Syrie* (Paris, 1825) (Œuvres, t. II), p. 409.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[49:3](odpr10.htm#fr_172) Article "Durūz,"
*Dā’irat al-Ma‘ārif*, ed. B. Bustāny (Beirūt, 1876-1900).

<span id="fn_173"></span>[49:4](odpr10.htm#fr_173) W. B. Seabrook, "The
Golden Calf of the Druzes," Asia (New York), March, 1926. See also
*Revue de l’Orient*, X, 238.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[49:5](odpr10.htm#fr_174) Year 1891, "Figurine
en terre cuite avec inscription arabe." See also Blochet, *Le
Messianisme*, *op. cit.*, p. 98, n. 1.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[49:6](odpr10.htm#fr_175) Al-Ghāyah
w-al-Naṣīḥah, MS. In *al-Sīrah al-Mustaqīmah*, MS., the statement is
made that in Plato's (*Iflāṭūn*) legislation there was no "calf
worship."

<span id="fn_176"></span>[49:7](odpr10.htm#fr_176) *Risālat al-Wādi*,
MS.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[49:8](odpr10.htm#fr_177) This epistle is
printed in part in Adler, *op. cit.*, p. 136.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[49:9](odpr10.htm#fr_178) Exposé, *op. cit.*,
II, 235.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[50:1](odpr10.htm#fr_179) Charles H. Churchill,
*The Druzes and Maronites under the Turkish Rule* (London, 1862), p. 12.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[50:2](odpr10.htm#fr_180) *The Latin Kingdom of
Jerusalem*, *op. cit.*, p. 234.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[51:1](odpr10.htm#fr_181) These precepts occur
in most of their leading religious tracts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Folklore](odpr11)
