[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odpr16)  [Next](odpr18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040450518X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Origins of the Druze People and Religion*, by Philip K. Hitti,
\[1924\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### APPENDIX F

### EXHORTATIONS AND PRAYERS BY AL-SAYYID ‘ABDULLĀH AL-[TANŪKHI](errata.htm#0) <span id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_219)

#### I

#### EXHORTATION TO THE *‘ĀQIL* <span id="fr_220"></span>[2](#fn_220)

It is incumbent upon the *‘Āqil* that he should direct his energy only
to the next world, preparing for it the provisions of piety, and not
trusting this world which is a world of passage and not of settlement.
He should begin with training his character, sensing its good qualities
and purifying it from whatsoever alienates it from Allah (may he remain
high!), such as bodily passion, greed for worldly possessions, anger,
revenge, ill-temper, pride over others, and self-regard—all of which
stand as a screen between him and the knowledge of his Creator (may he
remain high!). And if he is thus screened from the knowledge of his
Creator, he then becomes a victim to evil habits.

On the other hand, if the worshiper makes his chief ambition and desire
the religion of Allah and the fear of him, holding fast to his
commandments, abiding by his laws and turning his back upon what he has
forbidden, then shall the Lord (may he remain high!) accord him success,
bestow upon him his wisdom, and enlighten his heart rendering it like a
polished mirror in which the divine facts are reflected. For wickedness,
feebleness, evil whisperings and corruption lie dormant in the innermost
part of

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

the souls; and if the light of Unity and gnosis <span
id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_221) should shine upon it, then all
wickedness therein is destroyed, extinguished and exterminated—just as
when the light of the sun shines, the light of the planets is eclipsed
and entirely put out. Although the planets’ light is extinguished in
effect, yet it is in heaven in fact; but so long as the light of the sun
is shining, the planets can produce no effect whatsoever. When the sun
sets, however, then the planets will appear. Such is the case with the
soul. As long as the light of reality and the knowledge of Allah (may he
remain high!) are shining upon it, its darkness and its wickedness are
dormant and have no trace; but in case wisdom and the knowledge of Allah
(may he remain high!), set, then will evil qualities appear and reveal
themselves in the same way as the stars reveal themselves when the sun
sets.

Nothing, therefore, is more incumbent upon the *‘Āqil* than to persevere
in the religion of Allah, to abide by it day and night, and to bend
every effort to keep the company of those who are useful and godly, so
that they may add to his enlightenment. He should also imagine that
Allah (may he remain high!) is with him, watching over him, and not
departing from him for one wink of the eye. At all times should he be
mentioning Allah's name, waiting upon him, and not neglecting him for
one instant. He should fear no blame in the pursuit of truth, but should
rather devote all energy and direct every sound mental power to the
acquisition of the favor of the Lord of mankind, and the following of
the path of right guidance which leads to victory on the last day.

#### II

#### COVENANT BETWEEN ALLAH AND SERVANT.

Said Allah: "O my servant, ten for thee and ten for me:—Be industrious
and I shall give thee aid; demand, and I shall bestow; repent, and I
shall forgive; thank, and I shall increase; depend, and I shall suffice;
strive, and I shall give thee success;

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

beseech, and I shall respond; be content, and I shall enrich thee; ask
and I shall give." <span id="fr_222"></span>[1](#fn_222)

#### III

#### PRAYER

O my God! Here is thy runaway slave returning to thy door, thy
disobedient slave coming back for reconciliation, thy sinning slave
bringing to thee his excuse. Pardon me by thy indulgence, accept me
through thy bounty, and look unto me with thy mercy. O God! Forgive me
my past iniquity, and guard me against committing iniquity in the
remaining days of my life; for in thy hand is all good, and unto us thou
are compassionate and merciful.

#### IV

#### PRAYER TO BE RECITED BEFORE SLEEP

In thy name, my Lord, I lay down my side; and in thy name, I lift it up.
Protect me, O my God, against thy punishment on the day in which thou
gatherest together thy creatures. In thy name, O Lord, I live and I die;
and in thee I seek refuge against the evil of my own self, as well as
against the evil of every creeping creature subject to thy control. Thou
art the first: so before thee there is naught. Thou art the last: so
after thee there is naught. O my Lord! Thou hast made my soul, and thou
protectest it; thine is its death, and thine is its life. If thou,
therefore, causest it to die, wilt thou pardon it; and if thou
permittest it to live, wilt thou preserve it?

O my Lord! I beseech thee for health. I pray thee to awaken me at the
hour that is most agreeable to thee, and to use me in the kind of work
that is most acceptable to thee. Let thy grace draw me nigh unto thy
favor, and alienate me from thy wrath. As I pray thee, grant my request;
as I seek thy pardon, forgive me; and as I call upon thee, answer my
prayer. "In the name of Allah, the merciful, the compassionate."

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

"Allah! There is no god but he, the living, the eternal. Slumber doth
not seize him, nor sleep. His is whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth. Who is he that can intercede with him but by
his own permission? He knoweth what hath been before them and what shall
be after them; yet naught of his knowledge shall they grasp, save what
he willeth. His throne reacheth over the heavens and the earth, and the
upholding of both burdeneth him not—and he is the high, the
great!" <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[71:1](odpr17.htm#fr_219) Al-Sayyid ‘Abdullāh,
the last great commentator of the Druze religion, died in 1480 A.D.; and
his tomb in ‘Abayh, Lebanon, is annually visited by thousands of
believers.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[71:2](odpr17.htm#fr_220) Singular of *‘Uqqāl*
= enlightened, initiated, wise. See *supra*, [p.
42](odpr09.htm#page_42).

<span id="fn_221"></span>[72:1](odpr17.htm#fr_221) Arabic *ma‘rifah* =
knowledge.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[73:1](odpr17.htm#fr_222) This extract and the
following prayers suggest Moslem Ṣūfi origin.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[74:1](odpr17.htm#fr_223) Koran 2: 256.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](odpr18)
