[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odpr13)  [Next](odpr15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/040450518X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Origins of the Druze People and Religion*, by Philip K. Hitti,
\[1924\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

### APPENDIX C

### EXCERPT FROM THE CHARTER FOUND POSTED ON THE WALLS OF THE MOSQUES ON THE OCCASION OF THE DISAPPEARANCE OF OUR LORD AL-IMĀM AL-ḤĀKIM

The friend of Allah, the Commander of the Believers, has at last
abandoned all mortals to themselves wandering in their desert and in
their state of blindness which they had preferred to guidance—just as
Moses had abandoned his people—until perdition came near attacking them
while they were unaware. He made his exit from their midst while they
were in a state of doubt regarding him, disagreeing among themselves and
faltering between different opinions, neither rendering obedience to
truth nor returning to the friend of Allah. Allah has said: "But if they
had referred it to Allah, to his Apostle and to those in authority among
them, it would have become clear to those of them who fail to understand
it." <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_194)

O you people! The word of Allah (may he remain high!) is the most
eloquent preacher, and what is clear from this sermon to you is your
poverty and your need for the pardon of Allah (may he remain high!) and
the pardon of his friend, the Commander of the Believers, upon whom
Allah's peace is more abundant than upon you. Oblivion leads to
negligence, negligence leads to rebellion, and rebellion leads to
perdition. For Allah (may his name remain blessed and high!) has said:
"But if they, having wronged themselves had come to thee asking Allah's
forgiveness, and if the Apostle had asked forgiveness for them, they
would surely have found Allah a forgiving

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

and merciful one." <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195) The greatest of
all sayers \[Allah\] has also said: "Excepting those who shall repent
and believe and do righteous works," <span
id="fr_196"></span>[2](#fn_196) "for verily Allah loveth those who seek
his indulgence and loveth those who wish to purify themselves." <span
id="fr_197"></span>[3](#fn_197) Allah (may he remain blessed and high!)
has moreover said: "And when my worshipers ask thee concerning me,
\[say\] I am nigh unto them, ready to answer the supplication of him
that calleth, when he calleth unto me." <span
id="fr_198"></span>[4](#fn_198)

Hasten, therefore, hasten, O you people! If you stand upon a desolate
tract of land, then your eyes shall be directed towards the first
road <span id="fr_199"></span>[5](#fn_199) which was pursued by the
Commander of the Believers (may Allah's peace be upon him!) when he
disappeared. Assemble there, yourselves and your children, purify your
hearts and make your intentions sincere toward Allah, the Lord of the
universe. Repent before him in a true manner and beseech him by the best
methods of supplication leading to pardon and forgiveness, so that he
may show mercy to you by according you the return of his friend, and may
turn his heart in compassion toward you; for he is mercy unto you and
unto all his creation in accordance with what Allah (may he remain
blessed and high!) has said to his Messenger \[Muḥammad\] (may Allah's
grace be upon him and upon his kin!): "We have not sent thee other than
as mercy unto all creatures." <span id="fr_200"></span>[6](#fn_200)

But beware, beware lest any of you should try to trace the steps of the
Commander of the Believers (may Allah's blessing be upon him!), or
should attempt to discover any information whatsoever! <span
id="fr_201"></span>[7](#fn_201) Cease not at the beginning of the road
to reiterate

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

your prayer: "Behold our dwelling place!" And when the time comes for
mercy to dawn upon you then shall the friend of Allah \[al-Ḥākim\]
appear before you by his own accord, well satisfied with your conduct,
visible in your midst.

Persist in the practice of these exercises, by day and by night, until
the last day arrives, and the hour of judgment strikes, and the door of
mercy is closed, and vengeance befalls all people of disobedience and
disbelief. "He is fully excused who has amply forewarned," <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202) he has nothing to blame upon himself
with regard to your case: he has given you full warning.

This is addressed to the people of intelligence among you; it is they
who are particularly meant by it. It is the will of Allah (may he remain
blessed and high!), and through him all success is achieved.

Peace be upon whomsoever follows guidance, fears the evil results of
impiety, and believes in the excellent words of his Lord!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[61:1](odpr14.htm#fr_194) *Cf*. Koran 4: 85.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[62:1](odpr14.htm#fr_195) Koran 4: 67.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[62:2](odpr14.htm#fr_196) *Ibid*. 25: 70.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[62:3](odpr14.htm#fr_197) *Ibid*. 2: 222.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[62:4](odpr14.htm#fr_198) *Ibid*. 2:18 2.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[62:5](odpr14.htm#fr_199) This is the road
leading outside of Cairo toward al-Muqaṭṭam and which al-Ḥākim followed
when he took his usual evening promenades including the last one
resulting in his disappearance.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[62:6](odpr14.htm#fr_200) Koran 21: 107.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[62:7](odpr14.htm#fr_201) This may indicate
that Ḥamzah, who was probably the one who drew this Charter, had a hand
in the conspiracy that resulted in the murder of al-Ḥakīm.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[63:1](odpr14.htm#fr_202) A common Arabic
saying.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix D. Excerpt From the Epistle Entitled Al-Qusṭanṭīniyyah
Addressed by Bahā’-al-Dīn to the Byzantine Emperor Constantine](odpr15)
