<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to01)  [Next](to03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

# AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

IN revising *Tertium Organum* for the second edition in English my chief
concern has been to coördinate its terminology with the more developed
terminology of those of my books written after the publication of the
second Russian edition of *Tertium Organum*, from which the English
translation was made.

Such a unity of terminology is the more necessary because I am obliged
to lead the reader into regions of thought and knowledge where
boundaries have not been clearly established, and where different
authors—and often one and the same author, in different works and during
different periods of his activity—have called the same thing by
different names, or different things by the same name.

It must be admitted that language is a weak and inadequate vehicle even
for the expression of our usual understanding of things, to say nothing
of those moments when the understanding unexpectedly expands and becomes
deeper, and we see revealed an entire series of facts and relations for
the description of which we have neither words nor expressions. But
quite aside from this, in ordinary conditions of thinking and feeling,
we are frequently at a loss for words, and we use one word at different
times to describe different things.

On the other hand, it is no merit in an author to invent new words, or
to use old words in new meanings which have nothing in common with the
accepted ones—to create, in other words, a special terminology. I have
always considered that it is necessary to write in the language which
men commonly speak, and I have endeavored to do this, although in some
cases it has been necessary to make some additions to and corrections of
that language for the sake of exactness and lucidity.

In due time I shall separately consider the subject of language and the
methods of its adaptation for the transmission of exact thought. For the
present I have reference only to the language of *Tertium Organum*.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

The first word demanding a more careful use is "consciousness."

In conversational language and in every-day psychology, even in
psychology purporting to be scientific, the word *consciousness* is
often used as a term for the designation of a complex of all psychic
functions in general, or for their separate manifestations. At present I
have not access to the necessary books—I abandoned them all in
Petrograd, four years ago—but to the best of my recollection Prof.
William James defined thought as "a moment of consciousness."

From my standpoint, which I shall elucidate in works now being prepared
for the press, it is necessary to regard consciousness as distinct from
the commonly understood psychic functions: thought, feeling and
sensation. Over and above all this, consciousness has several exactly
definable forms or phases, in each one of which thoughts, feelings and
sensations can function, giving in each different results. Thus
consciousness (be it this or something other) is a background upon which
thoughts, feelings and sensations reveal themselves. This background can
be more or less bright. But as thoughts, feelings and sensations have
their own separate life, and can be regarded independently of this
background, so can it be regarded and studied independently of them. For
the present I shall not insist too strongly upon the idea of this
*ground* as something separate in its substance from psychic functions.
The practical result is the same if we say that thoughts, feelings and
sensations may have *a different character*, and that thoughts, feelings
and sensations of this or that character create this or that state of
consciousness. It is important only to establish the fact that thoughts,
feelings and sensations, i.e., psychic functions, are not consciousness,
and that this or that state of consciousness is something pertaining to
them, but separate from them, and in some cases capable of being
separately observed.

In the early editions of *Tertium Organum* I have used the word
consciousness in its generally accepted meaning, i.e., as a complex of
psychic functions, or in the sense of their indication and contents. But
as in my future works it will be necessary for me to use the word
consciousness in its real and true meaning, I have tried in this revised
text of *Tertium Organum* to substitute for the word consciousness
(wherever it is used in the sense of a complex of psychic functions)

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

such other words as psyche, or psychic life, which perfectly express my
meaning in such cases.

Furthermore, in my work of revision, I have found numerous instances of
illustrations, examples, etc., having no direct connection with the main
theme. I have found also that some of these introduced themes vitiate
the correctness of the main line of thought, creating associations which
lead too far away. Other themes also, accidentally touched upon, demand
a considerably more extended treatment than can be given them within the
limits of this book, but being inadequately developed they leave a wrong
impression.

In such cases I consider it necessary to eliminate this extraneous
matter in order to elucidate the principal thought more clearly and
directly, particularly as some of the questions touched upon demanding
more or different exposition are discussed at length in my forth-coming
books.

In conclusion, let me express to Mr. Nicholas Bessaraboff and to Mr.
Claude Bragdon my deep appreciation of their labors on the translation
of my book into English. This translation, made without my knowledge and
participation, at a time when I was cut off by war and revolution from
the civilized world, transmits my thought so exactly that after a very
attentive review of the book I could find only one word to correct. Such
a result could be achieved only because Mr. Bessaraboff and Mr. Bragdon
were not translating words merely, but were grasping directly *the
thoughts* back of them. Also, it is especially pleasant for me to
remember that a number of years ago Mr. Bragdon's *Man the Square*
reached me in Petrograd, and that I, not knowing Mr. Bragdon's other
works at all, selected this little book from a whole series received
from abroad, as one which carried the message of a common thought, a
common understanding.

P. OUSPENSKY

Constantinople,  
  *June 1921*

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction to the English Translation](to03)

</div>
