<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to02)  [Next](to04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# INTRODUCTION TO THE ENGLISH TRANSLATION

IN naming his book *Tertium Organum* Ouspensky reveals at a stroke that
astounding audacity which characterizes his thought throughout—an
audacity which we are accustomed to associate with the Russian mind in
all its phases. Such a title says, in effect: "Here is a book which will
reorganize all knowledge. The *Organon* of Aristotle formulated the laws
under which the subject thinks; the *Novum Organum* of Bacon, the laws
under which the object may be known; but *The Third Canon of Thought*
existed before these two, and ignorance of its laws does not justify
their violation. *Tertium Organum* shall guide and govern human thought
henceforth."

How passing strange, in this era of negative thinking, of timid
philosophizing, does such a challenge sound! And yet it has the echo in
it of something heard before—what but the title of another volume,
Hinton's *A New Era of Thought*?

Ouspensky's *Tertium Organum* and Hinton's *A New Era of Thought*
present substantially the same philosophy (though Hinton's book only
sketchily), arrived at by the same route—mathematics.

Here is food for thought. In the words of Philip Henry Wynne,
"Mathematics possesses the most potent and perfect symbolism the
intellect knows; and this symbolism has offered for generations certain
concepts (of which hyper-dimensionality is only one) whose naming and
envisagement by the human intellect is perhaps its loftiest achievement.
Mathematics presents the highest certitudes known to the intellect, and
is becoming more and more the final arbiter and interpreter in physics,
chemistry and astronomy. Like Aaron's rod it threatens to swallow all
other knowledges as fast as they assume organized form. Mathematics has
already taken possession of great provinces of logic and psychology—will
it embrace ethics, religion and philosophy?"

In *Tertium Organum* mathematics enters and pervades the field of
philosophy; but so adroitly, so silently as it were, that one hardly

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

knows that it is there. It dwells more in Ouspensky's method than in his
matter, because for the most part the mathematical ideas necessary for
an understanding of his thesis are such as any intelligent high school
student can comprehend. The author puts to himself and to the reader
certain questions, propounds certain problems, which have baffled the
human mind for thousands of years—the problems of space, time, motion,
causality, of free will and determination—and he deals with them
according to the mathematical method: that is all. He has sensed the
truth that the problem of mathematics is the problem of the *world
order*, and as such must deal with every aspect of human life.

Mathematics is a terrible word to those whose taste and training have
led them into other fields, so lest the non-mathematical reader should
be turned back at the very threshold, deciding too hastily that the book
is not for him, let me dwell rather on its richly humanistic aspect.

To such as ask no "key to the enigmas of the world," but only some light
to live by, some mitigation of the daily grind, some glimpse of some
more enlightened polity than that which rules the world today, this book
should have an appeal. The author has thrown overboard all the jargon of
all the schools; he uses the language of common sense, and of every day;
his illustrations and figures of speech are homely, taken from the life
of every day. He simply says to the reader, "Come let us reason
together," and leads him away from the haunted jungle of philosophical
systems and metaphysical theories, out into the light of day, there to
contemplate and to endeavor to understand those primal mysteries which
puzzle the mind of a child or of a savage no less than that of the
sophisticated and super-subtle ponderer on the enigmas of the world. Not
that Ouspensky is a trafficker in the obvious—far from it: those who
know most, think most, feel most, will get most out of his book—but a
great sanity pervades his pages, and he never leads away into labyrinths
where guide and follower alike lose their way and fail to come to any
end.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Leaving the average reader out of account for the moment, there are
certain others whom the book should particularly interest—if only in the
way of repulsion.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

First of all come the mathematicians and the theoretical physicists, for
they already, without knowing it, have invaded that "dark backward and
abysm of time" which the Ouspenskian philosophy lights up—and are by way
of losing themselves there.

That is to say, in certain of their calculations, they are employing
four mutually interchangeable coördinates, three of space and one of
time. In other words, they use *time* as though it were a dimension of
space. Ouspensky tells them the reason they are able to do this. Time
*is* the fourth dimension of space imperfectly sensed—apprehended by
consciousness successively, and thereby creating the temporal illusion.

Moreover, mathematicians are perforce concerning themselves with
magnitudes to which the ordinary logic no longer applies. Ouspensky
presents a new logic, or rather, he presents anew an ancient logic—the
logic of intuition—removing at a stroke all of the nightmare aspects,
the preposterous paradoxes of the new mathematics, which by reason of
its extraordinary development has shattered the old logic, as a growing
oak shatters the containing jar.

It is from the philosophic camp, no doubt, that the book will receive
its sharpest criticism, on [account](errata.htm#1) of the author's
lèse-majesté toward so many of the crowned kings of philosophic thought,
and his devastating assault on positivism—that inevitable by-product of
our materialistic way of looking at the world. His attempt to prove the
Kantian problem—the subjectivity of space and time—doubtless will be
acutely challenged, and with some chance of success, because the two
chapters devoted to this are perhaps the least convincing of the book.
But no one heretofore has even attempted to demonstrate absolutely or
successfully to controvert the staggering proposition advanced by Kant
regarding space and time as forms of consciousness.

Whatever the verdict of the philosophical pundits of the day and hour,
whether favorable or otherwise, Ouspensky is sure of a place in the
hierarchy of philosophers, for he has essayed to solve the most profound
problems of human existence by the aid of the binocular vision of the
mathematician and the mystic. Starting from the irreducible minimum of
knowledge, he has carried philosophy into regions not hitherto explored.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

To persons of an artistic or devotional bent the book will be as water
in the desert. These, always at a disadvantage among the purely
practical-minded, by whom they are overwhelmingly out-numbered, will
find in Ouspensky a champion whose weapon is mathematical certitude, the
very thing by which the practical-minded swear. These he puts to rout,
holds up to ridicule, and applauds every effort to escape into the
"world of the wondrous."

But most of all Ouspensky will be loved by all true lovers, for his
chapter on the subject of love. We have had Schopenhauer on love, and
Freud on love, but what dusty answers do they give to the soul of a
lover! Edward Carpenter comes much nearer the mark, but Ouspensky
penetrates to its very center. It is because our loves are so dampened
by our egotisms, our cynicisms and our cowardices that we rot and
smoulder instead of bursting into purifying flame. Just as Goethe's
*Werther*, with its sex-sentimentality, is said to have provoked an
epidemic of suicides, so may *Tertium Organum*—which restores love to
that high heaven from whence descend every beauty and benison—inaugurate
a renascence of love and joy.

From one point of view this is a terrible book: there is a revolution in
it—a revolution of the very poles of thought. Some it will rob of their
dearest illusions, it will cut the very ground from beneath their feet,
it will consign them to the Abyss. It is a great destroyer of
complacency. Yes, this is a dangerous book—but then, life is like that.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

It is beyond the province of this Introduction either to outline the
Ouspenskian philosophy at any length, or to discuss it critically; but
some slight indication of its drift may be of assistance to the reader.

The book might have appropriately been called *A Study of
Consciousness*, for Ouspensky comes early to the conclusion that all
other methods of approach to an understanding of the "enigmas of the
world" are vain. Chapters I to VII, inclusive, deal with the problem of
the world-order by the objective method. The author erects an elaborate
scaffolding for his future edifice, and after it has served its purpose,
throws it down. Aware of the deficiencies

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

of the objective method and having made the reader conscious of them
too, he suddenly alters his system of attack. From chapter VIII onward,
he undertakes the study of the world-order from the standpoint of
subjectivity—of consciousness.

By a method both ingenious and new he correlates the different grades of
consciousness observable in nature—those of vegetable-animal, animal and
man—with the space sense, showing that as consciousness changes and
develops, the sense of space changes and develops too. That is to say,
the dimensionality of the world depends on the development of
consciousness. Man, having reached the third stage in that development,
has a sense of three-dimensional space—and for no other reason.

Ouspensky concludes that nothing except consciousness unfolds, develops,
and as there appears to be no limit to this development, he conceives of
space as the multi-dimensional mirror of consciousness and of time and
motion as illusion—what appears to be time and motion being in reality
only the movement of consciousness upon a higher space.

The problem of superior states of consciousness in which "there shall be
time no longer" is thus directly opened up, and in discussing their
nature and method of attainment, he quotes freely from the rich
literature of mysticism. Instead of attempting to rationalize these
higher states of consciousness, as some authors do, he applies to them
the *logic of intuition*—"*Tertium Organum*"—paradoxical from the
standpoint of ordinary reason, but true in relation to the noumenal
world.

Joseph Conrad and Ford Madox Hueffer once wrote a novel called *The
Inheritors* and by this they meant the people of the fourth dimension.
Though there is small resemblance between Ouspensky's "superman" and
theirs, it is his idea also that those of this world who succeed in
developing higher-dimensional, or "cosmic" consciousness will indeed
inherit—will control and regulate human affairs by reason of their
superior wisdom and power. In this, and in this alone, dwells the
"salvation" of the world. His superman is the "just man made perfect" of
the Evangelist. The struggle for mastery between the blind and
unconscious forces of materialism on the one hand, and the spiritually
illumined on the other, is already upon us, and all conflicts between
nations, peoples

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

and classes must now be interpreted in terms of this greater warfare
between "two races" of men, in which the superior minority will either
conquer or disappear.

These people of the fourth dimension are in the world but not of it:
their range is far wider than this slum of space. In them dormant
faculties are alert. Like birds of the air, their fitting symbol, they
are at home in realms which others cannot enter, even though already
"there." Nor are these heavenly eagles confined to the narrow prison of
the breast. Their bodies are as tools which they may take up or lay
aside at will. This phenomenal world, which seems so real, is to them as
insubstantial as the image of a landscape in a lake. Such is the
Ouspenskian superman.

The entire book is founded upon a new generalization—new, that is, in
philosophy, but already familiar to mathematicians and
[theoretical](errata.htm#2) physicists. This generalization involves
startling and revolutionary ideas in regard to space, time and motion
far removed from those of Euclidian geometry and classical physics.

Ouspensky handles these new ideas in an absolutely original way, making
them the basis of an entire philosophy of life. To the timid and
purblind this philosophy will be nothing short of terrifying, but to the
clear-eyed and steadfast watcher, shipwrecked on this shoal of time,
these vistas, overflowing with beauty, strangeness, doubt, terror and
divinity, will be more welcome than anything in life.

*Fear not the new generalization*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Ouspensky's clearness of thought is mirrored in a corresponding clarity
of expression. He sometimes repeats the difficult and important passages
in an altered form of words, he uses short sentences and short
paragraphs, and italicizes significant phrases and significant words. He
defines where definition is needed, and suggests collateral trains of
thought with a skill which makes the reader who is intuitive a creator
on his own account. Schopenhauer has said that it is always a sign of
genius to treat difficult matters simply, as it is a sign of dullness to
make simple matters appear recondite. Ouspensky exhibits this order of
genius, and that other,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

mentioned by Schopenhauer, which consists in choosing always the apt
illustration, the illuminating simile.

The translators have tried to be rigidly true to the Russian original,
and they have been at great pains to verify every English quotation so
far as has been possible. It is therefore a source of great
gratification to them that their efforts should have received the
unqualified endorsement of the author himself.

CLAUDE BRAGDON

Rochester, N. Y.  
  *January 31, 1922*

 

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](to04)

</div>
