<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to09)  [Next](to11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

# CHAPTER VII

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">The impossibility of the mathematical definition of dimensions. Why does not mathematics sense dimensions? The entire conditionality of the representation of dimensions by powers. The possibility of representing all powers on a line. Kant and Lobachevsky. The difference between non-Euclidian geometry and metageometry. Where shall we find the explanation of the three-dimensionality of the world, if Kant's ideas are true? Are not the conditions of the three-dimensionality of the world confined to our receptive apparatus, to our psyche?</span> |

</div>

NOW that we have studied those "relations which our space itself bears
within it" we shall return to the questions: *But what in reality do the
dimensions of space represents—and why are there three of them*?

The fact that it is impossible to define *three-dimensionality*
mathematically must appear most strange.

We are little conscious of this, and it seems to us a paradox, because
we speak of the *dimensions* of space, but it remains a fact that
mathematics *does not sense* the dimensions of space.

The question arises, how can such a fine instrument of analysis as
mathematics not feel dimensions, if they represent some real properties
of space?

Speaking of mathematics, it is necessary to recognize first of all, as a
fundamental premise, that *correspondent to each mathematical expression
is always the relation of some realities*.

If there is no such a thing, if it be not true—then there is no
mathematics. This is its principal substance, its principal contents. To
express the correlations of magnitudes is the problem of mathematics.
But these correlations must be between something. Instead of algebraical
a, b and c it must be possible to substitute some reality. This is the
ABC of all mathematics; a, b and c are credit bills; they can be good
ones only if behind them there is a real *something*, and they can be
counterfeited if behind them there is no reality whatever.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

"Dimensions" play here a very strange rôle. If we designate them by the
algebraic symbols a, b and c, they have the character of counterfeit
credit bills. For this a, b and c it is impossible to substitute any
real magnitudes which are capable of expressing the correlations of
dimensions.

Usually dimensions are represented by powers: the first, the second, the
third; that is, if a line is called a, then a square, the sides of which
are equal to this line, is called a<sup>2</sup>, and a cube, the face of
which is equal to this square, is called a<sup>3</sup>.

This among other things gave Hinton the foundation on which he
constructed his theory of *tesseracts*, four-dimensional
solids—a<sup>4</sup>. But this is pure fantasy. First of all, because
the representation of "dimensions" by powers is entirely conditional. It
is possible to represent all powers on a line. For example, take the
segment of a line equal to five millimetres; then a segment equal to
twenty-five millimetres will be the square of it, i.e., a<sup>2</sup>
and a segment of one hundred and twenty-five millimetres will be the
cube—a<sup>3</sup>.

How shall we understand that mathematics does not feel dimensions—that
it is impossible to express mathematically the difference between
dimensions?

It is possible to understand and explain it by one thing only—namely,
that *this difference does not exist*.

We really know that all three dimensions are in substance identical,
that it is possible to regard each of the three dimensions either as
following the sequence, *the first, the second, the third*, or the other
way about. This alone proves that dimensions are not mathematical
magnitudes. All the real properties of a thing can be expressed
mathematically as quantities, i.e., numbers, showing the relation of
these properties to other properties.

But in the matter of dimensions it is as if mathematics sees more than
we do, or farther than we do, *through* some boundaries which arrest us
but not it—and sees that no realities whatever correspond to our
concepts of dimensions.

If the three dimensions *really* corresponded to three powers, then we
should have the right to say that only these three powers refer to
geometry, and that all the other higher powers, beginning with the
fourth, lie beyond geometry.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

But even this is denied us. The representation of dimensions by powers
is perfectly arbitrary.

More accurately, geometry, from the standpoint of mathematics, is an
artificial system for the solving of problems based *on conditional
data*, deduced, probably, from the properties of our psyche.

The system of investigation of "higher space" Hinton calls
*metageometry*, and with metageometry he connects the names of
Lobachevsky, Gauss, and other investigators of non-Euclidian geometry.

We shall now consider in what relation the questions touched upon by us
stand to the theories of these scientists. Hinton deduces his ideas from
Kant and Lobachevsky.

Others, on the contrary, place Kant's ideas in opposition to those of
Lobachevsky. Thus Roberto Bonola, in *Non-Euclidian Geometry*, declares
that Lobachevsky's conception of space is contrary to that of Kant. He
says:

<span class="small">The Kantian doctrine considered space as a
subjective intuition, a necessary presupposition of every experience.
Lobachevsky's doctrine was rather allied to sensualism and the current
empiricism, and compelled geometry to take its place again among the
experienced sciences. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md)</span>

Which of these views is true, and in what relation do Lobachevsky's
ideas stand to our problem? The correct answer to this question is: in
no relation. Non-Euclidian geometry is not *metageometry*, and
non-Euclidian geometry stands in the same relation to metageometry as
Euclidian geometry itself.

The results of non-Euclidian geometry, which have submitted the
fundamental axioms of Euclid to a revaluation, and which have found the
most complete expression in the works of Bolyai, Gauss, and Lobachevsky,
are embraced in the formula:

*The axioms of a given geometry express the properties of a given
space*.

Thus geometry on the plane accepts all three Euclidian axioms, i.e.:

1\. A straight line is the shortest distance between two points.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

2\. Any figure may be transferred into another position without changing
its properties.

3\. Parallel lines do not meet.

(This last axiom is formulated differently by Euclid.)

In geometry on a sphere, or on a concave surface the first two axioms
alone are true, because the meridians which are separated at the equator
meet at the poles.

In geometry on the surface of irregular curvatures only the first axiom
is true—the second, regarding the transference of figures, is impossible
because the figure taken in one part of an irregular surface can change
when transferred into another place. Also, the sum of the angles of a
triangle can be either more or less than two right angles.

Therefore, *axioms* express the difference of properties of various
kinds of surfaces.

A geometrical axiom is a law of given surface.

But what is a surface?

Lobachevsky's merit consists in that he found it necessary to revise the
fundamental concepts of geometry. But he never went so far as to revalue
these concepts from Kant's standpoint. At the same time he is in no
sense contradictory to Kant. *A surface* in the mind of Lobachevsky, as
a [geometrician](errata.htm#12.md), was only a means for the generalization
of certain properties on which this or that geometrical system was
constructed, or the generalization of the properties of certain given
lines. About the reality or the unreality of a surface, he probably
never thought.

Thus on the one hand, Bonola, who ascribed to Lobachevsky views opposite
to Kant, and their nearness to "sensualism" and "current empiricism," is
quite wrong, while on the other hand, it is not impossible to conceive
that Hinton entirely subjectively ascribes to Gauss and Lobachevsky
their inauguration of a new era *in philosophy*.

Non-Euclidian geometry, including that of Lobachevsky, has no relation
to *metageometry* whatever.

Lobachevsky does not go outside of the three-dimensional sphere.

Metageometry regards the three-dimensional sphere *as a section* of
higher space. Among mathematicians, Riemann, who understood the relation
of time to space, was nearest of all to this idea.

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

The point, of three-dimensional space, is a section of a
meta-geometrical line. It is impossible to generalize on any surface
whatever the lines considered in metageometry. Perhaps this last is the
most important for the definition of the difference between geometries
(Euclidian and non-Euclidian and metageometry). It is impossible to
regard metageometrical lines as distances between points in our space,
and it is impossible to represent them as forming any figures in our
space.

The consideration of the possible properties of lines lying out of our
space, the relation of these lines and their angles to the lines,
angles, surfaces and solids of our geometry, forms the subject of
*metageometry*.

The investigators of non-Euclidian geometry could not bring themselves
to reject the consideration of surfaces. There is something almost
tragic in this. See what surfaces Beltrami invented in his
investigations of non-Euclidian geometry—one of his surfaces *resembles
the surface of a ventilator*, another, the inner surface of a funnel.
But he could not decide to reject the surface, to cast it aside once and
for all, to imagine *that the line can be independent of the surface*,
i.e., a series of lines which are parallel or nearly parallel cannot be
generalized on any surface, or even in three-dimensional space.

And because of this, both he and many other geometers, developing
non-Euclidian geometry, could not transcend the three-dimensional world.

Mechanics recognizes the *line in time*, i.e., such a line as it is
impossible by any means to imagine upon the surface, or as the distance
between two points of space. This line is taken into consideration in
the calculations pertaining to machines. But geometry never touched this
line, and dealt *always* with its sections only.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Now it is possible to return to the question: *what is space?* and to
discover if the answer to this question has been found.

The answer would be the exact definition and explanation of the
*three-dimensionality* of space as a property of the world.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

But this is not the answer. The *three-dimensionality* of space as an
objective phenomenon remains just as enigmatical and inconceivable as
before. In relation to three-dimensionality it is necessary:

Either to accept it as *a thing given*, and to add this to the two data
which we established in the beginning.

Or to recognize the fallacy of all objective methods of reasoning, and
return to another method, outlined in the beginning of the book.

Then, on the basis of the two fundamental data, *the world* and
*consciousness*, it is necessary to establish whether three-dimensional
space *is a property of the world, or a property of our knowledge of the
world*.

Beginning with Kant, who affirms that space is a *property of the
receptivity of the world by our consciousness*, I intentionally deviated
far from this idea and regarded space as *a property of the world*.

Along with Hinton, I postulated that our space itself bears within it
the relations which permit us to establish its relations to higher
space, and on the foundation of this postulate I built a whole series of
analogies which somewhat clarified for us the problems of space and time
and their mutual co-relations, but which, as was said, did not explain
anything concerning the principal question of *the causes of the
three-dimensionality of space*.

The method of analogies is, generally speaking, a rather tormenting
thing. With it, you walk in a vicious circle. It helps you to elucidate
certain things, and the relations of certain things, but in substance it
never gives a direct answer to anything. After many and long attempts to
analyze complex problems by the aid of the method of analogies, you feel
the uselessness of all your efforts; you feel that you are walking
alongside of a wall. Thereupon you begin to experience simply a hatred
and aversion for analogies, and you find it necessary to search in the
direct way which leads where you need to go.

The problem of higher dimensions has usually been analyzed by the method
of analogies, and only very lately has science begun to elaborate that
direct method which will be shown later on.

If we desire to go straight, without deviating, we shall keep

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

strictly up to the fundamental propositions of Kant. But if we formulate
Hinton's above-mentioned thought from the point of view of these
propositions, it will be as follows: *We bear within ourselves the
conditions of our space, and therefore within ourselves we shall find
the conditions which will permit us to establish correlations between
our space and higher space*.

In other words, we shall find the conditions of the three-dimensionality
of the world in our psyche, in our receptive apparatus—*and shall find
exactly there the conditions of the possibility of the higher
dimensional world*.

Propounding the problem in this way, we put ourselves upon the direct
path, and we shall receive an answer to our question, what is space and
its three-dimensionality?

How may we approach the solution of this problem?

Plainly, by studying our consciousness and its properties.

We shall free ourselves from all analogies, and shall enter upon the
correct and direct path toward the solution of the fundamental question
about the objectivity or subjectivity of space, if we shall decide to
study the psychical forms by which we perceive the world, and to
discover if there does not exist a correspondence between them and the
three-dimensionality of the world—that is, if the three-dimensional
extension of space, with its properties, does not result from properties
of the psyche which are known to us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[75:1](to10.htm#fr_7.md) Roberto Bonola,
"Non-Euclidian Geometry." The Open Court Publishing Co., Chicago, 1912,
pp. 92, 93.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](to11.md)

</div>
