<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to13)  [Next](to15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

# CHAPTER XI

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Science and the problem of the fourth dimension. The address of Prof. N. A. Oumoff before the Mendeleevskian Convention in 1911—"The Characteristic Traits and Problems of Contemporary Scientific Thought." The new physics. The electro-magnetic theory. The principle of relativity. The works of Einstein and Minkowsky. Simultaneous existence of the past and the future. The Eternal Now. Van Manen's book about occult experiences. The drawing of a four-dimensional figure.</span> |

</div>

SPEAKING generally with regard to the problems propounded in the
foregoing chapters—those of time, space, and the higher dimensions—it is
impossible not to dwell once more upon the relation of science to these
problems. To many persons the relation of "exact science" to these
questions which undoubtedly constitute the most important problem now
engaging human thought appears highly enigmatical.

If it is important why does not science deal with it? And why, on the
contrary, does science repeat the old, contradictory affirmations,
pretending not to know or not to notice an entire series of theories and
hypotheses advanced?

Science should *be the investigation of the unknown*. Why, therefore, is
it not anxious to investigate *this unknown*, which has been in process
of revelation for a long time—which soon will cease to be the unknown?

It is possible to answer this question only by acknowledging that
unfortunately official, academic science is doing but a small part of
what it should be doing in regard to the investigation of the new and
unknown. For the most part, it is only teaching that which has already
become the commonplace of the independent thinker; or still worse, has
already become antiquated and rejected as valueless.

So it is the more pleasant to remark that even in science may sometimes
be discerned an aspiration toward the search of new horizons of thought;
or, to put it differently, not always and not in

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

all the academic routine, with its obligatory repetition of an endless
number of commonplaces, has the love of knowledge and the power of
independent thinking been crowded out.

Although timidly and tentatively, science, through its boldest
[representatives](errata.htm#21), in the last few decades has after all
been touching upon the problems of higher dimensions, and in such cases
has arrived at results almost identical with those propounded in the
preceding chapters.

In December, 1911, the second Mendeleevskian Convention <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) was opened by the address of Prof. N. A.
Oumoff, dedicated to the *problems of time and higher dimensions* under
the title, *The Characteristic Traits and Problems of Contemporary
Natural-Scientific Thought*.

The address of Prof. Oumoff, though not altogether outspoken, was
nevertheless an event of great importance in the history of the
development of exact science, and some time it will doubtless be
recognized as an unusually bold and brilliant attempt to come forward
and proclaim absolutely new ideas which practically renounce all
positivism: and in the very citadel of positivism which the
Mendeleevskian Convention represents.

But inertia and routine of course did their work. Prof. Oumoff's address
was heard along with the other addresses, was printed in the Proceedings
of the Convention, and there rested, without producing at all the
impression of an exploded bomb that it should have produced had the
listeners been more in a position to appreciate its true meaning and
significance, and—more important—had they the desire to do so.

In this diminution of its significance the reserves and limitations
which Prof. Oumoff himself made in his address assisted to a degree, as
did the title, in failing to express its substance and general tendency,
which was to show *that science goes now in a new direction*, and one
which is not in reality—i.e., *that the new direction goes against
science*.

Professor Oumoff died in 1916, and I am unwilling to impose upon him
thoughts which he did not share. I talked with him in January, 1912, and
from our conversation I saw that he was stopping half way, as it were,
between the ideas of the fourth dimension approximating

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

those expressed by me in the first edition of *Tertium Organum* and
those physical theories which still admit *motion* as an independent
fact. What I wish to convey is that Prof. Oumoff, admitting time as
being the fourth dimension of space, did not regard motion as the
illusion of our consciousness, but recognized the reality of motion in
the world, as a fact independent of us and of our psyche.

I speak of this, because later I shall quote extracts from Prof.
Oumoff's paper, choosing generally those places containing the ideas
almost identical with the thoughts expressed in the preceding chapters.

That part of the address which pictures the evolution of modern physics
from the atom to the electron I shall omit, because this seems to me
somewhat artificially united to those ideas upon which I wish to dwell,
and is not inwardly connected with them at all.

From my standpoint it is immaterial whether we make the foundation of
matter the atom or the electron. I believe that at the foundation of
matter lies *illusion*, or, in other words, a form of perception. And
the consistent development of those ideas of higher space which Prof.
Oumoff made the basis of his address leads, in my opinion, to the
negation of *motion*; just as the consistent development of the ideas of
mathematical physics has led to the negation of matter *as substance*.

Having mentioned *electrons*, I may add that there is a method whereby
modern scientific ideas and the data of the psychological method may be
reconciled; namely, by the aid of the very ancient systems of the
*Kabala*, Alchemy and so forth, which establish the foundation of the
material world in four principles or elements, of which the first
two—fire and water—correspond to the positive and negative electrons of
modern physics.

But in such case the electrons must be regarded, not simply as
*electro-magnetic units*, but as principles, i.e., as two opposite
aspects or phases constituting the world.

Prof. Oumoff's address is interesting and remarkable in that he stands
already on the very threshold of metaphysics, and he is perhaps hindered
from entering only by a lingering faith in the value of the positivistic
method, which dies when the new watch-words of science are declared.

<span class="small">The introductory word to our forthcoming labors
\[says Prof. Oumoff\] it will be most proper to dedicate to the
excursions of scientific thought</span>

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

in its [search](errata.htm#22) for the image of the world. The necessity
for scientific research along this path will become clear if we will
turn to the covenants of our high priests of science. These covenants
convey the deep motives of active service to natural science and to men.
It is useful to express them in our time, wherein thought is
preeminently directed to the questions of the organization of life. Let
us remember the *credo* of the natural scientist:

To establish the authority of man over energy, time and space:

To know the architecture of the universe, and in this knowledge to find
a basis of creative foresight. This foresight inspires confidence that
natural science continuing the great and responsible work of creation in
the fields of nature which it has already made its own, will not fail to
enter a new field adapted to the enlarged necessities of mankind.

This new nature has become a vital necessity of personal and public
activity. But its grandeur and power summon the mind as it were to
tranquillity.

The demand for stability in the household and the brevity of the
personal experience in comparison with the evolution of the earth lead
men to faith, and create in them an image of the durability of the
surrounding order of things not for the present only, but for the
future. The pioneers of natural science do not enjoy such a serene point
of view, and to this circumstance the natural sciences are indebted for
their continuous development. I venture to lift the brilliant and
familiar veil and throw open the sanctuaries of scientific thought, now
poised upon the summit of two contrasted contemplations of the world.

The steersman of science shall be ceaselessly vigilant, despite the
felicity of his voyage; above him shall invariably shine the stars by
which he finds his way upon the ocean of the unknown.

At the time in which we are living now the constellations in the skies
of our science have changed, and a new star has flashed out, having no
equal to itself in brightness.

Persistent scientific investigation has expanded the volume of the
knowable to dimensions which could scarcely be imagined only a short
time—fifteen or twenty years—ago. Number remains, as before, the
lawmaker of nature, but, being capable of representation, it has escaped
from that mode of contemplating the world which regarded as possible its
representation by mechanical models.

This augmentation of knowledge gives a sufficient number of images for
the construction of the world, but they destroy its architecture as that
is known to us, and create as it were a new order, extending far, in its
free lines, beyond the limits not only of the old visible world, but
even beyond the fundamental forms of our thinking.

I have now to lead you to the summits from which open the perspectives
that are re-forming the very basis of our understanding of the world.

The ascent to them amid the ruins of classical physics is attended with

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

no small difficulty, and I ask in advance your indulgence and shall
exercise all my efforts to simplify and shorten our path as far as
possible.

Prof. Oumoff proceeds to picture the evolution of form "from the atom to
the electron," from materialistic and mechanistic ideas about the
universe to the electro-magnetic theory.

The axioms of mechanics are only fragments, and their application may be
compared to the judgment concerning the contents of an entire chapter by
means of a single sentence.

Therefore it is not strange that the attempt of the mechanistic
explanation of the properties of the electro-magnetic ether by the aid
of axioms in which these properties were either denied or one-sidedly
predetermined was doomed to failure. . . .

The mechanistic contemplation of the world appeared as one-sided. . . .
In the image of the world, unity was not in evidence. The
electro-magnetic world could not remain as something quite alien,
unrelated to matter. The material mode of contemplating the world, with
its fixed formula, had no sufficient flexibility to bring about
unification through it and its principles. There remained only one way
out—to sacrifice one of the worlds—the material, the mechanistic, or the
electro-magnetic. It was necessary to find sufficient foundations for
decision on the one side or on the other. These were not slow to appear.

The consequent development of physics is a process against matter, which
ended with its expulsion. But along with this negative activity has gone
the creative work of the reformation of electro-magnetic symbolics; it
was forced to become adequate to express the properties of the material
world: its atomic structure, inertia, radiation and absorption of
energy, electromagnetic phenomena. . . .

. . . On the horizon of scientific thought was arising the electronic
theory of matter.

Through electrical corpuscles was opening the connection between matter
and vacuum. . . .

. . . The idea of a special substratum filling the vacuum—ether—became
superfluous.

. . . Light and heat are born by the motion of electrons. They are the
suns of microcosms.

. . . The universe consists of positive and negative corpuscles, bound
by electro-magnetic fields.

Matter disappeared; its variety was replaced by a system of mutually
related electric corpuscles and instead of the accustomed material world
one deeply different—the electro-magnetic world—is envisaging itself to
us....

But the recognition of the electro-magnetic world did not annihilate
many unsolved problems and difficulties, and the necessity for a
generalizing system was felt.

In our difficult ascent we have reached the point \[according to Prof.
Oumoff\] at which the road divides. One stretches horizontally to that
plane

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

which has been pictured, another goes to the high summit which is
already visible, and the grade is not steep.

Let us look about us at the point which we have reached. It is very
dangerous; not one theory only has suffered wreck there. It is the more
dangerous that its subtlety is covered by the mask of simplicity. Its
basis is the experimental attempts which gave a negative answer to the
researches of careful and skilled experimenters.

Prof. Oumoff shows the contradictions which were the outcome of certain
experiments. The necessity to explain these contradictions served as the
incentive to the discovery of the unifying principle: this was the
*principle of relativity*.

The deductions of Lorentz, which were made in 1909, and which in general
had in view electro-optical phenomena only, gave the impetus to the
promulgation by Albert Einstein of a new principle and to its remarkable
generalization by the recently deceased Hermann Minkowsky.

We are approaching the summit of modern physics. It is occupied by the
principle of relativity, the expression of which is so simple that it is
difficult to discern its all-important significance. It asserts that the
laws of phenomena in the system of bodies for the observer who is
connected with it, will be the same, whether this system is at rest, or
is moving uniformly and rectilinearly.

Hence it follows that the observer cannot detect by the aid of the
phenomena which are proceeding in the system of bodies with which he is
connected, whether this system has a uniform translational motion or
not.

Thus we cannot detect from any phenomena proceeding on the earth, its
translational motion in space.

The principle of relativity includes the observing intellect within
itself, which is a circumstance of extraordinary significance. The
intellect is connected with a complex physical instrument—the nervous
system. This principle therefore gives directions concerning things
proceeding in moving bodies, not only in relation to physical and
chemical phenomena, but also in relation to the phenomena of life and
therefore to the quests of man. It is remarkable as an example of a
thesis, founded upon strictly scientific experiment, in a purely
physical region, which erects a bridge between two worlds usually
regarded as quite distinct.

Prof. Oumoff gives examples of the explanation of complex phenomena by
the aid of the principle of relativity.

He shows further how the most enigmatical problems of life are explained
from the standpoint of the electro-magnetic theory and the principle of
relativity, and he comes at last to that which is the most interesting
to us.

*Time is involved in all spatial measurements*. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) *We cannot define the geometrical form of
a solid moving in relation to us; we are always defining* 

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

*its kinematical form. Therefore our spatial measurements are in reality
proceeding not in a three-dimensional manifold, i.e., having three
dimensions, of height, length and width, like this hall; but in a
four-dimensional manifold: the first three dimensions we can represent
by the divisions of a tape-measure upon which are marked feet, yards, or
some other measure of length; the fourth dimension we will represent by
the film of a cinematograph upon which each point corresponds to a new
phase of the world's phenomena. The distances between the points of this
film are measured by a clock going indifferently with this or that
velocity. One observer will measure the distance between two points by a
year—another by a hundred years. The transition from one point to
another of this film corresponds to our concept of the flow of time.
This fourth dimension we will call, therefore, time. The film of a
cinematograph can replace the reel of any tape-measure, and
contrariwise. The ingenious mathematician, Minkowsky, who died too
young, proved that all these four dimensions are equivalent. How shall
we comprehend this? Persons who arrive in St. Petersburg from Moscow
have passed through Tver. They are not at this station (Tver) any
longer, but nevertheless it continues to exist. In the same manner, that
moment of time corresponding to some event which has already passed—the
beginning of life on earth, for example—has not disappeared, it exists
still. It is not outlived by the universe, but only by the earth. The
place of this event is defined by a certain point in the
four-dimensional universe and this point existed, is existing, and will
exist; now through it, through this station passed by the earth, passes
another wanderer. Time does not flow, any more than space flows. It is
we who are flowing, wanderers in a four-dimensional universe. Time is
just the same measurement of space as is length, breadth and height.
Having changed them in the expression of some law of nature we are
returning to the identical law.*

*These new concepts are embodied by Minkowsky in an elegant mathematical
theory; we shall not enter the magnificent temple erected by his genius,
from which proceeds this voice:*

*"In nature all is given: for her the past and future do not exist; she
is the eternal present; she has no limits, either of space or of time.
Changes are proceeding in individuals and correspond to their
displacements upon world-ways in a four-dimensional eternal and
limitless manifold. These concepts in the region of philosophical
thought will produce a revolution considerably greater than that caused
by the displacement of the earth from the centre of the universe by
Copernicus."* From the times of Newton to those of natural science, more
brilliant perspectives have never opened up. Is not the power of natural
science proclaimed in the transition from the undoubted experimental
fact—the impossibility of the absolute motion of the earth—to a problem
of the soul! A contemporary philosopher exclaimed in his confusion,
"beyond truth and falsehood."

When the cult of a new God is born his word is not perfectly understood;
the true meaning only becomes clear after the lapse of time. I

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

think that this is true also as regards the principle of relativity. The
elimination of anthropomorphism from scientific conceptions was of
enormous service to science. On the same path stands the principle of
relativity showing the dependence of our observations on general
conditions of phenomena.

The electro-magnetic theory of the world (and the principle of
relativity) explains only those phenomena the place of which is defined
by that part of the universe which is occupied by matter; the rest of
it, which presents itself to our senses as a vacuum remains as yet
beyond the reach of science. But at the shores of the material world is
changelessly dashing the surf of new energy from that deep ocean empty
for our senses, but not for our reason.

Is not this dualism of matter and vacuum the anthropomorphism of
science, and the last one? Let us put the fundamental question: What
part of the universe is filled by matter? Let us surround our planetary
system with a sphere the radius of which is equal to half of the
distance [from](errata.htm#23) the sun to the nearest stars: the length
of this radius is traversed by a light-ray in one and a half years. The
volume of this sphere let us take as the volume of the world. Let us now
describe, with the sun as a centre, another, lesser sphere with a radius
equal to the distance of our sun to the outermost planet. I admit that
the matter of our world, collected in one place, will not take more than
one-tenth of the volume of the planetary sphere: Ii think that this
figure is considerably exaggerated. After calculations of volume it will
appear that in our world the volume occupied by the matter will be
related to the volume of the vacuum as the figure 1 to the number
represented by the figure 3 with 13 zeros. This relation is equivalent
to the relation of one second to one million years.

According to the calculations of Lord Kelvin, the density of matter
corresponding to such a relation would be less than the density of water
by ten thousand million times, i.e., it would be in an extreme degree of
rarefaction. . . .

Prof. Oumoff gives the example of such a number of balls as correspond
to the number of seconds in one million years. Upon one of these balls
(corresponding to the matter in the universe) is written all that we
know, because all that we know is related to matter. And matter is only
one ball among millions and millions of "balls of vacuum."

This is his conclusion; says he:

Matter represents a highly improbable fact in the universe. This event
came into existence because small probability does not mean
impossibility. But where, and in what manner, are realized more probable
events? Is it not in the domain of radiant energy?

The theory of probability includes the immense part of the universe—the
vacuum—in the world of becoming. We know that radiant energy possesses
the preponderating mass. Among the different phenomena in the world of
inter-crossing rays, out of elements attracting one another are not the
tiny fragments born which by their congregation compose our

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="small">material world? Is not the vacuum the laboratory
matter? The material world corresponds to that limited horizon which is
open to a man who has come out into a field. To his senses life is
teeming only within the limits of this horizon; outside of it for the
senses of man there is only a vacuum.</span>

I do not desire to start a polemic about those thoughts in Prof.
Oumoff's address with which I do not agree. Yet I shall mention and
enumerate the questions which in my opinion are raised by the
incompatibility of certain principles.

The contrast between the *vacuum* and the *material world* sounds almost
naive after the just quoted words of Minkowsky concerning the necessity
of a transfer of attention, on the part of science, from purely physical
problems to questions of consciousness. Moreover I do not see any
fundamental difference between the material, the mechanical, and the
electro-magnetic universe. All this is three-dimensional. In the
electro-magnetic universe there is as yet no true transition to the
fourth dimension. And Prof. Oumoff makes only one clear attempt to bind
the electro-magnetic world with the higher dimensions. He says:

<span class="small">That sheet of paper, written in electro-magnetic
symbols, with which we covered the vacuum, it is possible to regard as
billions of separate superimposed sheets, but of which each one
represents the field of one small electric quantity or charge.</span>

But this is all. The rest is just as three-dimensional as the theory of
atoms and the ether.

"We are present at the funeral of the old physics," says Prof. Oumoff,
and this is true. But the old physics is losing itself and disappears
not in the electro-magnetic theory, but in the idea of a new dimension
of space which up to the present has been called time and *motion*.

Truly, the *new physics* will be that in which there will be no
*motion*, i.e., there will be no dualism of rest and motion, and no
dualism of matter and vacuum.

Understanding the universe as *thought* and *consciousness* we
completely divorce ourselves from the idea of a vacuum. And from this
standpoint is explained *the small probability* of matter to which

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Prof. Oumoff
referred. Matter, i.e., everything finite, is an illusion in an infinite
world. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

Among many attempts at the psychological investigation of the fourth
dimension I shall note one in the book by Johan Van Manen, *Some Occult
Experiences*.

In this book is a remarkable drawing of a four-dimensional figure which
the author "saw" by means of his inner vision. This interesting
experience Van Manen describes in the following way:

When residing and touring in the North of England, several years ago, I
talked and lectured several times on the fourth dimension. One day after
having retired to bed, I lay fully awake, thinking out some problems
connected with this subject. I tried to visualize or think out the shape
of a four-dimensional cube, which I imagined to be the simplest
four-dimensional shape. To my great astonishment I saw plainly before me
first a four-dimensional globe and afterwards a four-dimensional cube,
and learned only then from this object-lesson that the globe is the
simplest body, and not the cube, as the third-dimensional analogy ought
to have told me beforehand. The remarkable thing was that the definite
endeavor to see the one thing made me see the other. I saw the forms as
before me in the air (though the room was dark), and behind the forms I
saw clearly a rift in the curtains through which a glimmer of light
filtered into the room. This was a case in which I can clearly fix the
impression that the objects seen were outside my head. In most of the
other cases I could not say so definitely, as they partake of a dual
character, being almost equally felt as outside and inside the brain.

I forego the attempt to describe the fourth-dimensional cube as to its
form. Mathematical description would be possible, but would at the same
time disintegrate the real impression in its totality. The
fourth-dimensional globe can be better described. It was an ordinary
three-dimensional globe, out of which, on each side, beginning at its
vertical circumference, bent, tapering horns proceeded, <span
id="img_13300"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/13300.jpg) |

which, with a circular bend, united their points above the globe from
which they started. The effect is best indicated by circumscribing the
numeral 8 by a circle. So three circles are formed, the lower one
representing the initial globe, the upper one representing empty space,
and the greater circle [circumbscribing](errata.htm#24) the whole. If it
be now understood that the upper circle does not exist and the lower
(small) circle is identical with the outer (large) circle, the
impression will have been conveyed, at least to some extent.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

I have always been easily able to recall this globe; to recall the cube
is far more difficult, and I have to concentrate to get it back.

I have in a like manner had rare visions of the fifth and
sixth-dimensional figures. At least I have felt *as if* the figures I
saw were fifth- and sixth-dimensional. In these matters the greatest
caution is necessary. I am aware that I have come into contact with
these things as far as the physical brain allows it, without denying
that beyond what the brain has caught there was something further,
*felt* at the time, which was not handed on. the sixth-dimensional
figure I cannot describe. All I remember of it is that it gave me at the
time an impression in *form* of what we might call diversity in unity,
or synthesis in differentiation. The fifth-dimensional vision is best
described, or rather hinted at, by saying that it looked like an Alpine
relief map, with the singularity that all mountain peaks and the whole
landscape represented in the map were *one* mountain, or again in other
words as if all the mountains had one single base. This was the
difference between the fifth and the sixth, that in the fifth the
excrescences were in one sense exteriorized and yet rooted in the same
unit; but in the sixth they were differentiated but not exteriorized;
they were only *in different ways* identical with the same base, which
was their whole.

C. W. Leadbeater on a note to these remarkable pages says:

Striking as this drawing is, its value lies chiefly in its
suggestiveness to those who have once seen that which it represents. One
can hardly hope that it will convey a clear idea of the reality to those
who have never seen it. It is difficult to get an animal to understand a
picture—apparently because he is incapable of grasping the idea that
perspective on a flat surface is intended to represent objects which he
knows only as solid. The average man is in exactly the same position
with regard to any drawing or model which is intended to suggest to him
the idea of the fourth dimension; and so, clever and suggestive as this
is, I; doubt whether it will be of much help to the average reader.

The man who has seen the reality might well be helped by this to bring
into his ordinary life a flash of that higher consciousness; and in that
case he might perhaps be able to supply, in his thought, what must
necessarily be lacking in the physical-plane drawing.

For my part, I may say that the true meaning of Van Manen's "vision" is
difficult even to appreciate with the means at our disposal. After
seeing the drawing in his book I at once felt and understood all that it
means, but I disagree somewhat with the author in the interpretation of
his drawing. He says:

"We may also call the total impression that of a ring. I think

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

it was then that I understood for the first time that so-called
fourth-dimensional sight is sight with reference to a space-conception
arising from the visual perception of density."

This remark though very cautions seems to me dangerous, because it
creates the possibility of the same mistake which stopped Hinton in many
things and which I partly repeated in the first edition of the book *The
Fourth Dimension*. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15) This mistake
consists in the possibility of the construction of some *pseudo fourth
dimension*, which lies in reality completely in three dimensions. In my
opinion there is *very much of motion* in the figure. The entire figure
appears to me *as a moving one*, continuously generating itself, as
though it were at the point of contact of the acute ends, coming from
there and involving back there. But I shall not analyze and comment upon
Van Manen's experience now, leaving it to readers who have had similar
experiences.

So far as Van Manen's descriptions of his observations of the "fifth"
and "sixth" dimensions are concerned, it seems to me that nothing in
them warrants the supposition that they are related to any region
*higher* or *more complex* than the four-dimensional world. In my
opinion all these are just observations of the region of the fourth
dimension. But the similarity to the experience of certain mystics is
very remarkable in them, especially those of Jacob Boehme.
[Moreover](errata.htm#25) the method of *object-lesson* is very
interesting—i.e., those *two images* which Van Manen saw and from the
comparison of which he deduced his conclusions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[125:1](to14.htm#fr_12) A convention of Russian
scientists, named in honor of the famous Russian chemist, Prof.
Mendeleeyeff. *Transl*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[129:1](to14.htm#fr_13) Italicized by me. *P.
Ouspensky*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[133:1](to14.htm#fr_14) The works on Relativity
by Dr. A. Einstein make possible a more thorough acquaintance with the
scientific (physical) treatment of this subject.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[135:1](to14.htm#fr_15) One of P. D. Ouspensky's
books. *Transl*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](to15)

</div>
