<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to19)  [Next](to21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

# CHAPTER XVII

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">A living and rational universe. Different forms and lines of rationality. Animated nature. The souls of stones and the souls of trees. The soul of a forest. The human "I" as a collective rationality. Man as a complex being. "Humanity" as a being. The world's soul. The face of *Mahadeva*. Prof. James on the consciousness of the universe. Fechner's ideas. *Zendavesta*. A living Earth.</span> |

</div>

IF rationality exists in the world, then it must permeate everything,
although manifesting itself variously. We have accustomed ourselves to
ascribe animism and rationality in this or that form to those things
only which we designate as "beings," i.e., to those whom we find
analogous to ourselves in the functions which define ANIMISM in our
eyes.

Inanimate objects and mechanical phenomena are to us lifeless and
irrational.

*But this cannot be so*.

It is only for our limited mind, for our limited power of communion with
other minds, for our limited skill in analogy that rationality and
psychic life in general manifest only in certain classes of living
creatures, alongside of which a long series of dead things and
mechanical phenomena exist.

But if we could not converse among ourselves, if every one of us could
not infer the existence of rationality and of psychic life in another by
analogy with himself, then everyone would consider himself alone to be
alive and animated, and he would relegate all the rest of humankind to
mechanical, "dead" nature.

In other words, we recognize as animated only those beings which have
psychic life accessible to our observation in three-dimensional sections
of the world, i.e., beings whose psyche is analogous to ours. About
other consciousness we do not know and cannot know. All "beings" whose
psychic does not manifest itself in the three-dimensional section of the
world are inaccessible to us. If they contact our life at all, then *we
necessarily regard* their manifestations as those of dead and
unconscious nature. Our power of analogy

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

is limited to *this section*. We cannot think logically outside of the
conditions of the three-dimensional section. Therefore everything that
lives, thinks and feels in a manner not analogous to us must appear dead
and mechanical.

But sometimes we vaguely feel an intense *life* manifesting in the
phenomena of nature, and sense a vivid emotionality the manifestations
of which constitute the phenomena of (to us) inanimate nature. What I
wish to convey is that behind the *phenomena* of visible manifestations
is felt the noumenon of emotion.

In *electrical discharges*, in thunder and lightning, in the rush and
howling of the wind, are seen flashes of the sensuous-nervous
shudderings of some gigantic organism.

A strange individuality which is all their own is sensed in certain
days. There are days brimming with the marvelous and the mystic, days
having each its own individual and unique consciousness, its own
emotions, its own thoughts. One may almost commune with these days. And
they will tell you that they live a long, long time, perhaps eternally,
and that they have known and seen many, many things.

In the processional of the year; in the iridescent leaves of autumn,
with their memory-laden smell; in the first snow, frosting the fields
and communicating a strange freshness and sensitiveness to the air; in
the spring freshets, in the warming sun, in the awakening but still
naked branches through which gleams the turquoise sky; in the white
nights of the north, and in the dark, humid, warm tropical nights
spangled with stars—in all these are the thoughts, the emotions, the
forms, peculiar to itself alone, of some great consciousness; or better,
all this is *the expression* of the emotions, thoughts and forms of
consciousness of a [mysterious](errata.htm#30.md) being—Nature.

There can be nothing dead or mechanical in nature. If in general life
and feeling exist, they must exist in all. Life and rationality make up
the world.

If we consider nature *from our side*, from the side of phenomena, then
it is necessary to say that each thing, each
[phenomenon](errata.htm#31.md), possesses a psyche of its own.

A MOUNTAIN, A TREE, A RIVER, THE FISH WITHIN THE RIVER, DEW AND RAIN,
PLANET, FIRE—each separately must possess a psyche of its own.

If we consider nature *from the other side*, from the side of noumena,

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

then it is necessary to say that each thing and each phenomenon of our
world is a manifestation in our section of a rationality
incomprehensible to us, belonging to another section, the same having
*there* functions incomprehensible to us. In that section of space, one
rationality is such and its function is such that it manifests itself
*here* as *a mountain*, some other manifests as *a tree*, a third as *a
little fish*, and so forth.

The phenomena of our world are very different from one another. If they
are nothing else but manifestations in our section of different rational
beings, then these beings must be *very different* too.

Between *the psyche of a mountain* and *the psyche of a man* there must
be *the same difference* as between a mountain and a man.

We have already admitted the possibility of different existences. We
said that a house exists, and that a man exists, and that an idea exists
also—but they all exist differently. If we pursue this thought, then we
shall discover many kinds of *different existences*.

The fantasy of fairy tales, making all the world animate, ascribes to
mountains, rivers, forests a psychic life similar to that of men. But
this is just as untrue as the complete denial of consciousness to
inanimate nature. Noumena are as distinct and various as phenomena,
which are their manifestation in our three-dimensional sphere.

Each stone, each grain of sand, each planet has its noumenon, consisting
of life and of psyche, binding them into certain wholes incomprehensible
to us.

The *activity of life* of separate units may vary greatly. The degree of
the activity of life can be determined from the standpoint of its power
of reproducing itself. In inorganic, mineral nature, this activity is so
insignificant that units of this nature *accessible to our observation*
do not reproduce themselves, although it may only seem so to us because
of the narrowness of our view in time and space. Perhaps if that view
embraced hundreds of thousands of years and our entire planet
simultaneously, we might then see *the growth* of minerals and metals.

Were we to observe, *from the inside*, one cubic centimeter of the human
body, knowing nothing of the existence of the entire body and of the man
himself, then the phenomena going on in this little cube of flesh would
seem like elemental phenomena in inanimate nature.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

But in any case, *for us* phenomena are divided into living and
mechanical, and visible objects are divided into organic and inorganic.
The latter are partitioned without resistance, remaining as they were
before. It is possible to break a stone in halves, and then there will
be two stones. But if one were to cut a snail in two, then there would
not be two snails. This means that the psyche of the stone is very
simple, primitive—so simple that it may be fractured without change of
state. But a snail consists of living cells. Each living cell is a
complex being, considerably more intricate than that of a stone. The
body of the snail possesses the power to move, to nourish itself, feel
pleasure and pain, seek the first and avoid the last; and most important
of all, it possesses the faculty to multiply, to create new forms
similar to itself, to involve inorganic substance within these forms,
subduing physical laws to its service. The snail is a *complex centre*
of transmutation of some physical energies into others. This centre
possesses a consciousness of its own. It is for this reason that the
snail is indivisible. Its psyche is infinitely higher than that of the
stone. The snail has the *consciousness of form*, i.e., the form of a
snail is conscious of itself, as it were. The form of a stone is not
conscious of itself.

In organic nature where we see life, it is easier to assume the
existence of a psyche. In the snail, a living creature, we already admit
without difficulty a certain kind of psyche. But life belongs not alone
to separate, individual organisms—anything indivisible is a living
being. Each cell in an organism is a living being and it must have a
certain psychic life.

Each combination of cells having a definite function is a living being
also. Another higher combination—the organ—is a living being no less,
and possesses a [psychic](errata.htm#32.md) life of its own.

Indivisibility in our sphere is the sign of a definite function. If a
given phenomenon in our plane is *a manifestation* of that which exists
on another plane, then on our side evidently, indivisibility corresponds
to *individuality* on that other side. Divisibility on our side shows
divisibility on that side. The rationality of the divisible can express
itself in a collective, non-individual reason only.

But even a complete organism is *merely a section* of a certain
magnitude, of what we may call the life of this organism from birth to
death. We may imagine this *life* as a body of four dimensions extended
in time. The three-dimensional physical body is merely

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

a section of the four-dimensional body, *Linga-Sharîra*. The image of
the man which we know, his "personality," is also merely a section of
his true personality, which undoubtedly has its separate psychic life.
Therefore we may assume in man three psychic lives: first, the *psychic
life of the body*, which manifests itself in instincts, and in the
constant work of the body; second, his personality, a complex and
constantly changing I, which we know, and in which we are conscious of
ourselves; third, the consciousness of *all life*—a greater and higher
I. In our state of development these *three* psychic lives know one
another only very imperfectly, communicating under narcosis only, in
trance, in ecstacy, in sleep, in hypnotic and mediumistic states, i.e.,
in other states of consciousness.

In addition to our own psychic lives, with which we are indissolubly
bound, but which we do not know, we are surrounded by various *other
psychic lives* which we do not know either. These lives we often *feel*,
they are composed of our lives. We enter into these lives as their
component parts, just as into our life enter different other lives.
These lives are good or evil spirits, helping us or precipitating evil.
*Family*, clan, nation, race—any aggregate to which we belong (such an
aggregate undoubtedly possesses a life of its own), any group of men
having its separate function and feeling its inner connection and unity,
such as a philosophical school, a "church," a sect, a masonic order, a
society, a party, etc., etc., is undoubtedly a living being possessing a
certain rationality. A nation, a people, is a living being; humanity is
a living being also. This is the *Grand Man*, ADAM KADMON of the
Kabalists. ADAM KADMON is a being living in men, uniting in himself the
lives of all men. Upon this subject, H. P. Blavatsky, in her great work,
*The Secret Doctrine* (Vol. III, p. 146), has this to say:

. . . "It is not the *Adam of dust* (of Chapter II) who is thus made in
the divine image, but the Divine Androgyne (of Chapter I), or Adam
Kadmon."

ADAM KADMON is HUMANITY, or humankind—*Homo Sapiens*—the SPHYNX, i.e.,
"the being with the body of an animal and the face of a superman."

Entering as a component part into different great and little lives man
himself consists of an innumerable number of great and little I's. Many
of the I's living in him do not even know one another, just as men who
live in the same house may not know one another.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

Expressed in terms of this analogy, it may be said that "man" has much
in common with a house filled with inhabitants the most diverse. Or
better, he is like a great ocean liner on which are many transient
passengers, each going to his own place for his own purpose, each
uniting in himself elements the most diverse. And each separate unit in
the population of this steamer orientates himself, involuntarily and
unconsciously regards himself as the very centre of the steamer. This is
a fairly true presentment of a human being.

Perhaps it would be more correct to compare a man with some little
separate place on earth, living a life of its own; with a forest lake,
full of the most diverse life, reflecting the sun and stars, and hiding
in its depths some incomprehensible phantasm, perhaps an undine, or a
water-sprite.

If we abandon analogies and return to facts, so far as these are
accessible to our observation, it then becomes necessary to begin with
several somewhat artificial divisions of the human being. The old
division into body, soul and spirit, has in itself a certain
authenticity, but leads often to confusion, because when such a division
is attempted disagreements immediately arise as to where the body ends
and where the soul begins, where the soul ends and the spirit begins,
and so forth. There are no strict limits at all, nor can there be. In
addition to this, confusion enters in by reason of the *opposition* of
body, soul and spirit, which are recognized in this case as *inimical*
principles. This is entirely erroneous also, because the body is the
expression of the soul, and the soul of the spirit.

The very terms, body, soul and spirit need explanation. The "body" is
the physical body with its (to us)little understood mind; the soul—the
*psyche* studied by scientific psychology—is the reflected activity
which is guided by impressions received from the external world and from
the body. The "spirit" comprises those higher principles which guide, or
under certain conditions may guide, the soul-life.

Thus a human being contains in itself the following three categories.

First: *the body*—the region of instincts, and the inner "instinctive"
consciousnesses of the different organs, parts of the body, and the
entire organism.

Second: *the soul*—consisting of sensations, perceptions, conceptions,
thoughts, emotions and desires.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

Third: *the region of the unknown*—consciousness, will, and the one I,
i.e., those things which in ordinary man are in potentiality only.

Under the usual conditions of the average man the extremely misty focus
of his consciousness is confined to the *psyche* perpetually going from
one object to another.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*I wish to eat.*

*I read a newspaper.*

*I wait for a letter*.

</div>

Only rarely does it touch the regions which give access to the
religious, esthetic and moral emotions, and to the higher intellect,
which expresses itself in abstract thinking, united with the moral and
esthetic sense, i.e., the sense of the necessity of the *co-ordination*
of thought, feeling, word and action.

"In saying "I," a man means, of course, not the total complex of all
these regions, but that which in a given moment is in the focus of his
consciousness. "*I wish*" (or more correctly, simply "wish," because man
very seldom says I wish): these words (or this word), playing the most
important rôle in the life of man, usually refer not at all to every
side of his being simultaneously, but merely to some small and
insignificant facet, which at a given moment holds the focus of
consciousness and subjects to itself all the rest, until it in turn is
forced out by another equally insignificant facet.

In the psyche of man there occurs a continual shifting of view from one
subject to another. Through the focus of receptivity runs a continuous
cinematographical film of feelings and impressions, and each separate
impression defines the I of a given moment.

From this point of view the psyche of man has often been compared to a
dark, sleeping town in the midst of which night-guards with lanterns
slowly move about, each lighting up a little circle around himself. This
is a perfectly true analogy. In each given moment there are several such
unsteadily lighted circles in the focus, and all the rest is enveloped
in darkness.

Each such little lighted circle represents an I, living its own life,

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

sometimes very short. And there is continuous movement, either fast or
slow, moving out into the light more of new and still new objects, or
else old ones from the region of memory, or tormentingly revolving in a
circle of the same fixed ideas.

This continuous motion going on in our psyche, this uninterrupted
running over of the light from one I to another, perhaps explains the
phenomenon of motion in the outer visible world.

We know already by our *intellect*, that there is no such motion. We
know that *everything exists* in infinite spaces of time, nothing is
made, nothing becomes, *all is*. But we do not see everything at once,
and therefore *it seems to us* that everything moves, grows, is
becoming. We do not see everything at once, either in the outer world,
or in the inner world; thence arises the illusion of motion. For
example, as we ride past a house the house turns behind us; but if we
could see it, not with our eyes, not in perspective, but by some sort of
vision, simultaneously from all sides, from below and from above and
from the inside, we should no longer see that illusory motion, but would
see the house entirely immobile, just as it is in reality. Mentally, we
know that the house did not move.

It is just the same with everything else. The motion, growth,
"becoming," which is going on all around us in the world is no more real
than the motion of a house which we are riding by, or the motion of
trees and fields relative to the windows of a rapidly moving railway
car.

Motion goes on inside of us, and it creates the illusion of motion round
about us. The lighted circle runs quickly from one I to another—from one
object, from one idea, from one perception or image to another: within
the focus of consciousness rapidly changing I's succeed one another, a
little of the light of consciousness going over from one I to another.
This is the true motion which alone exists in the world. Should this
motion stop, should all I's simultaneously enter the focus of
receptivity, should the light so expand as to illumine all at once that
which is usually lighted bit by bit and gradually, and could a man grasp
simultaneously by his reason all that ever entered or will enter his
receptivity and all that which is never clearly illumined by thought
(producing its action on the psyche nevertheless)—then would a man
behold himself in the midst of an *immobile universe*, in which there
would exist simultaneously

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

everything that lies usually in the remote depths of memory, in the
past; all that lies at a remote distance from him; all that lies in the
future.

C. H. Hinton very well says, in regard to beings of other sections of
the world:

By the same process by which we know about the existence of other men
around us, we may know of the high intelligences by whom we are
surrounded. We feel them but we do not realize them.

To realize them it will be necessary to develop our power of
[perception](errata.htm#33.md).

The power of seeing with our bodily eye is limited to the
three-dimensional section. But the inner eye is not thus limited; we can
organize our power of seeing in higher space, and we can form
conceptions of realities in this higher space.

And this affords the groundwork for the perception and study of these
other beings than man.

We are, with reference to the higher things of life, like blind and
puzzled children. We know that we are members of one body, limbs of one
vine; but we cannot discern, except by instinct and feeling, what that
body is, what the vine is.

Our problem consists in the diminution of the limitations of our
perception.

Nature consists of many entities toward the apprehension of which we
strive.

For this purpose *new conceptions* have to be formed first, and vast
fields of observation shall be unified under one common law. The real
history of progress *lies in the growth of new conceptions*.

When the new conception is formed it is found to be quite simple and
natural. We ask ourselves what we have gained; and we answer: Nothing;
we have simply removed an obvious limitation.

The question may be put: In what way do we come into contact with these
higher beings at present? And evidently the answer is: *In those ways in
which we tend to form organic unions*—unions in which the activities of
individuals coalesce in a living way.

The coherence of a military empire or of a subjugated population,
presenting no natural nucleus of growth, is not one through which we
should hope to grow into direct contact with our higher destinies. But
in friend-ship, in voluntary associations and above all in the family,
we tend towards our greater life.

Just as, to explore the distant stars of the heavens, a particular
material arrangement is necessary which we call a telescope, so to
explore the nature of the beings who are higher than we, a mental
arrangement is necessary. We must prepare a more extended power of
looking. We

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="small">want a structure developed inside the skull for the
one purpose which an exterior telescope will do for the other.</span>

\_\_\_\_\_\_

This animism of nature takes the most diverse directions. *This tree* is
a living being. The *birch tree* in general—*the species* is a living
being. A birch tree forest is a living being also. A forest in which
there are trees of different kinds, grass, flowers, ants, beetles,
birds, beasts—this is a living being too, living by the life of
everything composing it, thinking and feeling for all of which it
consists.

This idea is very interestingly expressed in the essay of P. Florensky,
*The Humanitarian Roots of Idealism*. (*The Theological Messenger*,
1909, II, p. 288. In Russian.)

<span class="small">Are there many people who regard a forest not merely
as a collective proper noun and rhetorical embodiment, i.e., as a pure
fiction, but as something unique, living? . . . The real unity is a
unity of self-consciousness. . . . Are there many who recognize unity in
a forest, i.e., the living soul of a forest taken as a whole—voodoo,
wood-demon, Old Nick? Do you consent to recognize undines and
water-sprites—those souls of the aquatic element?</span>

The activity of the life of such a composite being as a forest is not
the same as the activity of *different species* of plants and animals,
and the activity of the life of a species is again different from the
life of separate individuals.

Moreover, the diversity of the functions expressed in different
life-activities reveals the differences existing between the psychic
lives of different "organisms." The life-activity of a single leaf of a
birch tree, is of course an infinitely lower form of activity than the
life of *the tree*. The activity of the life of the tree is not such as
the activity of the life of the species, and the life of *the species*
is not such as the life of the forest.

The functions of these four "lives" are entirely different, and their
rationality must be correspondingly different also.

The rationality of a single cell of the human body must be as much lower
in comparison with the rationality of the body—i.e., with the "physical
consciousness of man"—as its life-activity is lower in comparison with
the life-activity of the entire organism.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

Therefore, from a certain standpoint, we may regard the noumenon of a
phenomenon as the soul of that phenomenon, i.e., we may say that the
hidden *soul of a phenomenon* is its noumenon. The concept of *the soul
of a phenomenon* or the *noumenon of a phenomenon* includes within
itself both life and rationality together with their functions in
sections of the world incomprehensible to us; and the manifestation of
those in our sphere constitutes a phenomenon.

The idea of an animistic universe leads inevitably to the idea of a
"World-Soul"—a "Being" whose manifestation is this visible universe.

The idea of the "World-Soul" was very picturesquely understood in the
ancient religions of India. The mystical poem, The *Bhagavad Gitâ* gives
a remarkable presentment of *Mahadeva*, i.e., the great *Deva* whose
life is this world.

Thus Krishna propounded his teaching to his disciples. . . . preparing
them for an apprehension of those high spiritual truths which unfold
before his inner sight in a moment of illumination.

When he spoke of Mahadeva his voice became very deep, and his face was
illuminated by an inner light.

Once Arjuna, in an impulse of boldness, said to him:

Let us see Mahadeva in his divine form. May we behold him?

And then Krishna . . . began to speak of a being who breathes in every
creature, has an hundred-fold and a thousand-fold forms, many-faced,
many-eyed, facing everywhere, and who surpasses everything created by
infinity, who envelops in his body the whole world, things still and
animate. If the radiance of a thousand suns should burst forth suddenly
in the sky, it would not compare with the radiance of that Mighty
Spirit.

When Krishna spoke thus of Mahadeva, a beam of light of such tremendous
force shone in his eyes, that his disciples could not endure the
radiance of that light, and fell at Krishna's feet. From very fear the
hair rose on Arjuna's head, and bowing low he said: Thy words are
terrible, we cannot look upon such a being as Thou evokest before our
eyes. His form makes us tremble. <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

In an interesting book of lectures by Prof. William. James, *A
Pluralistic Universe*, there is a lecture on Fechner, devoted to "a
conscious universe."

<span class="small">Ordinary monistic idealism leaves everything
intermediary out. It recognizes only extremes, as if, after the first
rude face of the phenomenal</span>

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

<span class="small">world in all its particularity, nothing but the
supreme in all its perfection could be found. First, you and I, just as
we are in this room; and the moment we get below that surface, the
unutterable itself! Doesn't this show a singularly indigent imagination?
Isn't this brave universe made on a richer pattern, with room in it for
a long hierarchy of beings? Materialistic science makes it infinitely
richer in terms, with its molecules, and ether, and electrons and what
not. Absolute idealism, thinking of reality only under intellectual
forms, knows not what to do with bodies of any grade, and can make no
use of any psycho-physical analogy or correspondence.</span>

Fechner, from whose writings Prof. James makes copious quotations,
upheld quite a different view-point. Fechner's ideas are so near to
those which have been presented in the previous chapters that we shall
dwell upon them more extensively. I use the words of Prof. James:

The original sin, according to Fechner, of both our popular and
scientific thinking, is our inveterate habit of regarding the spiritual
not as the rule but as an exception in the midst of nature. Instead of
believing our life to be fed at the breasts of the greater life, our
individuality to be sustained by the greater individuality, which must
necessarily have more consciousness and more independence than all that
it brings forth, we habitually treat whatever lies outside of our life
as so much slag and ashes of life only.

Or if we believe in Divine Spirit, we fancy it on the one side as
bodiless, and nature as soulless on the other.

What comfort, or peace, Fechner asks, can come from such a doctrine? The
flowers wither at its breath, the stars turn into stone; our own body
grows unworthy of our spirit and sinks to a tenement for carnal senses
only. The book of nature turns into a volume on mechanics, in which
whatever has life is treated as a sort of anomaly; a great chasm of
separation yawns between us and all that is higher than ourselves; and
God becomes a thinnest of abstractions.

Fechner's great instrument for verifying the daylight view is analogy, .
. .

*Bain defines genius as the power of seeing analogies*.

The number that Fechner could perceive was prodigious; *but he insisted
on the differences as well*. Neglect to make allowance for these, he
said, is the common fallacy in analogical reasoning.

Most of us, for example, reasoning justly that, since all the minds we
know are connected with bodies, therefore God's mind should be connected
with a body, proceed to suppose that that body must be just an animal
body over again, and paint an altogether human picture of God.

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But all that the
analogy comports is *a* body—the particular features of our body are
adaptations to a habitat so different from God's that if God have a
physical body at all, it must be utterly different from ours in
structure.

The vaster orders of mind go with the vaster orders of body. The entire
earth on which we live must have, according to Fechner, its own
collective consciousness. So must each sun, moon, planet; so must the
whole solar system have its own wider consciousness, on which the
consciousness of our earth plays one part. So has the entire starry
system as such its consciousness; and if that starry system be not the
sum of all that *IS*, materially considered, then that whole system,
along with whatever else may be, is the body of that absolutely
totalized consciousness of the universe to which men give the name of
God. Speculatively Fechner is thus a monist in his theology; but there
is room in his universe for every grade of spiritual being between man
and the final all-inclusive God.

The earth-soul he passionately believes in; he treats the earth as our
special human guardian angel; we can pray to the earth as men pray to
their saints.

His most important conclusion is, that the constitution of the world is
identical throughout. In ourselves, visual consciousness goes with our
eyes, tactile consciousness with our skin. But although neither skin nor
eye knows aught of the sensations of the other, they come together and
figure in some sort of relation and combination in the more inclusive
consciousness which each of us names his *self*. Quite similarly, then,
says Fechner, we must suppose that my consciousness of myself and yours
of yourself, although in their immediacy they keep separate and know
nothing of each other, are yet known and used together in a higher
consciousness, that of the human race, say, into which they enter as
constituent parts.

Similarly, the whole human and animal kingdoms come together as
conditions of a consciousness of still wider scope. This combines in the
soul of the earth with the consciousness of the vegetable kingdom, which
in turn contributes its share of experience to that of the whole solar
system, etc.

The supposition of an earth-consciousness meets a strong instinctive
prejudice. All the consciousness we directly know seems told to brains.
But our brain, which primarily serves to correlate our muscular
reactions with the external objects on which we depend, performs a
function which the earth performs in an entirely different way. She has
no proper muscles or limbs of her own, and the only objects external to
her are the other stars. To these her whole mass reacts by most
exquisite alterations in its total gait, and by still more exquisite
vibratory responses in its substance. Her ocean reflects the lights of
heaven as on a mighty mirror, her atmosphere refracts them like a
monstrous lens, the clouds

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

and snow-fields combine them into white, the woods and flowers disperse
them into colors. Polarization, interference, absorption awaken
sensibilities in matter of which our senses are too coarse to take any
note.

For these cosmic relations of hers, then, she no more needs a special
brain than she needs eyes or ears. *Our* brains do indeed unify and
correlate innumerable functions. Our eyes know nothing of sound, our
ears nothing of light, but having brains, we can feel sound and light
together, and compare them . . . . . Must every higher means of
unification between things be a literal brain-fibre? Cannot the
earth-mind know otherwise the contents of our minds together?

In a striking page Fechner relates one of his moments of direct vision
of truth.

"On a certain morning I went out to walk. The fields were green, the
birds sang, the dew glistened, the smoke was rising, here and there a
man appeared, a light as of transfiguration lay on all things. It was
only a little bit of earth; it was only one moment of her existence; and
yet as my look embraced her more and more it seemed to me not only so
beautiful an idea, but so true and clear a fact, that she is an angel—an
angel carrying me along with her into Heaven. . . . I asked myself how
the opinions of men could ever have so spun themselves away from life so
far as to deem the earth only a dry clod . . . But such an experience as
this passes for fantasy. The earth is a globular body, and what more she
may be, one can find in mineralogical cabinets."

The special thought of Fechner's is his belief that the more inclusive
forms of consciousness are in part *constituted* by the more limited
forms. Not that they are the mere sum of the more limited forms. As our
mind is not the bare sum of our sights plus our sounds, plus our pains,
but in adding these terms together it also finds relations among them
and weaves them into schemes and forms and objects of which no one sense
in its separate estate knows anything, so the earth-soul traces
relations between the contents of my mind and the contents of yours of
which neither of our separate minds is conscious. It has schemes, forms,
and objects proportionate to its wider field, which our mental fields
are far too narrow to cognize. By ourselves we are simply out of
relation with each other, for we are both of us there, and *different*
from each other, which is a positive relation. What we are without
knowing, it knows that we are. It is as if the total universe of inner
life had a sort of grain or direction, a sort of valvular structure,
permitting knowledge to flow in one way only, so that the wider might
always have the narrower under observation, but never the narrower the
wider.

Fechner likens our individual persons on the earth unto so many
sense-organs of the earth-soul. We add to its perceptive life. . . . It
absorbs our perceptions into its larger sphere of knowledge, and
combines them with the other data there. The memories and conceptual
relations that have spun themselves round the perceptions of a certain

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

person remain in the larger earth-life as distinct as ever, and form new
relations. . . ."

Fechner's ideas are expounded in his book, *Zendavesta*.

I have made such a lengthy quotation from Prof. James' book in order to
show that the ideas of the animism and of the rationality of the world
are neither new nor paradoxical. It is a natural and logical necessity,
resulting from a broader view of the world than that which we usually
permit ourselves to hold.

*Logically* we must either recognize life and rationality in everything,
in all "dead nature," or deny them completely, even IN OURSELVES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[208:1](to20.htm#fr_27.md) "The Great Initiates,"
by E. Schure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](to21.md)

</div>
