<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to25)  [Next](to27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

# CHAPTER XXIII

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">*Cosmic Consciousness* of Dr. Bucke. The three forms of [consciousness](errata.htm#54) according to Dr. Bucke. Simple consciousness, or the consciousness of animals. Self-consciousness, or the consciousness of men. Dr. Bucke's fundamental error. Cosmic consciousness. In what is it expressed? Sensation, perception, concept, higher MORAL concept—creative intuition. Men of cosmic consciousness. Adam's fall into sin. The knowledge of good and evil. Christ and the salvation of man. Commentary on Dr. Bucke's book. Birth of the new humanity. Two races. SUPERMAN. Table of the four forms of the manifestation of consciousness.</span> |

</div>

VERY many men believe that the fundamental problems of life are
absolutely unsolvable, that humanity will never know why it is striving,
or for what it is striving, for what it suffers, or whither it is bound.
It is regarded as almost indecent even to raise these questions. It is
decreed that we live "so"—that we "simply live" thinking of nothing or
thinking only on that which yields a solution—on the surface at least.
Men have des-paired of finding answers to fundamental questions and so
have left them alone.

Yet at the same time men are not in the least aware of *what really*
created in them such a sense of insolubility and despair. Whence comes
this feeling *that it is better not to think about many things*?

In reality we feel this despair only when we begin to regard man as
something "finite," finished; when we see nothing beyond man, and think
that we already know everything about him. In such form the problem is
truly a desperate one. A cold wind blows on us from all those social
theories promising incalculable welfare on earth, leaving a sense of
dissatisfaction and chill even when we believe their promises.

Why? What is all this for? Well, everybody will be well fed and well
taken care of—Splendid! *But after that, what*?

Let us suppose—although it is difficult, almost impossible to imagine—

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

that materialistic culture, of itself, has led men to a fortunate state
of existence. On earth, then, there exists an unadulterated civilization
and culture. *But after that, what*?

After that, many resounding phrases of "incredible horizons" opening
before *science*. "Communication with the planet Mars," "The chemical
synthesis of protoplasm," "The utilization of the rotation of the earth
around the sun," "Energy imprisoned in an atom," "Vaccine for all
diseases," "*Life to the length of a hundred years*"—or even to one
hundred and fifty! After that perhaps, "The artificial creation of
men"—but beyond this imagination fails.

It is possible to dig through the earth, but that would be
[entirely](errata.htm#55) useless.

Here indeed we encounter that feeling of the insolubility of the main
questions concerning the aims of existence, and that feeling of despair
on account of our lack of understanding.

Truly, suppose that we have dug completely through the earth—what then?
Shall we dig in another direction? But it is all very wearisome after
all. Nevertheless the various positivistic social theories, "historical
materialism," and so forth, promise nothing better, and can promise
nothing. To get any answer at all to such tormenting questions we must
turn in quite another direction: to the psychological method of study of
man and of humanity. And here we see with amazement, that the
psychological method gives an entirely satisfactory answer to those
fundamental questions which seem to us quite insoluble, and around about
which we fruitlessly wander equipped with the defective instrument of
the positivistic method.

The psychological method gives a direct answer at least to the question
of the immediate purpose of our existence. For some strange reason men
do not care to accept this answer; and they desire at all costs to
receive an answer in some form that they like, refusing to recognize
anything that is different from that form. They require the solution of
the destiny of man as they fancy him, and they do not want to recognize
that *man* can and must become entirely different. In him there are not
as yet manifest those faculties which will create his future. Man must
not and cannot remain such as he is now. To think of the future of this
man is just as absurd as to think of the future of a child as

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

if it were always going to remain a child. The analogy is not quite
complete, for the reason that probably only a small part of humanity is
capable of growth, but nevertheless this comparison paints a true
picture of our usual attitude toward this question. And the fate of that
greater part of humanity which will prove incapable of growth, depends
not upon itself, but upon that minority which will progress. Only inner
growth, the unfoldment of new forces, will give to man a correct
understanding of himself, his ways, his future, and give him power to
organize life on earth. At the present time the general concept "man" is
too undifferentiated and includes within himself *entirely different
categories*, those capable of development and those incapable. In men
capable of development, new faculties are stirring into life, though not
as yet manifest, because for their manifestation they require a special
culture, a special education. *The new conception of humanity disposes
of the idea of equality*, which after all does not exist, and it tries
to establish the signs and facts of the differences between men, because
humanity will need soon to divide the "progressing" from the "incapable
of progress"—*the wheat from the tares*, for the tares are growing too
fast, and choke the growth of the wheat.

This is the key to the understanding of our life, and this key was found
long ago!

*The enigma was solved long ago*. But different thinkers, living in
different epochs, finding the solution, expressed it differently, and
often, not knowing one another, trod the same path amid enormous
difficulties, unaware of their predecessors and contemporaries who had
gone and were going along the selfsame path.

In the world's literature there exist books, usually little known, which
accidentally or by design may happen to be assembled on one shelf in one
library. These, taken together, will yield so clear and complete a
picture of human existence, its path and its goal, that there will be no
further doubts about the destiny of humanity (though only its minor
part), but a destiny of *quite a different sort* from those hard labors
of digging through the globe, which positive philosophy, "historical
materialism" and "socialism" have in store for
[humankind](errata.htm#56).

And if it seems to us that we do not as yet know our destiny, if we
still doubt, and do not dare to part with the hopeless "positivistic"
view of life, it is primarily because men of different categories,

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

having quite different futures, are commingled into one in our
perception; and secondarily because the necessary ideas by means of
which we might understand the true relation of forces have not won for
themselves their rightful place in official science—do not represent any
*recognized* division or branch of science; it is rarely possible to
find them all in one book and it is even rarely possible to find books
expressing these ideas assembled together.

We do not understand many things because we too easily and too
arbitrarily specialize. Philosophy, religion, psychology, mathematics,
the natural sciences, sociology, the history of culture, art—each has
its own separate literature. There is no complete whole at all. Even the
little *bridges* between these separate literatures are built very badly
and unsuccessfully, while they are often altogether absent. And this
formation of special literatures is the chief evil and the chief
obstacle to a correct understanding of things. Each "literature"
elaborates its own terminology, its own language, which is
incomprehensible to the students of other literatures, and *does not
coincide* with other languages; by this it defines its own limits the
more sharply, divides itself from others, and makes these limits
impassable.

But there are movements of thought which strive not in words, but in
action, to fight this specialization.

Books are appearing which it is impossible to refer to any accepted
library classification, which it is impossible to "enroll" in any
faculty. These books are the forerunners of a new literature which will
break down all fences built in the region of thought, and will clearly
show to those who desire to know, where they are going and where they
can go.

The names of the authors of these books yield the most unexpected
combinations. I shall not now mention the names of these authors, or the
titles of these books, but shall dwell only upon the writings of Edward
Carpenter and Dr. R. M. Bucke.

Edward Carpenter, directly and without any allegories and symbols,
formulated the thought that the existing consciousness by which
contemporary man lives, is merely the transitory form of another higher
consciousness, which *even now* is manifesting in certain men, after
appropriate preparation and training.

This higher consciousness Edward Carpenter names *cosmic consciousness*.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

Carpenter traveled in the Orient, visited India and Ceylon, and there he
found men, yogis and ascetics, striving to achieve cosmic consciousness,
and he holds the opinion that the path to cosmic consciousness is
already found in the Orient.

In the book, *From Adam's Peak to Elephanta*, he says:

The West seeks the individual consciousness—the enriched mind, ready
perceptions and memories, individual hopes and fears, ambitions, loves,
conquests—the self, the local self, in all its phases and forms—and
sorely doubts whether such a thing as an universal consciousness exists.
The East seeks the universal consciousness, and in these cases where its
quest succeeds individual self and life thin away to a mere film, and
are only the shadows cast by the glory revealed beyond.

The individual consciousness takes the form of *Thought*, which is fluid
and mobile like quicksilver, perpetually in a state of change and
unrest, fraught with pain and effort; the other consciousness is not in
the form of thought. It touches, sees, hears, and is those things which
it perceives, without motion, without change, without effort, without
distinction of subject and object, but with a vast and incredible joy.

The individual consciousness is specially related to the body. The
organs of the body are in some degree its organs. But the *whole* body
is only as one organ of the cosmic consciousness. To attain this latter
one must have the power of knowing one's self separate from the body—of
passing into a state of *ecstasy*, in fact. Without this the cosmic
consciousness cannot be experienced.

All the subsequent writings of Carpenter, and especially his book of
free verse, *Towards Democracy*, deal with the psychology of ecstatic
experiences and portray the path whereby man goes toward this *principal
aim of his existence*, i.e., to a new consciousness.

Only the attainment of this principal aim will illumine for man the past
and the future; it will be a seership, an awakening—without this, with
only the ordinary sleepy, "individual" consciousness, man is blind, and
cannot hope to know anything that he cannot feel with his stick.

Dr. Bucke, in his book, *Cosmic Consciousness*, gives the psychological
view of this awakening of the new consciousness.

I shall give, in abbreviated form, several quotations from his book.

I

<span class="small">What is Cosmic Consciousness?</span>

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

Cosmic Consciousness is a higher form of consciousness than that
possessed by the ordinary man. This last is called Self Consciousness
and is that faculty upon which rests all of our life (both subjective
and objective) which is not common to us and the higher animals, except
that small part of it which is derived from the few individuals who have
had the higher consciousness above named. To make the matter clear it
must be understood that there are three forms or grades of
consciousness. (1) *Simple Consciousness*, which is possessed by, say,
the upper half of the animal kingdom. (2) *Self Consciousness* possessed
by man in addition to the simple consciousness, which is similar in man
and in animals. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) (3) *Cosmic
Consciousness*. By means of simple consciousness a dog or a horse is
just as conscious of the things about him as a man is; he is also
conscious of his own limbs and body and knows that these are a part of
himself. By virtue of self-consciousness man is not only conscious of
trees, rocks, water, his own limbs and body, but he becomes conscious of
himself as a distinct entity apart from all the rest of the universe.

It is as good as certain that no animal can realize himself in that way.
Further, by means of self-consciousness, man becomes capable of treating
his own mental states as objects of consciousness. The animal is, as it
were, immersed in his consciousness as a fish in the sea; he cannot,
even in imagination, get outside of it for one moment so as to realize
it. But man by virtue of self-consciousness can step aside, as it were,
from himself and think: "Yes, that thought that I had about that matter
is true; I know it is true and I, know that I know it is true." There is
no evidence that any animal can think, but if they could we should soon
know it. Between two creatures living together, as dogs or horses and
men, and each self-conscious, it would be the simplest matter in the
world to open up communication. We do, by watching the dog's acts, enter
into his mind pretty freely. If he were self-conscious, we must have
learned it long ago. We have not learned it and it is as good as certain
that no dog, horse, elephant or ape ever was self-conscious. Another
thing: on man's self-consciousness is built everything in and about us
distinctly human. Language is the objective of which self-consciousness
is the subjective, Self-consciousness and language (two in one for they
are two halves of the same thing) are the sine qua non of human social
life, of manners, of institutions, of industries of all kinds, of all
arts useful and fine. If any animal possessed
[self-consciousness](errata.htm#57) it would build a superstructure of
language. . . But no animal has done this, therefore, we infer that no
animal has self-consciousness. The possession of self-consciousness and
language (its other self) by man creates an enormous gap between him and
the highest creature possessing simple consciousness merely.

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

Cosmic Consciousness is a third form, which is as far above Self
Consciousness as is that above Simple Consciousness. The prime
characteristic Cosmic Consciousness is, as its name implies, a
consciousness of the cosmos, that is, of the life and order of the
universe. Along with the consciousness of the cosmos there occurs an
intellectual enlightenment or illumination which alone would place the
individual on a new plane of existence—would make him almost a member of
a new species. To this is added a state of moral exaltation, an
indescribable feeling of elevation, elation and joyousness, and a
quickening of the moral sense, which is fully as striking and more
important both to the individual and to the race than is the enhanced
intellectual power. With these come what may be called a sense of
immortality, a consciousness of eternal life, not a conviction that he
shall have this, but the consciousness that he has it already.

Only a personal experience of it, or a prolonged study of men who have
passed into the new life, will enable us to realize what this actually
is. The writer expects his work to be useful in two ways: first, in
broadening the general view of human life by comprehending in our mental
vision this important phase of it, then by enabling us to realize, in
some measure, the true status of certain men who, down to the present,
are either exalted to the ranks of gods or are adjudged insane. The
writer takes the view that our descendants will sooner or later reach,
as a race, the condition of cosmic consciousness, just as long ago, our
ancestors passed from simple to self-consciousness. He believes that
this step in evolution is even now being made, since it is clear to him
both that men with the faculty in question are becoming more and more
common and also that as a race we are approaching nearer and nearer to
that stage of the self-conscious mind from which the transition to the
cosmic conscious is effected. He knows that intelligent contact with
cosmic conscious minds assists self-conscious individuals in the ascent
to the higher plane.

II

The immediate future of our race \[the writer thinks\] is indescribably
hopeful. There are at the present moment impending over us three
revolutions, the least of which would dwarf the ordinary historic
upheaval called by that name into absolute insignificance. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49) They are: (1) the material, economic and
social revolution which will depend upon and result from the
establishment of aerial navigation. (2) The economic and social
revolution which will abolish individual ownership and rid the earth at
once of two immense evils—riches and poverty. And (3) The psychical
revolution of which there is here question.

Either of the first two would (and will) radically change the conditions
of, and greatly uplift, human life; but the third will do more for
humanity

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

than both of the former, were their importance multiplied by hundreds or
even thousands.

The three operating (as they will) together will literally create a new
heaven and a new earth. Old things will be done away and all will become
new.

Before aerial navigation national boundaries, tariffs and perhaps
distinctions of language will fade out. Great cities will no longer have
reason for being and will melt away. The men who now dwell in cities
will inhabit in summer the mountains and the seashores; building often
in airy and beautiful spots, now almost or quite inaccessible,
commanding the most extensive and magnificent views. In the winter they
will probably dwell in communities of moderate size. As herding
together, as now, in great cities, so the isolation of the worker of the
soil will become a thing of the past. Space will be practically
annihilated, there will be no crowding together and no enforced
solitude.

Before socialism crushing toil, cruel anxiety, insulting and
demoralizing riches, poverty and its ills will become subjects for
historical novels. <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50)

\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span class="small">In contact with the flux of cosmic consciousness all
religions known and named today will be melted down. The human soul will
be revolutionized. Religion will absolutely dominate the race. It will
not depend on traditions. It will not be believed and disbelieved. It
will be part of life, not belonging to certain hours, times, occasions.
It will not be in sacred books, nor in the mouths of priests. It will
not dwell in churches and meetings and forms and days. Its life will not
be in prayers, hymns nor discourses. It will not depend on special
revelations, on the words of gods who came down to teach, nor on any
bible or bibles. It will have no mission to save men from their sins or
to secure their entrance to heaven. It will not teach a future
immortality nor future glories, for immortality and all glory will exist
in the here and now. The evidence of immortality will live in every
heart as sight in every eye. Doubt of God and of eternal life will be as
impossible as is now doubt of existence; the evidence of each will be
the same. Religion will govern every minute of every day of all life.
Churches, priests, forms, creeds, prayers, all agents, all
intermediaries between the individual man and God will be permanently
replaced by direct unmistakable intercourse. Sin will no longer exist
nor will salvation be desired. Men will not worry about death or a
future, about the kingdom of heaven, about what may come with and after
the cessation of the life of the present body. Each soul will feel and
know itself to be immortal, will feel and know that the entire universe
with all its good and with all its beauty is for it and belongs to it
forever. The world peopled by men possessing cosmic consciousness will
be as far removed from the world</span>

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<span class="small">of today as this is from the world as it was before
the advent of self-consciousness.</span>

III

There is a tradition, probably very old, to the effect that the first
man was innocent and happy until he ate of the fruit of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. That having eaten thereof he became aware
that he was naked and was ashamed. Further, that there sin was born into
the world, the miserable sense whereof replaced man's former feeling of
innocency; that then and not till then man began to labor and to cover
his body. Stranger than all, the story runs, that along with this change
or immediately following upon it there came into man's mind the
remarkable conviction which has never since left it, but which has been
kept alive by its own inherent vitality and by the teaching of all true
seers, prophets and poets that man will be saved by the rising up within
him of a Savior—the Christ.

Man's progenitor was a creature with simple consciousness merely. He was
(as are today the animals) incapable of sin and equally incapable of
shame (at least in the human sense). He had no feeling or knowledge of
good and evil. He as yet knew nothing of what we call work and had never
labored. From this state he fell (or rose) into self-consciousness, his
eyes were opened, he knew he was naked, he felt shame, acquired the
sense of sin (became in fact what is called a sinner) and learned to do
certain things in order to encompass certain ends—that is, he learned to
labor.

For weary aeons this condition has lasted—the sense of sin still haunts
his pathway—by the sweat of his brow he still eats bread—he is still
ashamed. Where is the deliverer, the Savior? Who or what?

The Savior of man is Cosmic Consciousness—in Paul's language, the
Christ. The cosmic sense (in whatever mind it appears) crushes the
serpent's head—destroys sin, shame, the sense of good and evil, as
contrasted one with the other, and will annihilate labor, though not
human activity.

IV

A personal exposition of the writer's own experience of cosmic
consciousness may help the reader to understand the meaning of the
following facts:

In childhood he was subject at times to a sort of ecstasy of curiosity
and hope. As on one special occasion when about ten years old he
earnestly longed to die that the secrets of the beyond, if there were
any beyond, might be revealed to him. . . .

At the age of thirty he fell in with "Leaves of Grass," and at once saw
that it contained, in greater measure than any book so far found, what
he had so long been looking for. He read the "Leaves" eagerly, even
passionately, but for several years derived little from them. At last
light broke and there was revealed to him (as far perhaps as such things
can be revealed)

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

at least some of the meanings. Then occurred that to which the foregoing
is the preface.

It was in the early spring, at the beginning of his thirty-sixth year.
He and two friends had spent the evening reading Wordsworth, Shelley,
Keats, Browning, and especially Whitman. They parted at midnight and he
had a long drive in a hansom (it was in an English city). His mind,
deeply under the influence of the ideas, images and emotions called up
by the reading and talk of the evening, was calm and peaceful. He was in
a state of quiet, almost passive enjoyment. All at once, without warning
of any kind, he found himself wrapped around as it were by a
flame-colored cloud. For an instant he thought of fire, some sudden
conflagration in the great city; the next he knew the light was within
himself. Directly afterwards came upon him a sense of exultation, of
immense joyousness accompanied or immediately followed by an
intellectual illumination quite impossible to describe. Into his brain
streamed one momentary lightning-flash of the Brahmic splendor which has
ever since lightened his life; upon his heart fell one drop of Brahmic
Bliss, leaving thenceforward for always an after taste of heaven. Among
other things he did not come to believe, he saw and knew that the cosmos
is not dead matter but a living Presence, that the soul of man is
immortal, that the universe is so built and ordered that without
peradventure all things work together for the good of each and all, that
the foundation principle of the world is what we call love and that the
happiness of everyone in the long run is absolutely certain. He claims
he learned more within the few seconds during which the illumination
lasted than in previous months or even years of study and that he
learned much that no study could ever have taught.

The illumination itself continued not more than a few moments, but its
effects proved ineffaceable; it was impossible for him ever to forget
what he at that time saw and knew; neither did he, nor could he, ever
doubt the truth of what was then presented to his mind. There was no
return that night or at any other time of the experience.

The supreme occurrence of that night was his real and sole initiation to
the new and higher order of ideas. But it was only an initiation. He saw
the light but had no more idea whence it came and what it meant than had
the first creature that saw the light of the sun. Years afterwards he
met a man who had had a large experience in the higher life. His
conversations with this man threw a flood of light upon the meaning of
what he had himself experienced.

Looking round then upon the world of man, he saw the significance of the
subjective light in the case of Paul and in that of Mohammed. The secret
of Whitman's transcendent greatness was revealed to him. Personal
intercourse and conversations with men, <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) who had similar experiences assisted
greatly in the broadening and clearing up of his speculations.

After spending much time and labor in thinking he came to the conclusion

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

that there exists a family sprung from, living among, but scarcely
forming a part of ordinary humanity, whose members are spread abroad
throughout the advanced races of mankind and throughout the last forty
centuries of the world's history.

The trait that distinguishes these people from other men is this: Their
spiritual eyes have been opened and they have seen. The better known
members of this group who, if they were collected together, could be
accommodated all at one time in a modern drawing-room, have created all
the great modern religions, beginning with Taoism and Buddhism, and
speaking generally, have created, through religion and literature,
modern civilization. Not that they have contributed any large numerical
proportion of the books which have been written, but that they have
produced the few books which have inspired the larger number of all that
have been written in modern times. These men dominate the last
twenty-five, especially the last five centuries as stars of the first
magnitude dominate the midnight sky.

V

It remains to say a few words upon the psychological origin of what is
called in this book Cosmic Consciousness.

Although in the birth of Cosmic Consciousness the moral nature plays an
important part, it will be better for many reasons to confine our
attention at present to the evolution of the intellect. In this
evolution there are four distinct steps. The first of them was taken
when upon the primary quality of excitability sensation was established.
At this point began the acquisition and more or less perfect
registration of sense impressions—that is, of percepts. A percept is of
course a sense impression. If we could go back far enough we should find
among our ancestors a creature whose whole intellect was made up simply
of these percepts. But this creature had in it what may be called an
eligibility of growth, and what happened with it was something like
this: Individually and from generation to generation it accumulated
these percepts, the constant repetition of which, calling for further
and further registration, led, in the struggle for existence and under
the law of natural selection, to an accumulation of cells in the central
sense ganglia; at last a condition was reached in which it became
possible for our ancestor to combine groups of these percepts into what
we today call a recept. This process is very similar to that of
composite photography. Similar percepts (as of a tree) are registered
one over the other until they are generalized into the percept of a
tree.

Now the work of accumulation begins again on a higher plane: the sensory
organs keep steadily at work manufacturing percepts; the receptual
centers keep steadily at work manufacturing more and yet more recepts
from the old and the new percepts; the capacity of the central ganglia
is constantly taxed to do necessary registration of percepts, the
necessary elaboration of these into recepts; then as the ganglia by use
and selection are

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

improved they constantly manufacture from percepts and from the initial
simple recepts, more and more complex, that is, higher and higher
recepts.

At last, after many thousands of generations have lived and died, comes
a time when the mind has reached the highest possible point of purely
receptual intelligence; the accumulation of percepts and of recepts has
gone on until no greater stores of impressions can be laid up and no
further elaboration of these can be accomplished on the plane of
receptual intelligence. Then another break is made and the higher
recepts are replaced by concepts. The relation of a concept to a recept
is somewhat similar to the relation of algebra to arithmetic. A recept
is a composite image of hundreds, perhaps thousands of percepts; it is
itself an image abstracted from many images; but a concept is that same
composite image—that same recept—named, ticketed, and, as it were,
dismissed. A concept is in fact neither more nor less than a *named
recept*—the name that is, the sign (as in algebra), standing henceforth
for the thing itself, that is, for the recept.

Now it is clear as day to any one who will give the least thought to the
subject, that the revolution by which concepts are substituted for
recepts increases the efficiency of the brain for thought as much as the
introduction of machinery increases the capacity of the race for work—as
much as the use of algebra increases the power of the mind in
mathematical calculations. To replace a great cumbersome recept by a
simple sign was almost like re-placing actual goods—as wheat, fabrics
and hardware—by entries in the ledger.

But, as hinted above, in order that a recept may be replaced by a
concept it must be named, or, in other words, marked with a sign which
stands for it—just as a check stands for a piece of goods; in other
words, the race that is in possession of concepts is also, and
necessarily, in possession of language. Further, it should be noted, as
the possession of concepts implies the possession of language, so the
possession of concepts and language (which are in reality two aspects of
the same thing) implies the possession of self-consciousness. All this
means that there is a moment in the evolution of mind when the receptual
intellect, capable of simple consciousness only, becomes almost or quite
instantaneously a conceptual intellect in possession of language and
self-consciousness.

Our intellect, then, today is made up of a very complex mixture of
percepts, recepts and concepts.

The next chapter in the story is the accumulation of concepts. This is a
double process, each individual accumulates a larger and larger number
while the individual concepts are becoming constantly more and more
complex.

Is there to be any limit to this growth of concepts in number and
complexity? Whoever will seriously consider that question will see that
there must be a limit. No such process could go on to infinity.

We have seen that the expansion of the perceptual mind had a necessary
limit: that its continued life led inevitably up to and into the
receptual mind;

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

that the receptual mind by its own growth was inevitably led up to and
into the conceptual mind. A priori considerations make it certain that a
corresponding outlet will be found for the conceptual mind.

But we do not need to depend upon abstract reasoning to demonstrate the
necessary existence of the supra-conceptual mind, since it exists and
can be studied with no more difficulty than other natural phenomena. The
supra-conceptual intellect, the elements of which instead of being
concepts are intuitions, is already (in small numbers it is true) an
established fact, and the form of consciousness that belongs to that
intellect may be called and has been called—Cosmic Consciousness.

The basic fact in cosmic consciousness is implied in its name—that fact
is consciousness of the cosmos—this is what is called in the East the
"Brahmic Splendor," which is in Dante's phrase capable of
trans-humanizing a man into a god. Whitman, who has an immense deal to
say about it, speaks of it in one place as "ineffable light—light rare,
untellable, lighting the very light—beyond all signs, description,
languages." This consciousness shows the cosmos to consist not of dead
matter governed by unconscious, rigid, and unintending law; it shows it
on the contrary as entirely immaterial, entirely spiritual and entirely
alive; it shows that death is an absurdity, that everyone and everything
has eternal life; it shows that the universe is God and that God is the
Universe. . . . A great deal of this is of course, from the point of
view of self-consciousness, absurd; it is nevertheless undoubtedly true.
Now all this does not mean that when a man has cosmic consciousness he
knows everything about the universe. We all know that when at three
years of age we acquired self-consciousness, we did not at once know all
about ourselves. . . . So neither does a man know all about the cosmos
merely because he becomes conscious of it. . . .

If it has taken the race several thousand years to learn a smattering of
the science of humanity since its acquisition of self-consciousness, so
it may take it millions of years to acquire cosmic consciousness.

As on self-consciousness is based the human world as we see it with all
its works and ways, so on cosmic consciousness is based the higher
religions and the higher philosophies and what comes from them, and on
it will be based, when it becomes more general, a new world of which it
would be idle to try to speak today.

The philosophy of the birth of cosmic consciousness in the individual is
very similar to that of the birth of self-consciousness. The mind
becomes overcrowded (as it were) with concepts and these are constantly
becoming larger, more numerous and more and more complex; some day (the
conditions being all favorable) the fusion, or what might be called the
chemical union, of several of them and of certain moral elements takes
place; the result is an intuition and the establishment of the
intuitional mind, or, in other words, cosmic consciousness. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52)

The scheme by which the mind is built up is uniform from beginning to

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

<span class="small">end: a recept is made of many percepts; a concept of
many or several recepts and percepts, and an intuition is made of many
concepts, recepts and percepts together with other elements belonging to
and drawn from the moral nature. The cosmic vision or the cosmic
intuition, from which what may be called the new mind takes its name, is
thus seen to be simply the complex and union of all prior thought and
experience—just as self-consciousness is the complex and union of all
thought and experience prior to it.</span>

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Cosmic consciousness, like other forms of consciousness, is capable of
growth, it may have different forms, different degrees.

It must not be supposed that because a man has cosmic consciousness he
is therefore omniscient or infallible. Men of cosmic consciousness have
reached a higher level; but on that level there can be different degrees
of consciousness. And it must be still more evident that, however
godlike the faculty may be, those who first acquire it, living in
diverse ages and countries, passing their life in different
surroundings, brought up to view life from totally different points of
view, must necessarily interpret somewhat differently those things which
they see in the new world which they enter.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Language corresponds to the intellect and is therefore capable of
expressing it perfectly and directly; on the other hand, the functions
of the moral nature are not connected with language and are only capable
of indirect and imperfect expression by its agency. Perhaps music, which
certainly has its roots in the moral nature, is, as at present existing,
the beginning of a language which will tally and express emotions as
words tally and express ideas. . . .

Language is the exact tally of the intellect; for every concept there is
a word or words and for every word there is a concept. . . . No word can
come into being except as the expression of a concept, neither can a new
concept be formed without the formation (at the same time) of the new
word which is its expression. But as a matter of fact ninety-nine out of
every hundred of our sense impressions and emotions have never been
represented in the intellect by concepts and therefore remain
unexpressed and inexpressible except by roundabout description and
suggestion.

As the correspondence of words and concepts is not casual or temporary
but resides in the nature of these and continues during all time and
under all circumstances absolutely constant, so changes in one of the
factors must correspond with changes in the other. So evolution of
intellect must be accompanied by evolution of language. An evolution of
language will be evidence of evolution of intellect.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

It seems that in every, or nearly every man who enters into cosmic
consciousness apprehension is at first more or less excited, the person
doubting whether the new sense may not be a symptom or form of insanity.
Mohammed was greatly alarmed. The Apostle Paul was alarmed in the same
manner.

The first thing each person asks himself upon experiencing the new sense
is: Does what I see and feel represent reality or am I suffering from a
delusion? The fact that the new experience seems even more real than the
old teachings of consciousness does not at first fully reassure him,
because he knows the force of delusions.

Simultaneously or instantly following the above sense and emotional
experiences there comes to the person an intellectual illumination quite
impossible to describe. Like a flash there is presented to his
consciousness a clear conception (a vision) in outline of the meaning
and drift of the universe. He does not come to believe merely; but he
sees and knows that the cosmos, which to the self-conscious mind seems
made up of dead matter, is in fact far otherwise—is in very truth a
living presence. He sees that in-stead of men being, as it were, patches
of life scattered through an infinite sea of non-living substance, they
are in reality specks of relative death in an infinite ocean of life. He
sees that the life which is in man is eternal, as all life is eternal,
that the soul of man is as immortal as God is. . . .

A man learns infinitely much of the new. Especially does he obtain such
a conception of THE WHOLE—or at least of an immense WHOLE—as dwarfs all
conception, imagination or speculation, such a conception as makes the
old attempts to mentally grasp the universe and its meaning petty and
even ridiculous.

This expansion of the intellect enormously increases the capacity both
for learning and initiating.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The history of the development and appearance of cosmic consciousness
*in humanity* is the same as that of the development of all the various
psychic faculties. These faculties appear first in certain exceptional
individuals, then become more frequent, thereafter become susceptible of
development in all, and at last begin to belong to all men from their
birth. Rare, exceptional, unique abilities appear in man in mature age,
sometimes even in senility. Becoming more common they manifest as
"talents" in younger men. And then they appear as "abilities" even in
children. At last they become the common property of all from their
birth, and their absence is regarded as a monstrosity.

Such is the faculty of *speech* (i.e., the faculty of making concepts).
Probably in a distant past, at the beginning of the appearance of
self-consciousness, this faculty was the gift of a few exceptional
individuals and it began then to appear perhaps in senility. After that
it began to appear more frequently and to manifest itself earlier.
Probably there was a period

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

when *speech* was not a gift of all men just as are not now artistic
talents, the musical sense, the sense of color and form. Gradually it
became *possible* for all and then inevitable and necessary, if some
physical defect did not prevent its manifestation.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

COMMENTS ON THE QUOTATIONS FROM DR. BUCKE'S BOOK

1\. Though I am quoting Dr. Bucke's opinion regarding three coming
revolutions, let me note that I do not at all share his optimism
regarding social life, which, as follows from what he says, can and must
change by reason of material causes (the conquest of the air and social
revolution). The only possible ground for favorable changes in the outer
life (provided such changes are generally possible) can only be changes
in the inner life—i.e., those changes which Dr. Bucke calls the
psychical revolution. This is the only thing that can create a better
future for men. All cultural conquests in the realm of the material are
double-edged, may equally serve for good or for evil. A change of
consciousness can alone be a guarantee of the surcease of wilful misuses
of the powers given by culture, and only thus will culture cease to be a
"growth of barbarity." Democratic organization and the nominal rule of
the majority guarantee nothing: on the contrary, even now, where they
are realized—though only in name—they create without delay, and promise
in future to create on a larger scale, violence toward the minority, the
limitation of the individual, and the curtailment of freedom.

2\. Dr. Bucke says that once human consciousness is attained, then
further evolution is inevitable. In this affirmation Dr. Bucke makes a
mistake common to all men who dogmatize about evolution. Having painted
a very true picture of the consecutive gradations of the forms of
consciousness observed by us—of animal-vegetable, of animal, and of
man—Dr. Bucke considers this gradation exclusively in the light of the
evolution of one form from another, not at all admitting the possibility
of other points of view: for example, the fact that each of the existing
forms is a link of *separate* evolutionary chains, i.e., that the
evolutions of animal-vegetables, of animals and of men are different, go
by different routes, and do not impinge upon one another. And this
standpoint is entirely

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

justifiable when we take into consideration the fact that we *never
know* transitional forms. Moreover Dr. Bucke makes an entirely arbitrary
conclusion concerning the *inevitability* of the further evolution of
man, because unconscious evolution (i.e., unconscious for the individual
directed by the consciousness of the species) in the vegetable and
animal kingdoms is impossible with the appearance of reasoning in man.
It is necessary to recognize that the mind of a man depends upon itself
to a considerably greater degree than the mind of an animal. The mind of
a man has far more power over itself; it can assist in its own
evolution, and can also *impede* it. We are confronted with the general
question: can unconscious evolution proceed with the appearance of
reasoning? It is far more correct to suppose that the appearance of
reasoning annihilates the possibility of unconscious evolution. Power
over evolution passes from the group-soul (or from nature) to the
individual itself. Further evolution, if it take place, cannot be an
elemental and unconscious affair, but will result solely from conscious
*efforts toward growth*. <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53) This is the
most interesting point in the whole process, but Dr. Bucke fails to
bring it out. *Man*, not striving toward evolution, not conscious of its
possibility, not helping it, will not evolve. And the individual who is
not evolving does not remain in a static condition, but goes down,
*degenerates* (i.e., some of his elements begin their own evolution,
inimical to the whole). This is the general law. And if we take into
consideration what an infinitesimal percentage of men think and are
capable of thinking of their evolution (or their striving toward higher
things) then we shall see that to talk about the inevitability of this
*evolution is at least naive*.

3\. Speaking of the formation of a higher faculty of knowledge and
reason, Dr. Bucke fails to take into consideration one very important
circumstance. He himself previously remarks that the blending of
concepts with emotional elements proceeds in the mind, and as *a result
of this* a new understanding appears, and then cosmic consciousness.
Thus it follows from his own words that cosmic consciousness is not
simply a blending of concepts with emotional elements, or ideas with
feelings, but is *the result* of this blending. Dr. Bucke however does
not dwell on this with sufficient attention. Moreover he further regards
the fundamental element

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

of cosmic consciousness as the blending of sensations, perceptions and
concepts with elements properly belonging to the emotional nature. This
is a mistake, because one element of cosmic consciousness is not simply
*the blending* of thought and feeling, but *the result* of this
blending, or in other words: thought and feeling *plus something else*,
plus something else that is absent either in the intellect or in the
emotional nature.

But Dr. Bucke regards this new faculty of understanding and reasoning as
a product of the *evolution of existing faculties* and this vitiates all
his deductions. Let us imagine that some scientist from another planet,
not suspecting the existence of *man*, studies the horse, and its
"evolution" from colt to saddle-horse, and regards as its highest
evolution the horse with the horseman in the saddle. From our standpoint
it is clearly impossible to regard a man sitting in the horse's saddle
as a fact of *horse* evolution, but from the point of view of the
scientist who knows nothing about man, this will be only logical. Dr.
Bucke finds himself in exactly this position when he regards that which
transcends the region of humanity altogether as a fact of human
evolution. Man possessing cosmic consciousness, or approaching cosmic
consciousness is not merely man, but man with something higher added.
Dr. Bucke, like Edward Carpenter in many cases also, is handicapped by
the desire not to go too strongly counter to accepted views (although
that is inevitable); by the desire to reconcile those views with the
"new thought," to flatten out contradictions, to reduce everything to
one thing, which is of course impossible—as is the reconciliation of
correct and incorrect, true and false views upon one and the same thing.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The greater part of Dr. Bucke's book consists of examples and quotations
from the teachings and writings of men of "cosmic consciousness" in the
history of the world. He draws parallels between these teachings, and
establishes the *unity* of the forms of transition into the new state of
consciousness in men of different centuries and of different peoples,
and the unity of their sensations of the world and of the self,
testifying more than anything else to the genuineness and reality of
their experiences.

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

The founders of world-religions, prophets, philosophers, poets—these are
men of "cosmic consciousness" according to Dr. Bucke's book. He does not
pretend to present a full list of them, and it is of course possible to
add many names to his list. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)

But after all, various little imperfections of Dr. Bucke's book are not
important, nor additions which might possibly be made. What is important
is the general conclusion to which Dr. Bucke comes—the possibility and
the immanence of the NEW CONSCIOUSNESS.

All this announces to us the nearness of the NEW HUMANITY. We are
building without taking into consideration the fact that a NEW MASTER
must come who may not at all like everything that we have built. Our
"social sciences," sociology, and so forth, have in view only man, while
as I have several times shown before, the concept "man" is a complex
one, and includes in itself different categories of men going along
different paths. The future belongs not to *man*, *but to superman*, who
is already born, and lives among us.

A higher race is rapidly emerging among humanity, and it is emerging by
reason of its quite remarkable understanding of the world and life.

It will be truly a HIGHER RACE—and there will be no possibility of any
falsification, any substitution, or any usurpation at all. It will be
impossible for anything to be *bought*, or *appropriated* to oneself by
deceit or by might. Not only will this race be, but it already is.

The men approaching the transition into a new race begin already to know
one another: already are established pass-words and counter-signs. And
perhaps those social and political questions so sharply put forward in
our time may be solved on quite another plane and

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

by quite a different method than we think—may be solved by the entrance
into the arena of a new race CONSCIOUS OF ITSELF which will judge the
old races.

\_\_\_\_\_

In my remarks I called attention to certain imperfections in Dr. Bucke's
book arising chiefly from a strange indecisiveness of his, from his
timidity in asserting the dominant significance of the new
consciousness. This results from the desire of Dr. Bucke to establish
the future of humanity from a positivistic standpoint upon social and
political revolutions. But we may regard this view as having lost all
validity. The bankruptcy of materialism, i.e., "logical" systems, when
it comes to organizing life on earth is now evident in the bloody epoch
which we are undergoing, even to those men who but yesterday were
prating of "culture" and "civilization." It became clearer and clearer
that the changes in the outer life of the majority, when these changes
come, will do so *as a result* of inner changes in a few.

We may say further with regard to Dr. Bucke's entire book, that touching
the idea *of the natural growth* of consciousness, he does not notice
that these faculties do not unfold themselves perforce: conscious work
on them is necessary. And he does not dwell at all on conscious efforts
in this direction, on the idea of the *culture* of cosmic consciousness.
Meanwhile there exists a whole series of psychological teachings
(occultism, yoga, etc.) and a large literature having in view a
systematic culture of the higher consciousness. Dr. Bucke does not
remark this, and insists upon the idea of natural growth, although he
himself several times touches upon the culture of consciousness. In one
portion of his book he speaks very contemptuously regarding the use of
narcotics for the creation of ecstatic states, not taking into
consideration the fact that narcotics cannot give anything which man
does not possess (this is the explanation of the different action of
narcotics on different men), but can only in certain cases unfold that
which is already in the soul of man. This entirely alters the point of
view upon narcotics, as Prof. William James has shown in his book, *The
Varieties of Religious Experience*.

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

In general, allured by the evolutionary point of view, and looking at
*the future*, Dr. Bucke, like many others, does not pay sufficient
attention to *the present*. That new consciousness which men may
discover or unfold *in themselves* now is indeed far more important than
that which may or may not appear in other men millenniums hence.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Regarding from different standpoints the complex forms of the
manifestation of spirit, and analyzing the views and opinions of various
authors, we are always confronted with what seem to be consecutive
phases or consecutive stages of this unfoldment. And we find such phases
or stages to be four in number. Further consideration of the living
world known to us, from the lower animal organisms up to the highly
developed body of man, reveals the simultaneous existence of all four
forms of consciousness to which all other aspects of the inner life
correspond: the sense of space and time, the form of activity, etc.
Still further consideration of *man of the higher type* reveals the
presence of all the four forms of consciousness which are in living
nature, with forms corresponding to them. (See table, [p.
327](#page_327).)

The simultaneous coexistence of all four forms of consciousness at once,
both in nature and in the higher type of man makes the exclusively
evolutionary standpoint seem forced and artificial. The evolutionary
standpoint is often made the means of escape from difficult problems,
and from hard thinking.

Some people apply the evolutionary theory where there is no necessity
for it whatever. In many cases this is a compromise of thought. Not
understanding the existing variety of forms, and not possessing the
skill to think of all this *as a unity*, men have recourse to the
evolutionary idea, and regard this great variety of forms as an
ascending ladder—not because this conforms to facts, but from a desire
to systematize the observed facts at all costs, though on entirely
artificial foundations. It appears to men that having built a system
they already know something, whereas in reality the absence of a system
is often much nearer to real knowledge than an artificial system.

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                               |                                                                                                           |                                                                |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| FORMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS                                                        | LIVING WORLD                                                                                              | MAN OF HIGHER TYPE                                             |
| Latent Consciousness, similar to our instincts and subconscious feelings.     | Cells, groups of cells, plants, lower animals, and organs and parts of body of higher animals and of man. | Cells, groups of cells, tissues and organs of the body.        |
| Simple Consciousness and flashes of thought.                                  | Animals possessing complex organisms. Absence of consciousness of death.                                  | Body, instincts, desires, voices of the body, emotions.        |
| Reasoning. Moments of self-consciousness and flashes of cosmic consciousness. | Man. Consciousness of death or fantastic theories of immortality.                                         | Simple emotions, logical reason, mind.                         |
| Self-consciousness and beginning of cosmic consciousness.                     | Man of higher type. Beginning of immortality.                                                             | Higher emotions, higher intellect, intuition, mystical wisdom. |

</div>

"Evolutionists," being incapable of understanding the whole, without
representing it to themselves as a chain, one link of which is connected
with another, are like the blind men in the Oriental fable, who feel of
an elephant in different places, and one affirms that the elephant is
like pillars, another that it is like a thick rope, and so forth. The
evolutionists however, add to this that the trunk of the elephant must
*evolve* from the feet, the ears from the trunk, and so on. But we after
all know that this is an *elephant*, i.e., a single being, unknown to
men who are blind. Such a being is the living world. And with regard to
the forms of consciousness, it is far more correct to consider them not
as consecutive phases or steps of evolution which are separate from one
another, but as different sides or parts of one whole which we do not
know.

In "man" this unity is apparent. All forms of consciousness in him can
exist simultaneously; the life of cells and organs, with their
consciousness; the life of the entire body, taken as a whole; the life
of the emotions and of the logical reason, and the life of the higher
understanding and feeling.

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

The higher form of consciousness is not necessary *for life*; it is
possible to live without it. But without it the organization and
orderliness of life is impossible. Long under the domination of
materialism and positive thinking, forgetting and perverting religious
ideas, men thought that it was possible to live by the merely logical
mind alone. But now, little by little, it is becoming quite evident to
those who have eyes, that merely by the exercise of logical reason men
will not be able to organize their life on earth, and if they do not
finally exterminate themselves, as some tribes and peoples are doing, in
any case they will create (and have already created) impossible
conditions of life in which everything gained will be lost—i.e.,
everything that was given them in the past by men of self-consciousness
and cosmic consciousness.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The living world of nature (including man) is analogous to man; and it
is more correct and more convenient to regard the different forms of
consciousness in different divisions and strata of living nature as
belonging to one organism and performing different, but related
functions, than as separate, and evolving from one another. Then the
necessity disappears for all this naive theorizing on the subject of
evolution. We do not regard the organs and members of the body of man as
evolved one from another *in a given individual* and we should not be
guilty of the same error with relation to the organs and members of the
body of living nature.

I do not deny the law of evolution, but the application of it to the
explanation of many phenomena of life is in great need of correction.

Firstly, if we accept the idea of one common evolution, after all it is
necessary to remember that the types which develop slower, the remnants
of evolution, may not continue to follow after, and at a slow pace, *the
same* evolution, but may begin an evolution of their own, developing in
many cases exactly those properties on account of which they were thrown
out from basic evolution.

Secondly, though we accept the law of evolution, there is no necessity
to regard all existing forms as having been developed one from another
(like man from the ape, for example). In such

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

cases it is more correct to regard them all as the *highest types* in
their own evolution. The absence of intermediate forms makes this view
much more probable than that which is usually accepted, and which gives
such rich material for discussions about the obligatory and inevitable
perfection of all—"perfection" from our standpoint.

The views propounded here are indeed more difficult than the usual
evolutionary point of view, just as the conception of the living world
as an *entire* organism is more difficult; but this difficulty must be
surmounted. I have said already that the real world must be illogical
from the usual points of view, and by no means can it be made simple and
comprehensible to one and all. The theory of evolution is in need of
many corrections, additions, and much development. If we consider the
existing forms on any given plane, it will be quite impossible to
declare that all these forms evolved from the simplest forms on this
plane. Some undoubtedly evolved from the lowest ones; others resulted
from the process of degeneration of the higher ones; a third class
developed from the remnants of some evolved form—while a fourth class
resulted as a consequence of the incursion into the given plane of the
properties and characteristics of some higher plane. It is certainly
impossible to regard these complex forms as developed by an evolutionary
process upon the given plane.

The below classification will show more clearly this correlation of
forms of manifestation of consciousness, or of different states of
consciousness.

*First form*. A sense of one-dimensional space in relation to the outer
world. Everything transpires on a line, as it were. Sensations are not
differentiated. Consciousness is immersed in itself, in its work of
nutrition, digestion and assimilation of food, etc. This is the state of
the cell, the group of cells, of tissues and organs of the body of an
animal, of plants and lower organisms. In a man this is the "instinctive
mind."

*Second form*. A sense of two-dimensional space. This is the state of
the animal. That which is for us the third dimension, for it is motion.
It already senses, feels, but does not think. Everything that it sees
appears to it as genuinely real. Emotional life and flashes of thought
in a man.

*Third form*. A sense of three-dimensional space. Logical

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

thinking. Philosophical division into I and Not-I. Dogmatic religions or
dualistic spiritism. Codified morality. Division into spirit and matter.
Positivistic science. The idea of evolution. A mechanical universe. The
understanding of cosmic ideas as metaphors. Imperialism, "historical
materialism," socialism, etc. Subjection of the personality to society
and law. Automatism. Death as the extinction of the personality.
Intellect and flashes of self-consciousness.

*Fourth form*. Beginning of the understanding of four-dimensional space.
A new concept of time. The possibility of more prolonged
self-consciousness. Flashes of cosmic consciousness. The idea and
sometimes the sensation of a living universe. A striving toward the
wondrous. Sensation of infinity. Beginning of self-conscious will and
moments of cosmic consciousness. Possibility of personal immortality.

Thus the third form includes that "man" whom science studies. But the
fourth form is characteristic of the man who is beginning to pass out of
the field of observation of positivism and logical understanding.

The table at the end of the book is a summing up of the contents of the
entire book, and shows more in detail the correlation of the observed
forms of consciousness in the living world and in man."

EVOLUTION OR CULTURE?

The most interesting and important questions arising with regard to
cosmic consciousness may be summed up as follows: 1.—Is the
manifestation of cosmic consciousness a problem of the distant future,
and of other generations—i.e., must cosmic consciousness appear as the
result of an evolutionary process, after centuries and millenniums, and
will it then become a common property or a property of the majority? And
2.—Can cosmic consciousness make its appearance *now* in contemporary
man, i.e., at least as the result of a certain education and
self-development which will aid the unfolding in him of dominant forces
and capabilities, i.e., as the result of a certain *culture*?

It seems to me that with regard to this, the following ideas are
tenable:

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

The possibility of the appearance or development of cosmic consciousness
belongs to the few.

But even in the case of those men in whom cosmic consciousness may
appear, certain quite definite inner and outer conditions are requisite
for its manifestation—a certain *culture*, the education of those
elements congenial to cosmic consciousness, and the elimination of those
hostile to it.

The distinguishing signs of those men in whom cosmic consciousness is
likely to manifest are not studied at all.

The first of these signs is the constant or frequent sensation that the
world is not at all as it appears; that what is most important in it is
not at all what is considered most important. The quest of the wondrous,
sensed as the only real and true, results from this impression of the
unreality of the world and everything related thereto.

High mental culture, high intellectual attainments, are not necessary
conditions at all. The example of many *saints*, who were not
intellectual, but who undoubtedly attained cosmic consciousness, shows
that cosmic consciousness may develop in purely emotional soil, i.e., in
the given case as a result of religious emotion. Cosmic consciousness is
also possible of attainment through the emotion attendant upon
creation—in painters, musicians and poets. Art in its highest
manifestations is a path to cosmic consciousness.

But equally in all cases the unfoldment of cosmic consciousness demands
a certain *culture*, a correspondent life. From all the examples cited
by Dr. Bucke, and all others that one might add, it would not be
possible to select a single case in which cosmic consciousness unfolded
in conditions of inner life adverse to it, i.e., in moments of
absorption by the *outer* life, with its struggles, its emotions and
interests.

For the manifestation of cosmic consciousness it is necessary that the
center of gravity of *everything* shall lie for man in the inner world,
in self-consciousness, and not in the outer world at all.

If we assume that Dr. Bucke himself had been surrounded by entirely
different conditions than those in which he found himself at the moment
of experiencing cosmic consciousness, then in all probability his
illumination would not have come at all.

He spent the evening reading poetry in the company of men of

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

high intellectual and emotional development, and was returning home full
of the thoughts and emotions of the evening.

But if instead of this he had spent the evening playing cards in the
society of men whose interests were common and whose conversation was
vulgar, or at a political meeting, or had he worked a night shift in a
factory at a turning-lathe or written a newspaper editorial in which he
himself did not believe and nobody else would believe—then we may
declare with certainty that no cosmic consciousness would have appeared
in him at all. For it undoubtedly demands a great freedom, and
concentration on the inner world.

This conclusion in regard to the necessity for special culture and
definitely favorable inner and outer conditions does not necessarily
mean that cosmic consciousness is likely to manifest *in every man* who
is put in these conditions. There are men, probably an enormous majority
of contemporary humanity, in whom exists no such possibility at all. And
in those who do not possess it in some sort already, it cannot be
created by any culture whatever, in the same way that no kind or amount
of culture will make an animal speak the language of man. The
possibility of the manifestation of cosmic consciousness cannot be
inoculated artificially. A man is either born with or without it. This
possibility can be throttled or developed, but it cannot be created.

Not all can learn to discern the real from the false; but he who can
will not receive this gift of discernment free. This is a thing of great
labor, a thing of great work, which demands boldness of thought and
boldness of feeling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[311:1](to26.htm#fr_48) This division
constitutes Dr. Bucke's principal error. Human consciousness, i.e., the
consciousness of the enormous majority of men, is "simple
consciousness"; "self-consciousness," like "cosmic consciousness,"
exists only in a flash.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[312:1](to26.htm#fr_49) See the comment 1, p.
321.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[313:1](to26.htm#fr_50) See the comment 2, p.
321.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[315:1](to26.htm#fr_51) Among whom was Edward
Carpenter.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[318:1](to26.htm#fr_52) See the comment 3, p.
322.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[322:1](to26.htm#fr_53) See p. 292. Quotation
from [Mabel](errata.htm#58) Collins' book.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[324:1](to26.htm#fr_54) Dr. Bucke makes a very
important error concerning self-consciousness. In his opinion "simple
consciousness" characterizes an animal and "self-consciousness"
characterizes a man. But as a matter of fact a prolonged
self-consciousness *during* sensation, feeling or thinking is a very
rare phenomenon in man, usually that which is called self-consciousness
is simply thought and it goes *post factum*. True self-consciousness
exists in man only potentially, and, if it manifests itself, it does so
only by moments. These moments of [self-consciousness](errata.htm#59)
should not be identified with prolonged self consciousness. Prolonged
self-consciousness is already "a new consciousness," and there is the
possibility of moments of cosmic consciousness, which in the course of
further development may, in turn, become prolonged.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](to27)

</div>
