[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass08)  [Next](nass10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

# THE STARS

\[Told by Moses\]

There was a town. One evening a man went out of the house, and his son
accompanied him. They sat down on the beach. After they had been sitting
there for some time, the boy looked up to the sky and said to a star,
"Poor fellow! You little twinkler, indeed, you must feel cold." Thus
spoke the boy to the Star. The Star heard it, and one evening when the
boy went out, the Star came down and took him up to the sky.

When day broke, the people found that the boy was lost. They

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

looked for him everywhere. They asked all the tribes, but they could not
find him. Then the people stopped, but his father and his mother longed
for him. They were crying all the time. They did so many days.

One day the man was walking about crying. When he stopped crying, he
looked up a mountain, and, behold, smoke came out of it. He went up, and
when he came near, he saw a woman. She asked the man, "Do you know who
took your child?" "No," said the man. "The Star took your child. He tied
him onto the edge of his smoke-hole. The child is crying all the time.
He is almost dead, because the sparks the fire are burning his body."
Thus she spoke. Then she said,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Go on. Make many arrows, that you may have a
great many quickly." The man went down and came to his town. There he
made four bundles of arrows. He saw a very long mountain, which he
climbed. He stood on top of it, took his bow, and took an arrow and shot
at the sky. The arrow hit the edge of the hole of the sky, and stuck
there. He shot another arrow, which hit the nock of the first one. He
shot again, and continued to do so for many days. Then the arrows came
down, and reached to him. The man was carrying tobacco, red paint, and
sling-stones. Then he went up, climbing the arrows. He reached the sky,
and met a person who said, "Your

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

child is about to die. He is crying all the time because his body is
being burned. Carve a piece of wood so that it will look just like your
child." He gave to this person tobacco, red paint, and sling-stones in
return for his advice. Then the person was very glad. The man made a
figure of spruce, one of hemlock, one of balsam fir, and one of red
cedar, and one of yellow cedar, all as large as his boy. Then be made a
great fire. He built a pyre of slender trees, which he placed crosswise,
and placed fire underneath. He hung his wooden images to a tree over the
fire. He poked the fire, so that the sparks burned the body of the
wooden figure. Then the latter cried aloud, but after a short time it
stopped. Then he took it off, and took another one. It did the same. The
figure stopped crying after a short time. He

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

took it down. Then he tied the red cedar to the tree and poked the fire.
There were very many sparks. The figure cried for a long time, and then
stopped. He took it down and hung up the yellow cedar. It did not stop.
Then he took the image of yellow cedar.

He went on, and came to a place where he heard a man splitting firewood
with his wedge and hammer. His name was G\*ix\*sats?ā'ntx\*. When he
came near, he asked him, "Where is the house?" At the same time he gave
him tobacco. Then G\*ix\*sats?ā'ntx\* began to swell when he tasted the
tobacco. (The people of olden times called it "being troubled.") He also
gave him red paint and sling-stones.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then G\*ix\*sats?ā'ntx\* told him where the
child was. He said, "Wait in the woods until they are all asleep, then
go up to the roof of the house." The man went, and when he came nearer,
he heard the voice of his boy, who was crying; but as soon as the boy
stopped, the chief ordered his men to poke the fire until many sparks
flew up. When all the people were asleep, the man went to the roof of
the house where the child was. The child recognized his father and
cried; but his father rebuked him, saying, "Don't cry, don't cry! They
might hear you in the house." The boy stopped and the man took him off.
In his place he tied the wooden image to the smoke hole. Then he went
down. Early in the morning the chief ordered his people to poke the
fire. Then the wooden image cried while the man

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

and his son were making their escape. But the wooden image did not cry
long. Then it stopped. The chief became suspicious, and sent a man to
the roof. He went up, and, behold, there was a stick. The boy was lost,
and the wooden image was on the roof. The chief said, "Pursue them!" The
people did so. The man heard them approaching. When they were close
behind him, he threw tobacco, red paint, and sling-stones in their way.
The paint was red; the sling-stones were blue.

The chief's people found these and picked them up. Some persons took the
sling-stones, and others took the red paint and put it on their
faces. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) While they were doing so, the
man and his son continued to

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

run. Again the man heard the pursuers approaching. Now he came to
G\*ix\*sats?ā'ntx\*, who said, "Run quickly, my dear. They will not
catch you." The Star had taken the boy, and therefore the Star's tribe
were pursuing them. The main gave G\*ix\*sats?ā'ntx\* tobacco, and then
G\*ix\*sats?ā'ntx\* swelled very much, so that he obstructed the trail,
and therefore the Star tribe could not reach the man.

Now he came near the hole of the sky. He came to it, and went down the
chain of arrows. As soon as he reached the ground, he pulled the arrows
down, and they all dropped to the ground. He had saved his boy. Then he
went down the mountain and ran home. He got the boy back, and therefore
he and his wife were glad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[92:1](nass09.htm#fr_4) This accounts for the
colors of the stars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rotten-feathers](nass10)
