[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](nass37)  [Next](nass39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

### GROWING-UP-LIKE-ONE-WHO-HAS-A-GRANDMOTHER

A chief's nephew is a poor orphan. A light comes down from heaven and
hangs at the end of a branch. It proves to be copper. The chief promises
his daughter to the one who will knock it down. The orphan boy receives
from a supernatural being stones of four different colors, and with the
last stone knocks it down, but the young men take the copper away from
him, and claim to have bit it. The next day a white bear is heard behind
the village, and the chief's daughter is promised to him who kills it.
The orphan boy kills it with his arrow. The other youths claim to have
killed it, but the youth's arrow is found, and thus the chief learns
that his nephew has killed the bear. The chief is ashamed and deserts
his nephew, his daughter, and their grandmother. The boy goes to a pond
and shouts. A giant frog, the guardian of the pond, emerges and pursues
the boy. The boy makes a trap and catches the frog in it. He skins it
and goes into the pond, where he catches a trout. He puts the trout on
the beach. In the morning a raven finds it and begins to croak. The
princess sends the boy to look, and he brings the trout. Every night he
goes out and catches in succession trout, salmon, halibut, bullheads,
seals, porpoises, sealions, and whales. Finally the princess discovers
that he catches them and asks him to marry her. They have two children.
The chief's people are starving, and the chief sends a man and some
slaves to see if his nephew, his daughter, and their grandmother are
dead. The boy gives them to eat, and they report what they have seen.
The people return, and he sells his provisions for slaves and elk skins,
gives a potlatch, and becomes a chief. Finally he is unable to take off
his frog blanket, and stays in the sea, whence he provides his wife and
children with food.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Little-Eagle](nass39)
