8\. The Slaying Of Orlam

The four grand provinces of Erin set forth on the morrow eastwards over
Cronn ('the Round'), which is a mountain. Cuchulain had gone out before
them, till he came upon the charioteer of Orlam son of Aililla and of
Medb. This was at Tamlacht Orlaim ('Orlam's Gravestone') a little to the
north of Disert Lochaid ('Lochat's Hermitage'). The charioteer was
engaged in cutting chariot-poles from a holly-tree in the wood.

"Behold, O Laeg," cried Cuchulain; How bold are the ways of the
Ulstermen, if it be they that cut down the woods in this fashion in the
face of the men of Erin. Tarry thou here a little, till I know who cuts
down the woods in this manner." Then Cuchulain went on till he came up
to Orlam's charioteer, to stop him; he thought he was one of the men of
Ulster. "What dost thou here, gilla?" asked Cuchulain; "Indeed, then,"
answered the gilla, "I cut chariot poles from this holm, because our
chariots were broken yesterday in pursuit of that famous wildling,
namely Cuchulain. And for thy manhood's sake, young warrior, pray come
to my aid, so that that famous Cuchulain come not upon me." "Take thy
choice, gilla," said Cuchulain, "to gather or to trim them, either." "I
will see to gathering them, for it is easier," the gilla answered.

Cuchulain started to cut the poles and he drew them between the forks of
his feet and his hands against their bends and their knots, so that he
made them smooth and straight and slippery and trimmed; he polished them
so that not even a midge could find footing thereon when he had passed
them away from him. Then full sure the gilla gazed upon him. "Far then,
meseems, from fitting is the task I put on thee. And for love of thy
valour, who art thou, say, O warrior?" the gilla asked, for he was sore
affrighted. "That same renowned Cuchulain am I of whom thou spakest a
while ago in the morning." "Woe is me then, by reason of this," cried
the gilla, "for this am I lost forever."

"Fear nothing; I will not slay thee at all, boy," said Cuchulain; "for I
slay nor charioteers nor horseboys nor persons unarmed. But, prithee,
where is thy master, gilla?" "Over yonder by the trench, with his back
to the pillar-stone," answered the gilla. "Off with thee thither to him
and bear him a warning that he be on his guard. For if we meet he shall
fall by my hand." Thereupon the charioteer repaired by one way to his
master, and Cuchulain went by another, and fast as the gilla sped to
Orlam, faster still Cuchulain did reach him and offered him combat and
he struck off his head, and raising it aloft displayed it to the men of
Erin.
