23e. Here Now The Deer-Stalking of Amargin in Taltiu

This Amargin was the son of Cass who was son of Bacc who was son of Ross
Ruad ('the Red') who was son of Rudraige. He came upon the warriors
going over Taltiu westward, and he made them turn before him over Taltiu
northwards. And he put his left elbow under him in Taltiu. And his
people furnished him with rocks and boulders and great clumps of earth,
and he began to pelt the men of Erin till the end of three days and
three nights.

The adventures of Curoi son of Dar√® follow now.

He was told that a single man was checking and stopping four of the five
grand provinces of Erin from Monday at Summer's end till the beginning
of Spring. And he felt it unworthy of himself and he deemed it too long
that his people were without him. And it was then he set out to the host
to fight and contend with Cuchulain. And when he was come to the place
where Cuchulain was, he saw Cuchulain there moaning, full of wounds and
pierced through with holes, and he felt it would not be honourable nor
fair to fight and contend with him after the combat with Ferdiad.
Because it would be said it was not that Cuchulain died of the sores and
wounds which he would give him so much as of the wounds which Ferdiad
had inflicted on him in the conflict before. Be that as it might,
Cuchulain offered to engage with him in battle and combat.

Thereupon Curoi set forth for to seek the men of Erin and, when he was
near at hand, he espied Amargin there and his left elbow under him to
the west of Taltiu. Curoi reached the men of Erin from the north. His
people equipped him with rocks and boulders and great clumps, and he
began to hurl them right over against Amargin, so that Badb's
battle-stones collided in the clouds and in the air high above them, and
every rock of them was shivered into an hundred stones.

"By the truth of thy valour, O Curoi," cried Medb, "desist from thy
throwing, for no real succour nor help comes to us therefrom, but ill is
the succour and help that thence come to us." "I pledge my word," cried
Curoi, "I will not cease till the very day of doom and of life, till
first Amargin cease!" "I will cease," said Amargin; "and do thou engage
that thou wilt no more come to succour or give aid to the men of Erin."
Curoi consented to that and went his way to return to his land and
people.

About this time the hosts went past Taltiu westwards. "It is not this
was enjoined upon me," quoth Amargin: "never again to cast at the
hosts." And he went to the west of them and he turned them before him
north-eastwards past Taltiu. And he began to pelt them for a long while
and time.

Then it was also that the men of Erin said it would be no disgrace for
Amargin to leave the camp and quarters, and that the hosts would retire
a day's march back to the north again, there to stop and stay, and for
him to quit his feats of arms upon the hosts until such time as he would
meet them on the day of the great battle when the four grand provinces
of Erin would encounter at Garech and Ilgarech in the battle of the Raid
for the Kine of Cualnge. Amargin accepted that offer, and the hosts
proceeded a day's march back to the northwards again. Wherefore the
'Deer-stalking' of Amargin in Taltiu the name of this tale.
