[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](om08)  [Next](om10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

# CHAPTER IV

### SUMMARY

IN the foregoing pages we have endeavoured to present some of the more
important and characteristic myths from Polynesia. Forced to give undue
emphasis to three or four of the many groups because of the paucity of
material from all but these, we may, nevertheless, gain a pretty clear
impression of the type of tales once current throughout the entire area.

In the presentation of the material and in its discussion resemblances
have been pointed out between the various island-groups, both within and
without Polynesia; but this has been done only for individual tales or
striking incidents, and no attempt has been made to summarize the
results. The fact of wide-spread relationship has probably become
evident, but the conclusions which may legitimately be drawn are not
perhaps apparent. Unless we are to depend entirely upon impressions,
some sort of statistical method must obviously be employed. While these
are particularly liable to lead to erroneous conclusions because of the
fragmentary and unequal quality of the available material, we must use
some such method to extract meaning from the mass of individual
similarities. All myths, as we have them, may be analyzed into a series
of separate incidents. This group of incidents may, and indeed often
does, remain intact for long periods, and may be transmitted as a unit
from one people or area to another. Very often, however, in the course
of time or in transmission one or other of these drops out or is
modified, and new ones are added; so that the result may be a tale quite
unlike the original, but in which certain of the original

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

incidents survive. Individual incidents also may be widely transmitted,
and by the study of the distribution of these much may be learned as to
historic associations, lines of migration, and cultural relationships.
Myths, then, as we find them, are of complex origin, the product of long
modification, decay, and accretion. If now we consider the mythology of
Polynesia from the standpoint of its constituent elements, i. e. its
incidents, much light may be thrown on its growth as a whole, on the
interrelationship of the mythology of the different island-groups, and
on the kinship which the mythology of this area bears to that of
adjoining ones. For a really satisfactory study of this sort relatively
complete material from the whole region is needed; but unfortunately, as
already pointed out, this is not, and probably never will be, available.
Incomplete records from certain island-groups inevitably lead to
erroneous conclusions in regard to the distribution of incidents, but
with all due allowance for these sources of error, and emphasizing the
tentative character of the results obtained, it is perhaps worth while
to see what conclusions may be drawn from the data which we possess.

Within Polynesia itself such a study of the distribution of
myth-incidents leads to results of interest. Perhaps the most striking
of these is the apparently close relationship between Hawaii and New
Zealand, the two most widely separated groups within the area, since of
the Hawaiian episodes occurring elsewhere in Polynesia two-thirds are
found in New Zealand, while in the much closer Cook and Society Groups
only about one-third appears. New Zealand's similarities are closest
with the Cook Group (as indeed they should be, seeing that the bulk of
the historic immigration came from there), but the number of agreements
with Hawaii is very nearly as great, and a strong relationship to Samoa
is also apparent. Considering other groups, Samoa is most closely
affiliated with the Cook Group and New Zealand, and only secondarily
with Tonga. Central Polynesia, i. e. the Cook Group, Society,

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

and Marquesas, seems to form more or less of a unit with affiliations
running in all directions.

If the character of the incidents themselves be considered, and not
merely the number of agreements, it appears that in the case of Hawaii
and New Zealand the episodes which are common to these two groups are,
for the most part, other than those which either shares with the
geographically intermediate Cook or Society Groups. Similarly, although
New Zealand's affiliation with Samoa is nearly as strong as with Hawaii,
the incidents which it possesses in common with the former are,
generally speaking, quite distinct from those which it shares with the
latter. The logical explanation of such a condition, would seem to be
that Polynesian mythology is, as a whole, a complex of incidents derived
from different sources, one portion of the area having received its
material mainly from one source, another from another. Thus the myths of
any individual group, such as New Zealand, would be the result of a
blending of two or more streams of incidents, or, to vary the figure,
would be composed of different strata superimposed in a definite
historical order.

In the presentation of the myths, as given in the preceding pages,
frequent reference has been made to the occurrence of similar incidents
in Melanesia and Indonesia; whence a consideration of the number and
proportions of these similarities in different parts of Polynesia may be
expected to throw light on this question of sources. The Melanesian area
lies immediately adjacent to Polynesia on the west, and we may first
consider how far incidents found in Polynesia also occur in Melanesia.
Theoretically, any community of episodes discovered between these two
areas might be due to transmission in either direction, i. e. from
Polynesia to Melanesia, or from Melanesia to Polynesia. Inasmuch,
however, as a great mass of evidence derived from other sources points
to the drift of peoples from west to east in the Pacific area, we may
reasonably regard the bulk of the similarities as due to transmission

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

from west to east; i. e. that the incidents common to Melanesia and
Polynesia are at least in part of Melanesian origin. Assuming for the
moment that this is true, it is obvious that we may have two sorts of
agreement: incidents of Melanesian origin (or at least of wide
Melanesian distribution) which occur only in a single group or in a
restricted area in Polynesia; and Melanesian incidents which are current
over a considerable portion or the whole of the Polynesian area.
Beginning with a consideration of the first of these types, it appears
that about one-sixth of the myth-incidents peculiar to the Hawaiian
group, and not found elsewhere in Polynesia, occur also in Melanesia. As
regards Samoa, however, almost half of the episodes which are purely
local and confined to Samoa, so far as Polynesia is concerned, are
recorded in Melanesia. In New Zealand the comparable figure rises to
nearly three-fourths; but, on the other hand, there are practically no
episodes of this type in the Society and Cook Groups. It is clear, then,
that from this point of view there is a very strong Melanesian. element
in New Zealand and Samoa, while it is weak in Hawaii and apparently
absent from the Society and Cook Groups. The individual incidents of
Melanesian similarity are, moreover, different in each case, one series
being found in New Zealand, another in Samoa, and a third in Hawaii.
Moreover, we must note that the Melanesian incidents showing similarity
with the Hawaiian are current, so far as our present information goes,
only in the Admiralty Islands and New Britain; whereas those occurring
in Samoa and New Zealand are more widely distributed and are especially
characteristic of eastern Melanesia. The influence, therefore-, exerted
on Hawaiian mythology by that of Melanesia would seem to have been not
only slight, but localized, as if the wave of Polynesian immigrants
which settled in Hawaii had merely touched the northern edge of
Melanesian territory. On the other hand, the ancestors of those who
reached Samoa and New Zealand must have passed through

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

much of eastern Melanesia and been subjected to a contact of greater
length and intensity.

If we now examine the second type of agreements the results are somewhat
different. We are here dealing with myth-incidents which are not
confined to single portions of Polynesia, but are common to two or more
island-groups. Of this class of episodes Hawaii shows a fifth which are
of Melanesian origin, the Society Group slightly less, the Cook Group
and Samoa slightly more, and New Zealand nearly one-half. The latter
area, again, reveals by far the strongest Melanesian affinities, while
Hawaii, Samoa, and the Cook Group have a much smaller proportion, with
the Society Group showing the minimum. It is fairly well established
that Hawaii received a considerable influx of population from central
Polynesia between the twelfth and fourteenth centuries, and the obvious
inference is that the Melanesian incidents which Hawaii shares with this
group are in large part to be traced to this migration. The great
proportion of Melanesian incidents in New Zealand would argue a strong
infusion of this darker blood among the Maori.

Nearly all the recognized theories as to the origin of the Polynesian
peoples bring them in one way or other from the Indonesian area, and
ascribe to them only a temporary stay in Melanesia en route to their
homes in historic times. In pointing out similarities of incident during
the presentation of Polynesian mythology, the Indonesian affinities have
frequently been mentioned, and we must now examine these in the same way
in which the Melanesian resemblances have just been considered.
Following our former order of treatment, we may first investigate those
myth-incidents which, although localized in some one island-group in
Polynesia, also have an Indonesian or extra-Polynesian distribution. Of
the important incidents of this type in Hawaii, fully half occur also
ill Indonesia; but in Samoa and New Zealand, on the other hand, the
proportion sinks to about one-eighth. Here again, as

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

with the Melanesian incidents, the series of episodes in common are
different for each group; but the conditions are exactly reversed, for
whereas in regard to Melanesian affinities Hawaii shows but few, though
New Zealand and Samoa possess a large number, in respect to Indonesian
similarities Hawaii is strong, while New Zealand and Samoa are weak. The
inference would seem to follow, therefore, that Hawaii has preserved a
larger proportion of its original Indonesian inheritance than the other
Polynesian groups, while in New Zealand and Samoa this original element
has been largely lost or overlaid with borrowed Melanesian incidents. If
instead of taking the localized incidents we consider those of general
Polynesian distribution which are also found outside its bounds) much
the same general results are obtained, although the disproportion
between the different island-groups is not so marked. Of this type of
incidents Hawaii has nearly a fifth that are also found in Indonesia;
the Society and Cook Groups, taken together, about one-tenth; and Samoa
and New Zealand even less. The relatively high proportion of Indonesian
incidents in central Polynesia is worthy of note in this connexion, as
indicating that here the ancestral material was not so largely overlaid
by elements of Melanesian origin as was the case in Samoa, which is
geographically nearer to Melanesia and which for many generations had
had close trade relationships with its eastern margin.

One other line of investigation throws some light upon the course of
development of Polynesian mythology. The Indonesian incidents, whose
general distribution in Polynesia has just been discussed, have been
such as occur in Indonesia and Polynesia, but not in the intervening
areas of either Melanesia or Micronesia. If the Polynesian ancestors
passed through either of these regions in the course of their movement
from west to east, we might expect to find the evidences of such
Migration in the presence of Indonesian incidents in Melanesian and
Micronesian mythologies. This is precisely what

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

does occur, and thus one class of incidents is found in Indonesia,
Melanesia, and Polynesia, and another in these areas and in Micronesia
as well. Of the first, Hawaii shows the smallest proportion, followed by
central Polynesia, Samoa, and New Zealand, in the order given. Of the
second, Hawaii shows the largest proportion, followed by the other
island-groups in the same order as above, only with much greater
differences between the extremes, i. e. Hawaii shows five times as many
incidents of this most widely distributed type as does New Zealand. It
thus becomes once more apparent that Hawaii has had less Melanesian
influence brought to bear upon it than the rest of Polynesia, and also
that it shows close relationship to Micronesia.

To sum up, then, it may be said that from a study of the distribution of
myth-incidents Polynesian mythology, as known to us today, bears
evidences of a composite origin. The facts may be reasonably explained
by assuming that the ancestors of the Polynesian people were immigrants
from the west and that they came into the area in at least two waves: an
earlier, one branch of which, barely touching the edge of northern
Melanesia, passed northward into Hawaii, while the main body delayed
longer in Melanesian territory and extended over the remainder of the
area; and a later, which, after traversing Melanesia, spread mainly
through western and central Polynesia to New Zealand, and afterward sent
an offshoot from the central region northward to Hawaii. The latter
group and New Zealand, owing to their comparative isolation, preserved
more of their early inheritance, whereas in the remainder of the area
this original material was much changed and largely overlaid by the
tales introduced by the later immigrant wave. There are, to be sure,
various legends which do not exactly fit with this theory, but it at
least serves as a working hypothesis and harmonizes remarkably with the
data obtained from the study of other aspects of Polynesian culture.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

In the foregoing discussion of Polynesian mythology no attempt has been
made to explain or to interpret the various myths. Although some of them
undoubtedly show features characteristic of sun-myths, moon-myths, and
so forth, and although certain scholars have recognized a solar and
lunar cycle of tales of supposedly separate origin, it seems wise to go
very slowly in any such investigations. It has been so clearly
demonstrated that, in the transmission and migration of myths, the
original form of the tale may become so greatly modified by the
elimination of some incidents and the absorption of others as quite to
change its meaning and application, and it has been demonstrated that
myths originally told to account for or to explain one phenomenon
ultimately come to be applied to a very different one. Consequently we
need a much more detailed knowledge of the whole Oceanic area before
trustworthy conclusions can be reached.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II. Melanesia](om10)
