[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](om13)  [Next](om15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

# CHAPTER IV

### SUMMARY

THE material on the mythology of Melanesia, though incomplete and
fragmentary, appears rather clearly to prove the existence of two
distinct strata, one of which may be called Papuan, the other
Melanesian. The former is best represented among the Kai tribes of the
region north of Huon Gulf in German New Guinea, as well as by the
Baining and Sulka of northern New Britain, and may be traced, more or
less plainly, among the remaining coastal tribes of both German and
British New Guinea; whereas it is much less apparent in the Banks
Islands, the New Hebrides, and Fiji. The Melanesian stratum, on the
other hand, is perhaps best developed in eastern Melanesia, i. e. Santa
Cruz, the Banks Islands, the New Hebrides, and Fiji; though it is well
represented throughout the New Guinea littoral districts, among the
coast tribes of northern New Britain and in the Admiralty Islands. What
has been called the Papuan type of mythology seems to be characterized.
by a relative absence of cosmogonic myths, by the prominence of ghosts,
and by a general simplicity and *naïveté*; and this category also
appears to show an extensive development of tales of local distribution
only, corresponding to the discreteness and lack of relationship on the
linguistic side. The Melanesian stratum, on the other hand, exhibits a
considerably greater evolution on the side of cosmogony, an especial
fondness for cannibalistic tales, and a rudimentary dualistic character
which is revealed in the many stories of the wise and foolish culture
hero brothers. Further examination of this Melanesian type seems to
indicate that

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

it is by no means a unit, although, because of the character of the
material, any conclusions must be wholly tentative. The following
grouping is suggested: (1) myths of general distribution throughout
Melanesia; (2) those confined more or less strictly to New Guinea and
the immediate vicinity; and (3) those similarly restricted in their
distribution to Fiji, the New Hebrides, and the Banks and Santa Cruz
Islands.

If now, instead of limiting our view to Melanesia alone, we include the
whole of the Oceanic area and endeavour to discover the relationship of
Melanesian mythology to that of the adjacent sections, it appears that,
whereas of the two main types (the Papuan and Melanesian) the former
shows little in common with any of the other Oceanic regions, the
latter, on the contrary, exhibits numerous and interesting relationships
with Indonesia, Micronesia, and Polynesia, and some even with Australia.
The Melanesian type of incidents which reveal similarities with these
other areas may be divided into four groups: (1) those whose
resemblances are only with Indonesia; (2) only with Polynesia; (3) with
both Indonesia and Polynesia; and (4) with Micronesia. The first of
these groups is represented much more strongly in New Guinea than in the
eastern archipelago; and in New Guinea it is far more prominent on the
northern coast than on the southern. It would seem to manifest
influences from Indonesia which, in the course of migrations eastward,
did not extend beyond Melanesia, and which were greater in New Guinea
and its vicinity than in the eastern and more distant archipelagos. The
second group--rather unexpectedly--is, like the first, more prominent in
New Guinea than farther east, but is better represented on the south
coast than is the first group. From the character of the incidents and
their distribution in Melanesia and Polynesia this group itself would
appear to comprise (a) incidents preponderantly Melanesian, borrowed by
the Polynesian ancestors and carried with them into Polynesia, and (b)
incidents of Polynesian development which have been

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

transmitted westward as a result of the probable late reflex of
Polynesian peoples into parts of eastern Melanesia.

The third group, comprising myth-incidents from Indonesia, Melanesia,
and Polynesia, is contrasted with both the others in that it is best
represented in eastern Melanesia. Theoretically, these incidents may be
regarded as a portion of those brought by the Polynesian ancestors from
their Indonesian homes and still preserved by them in Polynesia. Their
presence in Melanesia would thus be hypothetically due to their having
been taken over from the migrant Polynesians, and their greater
prominence in the eastern archipelago would be expected, as it was
presumably in this area, rather than in New Guinea, that, during their
migration, the Polynesian ancestors made their longest halt and exerted
their greatest influence on the aboriginal population. The last group,
which is composed of those incidents common to Melanesia and Micronesia,
is about equally represented in New Guinea and the eastern archipelago.
The relatively large number of similarities between Micronesia and
Melanesia is only what we should expect, owing to the many evidences
derived from other sources, of relationship between the peoples of the
two areas; but the amount of agreement with eastern Melanesia is rather
striking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part III. Indonesia](om15)
