[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcwe05)  [Next](wcwe07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISAIM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Witch-Cult in Western Europe*, by Margaret Alice Murray, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VI. THE RITES (*continued*)

### WITCHES' RAIN-MAKING AND FERTILITY RITES

## 1. General

IN common with many other religions of the Lower Culture, the witch-cult
of Western Europe observed certain rites for rain-making and for causing
or blasting fertility. This fact was recognized in the papal Bulls
formulated against the witches who were denounced, not for moral
offences, but for the destruction of fertility. The celebrated Decree of
Innocent VIII, which in 1488 let loose the full force of the Church
against the witches, says that 'they blight the marriage bed, destroy
the births of women and the increase of cattle; they blast the corn on
the ground, the grapes of the vineyard, the fruits of the trees, the
grass and herbs of the field'. Adrian VI followed this up in 1521 with a
Decretal Epistle, denouncing the witches 'as a Sect deviating from the
Catholic Faith, denying their Baptism, and showing Contempt of the
Ecclesiastical Sacraments, treading Crosses under their Feet, and,
taking the Devil for their Lord, destroyed. the Fruits of the Earth by
their Enchantments, Sorceries, and Superstitions'.

The charms used by the witches, the dances, the burning of the god and
the broadcast scattering of his ashes, all point to the fact that this
was a fertility cult; and this is the view taken also by those
contemporary writers who give a more or less comprehensive account of
the religion and ritual. Though most of the fertility or anti-fertility
charms remaining to us were used by the witches either for their own
benefit or to injure their enemies, enough remains to show that
originally all these charms were to promote fertility in general and in
particular. When the charm was for fertility in general, it was
performed by the whole congregation together; but for the fertility of
any particular woman, animal, or field, the ceremony was performed by
one witch alone or by two at most.

The power which the witches claimed to possess over human fertility is
shown in many of the trials. Jonet Clark was tried in Edinburgh in 1590
'for giving and taking away power from sundry men's
Genital-members';\[1\] and in the same year and place Bessie Roy was
accused of causing women's milk to dry up.\[2\] The number of midwives
who practised witchcraft points also to this fact; they claimed to be
able to cause and to prevent pregnancy, to cause and to prevent an easy
delivery, to cast the labour-pains on an animal or a human being
(husbands who were the victims are peculiarly incensed against these
witches), and in every way to have power over the generative organs of
both sexes. In short, it is possible to say that, in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, the better the midwife the better the witch.

The Red Book of Appin,\[3\] which was obtained from the Devil by a
trick, is of great interest in this connexion. It was said to contain
charms for the curing of diseases of cattle; among them must certainly
have been some for promoting the fertility of the herds in general, and
individual animals in particular. It is not unlikely that the charms as
noted in the book were the result of many experiments, for we know that
the witches were bound to give account to the Devil of all the magic
they performed in the intervals between the Sabbaths, and he or his
clerk recorded their doings. From this record the Devil instructed the
witches. It is evident from the confessions and the evidence at the
trials that the help of the witches was often required to promote
fertility among human beings as well as among animals. The number of
midwives who were also witches was very great, and the fact can hardly
be accidental.

Witches were called in to perform incantations during the various events
of a farm-yard. Margrat Og of Aberdeen, 1597, was 'indyttit as a
manifest witche, in that, be the space of a yeirsyn or theirby, thy kow
being in bulling, and James

\[1. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 206; Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 301.

2\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 207.

3\. J. G. Campbell, pp. 293-4. The book was in manuscript, and when last
heard of was in the possession of the now-extinct Stewarts of
Invernahyle.\]

Farquhar, thy awin gude son haulding the kow, thow stuid on the ane syd
of the kow, and thy dochter, Batrix Robbie, on the vther syd, and quhen
the bull was lowping the kow, thow tuik a knyff and keist ower the kow,
and thy dochter keapit the sam, and keist it over to the agane, and this
ye did thryiss, quililk thou can nocht deny'.\[1\] At Auldearne the
Coven, to which Isobel Gowdie belonged, performed a ceremony to obtain
for themselves the benefit of a neighbour's crop. 'Befor Candlemas, we
went be-east Kinlosse, and ther we yoaked an plewghe of paddokis. The
Divell held the plewgh, and Johne Yownge in Mebestowne, our Officer, did
drywe the plewghe. Paddokis did draw the plewgh as oxen; quickens wer
sowmes, a riglen's horne was a cowter, and an piece of an riglen's horne
was an sok. We went two seueral tymes abowt; and all we of the Coeven
went still wp and downe with the plewghe, prayeing to the Divell for the
fruit of that land, and that thistles and brieris might grow ther'.\[2\]
Here the ploughing ceremony was to induce fertility for the benefit of
the witches, while the draught animals and all the parts of the plough
connoted barrenness for the owner of the soil.

The most detailed account of a charm for human fertility is given in the
confession of the Abbé Guibourg, who appears to have been the Devil of
the Paris witches. The ceremony took place at the house of a
witch-midwife named Voisin or Montvoisin, and according to the editor
was for the benefit of Louis XIV or Charles II, two of the most
notorious libertines of their age.

'Il a fait chez la Voisin, revêtu d'aube, d'étole et de manipule, une
conjuration en présence de la Des Oeillets \[attendant of Madame de
Montespan\], qui prétendait faire un charme pour le (Roi) et qui était
accompagnée d'un homme qui lui donna la conjuration, et comme il était
nécessaire d'avoir du sperme des deux sexes, Des Oeillets ayant ses mois
n'en put donner mais versa dans le calice de ses menstrues et l'homme
qui l'accompagnait, ayant passé dans la ruelle du lit avec lui Guibourg,
versa de son sperme dans le calice. Sur

\[1. *Spalding Club. Misc*., i, p. 143.

2\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603. 'Toads did draw the plough as oxen,
couch-grass was the harness and trace-chains, a gelded animal's horn was
the Coulter, and a piece of a gelded animal's horn was the sock.'\]

le tout, la Des Oeillets et l'homme mirent chacun d'une poudre de sang
de chauve-souris et de la farine pour donner un corps plus ferme à toute
la composition et aprés qu'iI eut récité la conjuration il tira le tout
du calice qui fut mis dans un petit vaisseau que la Des Oeillets ou
l'homme emporta.'\[1\]

The ecclesiastical robes and the use of the chalice point to this being
a ceremony of a religious character, and should be compared with the
child-sacrifices performed by the same priest or Devil (see pp. 150,
157).

An anti-fertility rite, which in its simplicity hardly deserves the name
of a ceremony, took place at Crook of Devon in Kinross-shire. Bessie
Henderson 'lykeways confessed and declared that Janet Paton was with you
at ane meeting when they trampit down Thos. White's rie in the beginning
of harvest, 1661, and that she had broad soals and trampit down more nor
any of the rest'.\[2\]

## 2. Rain-making

The rain-making powers of the witches have hardly been noted by writers
on the subject, for by the time the records were made the witches were
credited with the blasting of fertility rather than its increase. Yet
from what remains it is evident that the original meaning of much of the
ritual was for the production of fertilizing rain, though both judges
and witnesses believed that it was for storms and hail.

One of the earliest accounts of such powers is given in the story quoted
by Reginald Scot from the *Malleus Maleficarum*, written in 1487, a
century before Scot's own book:

'A little girle walking abroad with hir father in his land, heard him
complaine of drought, wishing for raine, etc. Whie father (quoth the
child) 'can make it raine or haile, when and where I list: He asked
where she learned it. She said, of hir mother, who forbad hir to tell
anie bodie thereof. He asked hir how hir mother taught hir? She
answered, that hir mother committed hir to a maister, who would at anie
time doo anie thing for hir. Whie then (said he) make it raine but onlie
in my field. And so she went to the streame, and threw vp water in hir
maisters name, and made it raine presentlie. And proceeding further with
hir father, she made it haile in

\[1. Ravaisson, 1679-81, p. 336.

2\. Burns Begg, p. 224.\]

another field, at hir father's request. Herevpon he accused his wife,
and caused hir to be burned; and then he new christened his child
againe.'\[1\]

Scot also gives 'certaine impossible actions' of witches when he
ridicules the belief

'that the elements are obedient to witches, and at their commandement;
or that they may at their pleasure send raine, haile, tempests, thunder,
lightening; when she being but an old doting woman, casteth a flint
stone ouer hir left shoulder, towards the west, or hurleth a little sea
sand vp into the element, or wetteth a broome sprig in water, and
sprinkleth the same in the aire; or diggeth a pit in the earth, and
putting water therein, stirreth it about with hir finger; or boileth
hogs bristles; or laieth sticks acrosse vpon a banke, where neuer a drop
of water is; or burieth sage till it be rotten; all which things are
confessed by witches, and affirmed by writers to be the meanes that
witches vse to mooue extraordinarie tempests and raine'.\[2\]

More quotes Wierus to the same effect: 'Casting of Flint-Stones behind
their backs towards the West, or flinging a little Sand in the Air, or
striking a River with a Broom, and so sprinkling the Wet of it toward
Heaven, the stirring of Urine or Water with their finger in a Hole in
the ground, or boyling of Hogs Bristles in a Pot.'\[3\]

The throwing of stones as a fertility rite is found in the trial of
Jonet Wischert, one of the chief witches at Aberdeen, and is there
combined with a nudity rite. 'In hervest last bypast, Mr. William Raves
huikes \[saw thee at\] the heid of thi awin gudmannis croft, and saw the
tak all thi claiss about thi heid, and thow beand naikit from the
middill down, tuik ane gryte number of steynis, and thi self gangand
baklenis, keist ane pairt behind the our thi heid, and ane wther pairt
fordward.'\[4\]

## 3. Fertility

Every contemporary writer who gives a general view of the religion and
ritual observes the witches' powers over human fertility. Boguet says,
'Ils font encor cacher & retirer les

\[1. Reg. Scot, Bk. III, p. 60.

2\. Id., Bk. III, p. 60.

3\. More, p. 168.

4\. *Spalding Club Misc*., i, p. 93.\]

parties viriles, et puis les font ressortir quand il leur plait. Ils
empeschent aussi tantost la copulation charnelle de l'hom\[m\]e & de la
femme, en retirant les nerfs, & ostant la roideur du membre; et tantost
la procreation en destournant ou bouchant les conduicts de la semence,
pour empescher qu'elle ne descende aux vases de la generation.'\[1\]
Scot, who quotes generally without any acknowledgement and often
inaccurately, translates this statement, 'They also affirme that the
vertue of generation is impeached by witches, both inwardlie, and
outwardlie: for intrinsecallie they represse the courage, and they stop
the passage of the mans seed, so as it may not descend to the vessels of
generation: also they hurt extrinsecallie, with images, hearbs,
&c.'\[2\] Bodin also remarks that witches, whether male or female, can
affect only the generative organs.\[3\] Madame Bourignon says that the
girls, whom she befriended,

'told me, that Persons who were thus engaged to the Devil by a precise
Contract, will allow no other God but him, and therefore offer him
whatsoever is dearest to them; nay, are constrained to offer him their
Children, or else the Devil would Beat them, and contrive that they
should never arrive to the State of Marriage, and so should have no
Children, by reason that the Devil hath power by his Adherents, to
hinder both the one and the other . . . So soon as they come to be able
to beget Children, the Devil makes them offer the desire which they have
of Marrying, to his Honor: And with this all the Fruit that may proceed
from their Marriage. This they promise voluntarily, to the end that they
may accomplish their Designs: For otherwise the Devil threatens to
hinder them by all manner of means, that they shall not Marry, nor have
Children.'\[4\]

Glanvil, writing on the Scotch trials of 1590, speaks of some Effects,
Kinds, or Circumstances of Witchcraft, such as the giving and taking
away power from sundry men's Genital-members. For which Jannet Clark was
accused.'\[5\] In the official record Jonet Clark was tried and
condemned for 'gewing of ane secreit member to Iohnne Coutis; and gewing
and taking of power fra sindrie mennis memberis. Item, fylit of taking
Iohnne Wattis secreit member fra him.'\[6\]

\[1. Boguet, p. 211.

2\. R. Scot, p. 77.

3\. Bodin, pp. 125-7.

4\. Bourignon, *Vie*, pp. 222-3; Hale, pp. 37-8.

5\. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 301.

6\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 206.\]

Sexual ritual occurs in many religions of the Lower Culture and has
always horrified members of the higher religions both in ancient and
modern times. In fertility cults it is one of the chief features, not
only symbolizing the fertilizing power in the whole animate world, but,
in the belief of the actors, actually assisting it and promoting its
effects.

Such fertility rites are governed by certain rules, which vary in
different countries, particularly as to the age of girls, i.e. whether
they are over or under puberty. Among the witches there appears to have
been a definite rule that no girl under puberty had sexual intercourse
with the Devil. This is even stated as a fact by so great an authority
as Bodin: 'Les diables ne font point de paction expresse auec les
enfans, qui leurs sont vouëz, s'ils n'ont attaint l'aage de
puberté.'\[1\] The details of the trials show that this statement is
accurate. 'Magdalene de la Croix, Abbesse des Moniales de Cordoüe en
Espaigne, confessa que Satan n'eust point copulation, ny cognoissance
d'elle, qu'elle n'eust douze ans.'\[2\] Bodin and De Lancre both cite
the case of Jeanne Hervillier of Verbery in Compiègne; she was a woman
of fifty-two at the time of her trial in 1578, She 'confessa qu'à l'aage
de douze ans sa mere la presenta au diable, en forme d'vn grand homme
noir, & vestu de noir, botté, esperonné, auec vne espée an costé, et vn
cheual noir à la porte, auquel la mere dit: Voicy ma fille que ie vous
ay promise: Et à la fille, Voicy vostre amy, qui vous fera bien
heureuse, et deslors qu'elle renonça à Dieu, & à la religion, & puis
coucha auec elle charnellement, en la mesme sorte & maniere que' font
les hommes auec les femmes.'\[3\] De Lancre also emphasizes the age:
'Ieanne Haruillier depose qu'encore sa mere l'eust voüée à Satan dés sa
naissance, neantmoins qu'il ne la cognut charnellement qu'elle n'eust
attainct l'aage de douze ans.'\[4\] De Lancre's own experience points in
the same direction; he found that the children were not treated in the
same way as

\[1. Bodin, p. 465.

2\. Id., p. 465. The trial was in 1545, Magdalene being then forty-two.
See also *Pleasant Treatise*, p. 6.

3\. Id., p. 227.

4\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 183.\]

adults, nor were they permitted to join in all the ceremonies until
after they had passed childhood.\[1\]

The same rule appears to have held good in Scotland, for when little
Jonet Howat was presented to the Devil, he said, 'What shall I do with
such a little bairn as she?'\[2\] It is, however, rare to find
child-witches in Great Britain, therefore the rules concerning them are
difficult to discover.

Another rule appears to have been that there was no sexual connexion
with a pregnant woman. In the case of Isobel Elliot, the Devil 'offered
to lie with her, but forbore because she was with child; that after she
was *kirked* the Devil often met her, and had *carnal copulation* with
her'.\[3\]

Since the days of Reginald Scot it has been the fashion of all those
writers who disbelieved in the magical powers of witches to point to the
details of the sexual intercourse between the Devil and the witches as
proof positive of hysteria and hallucination. This is not the attitude
of mind of the recorders who heard the evidence at the trials. 'Les
confessions des Sorciers, que i'ay eu en main, me font croire qu'il en
est quelque chose: dautant qu'ils ont tous recogneu, qu'ils auoient esté
couplez auec le Diable, et que la semence qu'il iettoit estoit fort
froide; Ce qui est conforme à ce qu'en rapporte Paul Grilland, et les
Inquisiteurs de la foy.'\[4\] It pleaseth their new Maister oftentimes
to offer himselfe familiarly vnto them, to dally and lye with them, in
token of their more neere coniunction, and as it were marriage vnto
him.'\[5\] '*Witches* confessing, so frequently as they do, that the
Devil *lies with them*, and withal complaining of his tedious and
offensive *coldness*, it is a shrewd presumption that he doth lie with
them indeed, and that it is not a meer *Dream*.'\[6\]

It is this statement of the physical coldness of the Devil which modern
writers adduce to prove their contention that the witches suffered from
hallucination. I have shown above (pp. 61 seq.) that the Devil was often
masked and his whole person covered with a disguise, which accounts for
part of the evidence but not for all, and certainly not for the most
important item. For in trial after trial, in places far removed from

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, pp. 145, 398. Kinloch, p. 124.

2\. Arnot, p. 360.

3\. Boguet, p. 68.

4\. Cooper, p. 92.

5\. More, p. 241.\]

one another and at periods more than a century apart, the same fact is
vouched for with just the small variation of detail which shows the
actuality of the event. This is that, when the woman admitted having had
sexual intercourse with the Devil, in a large proportion of cases she
added, 'The Devil was cold and his seed likewise.' These were women of
every class and every age, from just above puberty to old women of over
seventy, unmarried, married, and widows. It is unscientific to
disbelieve everything, as Scot does, and it is equally unscientific to
label all the phenomena as the imagination of hysterical women. By the
nature of things the whole of this evidence rests only on the word of
the women, but I have shown above (pp. 63-5) that there were cases in
which the men found the Devil cold, and cases in which the women found
other parts of the Devil's person to be cold also. Such a mass of
evidence cannot be ignored, and in any other subject would obtain
credence at once. But the hallucination-theory, being the easiest,
appears to have obsessed the minds of many writers, to the exclusion of
any attempt at explanation from an unbiassed point of view.

Students of comparative and primitive religion have explained the custom
of sacred marriages as an attempt to influence the course of nature by
magic, the people who practise the rite believing that thereby all crops
and herds as well as the women were rendered fertile, and that
barrenness was averted. This accounts very well for the occurrence of
'obscene rites' among the witches, but fails when it touches the
question of the Devil's coldness. I offer here an explanation which I
believe to be the true one, for it accounts for all the facts; those
facts which the women confessed voluntarily and without torture or fear
of punishment, like Isobel Gowdie, or adhered to as the truth even at
the stake amid the flames, like Jane Bosdeau.

In ancient times the Sacred Marriage took place usually once a year; but
besides this ceremony there were other sexual rites which were not
celebrated at a fixed season, but might be performed in the precincts of
the temple of a god or goddess at any time, the males being often the
priests or temple officials. These are established facts, and it is not
too much to suppose that the witches' ceremonies were similar. But if
the women believed that sexual intercourse with the priests would
increase fertility, how much more would they believe in the efficacy of
such intercourse with the incarnate God of fertility himself. They would
insist upon it as their right, and it probably became compulsory at
certain seasons, such as the breeding periods of the herds or the sowing
and reaping periods of the crops. Yet as the population and therefore
the number of worshippers in each 'congregation' increased, it would
become increasingly difficult and finally impossible for one man to
comply with the requirements of so many women.\[1\] The problem then was
that on the one hand there were a number of women demanding what was in
their eyes a thing essential for themselves and their families, and on
the other a man physically unable to satisfy all the calls upon him. The
obvious solution of the problem is that the intercourse between the
Chief and the women was by artificial means, and the evidence in the
trials points clearly to this solution.

Artificial phalli are well known in the remains of ancient
civilizations. In ancient Egypt it was not uncommon to have statues of
which the phallus was of a different material from the figure, and so
made that it could be removed from its place and carried in procession.
The earliest of such statues are the colossal limestone figures of the
fertility-god Min found at Koptos, dating to the first dynasty, perhaps
B.C. 5500.\[2\] But similar figures are found at every period of
Egyptian history, and a legend was current at the time of Plutarch to
account for this usage as well as for the festival of the
Phallephoria.\[3\] Unless the phallus itself were the object of
adoration there would be no reason to carry it in procession as a
religious ceremony, and it is easily understandable that such a cult
would commend itself chiefly to women.\[4\]

\[1. The Deuill your maister, beand in liknes of ane beist, haid carnall
\[deal\] with ilk ane of you.'-*Spalding Club Misc*., i, p. 149.

2\. Petrie pp. 7-9; Capart, p. 223.

3\. Plutarch, *De Iside et Osiride*, xviii, 5.

4\. On the other hand, the female generative organs were also adored,
and presumably by men. This suggestion is borne out by the figures of
women with the pudenda exposed and often exaggerated in size. Such
figures are found in Egypt, where they were called Baubo, and a legend
was invented to account for the attitude; and similar figures were
actually known in ancient Christian churches (Payne Knight, Discourse on
the Worship of Priapus).\]

The phallus of a divine statue was not always merely for adoration and
carrying in procession; the Roman bride sacrificed her virginity to the
god Priapus as a sacred rite. This is probably the remains of a still
more ancient custom when the god was personated by a man and not by an
image. The same custom remained in other parts of the world as the *jus
primae noctis*, which was held as an inalienable right by certain kings
and other divine personages. As might be expected, this custom obtained
also among the witches.

'Le Diable faict des mariages au Sabbat entre les Sorciers & Sorcieres,
& leur joignant les mains, il leur dict hautement

Esta es buena parati  
Esta parati lo toma.

Mais auant qu'ils couchent ensemble, il s'accouple auec elles, oste la
virginité des filles.'--Ieannette d'Abadie, aged sixteen, 's'accusoit
elle mesme d'auoir esté depucellee par Satan.'\[1\]

The occasional descriptions of the Devil's phallus show without question
its artificial character:

In 1598 in Lorraine 'es sagte die Alexia Dragaea, ihre Bulschafft hätte
einen \[Glied\] so starcken etc allezeit gehabt, wenn ihm gestanden, und
so gross als ein Ofengabel-Stiel, dessgleichen sie zugegen zeigte, denn
ohngefehr eine Gabel zugegen war, sagte auch wie sie kein Geleuth weder
Hoden noch Beutel daran gemerckt hat'.\[2\]

'Iaquema Paget adioustoit, qu'elle auoit empoigné plusieurs fois auec la
main le membre du Demon, qui la cognoissoit, et que le membre estoit
froid comme glace, long d'vn bon doigt, & moindre en grosseur que celuy
d'vn homme. Tieuenne Paget et Antoine Tornier adioustoient aussi, que le
membre de leurs Demons estoit long et gros, comme l'vn de leurs
doigts.'\[3\] 'Il a au deuant son membre tiré et pendant, & le monstre
tousiours long d'vn coudée.--Le membre du Demon est faict à escailles
comme vn poisson.--Le membre du Diable

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, pp. 132, 404.

2\. Remigius, pt. i, p. 19.

3\. Boguet, pp. 68-9.\]

s'il estoit estendu est long enuiron d'vne aulne, mais il le tient
entortillé et sinueux en forme de serpent.--Le Diable, soit qu'il ayt la
forme d'homme, on qu'il soit en forme de Bouc, a tousiours vn membre de
mulet, ayant choisy en imitation celuy de cet animal comme le mieux
pourueu. Il l'a long et gros comme le bras.--Le membre du Diable est
long enuiron la moitié d'vne aulne, de mediocre grosseur, rouge, obscur,
& tortu, fort rude & comme piquant.--Ce mauuais Demon ait son membre
myparty, moitié de fer, moitié de chair tout de son long, & de mesme les
genitoires. Il tient tousiours son membre dehors.--Le Diable a le membre
faict de corne, ou pour le moins il en a I'apparence: c'est pourquoy il
faict tant crier les femmes.--Jeannette d'Abadie dit qu'elle n'a iamais
senty, qu'il eust aucune semence, sauf quand il la depucella qu'elle la
sentit froide, mais que celle des autres hommes qui l'ont cognue, est
naturelle.'\[1\]

Sylvine de la Plaine, 1616, confessed 'qu'il a le membre faict comme vn
cheual, en entrant est froid comme glace, iette la semence fort froide,
& en sortant la brusle comme si c'estoit du feu'.\[1\] In 1662 Isobel
Gowdie said, 'His memberis ar exceiding great and long; no man's
memberis ar so bigg as they ar.'\[3\].

The artificial phallus will account as nothing else can for the pain
suffered by many of the women; and that they suffered voluntarily, and
even gladly, can only be understood by realizing that they endured it
for motives other than physical satisfaction and pleasure. 'There
appeared a great *Black Goal* with a *Candle* between his Horns . . . He
had carnal knowledge of her which was with great pain." 'Presque toutes
les Sorcieres rapportent que cet accouplement leur est le plus souuent
des-agreable, tant pour la laideur & deformité de Satan, que pour ce
qu'elles y ont vne extreme douleur.'\[5\] 'Elle fuyoit l'accouplement du
Diable, à cause qu'ayant son membre faict en escailles il fait souffrir
vne extresme douleur.'\[6\] At the Sabbath in the Basses Pyrénées, the
Devil took the women behind some sort of screen, and the children 'les
oyent crier comme personnes qui souffrent vne grande douleur, et ils les
voyent aussi tost reuenir au Sabbat

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, pp. 68, 224-6.

2\. Id., *L'Incredulité*, p. 808.

3\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 610.

4\. F. Hutchinson, *Historical Essays*, p. 47.

5\. Boguet, p. 69.

6\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 132.\]

toutes sanglantes'.\[1\] As regards brides, 'En cet accouplement il leur
faict perdre vne infinité de sang, et leur faict souffrit mille
douleurs.'\[2\] Widow Bush of Barton said that the Devil, who came to
her as a young black man, 'was colder than man, and heavier, and could
not performe nature as man.'\[3\]

The physical coldness of the Devil is vouched for in all parts of
Europe.'\[4\]

Toutes les Sorcieres s'accordent en cela, que la semence, qu'elles
reçoiuent du Diable, est froide comme glace: Spranger & les
Inquisiteurs, qui en ont veu. vne infinité, l'escriuent ainsi. Remy, qui
a fait le procez à plus de deux milles Sorciers, en porte vn tesmoignage
irrefragable. Ie puis asseurer au semblable, que celles, qui me sont
passées par les mains, en ont confessé tout autant. Que si la semence
est ainsi froide, il s'ensuit qu'elle est destituée de ses esprits
vitaux, & ainsi qu'elle ne peut estre cause d'aucune generation.'\[5\]

Isobel Gowdie and Janet Breadheid of Auldearne both said that the Devil
was 'a meikle, blak, roch man, werie cold; and I fand his nature als
cold within me as spring-well-water'. Isobel continues, 'He is abler for
ws that way than any man can be, onlie he ves heavie lyk a malt-sek; a
hudg nature, verie cold, as yce.'\[6\]

Another point which goes to prove that the intercourse was by artificial
means was that pregnancy did not follow, except by special consent of
the woman. Jeannette d'Abadie, aged sixteen, said, 'Elle fuyoit
l'accouplement du Diable, à cause qu'ayant son membre faict en escailles
il fait souffrir vne extresme douleur; outre que la semence est
extresmement froide, si bien qu'elle n'engrosse iamais, ni celle des
autres hommes au

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 219.

2\. Id. ib., p. 404.

3\. Stearne, p. 29. The following references are in chronological order,
and are only a few out of the many trials in which this coldness of the
Devil is noted: 1565, Cannaert, p. 54; 1567, De Lancre, *Tableau*, p.
132; 1578, Bodin, *Fléau*, p. 227; 1590, Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 219;
1598, Boguet, *op. cit*., pp. 8, 412, 1645, Stearne, p. 29; 1649,
Pitcairn, iii, p. 599; 1652, Van Elven, *La Tradition* 1891, V, p. 215;
1661, Kinloch and Baxter, p. 132; 1662, Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 611,
617; 1662, Burns Begg, x, pp. 222, 224, 231-2, 234; 1678, Fountainhall,
i, p. 14; 1682, Howell, Viii, 1032; 170r, *Trials of Elinor Shaw*, p. 6.

4\. Boguet, p. 92.

5\. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 603, 611, 617.\]

sabbat, bien qu'elle soit naturelle.'\[1\] Boguet remarks, 'Il me
souuient, qu'Antoinette Tornier, & Antoinette Gandillon, estans
interroguées, si elles craignoient point de deuenir enceintes des œuures
du Diable; l'vne respondit qu'elle estoit trop vieille; l'autre que Dieu
ne le vouloit pas permettre.'\[2\] According to Jeanne Hervillier, the
Devil 'coucha auec elle charnellement, en la mesme sorte & maniere que
font les hommes auec les femmes, horsmis que la semence estoit froide.
Cele dit elle continua tous les huict ou quinze iours. . . . Et vn iour
le diable luy demanda, si elle vouloit estre enceinte de luy, ce qu'elle
ne voulut pas.'\[3\] But when the witch was willing to have a child, it
is noticeable that there is then no complaint of the Devil's coldness.
At Maidstone in 1652 'Anne Ashby, Anne Martyn, and one other of their
Associates, pleaded that they were with child pregnant, but confessed it
was not by any man, but by the Divell. . . . Anne Ashby and Anne Martyn
confessed that the Divell had known them carnally, and that they had no
hurt by it.'\[4\]

The Devil appears to have donned or doffed his disguise in the presence
of his worshippers, and this was often the case at the time of the
sexual rites, whether public or private:

'Il cognoist les Sorcieres tantost en forme d'homme tout noir, & tantost
en forme de beste, comme d'vn chien, d'vn chat, d'vn bouc, d'vn mouton.
Il cognoissoit Thieuenne Paget, & Antoine Tornier en forme d'vn homme
noir: Et lors qu'il accouploit auec Iaquema Paget, & Antoine Gandillon,
il prenoit la figure d'vn mouton noir, portant des cornes. Françoise
Secretain a dit que son Demon se mettoit tantost en chien, tantost en
chat, et tantost en poule, quand il la vouloit cognoistre charnellement.
Or tout cecy me fait de tant mieux asseurer l'accouplement reel du
Sorcier, & de la Sorciere auec le Demon.'\[5\]

In the Basses-Pyrénées Marie d'Aspilcouette 'disoit le mesme, pour ce
qui est du membre en escailles, mais elle deposoit, que lors qu'il les
vouloit cognoistre, il quitoit la forme de Bouc, & prenoit celle
d'homme'.\[6\] 'Il entra dans sa chambre en forme d'ung chat et se
changea en la posture d'un

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 132.

2\. Boguet, p. 78.

3\. Bodin, p. 227.

4\. *A Prodigious and Tragicall Historie*, pp. 4, 5.

5\. Boguet, p. 70.

6\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 225.\]

home vestu de rouge.'\[1\] At an attempt to wreck a ship in a great
storm 'the devil was there present with them all, in the shape of a
great horse. . . . They returned all in the same like. ness as of
before, except that the devil was in the shape of a man.'\[2\] 'The
Deivill apeired vnto her, in the liknes of ane prettie boy in grein
clothes. . . . And at that tyme the Deivil gaive hir his markis; and
went away from her in the liknes of ane blak doug.'\[3\] 'He wold haw
carnall dealling with ws in the shap of a deir, or in any vther shap,
now and then. Somtym he vold be lyk a stirk, a bull, a deir, a rae, or a
dowg, etc., and haw dealling with ws.'\[4\] 'Yow the said Margaret
Hamilton, relict of James Pullwart . . . had carnall cowpulatiown with
the devil in the lyknes of ane man, bot he removed from yow in the
lyknes of ane black dowg.'\[5\] The most important instance is in
Boguet's description of the religious ceremony at the Sabbath:
'Finalement Satan apres auoir prins la figure d'vn Bouc, se consume en
feu, & reduit en cendre.'\[6\]

The witches' habit of speaking of every person of the other sex with
whom they had sexual intercourse at the Sabbath as a 'devil' has led to
much confusion in the accounts. The confusion has been accentuated by
the fact that both male and female witches often used a disguise, or
were at least veiled. 'Et pource que les hommes ne cedent guieres aux
femmes en lubricité, c'est pourquoy le Demon se met aussi en femme ou
Succube. . . . Ce qu'il fait principalement au Sabbat, selon que l'ont
rapporté Pierre Gandillon, & George Gandillon, pere & fils, & les
autres, lesquels disent tout vnanimement, qu'en leurs assemblées il y a
plusieurs Demons, & que les vns exercent le mestier de l'homme pour les
femmes, & les autres le mestier des femmes pour les hommes.'\[7\] 'The
Incubus's in the shapes of proper men satisfy the desires of the
Witches, and the Succubus's serve for Whores to the Wizards.'\[8\]
Margaret

\[1. H. G. van Elveu, *La Tradition*, 1891, v, p. 215. Place and names
not given.

2\. Kinloch, pp. 122, 123.

3\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

4\. Id., iii, pp. 611, 613.

5\. *Scots Magazine*, 1817, p. 201.

6\. Boguet, p. 141.

7\. Id., p. 65.

8\. *Pleasant Treatise of Witches*, p. 6. The remembrance of the
numerous male devils at the Sabbath survives in the Samalsain dance in
the Basses-Pyrénées, where the male attendants on the King and Queen of
the dance are still called Satans. Moret, *Mystères Ègyptiens*, p.
247.\]

Johnson said the same: 'Their spirittes vsuallie have knowledge of
theire bodies . . . Shee also saith, that men Witches usualie have
woemen spirittes and woemen witches men spirittes.'\[1\] The girls under
Madame Bourignon's charge 'declared that they had daily carnal
Cohabitation with the Devil; that they went to the Sabbaths or Meetings,
where they Eat, Drank, Danc'd, and committed other Whoredom and
Sensualities. Every one had her Devil in form of a Man; and the Men had
their Devils in the form of a Woman. . . . They had not the least design
of changing, to quit these abominable Pleasures, as one of them of
Twenty-two Years old one day told me. *No*, said she, *I will not be
other than I am; I find too much content in my Condition; I am always
Caressed*." One girl of twelve said definitely that she knew the Devil
very well, 'that he was a Boy a little bigger than her self; and that he
was her Love, and lay with her every Night'; and another girl named
Bellot, aged fifteen, 'said her Mother had taken her with her \[to the
Sabbath\] when she was very Young, and that being a little Wench, this
Man-Devil was then a little Boy too, and grew up as she did, having been
always her Love, and Caressed her Day and Night.'\[3\] Such connexions
sometimes resulted in marriage. Gaule mentions this fact in his general
account: 'Oft times he marries them ere they part, either to himselfe,
or their Familiar, or to one another; and that by the Book of Common
Prayer (as a pretender to witchfinding lately told me in the Audience of
many).'\[4\] This statement is borne out in the trials: 'Agnes Theobalda
sagte, sie sey selbst zugegen auff der Hochzeit gewesen, da Cathalina,
und Engel von Hudlingen, ihren Beelzebub zur Ehe genommen haben.'\[5\]
The Devil of Isobel Ramsay's Coven was clearly her husband,\[6\] but
there is nothing to show whether the marriage took place before she
became

\[1. Baines, i, pp. 607-8, note.

2\. Bourignon, *Parole*, pp. 86, 87; Hale, pp. 26, 27.

3\. Id., *Vie*, p. 214, 211; Hale, pp. 29, 31.

4\. Gaule, p. 63.

5\. Remigius, p. 131.

6\. Record of Trial in the Edinburgh Justiciary Court.\]

a witch, as in the case of Janet Breadheid of Auldearne, whose husband
'enticed her into that craft'.\[1\] I have quoted above (p. 179) the
ceremony at the marriage of witches in the Basses-Pyrénées. Rebecca
Weste, daughter of a witch, married the Devil by what may be a primitive
rite; he came to her 'as shee was going to bed, and told her, he would
marry her, and that shee could not deny him; shee said he kissed her,
but was as cold as clay, and married her that night, in this manner; he
tooke her by the hand and lead her about the chamber, and promised to be
her loving husband till death, and to avenge her of her enemies; and
that then shee promised him to be his obedient wife till death, and to
deny God, and Christ Jesus.'\[2\] At Edinburgh in 1658 a young woman
called Anderson was tried: 'her confessioun was, that scho did marry the
devill.'\[3\] The Swedish witches in 1670 confessed that at Blockula
'the Devil had Sons and Daughters which he did marry together'.\[4\]
Giraldus Cambrensis gives an account of a 'spirit' in the, form of a
red-haired young man, called Simon, who 'was begotten upon the wife of a
rustic in that parish, by a demon, in the shape of her husband, naming
the man, and his father-in-law, then dead, and his mother, still alive;
the truth of which the woman upon examination openly avowed'.\[5\]

\[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 616.

2\. Howell, iv, 842.

3\. *Nicoll's Diary*, p. 212. *Bannatyne Club*.

4\. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 323.

5\. Davies, p. 183. Cp. also the birth of Merlin. Giraldus Cambrensis,
*Itinerary*, Bk. I, xii, 91 b.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Organization](wcwe07)
