[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Neopaganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wcwe03)  [Next](wcwe05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027ISAIM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Witch-Cult in Western Europe*, by Margaret Alice Murray, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IV. THE ASSEMBLIES

THERE were two kinds of assemblies; the one, known as the Sabbath, was
the General Meeting of all the members of the religion; the other, to
which I give-on the authority of Estebène de Cambrue--the name of Esbat,
was only for the special and limited number who carried out the rites
and practices of the cult, and was not for the general public.

The derivation of the word Sabbath in this connexion is quite unknown.
It has clearly nothing to do with the number seven, and equally clearly
it is not connected with the Jewish ceremonial. It is possibly a
derivative of *s'esbattre*, 'to frolic'; a very suitable description of
the joyous gaiety of the meetings.

## 1. Sabbath

*Locomotion.*-The method of going to the meetings varied according to
the distance to be traversed. In an immense majority of cases the means
of locomotion are not even mentioned, presumably therefore the witches
went on foot, as would naturally be the case in going to the local
meeting or Esbat, which was attended only by those who lived near. There
are, however, a few instances where it was thought worth while to
mention that the worshippers walked to the meeting. Boguet (1598), who
yields to none in his accounts of magical means of going to the Sabbath,
says, 'les Sorciers nea\[n\]tmoins vont quelquefois de pied au Sabbat,
ce qui leur aduient principalement, lors que le lieu, où ils font leur
assemblée, n'est pas guieres eslongné de leur habitation', and rites in
confirmation the evidence of George and Antoinette Gandillon and their
father Pierre, Clauda Ianprost, Clauda Ian-guillaume, Iaquema Paget,
Gros Iaques, the two brothers Claude and Claude Charloz, Pierre
Willermoz, l'Aranthon, Pernette Molard, Ianne Platet, and Clauda
Paget.\[1\] Iaquema Paget's account of how she and Antoine Tornier went
to a

\[1. Boguet, pp. 106-7.\]

meeting on their way home. from the harvest field (see p. 121), proves
that they were on foot. The Lang-Niddry witches (1608) clearly walked,
they 'convenit thame selffis at Deanefute of Lang-Niddry . . .
thaireffir thay past altogidder to the said Beigis hous in Lang-Nydry
\[where they drank\]; and thaireftir come with all thair speid to
Seaton-thorne be-north the zet; quhair the Devill. callit for the said
Christiane Tod, and past to Robert Smartis house, and brocht hir out....
And thay thaireftir past altogidder, with the Devill, to the irne zet of
Seatoun . . . And thaireftir come all bak agane to the Deane-fute,
quhair first thai convenit.'\[1\] The distance from Lang Niddry to
Seaton Castle is under a mile. Isaac de Queyran (1609), a young fellow
of twenty-five, told de Lancre that those living at a distance flew home
through the air, the near ones returned on foot.\[2\] Berthélemy Minguet
of Brécy was tried in 1616: 'Enquis, de quelle façon sa femme fut au
Sabbat la premiere fois. Respond, qu'elle y fut transportée par le
Diable, lequel la rapporta apres le Sabbat, & que la seconde fois
qu'elle y a esté, elle y fut de son pied avec luy, & s'en retourna de
son pied, & qu'elle n'y a iamais esté que ces deux fois.'\[3\] Helen
Guthrie of Forfar (1661) said that 'herselfe, Isobell Shyrie, and Elspet
Alexander, did meit togither at ane aile house near to Barrie, a litle
befor sunsett, efter they bade stayed in the said house about the spaice
of ane houre drinking of thrie pintis of ale togidder, they went foorth
to the sandis, and ther thrie other women met them, and the divell wes
there present with them all . . . and they parted so late that night
that she could get no lodging, but wes forced to lye at ane dyk syde all
night'.\[4\] Christian Grieve, of Crook of Devon (1662), acknowledged I
that ye came to the foresaid meeting immediately after your goodman and
the rest went to bed, and that ye locked the door and put the key under
the same, and that ye and the said Margaret Young your neighbor came
foot for foot to the foresaid meeting and that ye stayed at the foresaid
meeting about the space of two hours and came back again on your foot,
and the foresaid Margaret Young

\[1. Pitcairn, ii, pp. 542-3.

2\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 148.

3\. Id., *L'Incredulité*. P. 808.

4\. Kinloch, pp. 122-3.\]

with you, and found the key of the door in that same place where you
left it, and declared that neither your husband nor any other in the
house was waking at your return'.\[1\] At Lille (1661) the girl Bellot,
then aged fifteen, said that 'her Mother had taken her with her when she
was very Young, and had even carried her in her Arms to the Witches
Sabbaths or Assemblies'.\[2\] At Strathdown (eighteenth century) the
witches went along the side of the river Avon to Craic-pol-nain, fording
the river on foot.\[3\]

In the cases cited above there is nothing in the least bizarre or
extraordinary, but there are other methods recorded of reaching the
distant meetings. Sometimes the obvious means was by riding on a horse;
sometimes the witches were accused, or claimed the power, of flying
through the air, of riding in the air on a stick, of riding on animals
or human beings, which latter were sometimes in their own natural form
and sometimes enchanted into the form of animals.

The following instances are of those who rode to or from the meetings on
horseback. Agnes Sampson of North Berwick (1590) said that the Devil in
mans likeness met her going out in the fields from her own house at
*Keith*, betwixt five and six at even, being her alone and commanded her
to be at *North-berwick* Kirk the next night: And she passed there on
horse-back, conveyed by her Good-son, called Iohn Couper'.\[4\] Boguet
(1608) mentions, in passing, the fact that the witches sometimes rode on
horses.\[5\] The Lancashire witches (1613), after the meeting at Malking
Tower, 'went out of the said House in their owne shapes and likenesses.
And they all, by that they were forth of the dores, gotten on Horseback,
like vnto foals, some of one colour, some of another.\[6\] This was the
usual mode of locomotion among the Lancashire witches, for Margaret
Johnson (1633) said that at the meeting at Hoarstones 'there was, at
y<sup>t</sup> tyme, between 30 and 40 witches, who did all ride to the
said meetinge'.\[7\] Isobell Gowdie (1662) said, 'I haid a little horse,
and wold say, " Horse

\[1. Burns Begg, p. 239.

2\. Bourignon, *Vie*, p. 211; Hale, p. 29.

3\. Stewart, p. 174.

4\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 239. Spelling modernized.

5\. Boguet, p. 104.

6\. Potts, G4.

7\. Whitaker, p. 216.\]

and Hattock, in the Divellis name!"\[1\] The most detailed account is
from Sweden (1669):

'Another Boy confessed too, that one day he was carried away by his
Mistriss, and to perform the journey he took his own Father's Horse out
of the Meadow where it was, and upon his return she let the Horse go in
her own ground. The next morning the Boys Father sought for his Horse,
and not finding it, gave it over for lost; but the Boy told him the
whole story, and so his Father fetcht the Horse back again.'\[2\]

We now come to the marvellous and magical means of locomotion. The
belief in the power of witches to ride in the air is very ancient and
universal in Europe. They flew either unsupported, being carried by the
Devil, or were supported on a stick; sometimes, however, an animal which
they rode passed through the air. The flying was usually preceded by an
anointing of the whole or part of the body with a magical ointment.

The earliest example of unsupported flying is from Paul Grilland (1537),
who gives an account of an Italian witch in 1526, who flew in the air
with the help of a magic ointment.\[2\]

Reginald Scot (1584) says that the ointment 'whereby they ride in the
aire' was made of the flesh of unbaptized children, and gives two
recipes:

\[1\] 'The fat of yoong children, and seeth it with water in a brasen
vessell, reseruing the thickest of that which remaineth boiled in the
bottome, which they laie up and keepe, untill occasion serueth to use
it. They put hereunto Eleoselinum, Aconitum, Frondes populeas, and
Soote.' \[2\] 'Sium, acarum vulgare, pentaphyllon, the blood of a
flitter mouse, solanum somniferum, and oleum. They stampe all these
togither, and then they rubbe all parts of their bodys exceedinglie,
till they looke red, and be verie hot, so as the pores may be opened,
and their flesh soluble and loose. They ioine herewithall either fat, or
oil in steed thereof, that the force of the ointment maie the rather
pearse inwardly, and so be more effectuall. By this means in a moonlight
night they seeme to be carried in the aire.'\[4\]

\[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 604.

2\. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 320.

3\. Bodin, *Fléau*, p. 178.

4\. Scot, pp. 41, 184. Scot is as usual, extraordinarily in accurate in
his statements. The correct formulae, as given by Wierus, will be found
in Appendix V, with notes on the ingredients by Prof. A. J. Clark.\]

So far this is only hearsay evidence, but there is also a certain amount
of first-hand testimony, the witches declaring that they actually passed
through the air above ground, or had seen others do so.

In 1598 'Thieuenne Paget racontoit, que le Diable s'apparut à elle la
premiere fois en plein midy, en forme d'vn grand homme noir, & que comme
elle se fut baillée à luy, il l'embrassa & l'esleva en I'air, & la
transporta en la maison du prel de Longchamois . . . & puis \]a rapporta
au lieu mesme, où il l'auoit prise. Antide Colas disoit, que le soir,
que Satan s'apparut; à elle en forme d'vn homme de grande stature, ayant
sa barbe & ses habillemens noirs, il la transporta au Sabbat, & qu'aux
autres fois, il la venoit prendre dans son lict, & l'emportoit comme si
c'eust esté vn vent froid, l'empoignant par la teste.'\[1\]

Isaac de Queyran (1609), whose evidence has already been quoted, said
that the witches living at a distance flew home through the air.\[2\] In
France (1652) 'lors qu'elle vouloit aller aux danses, elle se oindoit
d'ung onguen qui lui estoit donné par vn sorcier envoyé par le diable.
Que lors elle s'en alloit comme ung vent aux dictes danses avecque les
aultres.'\[3\] At Crook of Devon (1661) Bessie Henderson confessed 'that
ye was taken out of your bed to that meeting in an flight'.\[4\] The
most detail comes from an English source: the Somerset witches (1664)
claimed that they habitually flew through the air by means of a magical
oil and magical words. Elizabeth Style said:

'Before they are carried to their meetings, they anoint their Foreheads,
and Hand-wrists with an Oyl the Spirit brings them (which smells raw)
and then they are carried in a very short time, using these words as
they pass, *Thout, tout a tout, tout, throughout and about*. And when
they go off from their Meetings, they say, *Rentum, Tormentum* . . . all
are carried to their several homes in a short space.' Alice Duke gave
the same testimony, noting besides that the oil was greenish in colour.
Anne Bishop, the Officer of the Somerset covens, confessed that 'her
Forehead being first anointed with

\[1. Boguet, p. 96.

2\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 148.

3\. H. G. van Elven, *La Tradition*, 1891, p. 215. Unfortunately neither
name nor place are given in the transcription.

4\. Burns Begg, 223.\]

a Feather dipt in Oyl, she hath been suddenly carried to the place of
their meeting. . . . After all was ended, the Man in black vanished. The
rest were oil a sudden conveighed to their homes.'\[1\]

The belief that the witches actually rode in the air seated on some
concrete object, such as an animal, a human being, or a stick, is both
ancient and universal, and is reflected in the ecclesiastical and civil
laws, of which the earliest is the decree of the ninth century,
attributed to the Council of Ancyra. 'Certeine wicked women following
sathans prouocations, being seduced by the illusion of diuels, beleeve
and professe, that in the night times they ride abroad, with *Diana*,
the goddesse of the *Pagans*, or else with *Herodias*, with an
innumerable multitude, vpon certeine beasts . . . and doo whatsoeuer
those fairies or ladies command.'\[2\] The laws of Lorraine (1329-46)
decree that 'celui qui fera magie, sortilège, billets de sort, pronostic
d'oiseau ou se vanteroit d'avoir chevauché la nurt avec Diane ou telle
autre vielle qui se dit magicienne, sera banni et payera dix livres
tournois'.\[3\]

The witches themselves confirmed the statements about riding on animals
to the Sabbath. Rolande du Vernier (1598) confessed 'que lors qu'elle y
fiat, elle y alla sur vn gros mouton noir, qui la portoit si viste en
I'air, qu'elle ne se pouuoit recognoistre'.\[4\] De Lancre says that the
witches 'se font porter iusqu'audit lieu, sur vne beste, qui semble
parfois vn cheual, & parfoys vn homme'.\[5\] Margaret Johnson (1633)
'saith, if they desyre to be in any place upon a sodaine, theire devill
or spirit will, upon a rodde, dogge, or any thinge els, presently convey
them thither'.\[6\] One of Madame Bourignon's girls, then aged twelve
(1661), declared that 'her said Lover came upon a little Horse, and took
her by the Hand, asking her if she would be his Mistress, and she saying
Ay, she was catched up into the Air with him and the other Girls, and
they

\[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 139, 141, 148-9. 151.

2\. Scot, Bk. iii, p. 66; Lea, iii, p. 493. I give Scot's translation as
being more racily expressed.

3\. J. Bournon, p. 19.

4\. Boguet, p. 96.

5\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 123.

6\. Whitaker, p. 216.\]

flew all together to a great Castle'.\[1\] The Swedish witches (1669)
said:

'He set us on a Beast which he had there ready, and carried us over
Churches and high walls . . . he gives us a horn with a Salve in it,
wherewith we do anoint our selves; and then he gives us a Saddle, with a
Hammer and a wooden nail, thereby to fix the Saddle; whereupon we call
upon the Devil, and away we go . . . For their journey they said they
made use of all sorts of Instruments, of Beasts, of Men, of Spits and
Posts. What the manner of their journey is, God alone knows . . .
Blockula is scituated in a delicate large Meadow whereof you can see no
end. They went into a little Meadow distinct from the other, where the
Beasts went that they used to ride on: But the Men whom they made use of
in their journey, stood in the House by the Gate in a slumbering
posture, sleeping against the wall.'\[2\]

Human beings were also said to be ridden upon in other places besides
Sweden. Agnes Spark of Forfar (1661) said she 'hard people ther present
did speake of Isabell Shirie, and say that shoe was the devill's horse,
and that the divill did allwayes ryde upon hir, and that shoe was shoad
lyke ane mare, or ane horse'.\[3\] Ann Armstrong, of a Northumbrian
Coven (1673).

'saith, that since she gave information against severall persons who
ridd her to severall places where they had conversation with the divell,
she hath beene severall times lately ridden by Anne Driden and Anne
Forster, and was last night ridden by them to the rideing house in the
close on the common . . . Whilst she was lying in that condition \[i.e.
"a fitt"\], which happened one night a little before Christmas, about
the change of the moone, the informant see the said Anne Forster come
with a bridle, and bridled her and ridd upon her crosse-leggd, till they
come to (the) rest of her companions at Rideing millne bridg-end, where
they usually mett. And when she light of her back, pulld the bridle of
this informer's head, now in the likenesse of a horse; but, when the
bridle was taken of, she stood up in her own shape . . . And when they
had done, bridled this informer, and the rest of the horses, and rid
home . . . Upon Collupp Munday last, being the tenth of February, the
said persons met at Allensford, where this

\[1. Bourignon, *Vie*, p, 214; Hale, p. 31.

2\. Horneck, pt. ii, pp. 316, 317, 318, 319, 321.

3\. Kinloch, p. 129.\]

informant was ridden upon by an inchanted bridle by Michael Aynsley and
Margaret his wife. Which inchanted. bridle, when they tooke it from her
head, she stood upp in her owne proper person . . . On Monday last at
night, she, being in her father's house, see one Jane Baites, of
Corbridge, come In the forme of a gray catt with a bridle hanging on her
foote, and breath'd upon her and struck her dead, and bridled her, and
rid upon her in the name of the devill southward, but the name of the
place she does not now remember. And the said Jane allighted and pulld
the bridle of her head.'\[1\]

The method of locomotion which has most impressed the popular
imagination and has become proverbial was riding on a stick, generally
said to be a broomstick. It must, however, be remembered that one of the
earliest cases on record of stick-riding does not definitely state that
the witch flew through the air. This was the case of the Lady Alice
Kyteler in 1324, when 'in rifleing the closet of the ladie, they found a
Pipe of oyntment, wherewith she greased a stafte, upon the which she
ambled and galloped through thick and thin, when and in what maner she
listed'.\[2\] Though Holinshed is not always a reliable authority, it is
worth while to compare this account with the stick-riding of the Arab
witches and the tree-riding of the Aberdeen Covens (see pp. 110, 134).

The number of cases vouched for by the persons who actually performed or
saw the feat of riding on a stick through the air are disappointingly
few. Guillaume Edeline, prior of St. Germain-en-Laye (1453), 'se mit en
telle servitude de l'ennemy, qu'il luy convenoit estre en certain lieu
toutes fois qu'il estoit par ledit ennemy évocqué: ouquel lieu ilz
avoient accoustumé faire leur consistoire, et ne luy falloit que monter
sur ung balay, qu'aussi-tost il estoit prestement transporté là où ledit
consistoire se faisoit'.\[3\] The Guernsey witch, Martin Tulouff (1563),
confessed 'q il soy est trouvé avecq la dite viellesse ou elle chevaucha
ung genest et luy ung aultre, et q lad<sup>te</sup> viellesse monta a
mont la chemynee et q il en perdyt la veue et q elle disoet deva\[n\]t q
monter "Va au nom du diable et luciffer dessq\[n\] roches et espyñes" q
po<sup>r</sup> luy il ne pouvoet

\[1. Surtees Society, xl, pp. 191-2, 194, 197 Denham Tracts, ii, pp.
299-301, 304, 307.

2\. Holinshed, *Ireland*, p. 58.

3\. Chartier, iii, p. 45; Lea, iii, p. 536.\]

ainsy faire, et d<sup>t</sup> q sa mere a chevauche le genest p IV ou V
foys et q il l'a veue monter a mont la cheminee'.\[1\] Danaeus (IS 75)
sums up the evidence of the witches themselves: 'He promiseth that
himself will conuay them thither, that are so weak that they cannot
trauaile of themselues: which many tymes he doth by meanes of a staffe
or rod, which he deliuereth vnto the\[m\], or promiseth to doo it by
force of a certen oyntment, which he will geue them: and sometimes he
offreth them an horse to ride vpon.'\[2\] Boguet's experience (1598) is
more dramatic than that of Danaeus: 'Les autres y vont, tantost sur vn
Bouc, tantost sur vn cheual, & tantost sur vn ballet, ou ramasse,
sortans ces derniers de leurs maisons le plus souuent par la cheminee .
. . Les vns encor se frottent auparauant de certaine graisse, &
oignement: les autres ne se frottent en aucune façon." He also records
the actual evidence of individual witches: Françoise Secretain said
'qu'elle avoit esté vne infinité de fois au Sabbat & assemblee des
Sorciers . . . & qu'elle y alloit sur vn baston blanc, qu'elle mettoit
entre ses iambes.\[4\]--Claudine Boban, ieune fille confessa, qu'elle, &
sa mere montoient sur vne ramasse,\[5\] & que sortans le contremont de
la cheminée elles alloient par l'air en ceste façon au Sabbat.'\[6\] In
Belgium Claire Goessen (1603) confessed 'qu'elle s'est trouvée à
diverses assemblées nocturnes tenues par lui, dans lesquelles elle s'est
laissée transporter au moyen d'un bâton enduit d'onguent'.\[7\] Isobel\]
Gowdie (1662) was fully reported, as regards the methods of locomotion
used by the witches, though in other places her evidence is
unfortunately cut short:

'I haid a little horse, and wold say, "Horse and Hattock, in the
Divellis name!" And than ve vold flie away, quhair ve vold, be ewin as
strawes wold flie wpon an hie-way. We will flie lyk strawes quhan we
pleas; wild-strawes and corne-strawes wilbe horses to ws, an ve put
thaim betwixt our foot, and say, "Horse and Hattok, in the Divellis
name! " . . . Quhan

\[1. From a trial in the Greffe, Guernsey.

2\. Danaeus, ch. iv.

3\. Boguet, p. 104.

4\. Id., pp. 9, 104.

5\. A marginal note against the word *ramasse* gives 'autrement balait,
& en Lyonnois coiue'.

6\. Boguet, pp. 9, 97, 104.

7\. Cannaert, p. 49.\]

we wold ryd, we tak windle-strawes, or been-stakes \[beanstalks\] and
put them betwixt owr foot, and say thryse,

Horse and Hattok, horse and goe,  
Horse and pellattis, ho! ho!

and immediatlie we flie away whair euir we wold . . . All the Coeven did
fflie lyk cattis, bot Barbara Ronald, in Brightmanney, and I, still
\[always\] read on an horse, quhich ve vold mak of a straw or
beein-stalk.'\[1\]

Julian Cox (1664) said that 'one evening she walkt out about a Mile from
her own House, and there came riding towards her three persons upon
three Broom-staves, born up about a yard and an half from the ground.
Two of them she formerly knew, which was a Witch and a Wizzard . . . The
third person she knew not. He came in the shape of a black Man.'\[2\]
Two of the New England witches (1692) confessed to riding on a pole;
Mary Osgood, wife of Capt. Osgood of Andover,' was carried through the
air to five-mile pond . . . she was transported back again through the
air, in company with the forenamed persons, in the same manner as she
went, and believes they were carried upon a pole'.\[3\] Goody Foster's
evidence was reported by two authors: 'One Foster confessed that the
Devil carry'd them on a pole, to a Witch-meeting; but the pole broke,
and she hanging about \[Martha\] Carrier's neck, they both fell down,
and she then received an hurt by the Fall, whereof she was not at this
very time recovered." The second account is substantially the same: 'In
particular Goody F. said (*Inter alia*) that she with two others (one of
whom acknowledged the same) Rode from Andover to the same Village Witch
meeting upon a stick above ground, and that in the way the stick brake,
and gave the said F. a fall: whereupon, said she, I got a fall and hurt
of which I am still sore.'\[5\]

*Site*.--The Sabbath seems to have been originally held on a fixed site.
So much so was this the case that de Lancre is

\[1. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 604, 608, 613.

2\. Glanvil, pt. ii, p. 194.

3\. Howell, vi, 660; J. Hutchinson, *Hist. of Massachusetts Bay*, p. 31.

4\. Cotton Mather, p. 158; Burr, p. 244. *See also* J. Hutchinson, ii,
pp. 35-6.

5\. Burr, p. 418.\]

able to say, 'communement ils l'appellent Aquelarre, qui signifie Lane
de Bouc, comme qui diroit la lane ou lãde, où le Bouc conuoque ses
assemblees. Et de faict les Sorciers qui confessent, nomme\[n\]t le lieu
pour la chose, & la chose ou Assemblee pour le lieu: tellement qu'encore
que proprement Lane de Bouc, soit le Sabbat qui se tient és landes, si
est-ce qu'ils appellent aussi bien Lane de Bouc, le Sabbat qui se tient
és Eglises, & és places des villages, paroisses, maisons, & autres
lieux.'\[1\] The confusion of the original Lane de Bouc, i.e. the
Sabbath or Great Assembly, with local meetings is thus shown to be due
to the inaccuracy of the witches themselves; and therefore it is not
surprising that de Lancre and other authors should also fail to
distinguish between the two. Still, in many of the records there are
certain indications by which it is possible to recognize the localities
where the real Sabbath, the true *Lane de Bouc*, was held.

De Lancre himself notes that the Sabbath must be held near a lake,
stream, or water of some kind.\[2\] Bodin, however, gives a better clue,
'Les lieux des assemblees des Sorciers sont notables, & signalez de
quelques arbres, ou croix.'\[3\] The *croix* is clearly the Christian
form of the standing stone which is a marked feature in many
descriptions of the Sabbath; and Bodin's statement recalls one of the
laws of Cnut in the eleventh century, 'We earnestly forbid every
heathenism: heathenism is, that men worship idols; that is that they
worship heathen gods, or stones, or forest trees of any kind.'

Estebène de Cambrue (1567) said, 'Le lieu de ceste grande conuocation
s'appelle generalement par tout le pays la Lanne de Bouc. Où ils se
mettent à dancer à l'entour d'vne pierre, qui est plantée audit lieu,
sur laquelle est assis vn grand homme noir.\[4\] At Poictiers in 1574
four witches, one woman and three men, said that they went 'trois fois
l'an, à l'assemblee generale, où plusieurs Sorciers se trouuoye\[n\]t
prés d'vne croix d'vn carrefour, qui seruoit d'enseigne'.\[5\] At
Aberdeen in 1596 the witches acknowledged that they danced round the
market cross and the 'fische croce' on All-Hallow-eve; and also round

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 65.

2\. Id. ib., p. 72.

3\. Bodin, *Fléau*, p. 181.

4\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 123.

5\. Bodin, p. 187.\]

'ane gray stane' at the foot of the hill at Craigleauch.\[1\] Margaret
Johnson (1633) said 'shee was not at the greate meetinge at Hoarestones
at the Forest of Pendle upon All Saints day'.\[2\] Though no stone is
actually mentioned the name suggests that there had been, or still were,
one or more stones standing in that place. The Swedish witches (1669)
seem to have used the same site for both kinds of meetings; *Blockula*
seems to have been a building of some kind, set in a meadow which was
entered by a painted gate; within the building were rooms and some kind
of chapel for the religious service.\[3\] The New England recorders
(1692) did not enter into much detail, but even among them the fact is
mentioned that there was I a General Meeting of the Witches, in a Field
at *Salem*-Village'.\[4\]

In modern times the identification of stones or of certain places with
the Devil or with witch meetings is very noticeable. Out of innumerable
instances I will mention only a few. In Guernsey the Catioroc is always
identified as the site of the Sabbath. In Belgium 'à Godarville
(Hainaut) se trouve un *tunnel* hanté par les sorcières; elles y
tiennent leur sabbat'.\[5\]

'Un bloc de pierre isolé et d'aspect extraordinaire est généralement
appelé *pierre du diable*. Exemples: A) le dolmen détruit près de Namur;
B) la grande pierre en forme de table à demi encastrée dans la route qui
conduit du village de Sény à celui d'Ellemelle (Candroz); C) *le fais du
diable*, bloc de grès d'environ 800 mètres cubes, isolé dans la bruyère
entre Wanne et Grand-Halleux près de Stavelot; D) les *murs du diable* à
Pepinster, &c.--Dans plusieurs cantons, il y a un terrain que l'on
appèle *tchan dè makral* "champ des sorciers". C'est le cas près de
Remouchamps, près de Tongres, près de la Gileppe et près de
Grand-Halleux.'\[6\]

\[1. *Spalding Club Misc*., i, pp. 97-8, 114, 149, 153, 165, 167.

2\. Whitaker, p. 216; Baines, i, p. 607 note, where the name is given as
Hartford. The importance of the stone in the Sabbath ceremonies is very
marked in the account of a meeting in Northumberland (1673). Ann
Armstrong declared that 'she and the rest had drawne their compasse nigh
to a bridg end, and the devil placed a stone in the middle of the
compasse, they sett themselves downe, and bending towards the stone,
repeated the Lord's prayer backwards'. Denham Tracts, ii, p. 307;
Surtees Soc., xl, p. 197.

3\. Horneck, pt. ii, pp. 321, 324.

4\. Mather, p. 131.

5\. Harou, *La Tradition*, vi (1892), p. 367.

6\. Monseur, pp. 2, 88.\]

It is also noticeable how many of our own stone circles, such as the
Nine Maidens, the Dancing Maidens, and so on, are connected by tradition
with women who danced there on the Sabbath.

*Date*.--It appears from the evidence that certain changes took place in
course of time in the religion; and, as might be expected, this is shown
very markedly in the festivals. The ancient festivals remained all
through, and to them were added the festivals of the succeeding
religions. The original celebrations belonged to the May-November year,
a division of time which follows neither the solstices nor the
agricultural seasons; I have shown below (pp. 130, 178) that there is
reason to believe these festivals were connected with the breeding
seasons of the flocks and herds.. The chief festivals were: in the
spring, May Eve (April 30), called Roodmas or Rood Day in Britain and
Walpurgis-Nacht in Germany; in the autumn, November Eve (October 31),
called in Britain All hallow Eve. Between these two came: in the winter,
Candlemas (February 2); and in the summer, the Gule of August (August
1), called Lammas in Britain. To these were added the festivals of the
solstitial invaders, Beltane at midsummer and Yule at midwinter; the
movable festival of Easter was also added, but the equinoxes were never
observed in Britain. On the advent of Christianity the names of the
festivals were changed, and the date of one--Roodmas--was slightly
altered so as to fall on May 3; otherwise the dates were observed as
before, but with ceremonies of the new religion. Therefore Boguet is
justified in saying that the witches kept all the Christian festivals.
But the Great Assemblies were always held on the four original days, and
it is this fact which makes it possible to distinguish with certainty
between the Sabbath and the Esbat whenever dates are mentioned.

De Lancre, generalizing from the evidence before him, says, 'Quelquefois
il y a des Sabbats & assemblees generales qui se font ordinairement les
quatre festes annuelles';\[1\] and he also gives the words of a witch,
tried in 1567: 'Estebène de Cambrue dit que les Sorcieres n'alloient en
la grande assemblee & au grand Sabbat que quatre fois l'année.'\[2\] The
four actual

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 64.

2\. Id. ib., p. 123.\]

days are given in only one trial, that of Issobell Smyth at Forfar in
1661, 'By these meitings shee mett with him every quarter at Candlemas,
Rud-day, Lambemas, and Hallomas',\[1\] but it is very clear that these
were the regular days, from the mention of them individually in both
England and Scotland. At North Berwick 'Barbara Napier was accused of
being present at the convention on Lammas Eve at the New haven' \[three
Covens, i. e., thirty-nine persons, were assembled\]. 'And the said
Barbara was accused that she gave her bodily presence upon All Hallow
even last was, 1590 years, to the frequent convention holden at the Kirk
of North-Berwick, where she danced endlong the Kirk-yard, and Gelie
Duncan played on a trump, John Fian, missellit, led the ring; Agnes
Sampson and her daughters and all the rest following the said Barbara,
to the number of seven score persons.'\[2\] The dittays against the
witches of Aberdeen in 1596 show that 'wpoun Hallowewin last bypast, att
tuelff houris at ewin or thairby, thow the said Thomas Leyis . . . withe
ane gryit number of vtheris witchis, come to the mercatt and fische
croce of Aberdene, wnder the conduct and gyding of the Dewill present
withe you, all in company, playing befoir yow on his kynd of
instrumentis. Ye all dansit about baythe the saidis croces, and the
meill mercatt, ane lang space of tyme.'\[3\] Christen Michell and Bessie
Thom had been not only at the Allhallow Eve meeting with Thomas Leyis
but also at another before that. 'Thow confessis that, thrie yeris
sensyn, vpon the Ruidday, airlie in the morning,' \[Bessie Thom: 'befoir
sone rysing'\] 'thow, accumpaniet with . . . certan vtheris witchis, thy
devilische adherentis, convenit vpon Sainct Katherines Hill . . . and
thair, vnder the conduct of Sathan, present with yow, playing befoir
yow, efter his forme, ye all dansit a devilische danse, rydand on treis,
be a lang space.'\[4\] In 1597 Issobell Richie, Margrat Og, Helene
Rogie, Jonet Lucas, Jonet Dauidsone, Issobell Oige, and Beatrice Robbie
were accused of a meeting at Craigleauche, near Aberdeen: 'Thow

\[1. Kinloch, p. 133.

2 Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 245. Spelling modernized.

3\. *Spalding Club Misc*., i, pp. 97-8.

4\. lb., i, Christen Michell, p. 165; Bessie Thom, p. 167.\]

art indyttit for the being at the twa devylische dances betuixt
Lumfannand and Cragleauche, with vmquhile Margerat Bane, vpon
Alhalowewin last, quhair thow conferrit with the Dewill.\[1\] In
Ayrshire in 1604 Patrik Lowrie and his companion-witches were accused
that they 'att Hallowevin in the yeir of God foirsaid, assemblit thame
selffis vpon Lowdon-hill, quhair thair appeirit to thame ane devillische
Spreit'.\[2\] Margaret Johnson, of the second generation of Lancashire
witches, in 1633 said 'shee was not at the greate meetinge at Hartford
in the Forrest of Pendle on All Saintes day'.\[3\] Isobel Gowdie
(Auldearne, 1662) does not enter into her usual detail, but merely
states that 'a Grand Meitting vold be about the end of ilk
Quarter'.\[4\]

Of the festivals belonging to later religions several mentions are made.
De Lancre, when giving a general account of the ceremonies, says that
the witches of the Basses-Pyrénées went to their assemblies at Easter
and other solemn festivals, and that their chief night was that of St.
John the Baptist.\[5\] Jane Bosdeau, from the Puy-de-Dôme district
(1594), bears this out, for she went to a meeting with the Devil 'at
Midnight on the Eve of St. John'.\[6\] Antide Colas (1598) 'auoit esté
au Sabbat à vn chacun bon iour de I'an, comme à Noel, à Pasques, à la
feste de Dieu '.\[7\] Both generations of Lancashire witches (1613 and
1633) kept Good Friday.\[8\] Jonet Watson of Dalkeith (1661) was at a
meeting 'about the tyme of the last Baille-ffyre night'.\[9\] The Crook
of Devon witches (1662) met on St. Andrew's Day, at Yule.\[10\] In
Connecticut (1662) the 'high frolic' was to be held at Christmas.\[11\]

*Hour*.--The actual hour at which the Sabbath was held is specified in
very few cases; it appears to have been a

\[1. Ib., i, Issobell Richie, p. 142; Margrat Og, p. 144; Helene Rogie,
p. 147; Jonet Lucas, p. 149; Jonet Dauidsone, p. 150; Issobell Oige, p.
152; Beatrice Robbie, p. 153.

2\. Pitcairn, ii, p. 478.

3\. Baines, i, p. 607 note.

4\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 606.

5\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 398.

6\. F. Hutchinson, *Historical Essay*, p. 42.

7\. Boguet, p. 125.

8\. Chetham Society, vi, p. lxxiii; Whitaker, p. 216.

9\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 601.

10\. Burns Begg, pp. 219, 226, 237.

11\. J. Hutchinson, *History of Massachusetts Bay*. ii, p. 17; Taylor,
p.98.\]

nocturnal assembly, beginning about midnight and lasting till early dawn
or cockcrow. 'Le coq s'oyt par fois és sabbats sonnãt la retraicte aux
Sorciers."

In the Vosges in 1408 the meeting was held 'en la minuit et la deuxieme
heure'.\[1\] In Lorraine in 1589 'Johannes a Villa und Agathina des
Schneiders Francisci Weib, sagt, eine oder zwey Stunde vor Mitternacht
were die bequemste Zeit darzu'.\[3\] At North Berwick, in 1590, Agnes
Sampson arrived at the appointed place 'about eleven hours at
even'.\[4\] The Aberdeen witches in 1,597 held their dance 'wpon
Hallowewin last bypast, at tuelff houris at ewin or thairby' (or more
particularly) 'betuixt tuelff & ane houris at nycht'.\[5\] In 1598 the
Lyons witch Françoise Secretain 'adioustoit qu'elle alloit tousiours au
Sabbat enuiron la minuit, & beaucoup d'autres sorciers, que i'ay eu en
main, ont dit le mesme'. Antide Colas, another Lyonnaise, went to the
meeting on Christmas Eve between the midnight mass and the mass at
dawn.'

The only daylight meeting which can be identified as a Sabbath occurred
at Aberdeen, and may have been peculiar either to the locality or to the
May-Day festival; or it may have been simply the continuation of the
festival till the sun rose. Christen Mitchell and Bessie Thom were each
accused that 'vpon the Ruidday, thrie yeris sensyn bygane, airlie in the
morning, befoir sone rysing, thow convenit vpon Sanct Katherines Hill,
accumpaniet with a numer of thy devilische factioun and band, the Devill
your maister in cumpanie with yow'.\[7\]

## 2. The Esbat

*Business*.--The Esbat differed from the Sabbath by being primarily, for
business, whereas the Sabbath was purely religious. In both, feasting
and dancing brought the proceedings to a close. The business carried on
at the Esbat was usually the practice of magic for the benefit of a
client or for the harming of an enemy. Sometimes the Devil appears to

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 154.

2\. Bournon, p. 23.

3\. Remigius, pt. i, p. 72.

4\. Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p. 239.

5\. Spalding Club i. pp. 97, 114, 165, 167.

6\. Boguet, pp. 119, 125.

7\. *Spalding Club Misc*., i, pp. 165, 167.\]

have ordered his followers to perform some action by which to impress
the imagination of those who believed in his power though they did not
worship him. Very often also the Esbat was for sheer enjoyment only,
without any ulterior object, as the following quotations show:

Estebène de Cambrue (1567), who is the authority for the name Esbat as
applied to local meetings, says that 'les petites assemblées qui se font
pres des villes ou parroisses, où il n'y va que ceux du lieu, ils les
appellent les esbats: & se font ores en vn lieu de ladicte paroisse,
ores en vn autre, où on ne faict que sauter & folastrer, le Diable ny
estant auec tout son grand arroy comme aux grandes assemblees'.\[1\]
Alesoun Peirsoun (1588) was taken by a party of men and women, under the
leadership of a man in green, 'fordir nor scho could tell; and saw with
thame pypeing and mirrynes and gude scheir, and wes careit to Lowtheane,
and saw wyne punchounis with tassis with them '.\[2\] Jonet Barker
(1643) said that 'scho and ye said Margaret Lauder being
w<sup>t</sup>hin ye said Jonet Cranstones house tua pyntis of beir war
drukkin be thame thre togidder in ye said house at quhilk ye devill
appeirit to thame in ye liknes of ane tryme gentill man and drank
w<sup>t</sup> thame all thre and that he Imbracet the said margaret
lauder in his armes at ye drinking of ye beir and put his arme about hir
waist'.\[3\] Isobel Bairdie (1649) was accused of meeting the Devil and
drinking with him, 'the devil drank to her, and she pledging him, drank
back again to him, and he pledged her, saying, *Grammercie, you are very
welcome*.\[4\] Janet Brown (1649) 'was charged with having held a
meeting with the Devil appearing as a man, at the back of Broomhills,
who was *at a wanton Play* with Isobel Gairdner the elder, and Janet
Thomson'.\[5\] In Forfar Helen Guthrie (1661) confessed that she went to
several meetings; at one in the churchyard 'they daunced togither, and
the ground under them wes all fyre flauchter, and Andrew Watson hade his
vsuale staff in his hand, altho he be a blind man yet he daunced alse
nimblie as any of the companye, and made also

\[1. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 123.

2 Pitcairn, i, pt. ii, p.163.

3\. From the record in the Justiciary Court of Edinburgh.

4\. Arnot, p. 358.

5\. Id., p. 358.\]

great miriement by singing his old ballads, and that Isobell Shyrrie did
sing her song called Tinkletum Tankletum; and that the divill kist every
one of the women'. At another meeting 'they all daunced togither a
whyle, and then went to Mary Rynd's house and sat doune together at the
table . . . and made them selfes mirrie; and the divell made much of
them all, but especiallie of Mary Rynd, and he kist them all'.\[1\]
Elspet Bruce of the same Coven, 'by turning the sive and sheires, reased
the divell, who being werry hard to be laid againe, ther wes a meiting
of witches for laying of him . . . and at this meiting they had
pipe-music and dauncing'.\[2\] Isobell Gowdie (1662) gives an account of
one of these joyous assemblies: 'We killed an ox, in Burgie, abowt the
dawing of the day, and we browght the ox with ws hom to Aulderne, and
did eat all amongst ws, in an hows in Aulderne, and feasted on it.'\[3\]
Marie Lamont (1662) also enjoyed her meetings; the first at which she
was present was held in Kettie Scott's house, where the devil 'sung to
them, and they dancit; he gave them wyn to drink, and wheat bread to
eat, and they warr all very mirrie. She confesses, at that meiting the
said Kettie Scott made her first acquaintance with the devill, and
caused her to drink to him, and shak hands with him.--Shee was with
Katie Scot and others at a meitting at Kempoch, wher they danced, and
the devil kissed them when they went away.'\[4\] Annaple Thomson and the
other witches of Borrowstowness (1679)--

'wis at several mettings with the devill in the linkes of
Borrowstonenes, and in the howsse of you Bessie Vickar, and ye did eatt
and drink with the devill, and with on another, and with witches in hir
howss in the night tyme; and the devill and the said Wm Craw browght the
ale which ye drank, extending to about sevin gallons, from the howss of
Elizabeth Hamilton; and yow the said Annaple had ane other metting abowt
fyve wekes ago, when yow wis goeing to the coalhill of Grange, and he
inveitted you to go alongst, and drink with him . . . And yow the said
Margret Hamilton has bein the devill's servant these eight or nyne
yeeres bygane; and he appered and conversed with yow at the town-well at
Borrowstownes, and several tymes in yowr awin howss, and drank severall.
choppens of ale with you."

\[1. Kinloch, pp. 120, 121.

2\. Id., p. 122.

3\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 613.

4\. Sharpe, pp. 131, 134.

5\. Scots Magazine, 1814, p. 200.\]

The magical ceremonies performed by the witches with, the help of the
Devil were usually for the destruction of, or for doing harm to, an
enemy. Sometimes, however, the spells were originally for the promotion
of fertility, but were misunderstood by the recorders and probably by
the witches themselves. Alexia Violaea (1589) said that 'nachdem sie
were mit ihren Gespielen umb und umb gelauffen eine ziemliche gut Weile,
habe sie pflegen in die Höhe über sich zu werffen ein reines subtiles
Pulverlein, welches ihr der Teuffel darzu gegeben habe, darvon Raupen,
Käffern, Heuschrecken, und dergleichen andere Beschädigung mehr, so
Hauffenweise wüchsen, dass die Acker darmit in einem Augenblick überall
beschmeist würden'.\[1\] Isobel Gowdie's magical charm (1662) to come
under this category:

We went be-east Kinlosse, and ther we yoaked an plewghe of paddokis. The
Devill held the plewgh, and Johne Yownge in Mebestowne, our Officer, did
drywe the plewghe. Paddokis did draw the plewgh, as oxen; qwickens wer
sowmes, a riglen's horne wes a cowter, and an piece of an riglen's horne
wes an sok. We went two seuerall tymes abowt; and all we of the Coven
went still wp and downe with the plewghe, prayeing to the Divell for the
fruit of that land.'\[2\]

The greater number of meetings were occupied with business of a magical
character with the intention of harming certain specified persons;
though any other kind of business was also transacted. The North Berwick
witches opened the graves which the Devil indicated in order to obtain
the means of making charms with dead men's bones; on another occasion
they attempted to wreck a ship by magic.\[3\] The Lang Niddry witches
(1608) went to the house of Beigis Tod, where they drank, and there
christened a cat.\[4\] The Lancashire witches (1613) met at Malking
Tower for two purposes; the first was to give a name to the familiar of
Alison Device, which could not be done as she was not present, being
then in prison; the second was to arrange a scheme or plot for the
release of Mother Demdike, the principal witch of the community, then a
prisoner in Lancaster Castle; the plot involved

\[1. Remigius, pt. i, p. 91.

2\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603; see below, p. 171.

3\. Id. pt. ii, pp. 210-11, 217, 239.

4\. Id., ii, pp. 542-3.\]

the killing of the gaoler and governor, and the blowing up of the
castle.\[1\] In 1630 Alexander Hamilton was tried in Edinburgh,

'the said Alexr Hamiltoun haifing concaivet ane deidlie haitrent agains
umqle Elizabeth Lausone Lady Ormestoun younger becaus the said Alexr
being at her zet asking for almous she choisit him therfra saying to him
"away custroun carle ye will get nothing heir". The said Alexr therupon
in revenge therof accompaneit wt tua wemen mentionet in his depostiones
come to Saltoun woid quhair he raisit the devill and quha appeirit to
him and his associattis in the likenes of ane man cled in gray and the
said Alexr and his associattis haifing schawin to him the caus of thair
coming desyring him to schaw to thame be quhat meanes thay micht be
revendget upon the said Lady."

Margaret Johnson (1633) deposed that 'She was not at the great
witch-meeting on All Saints' Day, but was at a smaller meeting the
Sunday after, 'where there was, at yt tyme, between 30 and 40 witches,
who did all ride to the said meetinge, and the end of theire said
meeting was to consult for the killinge and hurtinge of men and
beasts.'\[3\] The Forfar witches (1661) claimed to have wrecked a
ship.\[4\] Isobel Gowdie (1662) is as usual very dramatic in her
account; on one occasion the witches met to make a charm against the
minister of Auldearne, Mr. Harie Forbes: 'Satan wes with ws and learned
ws the wordis to say thryse ower. Quhan we haid learned all thes wordis
from the Divell, we fell all down wpon owr kneis, with owr hear down
ower owr showlderis and eyes, and owr handis lifted wp, and owr eyes
stedfastlie fixed wpon the Divell; and said the forsaidis wordis thryse
ower to the Divell, striktlie, against Maister Harie Forbes his
recowering from the said seiknes.' When making an image only a few of
the witches were present with the Devil.\[5\] Marie Lamont (1662)
claimed that her Coven raised storms on two occasions; and on a third,
they in the likeness of 'kats', and the Devil as a man with cloven feet,
made a charm with 'wyt

\[1. Potts, C3, G3, 12, 13.

2\. From the trial of 'Alexr Hamiltoun, warlok', in the Justiciary
Court, Edinburgh.

3\. Whitaker, p. 216.

4\. Kinloch, p. 122.

5\. Pitcairn, iii, pp. 609, 613.\]

sand' against Blackhall younger and Mr. John Hamilton.\[1\] Amongst the
most detailed accounts of the wax or clay images, and of the ritual for
killing the person whom the image represented, are those of the Somerset
witches\[2\] (1664). The baptism of the figure is an interesting point.
The Paisley witches (1678) had a meeting to make a clay figure in order
to kill an enemy of the witch in whose house the meeting was held.\[3\]
At Borrowstowness part of the accusation was that ( ye and ilk ane of
vow was at ane metting with the devill and other witches at the croce of
Murestane, upon the threttein of October last, where you all danced and
the devill acted the pyiper, and where yow indewored to have destroyed
Andrew Mitchell'.\[4\] In New England the witches accused George
Burroughs 'that he brought Poppets to them, and Thorns to stick into
those Poppets'.\[5\]

At the Esbats it is also evident that the Devil wished to maintain an
appearance of miraculous power not only before the world at large, but
in the eyes of the witches as well. This will account for the meetings
on the sea-shore in raging storms when vessels were liable to be
wrecked, and there are also many indications that the destruction of an
enemy was effected by means more certain than the making and pricking of
a wax or clay figure, means which were used after the figure had been
made. Some of the methods of maintaining this prestige are of the
simplest, others are noted without any explanation: 'Satan faict en ce
lieu \[le Sabbat\] tant de choses estrãges & nouuelles que leur
simplicité & abus prend cela pour quelques miracles.'\[6\] At Forfar
(1661) the means of obtaining the result are apparent; during a great
storm the Devil and the witches destroyed the bridge of Cortaquhie, and
the destruction was so arranged as to appear to have been effected by
magical power; but Helen Guthrie confessed that 'they went to the bridge
of Cortaquhie with intentione to pull it doune, and that for this end
shee her selfe, Jonnet Stout, and others of them, did thrust ther
shoulderis againest the bridge, and that the divelt wes bussie among
them acting

\[1. Sharpe, pp. 132-4.

2\. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 137-8, 164.

3\. Id., pt. ii, p. 294.

4\. *Scots Magazine*, 1814, p. 201.

5\. Mather, p. 125.

5\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 135.\]

his pairt'. Issobell Smyth, who also assisted on the occasion, said,
'Wee all rewed that meitting, for wee hurt our selves lifting.'\[1\]
Still more simple was the method of destroying the harvest of a field at
Crook of Devon, where Bessie Henderson 'confessed and declared that
Janet Paton was with you at ane meeting when they trampit down Thos.
White's rie in the beginning of harvest, 1661, and that she had broad
soales and trampit down more nor any of the rest'.\[3\] The Devil of
Mohra in Sweden cared only to impress his followers; when the wall which
they were building fell down 'some of the Witches are commonly hurt,
which makes him laugh, but presently he cures them again'.\[3\]

*Site*.--In some places the Esbat was held at a fixed site, in others
the site varied from week to week. In both cases, the locality was
always in the near neighbourhood of the village whose inhabitants
attended the meeting.

'Pour le lieu ordinaire c'est és carrefours, com\[m\]e disoit Isaac de
Queyran, qui deposoit y auoir esté au carrefour du Palays Galienne, près
la ville de Bourdeaux; ou aux places des paroisses au deuant des
Eglises, & le plus souuent au droict de la grand' porte, si l'Eglise est
plantée au milieu de la place comme elle est souuent, afin que le Diable
plante sa chaire tout vis à vis du grand autel où on met le Sainct
sacrement: comme il est en la place d'Ascain, où tous les tesmoins du
lieu, nous ont dict que le Sabbat se faisoit. Il a aussi accoustumé les
tenir en quelque lieu desert, & sauuage, comme au milieu d'vne lande; &
encore en lieu du tout hors de passage, de voisinage, d'habitation, & de
rencontre: Et communement ils s'appellent Aquelarre\[4\] qui signifie
Lane de Bouc, comme qui diroit la lane ou lãde, où le Bouc conuoque ses
assemblées.'\[5\]

Danaeus emphasizes the variation of both site and date: 'They meete
togither in certen apointed places, not al of them togither, nor at
once, but certen of them whom he pleaseth to call, so that he apointeth
where they shall meete, and at what houre of the day, or of the
nighte.'\[6\] The Windsor

\[1. Kinloch, pp. 122, 133.

2\. Burns Begg, p. 224.

3\. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 323.

4\. The full name is Aquelarre de verros, prado del Cabron.

5\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, pp. 64-5.

5\. Danaeus, ch. iv.\]

witches, however, 'did accustome to meete within the backeside of
Maister Dodges in the Pittes there'.\[1\] Boguet's evidence also points
to there being a settled site for the Esbat in each village:

'Les Sorciers du costé de Longchamois s'assembloient en vn pré, qui est
sur le grand chemin tirant à S. Claude, où l'on voit les ruines d'vne
maison. Ceux du costé de Coirieres tenoient leur Sabbat, sous le village
de Coirieres proche l'eau, en vn lieu appellé és Combes, qui est du tout
sans chemin. \[Autres\] se retrouuoient en vn lieu dict és Fontenelles,
sous le village de Nezan, qui est vn lieu assez descouuert . . . le
Sabbat des Sorciers de la Moüille se tenoit en la Cour du Prioré du
mesme lieu.'\[2\]

Jane Bosdeau (1594) went twice a week regularly to 'a Rendezvous of
above Sixty Witches at Puy de dome'.\[3\] And the Swedish witches went
so uniformly to one place that there was a special building for their
rites:

'They unanimously confessed that *Blockula* is scituated in a delicate
large Meadow whereof you can see no end. The place or house they met at,
had before it a Gate painted with divers colours; through this Gate they
went into a little Meadow distinct from the other . . . in a huge large
Room of this House, they said, there stood a very long Table, at which
the Witches did sit down: And that hard by this Room was another Chamber
where there were very lovely and delicate Beds.'\[4\]

On the whole the weight of evidence in England and Scotland is in favour
of Danaeus's statement that there was no fixed site, though this should
be taken as referring to the local meetings only, not to the Great
Assemblies. The Forfar witch-trials give much information: Helen Guthrie

'wes at a meitting in the church yeard of Forfar in the Holfe therof . .
. Betwixt the oatseid and the bearseid \[barleysowing\], she wes at ane
other meitting at the Pavilione hollis . . . This same year, betwixt the
oatseid and bearseid, she was at a thrid meiting in the church yeard of
Forfar in the holfe thereof, about the same tyme of the night as at the
\[former\] meitings, viz. at midnight.-About the beginning of the last
oat seid

\[1. Rehearsall, p. 7.

2 Boguet, pp. 126-7.

3\. F. Hutchinson, *Historical Essay*, p. 43.

4\. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 321.\]

tyme, Isabell Syrie did cary hir \[Jonet Howat\] to the Insch within the
loch of Forfar, shoe saw at this tyme, about threteen witches with the
divill, and they daunced togither . . . About four wiekes after the
forsaid meiting in the Insch, the said Isabell Syrie caried hir to ane
other meiting at Muryknowes. About three and a halfe yeares since, she
\[Elspet Alexander\] was at a meiting with the divill at Peterden,
midway betwixt Forfar and Dondie . . . About four wiekes after this
mieting at Petterden, shoe was at ane second mieting at the Muryknowes .
. . shoe was present at ane thrid mieting near Kerymure.'\[1\]

Isobel Gowdie's evidence is detailed as usual: 'The last tyme that owr
Coven met, we, and an vther Coven, wer dauncing at the Hill of Earlseat;
and befor that, betwixt Moynes and Bowgholl; and befor that we ves
beyond the Meikleburne; and the vther Coven being at the Downie-hillis
we went from beyond the Meikle-burne, and went besyd them, to the
howssis at the Wood-end of Inshoch . . . Befor Candlemas, we went
be-east Kinlosse.'\[2\] The same facts were elicited from the
Kinross-shire witches; Robert Wilson 'confessed ye had ane meeting with
the Devill at the Stanriegate, bewest the Cruick of Devon . . . the
Devil appointed them to meet at the Bents of Balruddrie'.--Margaret
Huggon confessed 'that ye was at another meeting with Sathan at the
Stanriegate, bewest the Cruik of Devon . . . lykeways ye confessed 'ye
was at another meeting with Satan at the Heathrie Knowe be-east the
Cruik of Devon, where the Gallows stands a meeting at the back of
Knocktinnie at the Gaitside . . . and another at the bents of
Newbiggin'.--Janet Brugh 'confessed that ye was at ane meeting at
Stanriegate . . . ye confessed that about Yule last bypast ye was at ane
meeting with Sathan at Turfhills . . . lykeways ye confessed that ye was
at the Bents of Balruddrie and Gibson's Craig, where Sathan was present
at them both'.--Christian Grieve 'freely confessed that ye was at ane
meeting with Sathan at the back of Andrew Dowie his house".\[3\] The
Somerset witches (1664) varied in this respect. Those of Wincanton met
in different places: Elizabeth Style 'hath been at several general
meetings in the night at High Common, and a Common near *Motcombe*, at a
place near *Marnhull*, and at

\[1. Kinloch, pp. 120 seq.

2\. Pitcairn, iii, p. 603.

3\. Burns Begg, pp. 226 seq.\]

other places'.--Alice Duke 'hath been at several meetings in Lie Common,
and other places in the night'. But the Brewham Coven appear to have met
commonly at Hussey's Knap in Brewham. Forest.\[1\]

Occasionally a reason is given for the change of site. 'Parfois vn
Sabbat finy à vn coin de paroisse, on s'en va le tenir à vne autre, où
le Diable mene les mesmes personnes: mais là, on y en rencontre
d'autres.'\[2\] Sometimes also a sidelight is thrown upon these
gatherings, which explains the fact that in many cases the witches said
that they did not know all the people present at a given meeting:

'Antoine Tornier, Et Iaquema Paget ont confessé, que comme elles
retournoient à certain iour par ensemble de glanner, passans au long du
pré de Longchamois, elles apperçeurent que l'on y tenoit le Sabbat;
Surquoy elles poserent bas leurs fardeaux, & allerent au lieu predict,
où elles firent comme les autres, & puis se retirerent chacune en leurs
maisons, apres auoir reprins leurs fardeaux.'\[3\]

The Salem Witches (1692) met 'upon a plain grassy place, by which was a
Cart path and sandy ground in the path, in which were the tracks of
Horses feet'.4

*Date and Hour*.--There was no fixed day or hour for the Esbat, and in
this it differed from the Sabbath, which was always at night. The Devil
let his followers know the time, either by going to them himself or by
sending a message by the officer. The message might be by word of mouth,
or by some signal understood by the initiated.

Though there was no fixed day for the Esbat, it seems probable that one
day in the week was observed in each locality.

Danaeus, in his general survey of the cult in 1575, says: 'He apointeth
where they shall meete, and at what houre of the day, or of the night:
wherein they haue no surenes, nor certentie. For these meetinges are not
weekely, nor monthly, nor yeerely, but when and how often it shall seeme
good to this their maister. And many times himself warneth them to

\[1. Glanvil, pt. ii, pp. 140, 148, 156, 161.

2\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, p. 64.

3\. Boguet, p. 102.

4\. Burr, p. 418.\]

meete, sometimes hee apoynteth others to warne them in his staede. But
when he doth it himself, he appeareth. vnto them in likenesse of a
man.'\[1\] De Lancre says that in the Basses-Pyrénées 'le lieu où on le
trouue ordinairement s'appelle Lanne de bouc, & en Basque *Aquelarre de
verros, prado del Cabron*, & là les Sorciers le vont adorer trois nuicts
durant, celle du Lundy, du Mercredy, & du Vendredy.--Les iours
ordinaires de la conuocation du Sabbat, ou pour mieux dire les nuicts,
sont celles du Mercredy venant au Ieudy, & du Vendredy venant au
Samedy.--Catherine de Naguille de la paroisse d'Vstarits, aagee de onze
ans, & sa compagne, nous ont asseuré qu'elles auoie\[n\]t esté au Sabbat
en plein midy." Jane Bosdeau (1594) 'every Wednesday and Friday met a
Rendezvous of aboue Sixty Witches at Puy de dome'.\[3\] Boguet says that
the day of the Sabbath was variable, usually Thursday night;\[4\] while,
according to Bodin, the most frequent was 'entre la nuict du Lundi &
Mardi'.\[5\] Boguet also goes on to say, 'Le Sabbat ne se tient pas
tousiours de nuict, ains que les Sorciers y vont aussi quelquefois de
iour, selon que firent Antoine Tornier, & Iaquema Paget, & plusieurs
autres de leur secte le confessent.'\[6\] The Lorraine witches also had
the same custom:

'Alle zugleich, so viel ihrer bisher in Lotharingen peinlich sind
verhöret worden, bekandten, dass solche Versammlung in keiner andern
Nacht, als welche zu nechst vor dem Donnerstag oder Sambstag hergehet,
gehalten werden.--Johannes a Villa und Agathina des Schneiders Francisci
weib, sagt, eine oder zwey Stunde vor Mitternacht, were die bequemste
Zeit darzu, und zwar nicht allein zu diesen Gespensten, sondern auch
sonsten zu allerhand Gespensten, Bollergeisten, Irrgeisten, &c. Aber die
Stunde nach Mitternacht diene nicht darzu.'\[7\]

The English and Scotch evidence is to the same effect. The witches 'are
likewise reported to have each of them a Spirit or Imp attending on, or
assigned to them. . . . These give the Witches notice to be ready on all
Solemn appointments, and meetings, which are ordinarily on Tuesday or
Wednesday night'.\[8\] Janet Breadheid of the Auldearne Coven emphasizes

\[1. Danaeus, ch, iv.

2\. De Lancre, *Tableau*, pp. 62, 398.

3\. F. Hutchinson, p, 43.

4\. Boguet, p. 124.

5\. Bodin, Fléau, p. 182.

6\. Boguet, p. 123.

7\. Remigius, pp. 71, 72.

8\. *Pleasant Treatise*, p. 4.\]

the irregularity of the dates: 'Efter that, we vold still meit euerie
ten, twelve, or twantie dayes continwally.'\[1\] Marie Lamont merely
notes that the meetings were at night: 'The devil came to Kattrein
Scott's house in the midst of the night. . . . When she had been at a
mietting sine Zowle last, with other witches, in the night, the devill
convoyed her home in the dawing.'\[2\] The Somerset witches had no
special night: 'At every meeting before the Spirit vanisheth away, he
appoints the next meeting place and time,'\[3\] and Mary Green went to a
meeting 'on Thursday Night before Whitsunday last'.\[4\] At Paisley the
meeting was on Thursday, the 4th of January, 1678, in the night, in John
Stuart's house.\[5\] The Swedish witches were much harder worked:
'whereas formerly one journey a week would serve his turn, from their
own Town to the place aforesaid, now they were forced to run to other
Towns and places for Children, and that some of them did bring with them
some fifteen, some sixteen Children every night.'\[6\]

The more modern examples suggest that the date became more fixed: 'On
croit que c'est toujours un vendredi soir que les sorciers et sorcières
se réunissent.'\[7\] 'Sorciers et sorcières vont au *sabbat* le
vendredi, à travers les airs.'\[8\]

\[1. Pitcairn, iii, p. 617.

2\. Sharpe, pp. 131, 133.

3\. Glanvil, pt, ii, p. 139.

4\. Id., pt. ii, p. 164.

5\. Id., pt. ii, pp. 293, 297.

6\. Horneck, pt. ii, p. 318.

7\. Monseur, p. 87.

8\. Lemoine, *La Tradition*, 1897, vi, p. 106.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Rites](wcwe05)
