[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh01)  [Next](mbh03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### II. The Circle of Myths

FROM the mass of chiefly biographic hero myths, we have selected those
that are best known and some that are especially characteristic. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) These myths will be given in abbreviated
form, as far as relevant for this investigation, with statements
concerning the sources. Attention will be called to the most important
and constantly recurring motifs by the use of italic type.

#### SARGON

Probably the oldest transmitted hero myth in our possession is derived
from the period of the foundation of Babylonia (about 2800 B.C.) and
concerns the birth history of its founder, Sargon the First. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) The literal translation

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

of the report--according to the mode of rendering, it appears to be an
original inscription by King Sargon himself--is as follows:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Sargon, the mighty king, King of Agade, am I. *My mother was a vestal,
my father I knew not*, while my father's brother dwelt in the mountains.
In my city Azuripani, which is situated on the bank of the Euphrates, my
mother, the vestal, bore me. In a hidden place she brought me forth. She
laid me in a vessel made of reeds, closed my door with pitch, and
dropped me down into the river, which did not drown me. The river
carried me to Akki, the water carrier. Akki the water carrier lifted me
up in the kindness of his heart, Akki the water carrier raised me as his
own son, Akki the water carrier made of me his gardener. In my work as a
gardener I was beloved by Ishtar, I became the king, and for forty-five
years I held kingly sway. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](mbh03.htm#fn_29)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[14:1](mbh02.htm#fr_27) Attention has been drawn
to the great variability and wide distribution of the birth myths of the
hero by the writings of Bauer, Schubert, and others referred to in the
preceding pages. The comprehensive contents of the myths and their fine
ramifications have been especially discussed by Hüsing, Lessmann, and
other representatives of the modern trend.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[14:2](mbh02.htm#fr_28) Innumerable fairy tales,
stories, and poems of all times, up to the most recent dramatic and
novelistic literature, show very distinct individual main motifs of this
myth. The exposure-romance appears in the late Greek
pastorals--Heliodorus' *Aethiopica*, Eustathius' *Ismenias and Ismene*,
and Longus' story of the two exposed children, Daphnis and Chloe. The
more recent Italian pastorals are likewise very frequently based upon
the exposure of children, who are raised as shepherds by <span
id="page_15">p. 15</span> their foster parents, but are later recognized
by the true parents, through identifying marks received at the time of
their exposure. To the same set belong the family history in
Grimmelshausen's *Limplizissimus* (1665), in Jean Paul's *Titan* (1800),
as well as certain forms of the Robinson stories and Cavalier romances
(compare Würzbach's Introduction to Hesse's edition of *Don Quixote*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moses](mbh03)
