[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mbh12)  [Next](mbh14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002H9XPY0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Myth of the Birth of the Hero*, by Otto Rank, \[1914\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### HERCULES <span id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_68)

After the loss of his numerous sons, Electryon betroths his daughter,
Alcmene, to Amphitryon, the son of his brother, Alcaeus. However,
Amphitryon, through an unfortunate accident, causes the death of
Electryon, and escapes to Thebes with his affianced bride. He has not
enjoyed her love, for she has solemnly pledged him not to touch her
until he has avenged her brothers on the Thebans. An expedition is
therefore started by him, from Thebes, and he conquers the king of the
hostile people, Pterelaos, with all the islands. As he is returning to
Thebes, Zeus in the form of Amphitryon betakes himself to Alcmene, to
whom he presents a golden goblet as evidence of victory. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[3](#fn_69) He rests with the beauteous maiden during
three nights, according to the later poets, holding back the sun one
day. In the same night, Amphitryon arrives, exultant in his victory and
aflame with love. In the fullness of time, the fruit of the divine and
the human embrace is brought forth, and Zeus announces to the gods his
son, as the most powerful ruler of the future. <span
id="fr_70"></span>[4](#fn_70) But his jealous spouse, Hera, knows how to
obtain from him the pernicious oath that the first-born grandson of
Perseus is to be the ruler of all the other descendants of Perseus. Hera
hurries to Mycenae,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

to deliver the wife of Perseus’ third son, Sthenelos, of the
seven-months child, Eurystheus. At the same time she hinders and
endangers the confinement of Alcmene, through all sorts of wicked
sorcery, precisely as at the birth of the god of light, Apollo. Alcmene
finally gives birth to Hercules and Iphicles, the latter in no way the
former's equal in courage or in strength, but destined to become the
father of his faithful friend, Iolaos. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) In this way Eurystheus became the king in
Mycenae, in the land of the Argolians, in conformity with the oath of
Zeus, and the later-born Hercules was his subject.

The old legend related the raising of Hercules on the strength-giving
waters of the Fountain of Dirce, the nourishment of all Theban children.
Later on, however, another version arose. Fearing the jealousy of Hera,
Alcmene *exposed the child she had borne* in a place that for a long
time after was known as the Field of Hercules. About this time, Athena
arrived, in company with Hera. She marveled at the beautiful form of the
child, and persuaded Hera to put him to her breast. But the boy took the
breast with far greater strength than his age seemed to warrant; Hera
felt pains and angrily flung the child to the ground. Athena, however,
carried him to the neighboring city and *took him to Queen Alcmene,
whose maternity was unknown to her, as a poor foundling, whom she begged
her to raise for the sake of charity*. This peculiar accident is truly
remarkable! The child's own mother allows him to perish, disregarding
the duty of maternal love, and the stepmother, who is filled with
natural hatred against the child, saves her enemy without knowing
it. <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) Hercules had drawn only a few
drops from Hera's breast,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

but the divine milk was sufficient to endow him with immortality. An
attempt on Hera's part to kill the boy, asleep in his cradle, by means
of two serpents, proved a failure, for the child awakened and crushed
the beasts with a single pressure of his hands. As a boy, Hercules one
day killed his tutor, Linos, being incensed over an unjust chastisement.
Amphitryon, fearing the wildness of the youth, sent him to tend his
ox-herds in the mountains, with the herders, among whom he is said by
some to have been raised entirely, like Amphion and Zethus, Cyrus, and
Romulus. Here he lives from the hunt, in the freedom of nature. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](mbh14.htm#fn_73)

The myth of Hercules suggests in certain features the Hindu saga of the
hero Krishna, who like many heroes escapes a general infanticide, and is
then brought up by a herder's wife, Iasodha. A wicked she-demon appears,
who has been sent by King Kansa to kill the boy. She takes the post of
wet nurse in the home, but is recognized by Krishna, who bites her so
severely in suckling--like Hera, when nursing Hercules, whom she also
means to destroy--that she dies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_67"></span>[48:1](mbh12.htm#fr_67) Mommsen: *Die Remus
Legende* (Berlin, 1881).

<span id="fn_68"></span>[48:2](mbh13.htm#fr_68) After Preller: *Greek
Mythology* (Leipzig, 1854), Vol. II, pp. 120 ff.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[48:3](mbh13.htm#fr_69) The same transformation
of the divine procreator into the form of the human father is found in
the birth history of the Egyptian queen, Hatshepsut (about 1500 B.C.),
who believed that the god Amen, in the form of her father, Thothmes I,
cohabited with her mother, Aahames. (See Budge: *A History of Egypt*.)
Later on she married her brother, Thothmes II, after whose dishonorable
death she endeavored to eradicate his memory, and herself assumed the
rulership, in masculine fashion. (See *The Deuteronium*, edited by
Schrader.)

<span id="fn_70"></span>[48:4](mbh13.htm#fr_70) A similar mingling of
the divine and human posterity is related in the myth of Theseus, whose
mother, Aethra, the beloved of Poseidon, was visited in one night by
this god and by the childless King Aegeus of Athens, who had been
brought under the influence of wine. The boy was raised in secret and in
ignorance of his father. (See Röscher, op. cit., article "Aegeus.")

<span id="fn_71"></span>[49:1](mbh13.htm#fr_71) Alcmene bore Hercules as
the son of Zeus, and Iphicles as the offspring of Amphitryon. According
to Apollodorus, they were twin children, born at the same time;
according to others, Iphicles was conceived and born one night later
than Hercules. (See Röscher, op. cit., articles "Amphitryon" and
"Alcmene.") The shadowy character of the twin brother, and his loose
connection with the entire myth, is again evident. In a similar way,
Telephus, the son of Auge, was exposed together with Parthenopaeus, the
son of Atalanta, nursed by a doe, and taken by herders to King Corythos.
The external subsequent insertion of the partner is here again quite
obvious.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[49:2](mbh13.htm#fr_72) After Diodorus Siculus,
Book IV, p. 9 of Wurm's German translation (Stuttgart, 1831).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jesus](mbh14)
