[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl217)  [Next](wl219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ALEXANDER THE ORACLE-MONGER

You, my dear Celsus, possibly suppose yourself to be laying upon me
quite a trifling task: *Write me down in a book and send me the life and
adventures, the tricks and frauds, of the impostor Alexander of
Abonutichus*. In fact, however, it would take as long to do this in full
detail as to reduce to writing the achievements of Alexander of Macedon;
the one is among villains what the other is among heroes. Nevertheless,
if you will promise to read with indulgence, and fill up the gaps in my
tale from your imagination, I will essay the task. I may not cleanse
that Augean stable completely, but I will do my best, and fetch you out
a few loads as samples of the unspeakable filth that three thousand oxen
could produce in many years.

I confess to being a little ashamed both on your account and<span
class="margnote"><span id="212:2">2</span></span> my own. There are you
asking that the memory of an arch-scoundrel should be perpetuated in
writing; here am I going seriously into an investigation of this
sort--the doings of a person whose deserts entitled him not to be read
about by the cultivated, but to be torn to pieces in the amphitheatre by
apes

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

or foxes, with a vast audience looking on. Well, well, if any one does
cast reflections of that sort upon us, we shall at least have a
precedent to plead. Arrian himself, disciple of Epictetus, distinguished
Roman, and product of lifelong culture as he was, had just our
experience, and shall make our defence. He condescended, that is, to put
on record the life of the robber Tilliborus. The robber we propose to
immortalize was of a far more pestilent kind, following his profession
not in the forests and mountains, but in cities; *he* was not content to
overrun a Mysia or an Ida; *his* booty came not from a few scantily
populated districts of Asia; one may say that the scene of his
depredations was the whole Roman Empire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="213:3">3</span></span>I will begin with
a picture of the man himself, as lifelike (though I am not great at
description) as I can make it with nothing better than words. In
person--not to forget that part of him--he was a fine handsome man with
a real touch of divinity about him, white-skinned, moderately bearded;
he wore besides his own hair artificial additions which matched it so
cunningly that they were not generally detected. His eyes were piercing,
and suggested inspiration, his voice at once sweet and sonorous. In fact
there was no fault to be found with him in these respects.

<span class="margnote"><span id="213:4">4</span></span>So much for
externals. As for his mind and spirit--well, if all the kind Gods who
avert disaster will grant a prayer, it shall be that they bring me not
within reach of such a one as he; sooner will I face my bitterest
enemies, my country's foes. In understanding, resource, acuteness, he
was far above other men; curiosity, receptiveness, memory, scientific
ability--all these were his in overflowing measure. But he used them for
the worst purposes. Endowed with all these instruments of good, he very
soon reached a proud pre-eminence among all who have been famous for
evil; the Cercopes, Eurybatus, Phrynondas, Aristodemus, Sostratus--all
thrown into the shade. In a letter to his father-in-law Rutilianus,
which puts his own pretensions

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

in a truly modest light, he compares himself to Pythagoras. Well, I
should not like to offend the wise, the divine Pythagoras; but if he had
been Alexander's contemporary, I am quite sure he would have been a mere
child to him. Now by all that is admirable, do not take that for an
insult to Pythagoras, nor suppose I would draw a parallel between their
achievements. What I mean is: if any one would make a collection of all
the vilest and most damaging slanders ever vented against
Pythagoras--things whose truth I would not accept for a moment--, the
sum of them would not come within measurable distance of Alexander's
cleverness. You are to set your imagination to work and conceive a
temperament curiously compounded of falsehood, trickery, perjury,
cunning; it is versatile, audacious, adventurous, yet dogged in
execution; it is plausible enough to inspire confidence; it can assume
the mask of virtue, and seem to eschew what it most desires. I suppose
no one ever left him after a first interview without the impression that
this was the best and kindest of men, ay, and the simplest and most
unsophisticated. Add to all this a certain greatness in his objects; he
never made a small plan; his ideas were always large.

While in the bloom of his youthful beauty, which we may<span
class="margnote"><span id="214:5">5</span></span> assume to have been
great both from its later remains and from the report of those who saw
it, he traded quite shamelessly upon it. Among his other patrons was one
of the charlatans who deal in magic and mystic incantations; they will
smooth your course of love, confound your enemies, find you treasure, or
secure you an inheritance. This person was struck with the lad's natural
qualifications for apprenticeship to his trade, and finding him as much
attracted by rascality as attractive in appearance, gave him a regular
training as accomplice, satellite, and attendant. His own ostensible
profession was medicine, and his knowledge included, like that of Thoon
the Egyptian's wife,

Many a virtuous herb, and many a bane;

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

to all which inheritance our friend succeeded. This teacher and lover of
his was a native of Tyana, an associate of the great Apollonius, and
acquainted with all his heroics. And now you know the atmosphere in
which Alexander lived.

<span class="margnote"><span id="215:6">6</span></span>By the time his
beard had come, the Tyanean was dead, and he found himself in straits;
for the personal attractions which might once have been a resource were
diminished. He now formed great designs, which he imparted to a
Byzantine chronicler of the strolling competitive order, a man of still
worse character than himself, called, I believe, Cocconas. The pair went
about living on occult pretensions, shearing 'fat-heads,' as they
describe ordinary people in the native Magian lingo. Among these they
got hold of a rich Macedonian woman; her youth was past, but not her
desire for admiration; they got sufficient supplies out of her, and
accompanied her from Bithynia to Macedonia. She came from Pella, which
had been a flourishing place under the Macedonian kingdom, but has now a
poor and much reduced population.

<span class="margnote"><span id="215:7">7</span></span>There is here a
breed of large serpents, so tame and gentle that women make pets of
them, children take them to bed, they will let you tread on them, have
no objection to being squeezed, and will draw milk from the breast like
infants. To these facts is probably to be referred the common story
about Olympias when she was with child of Alexander; it was doubtless
one of these that was her bed-fellow. Well, the two saw these creatures,
and bought the finest they could get for a few pence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="215:8">8</span></span>And from this
point, as Thucydides might say, the war takes its beginning. These
ambitious scoundrels were quite devoid of scruples, and they had now
joined forces; it could not escape their penetration that human life is
under the absolute dominion of two mighty principles, fear and hope, and
that any one who can make these serve his ends may be sure of a rapid
fortune.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They realized
that, whether a man is most swayed by the one or by the other, what he
must most depend upon and desire is a knowledge of futurity. So were to
be explained the ancient wealth and fame of Delphi, Delos, Clarus,
Branchidae; it was at the bidding of the two tyrants aforesaid that men
thronged the temples, longed for fore-knowledge, and to attain it
sacrificed their hecatombs or dedicated their golden ingots. All this
they turned over and debated, and it issued in the resolve to establish
an oracle. If it were successful, they looked for immediate wealth and
prosperity; the result surpassed their most sanguine expectations.

The next things to be settled were, first the theatre of
operations,<span class="margnote"><span id="216:9">9</span></span> and
secondly the plan of campaign. Cocconas favoured Chalcedon, as a
mercantile centre convenient both for Thrace and Bithynia, and
accessible enough for the province of Asia, Galatia, and tribes still
further east. Alexander, on the other hand, preferred his native place,
urging very truly that an enterprise like theirs required congenial soil
to give it a start, in the shape of 'fat-heads' and simpletons; that was
a fair description, he said, of the Paphlagonians beyond Abonutichus;
they were mostly superstitious and well-to-do; one had only to go there
with some one to play the flute, the tambourine, or the cymbals, set the
proverbial mantic sieve <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_18) a-spinning,
and there they would all be gaping as if he were a God from heaven.

This difference of opinion did not last long, and Alexander<span
class="margnote"><span id="216:10">10</span></span> prevailed.
Discovering, however, that a use might after all be made of Chalcedon,
they went there first, and in the temple

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

of Apollo, the oldest in the place, they buried some brazen tablets, on
which was the statement that very shortly Asclepius, with his father
Apollo, would pay a visit to Pontus, and take up his abode at
Abonutichus. The discovery of the tablets took place as arranged, and
the news flew through Bithynia and Pontus, first of all, naturally, to
Abonutichus. The people of that place at once resolved to raise a
temple, and lost no time in digging the foundations. Cocconas was now
left at Chalcedon, engaged in composing certain ambiguous crabbed
oracles. He shortly afterwards died, I believe, of a viper's bite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="217:11">11</span></span>Alexander
meanwhile went on in advance; he had now grown his hair and wore it in
long curls; his doublet was white and purple striped, his cloak pure
white; he carried a scimetar in imitation of Perseus, from whom he now
claimed descent through his mother. The wretched Paphlagonians, who knew
perfectly well that his parentage was obscure and mean on both sides,
nevertheless gave credence to the oracle, which ran:

Lo, sprung from Perseus, and to Phoebus dear,  
High Alexander, Podalirius' son!

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Podalirius, it
seems, was of so highly amorous a complexion that the distance between
Tricca and Paphlagonia was no bar to his union with Alexander's mother.
A Sibylline prophecy had also been found:

Hard by Sinope on the Euxine shore  
Th’ Italic age a fortress prophet sees.  
To the first monad let thrice ten be added,  
Five monads yet, and then a triple score:  
Such the quaternion of th’ alexic name <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_19).

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

This heroic entry into his long-left home placed Alexander<span
class="margnote"><span id="218:12">12</span></span> conspicuously before
the public; he affected madness, and frequently foamed at the mouth--a
manifestation easily produced by chewing the herb soap-wort, used by
dyers; but it brought him reverence and awe. The two had long ago
manufactured and fitted up a serpent's head of linen; they had given it
a more or less human expression, and painted it very like the real
article; by a contrivance of horsehair, the mouth could be opened and
shut, and a forked black serpent tongue protruded, working on the same
system. The serpent from Pella was also kept ready in the house, to be
produced at the right moment and take its part in the drama--the leading
part, indeed.

In the fullness of time, his plan took shape. He went one<span
class="margnote"><span id="218:13">13</span></span> night to the temple
foundations, still in process of digging, and with standing water in
them which had collected from the rainfall or otherwise; here he
deposited a goose egg, into which, after blowing it, he had inserted
some new-born reptile. He made a resting-place deep down in the mud for
this, and departed. Early next morning he rushed into the market-place,
naked except for a gold-spangled loin-cloth; with nothing but this and
his scimetar, and shaking his long loose hair, like the fanatics who
collect money in the name of Cybele, he climbed on to a lofty altar and
delivered a harangue, felicitating the city upon the advent of the God
now to bless them with his presence. In a few minutes nearly the whole
population was on the spot, women, old men, and children included; all
was awe, prayer, and adoration. He uttered some unintelligible sounds,
which might have been Hebrew or Phoenician, but completed his victory
over his audience, who could make nothing of what he said, beyond the
constant repetition of the names Apollo and Asclepius.

He then set off at a run for the future temple. Arrived at<span
class="margnote"><span id="218:14">14</span></span>

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the excavation and the already completed sacred fount, he got down into
the water, chanted in a loud voice hymns to Asclepius and Apollo, and
invited the God to come, a welcome guest, to the city. He next demanded
a bowl, and when this was handed to him, had no difficulty in putting it
down at the right place and scooping up, besides water and mud, the egg
in which the God had been enclosed; the edges of the aperture had been
joined with wax and white lead. He took the egg in his hand and
announced that here he held Asclepius. The people, who had been
sufficiently astonished by the discovery of the egg in the water, were
now all eyes for what was to come. He broke it, and received in his
hollowed palm the hardly developed reptile; the crowd could see it
stirring and winding about his fingers; they raised a shout, hailed the
God, blessed the city, and every mouth was full of prayers--for treasure
and wealth and health and all the other good things that he might give.
Our hero now departed homewards, still running, with the new-born
Asclepius in his hands--the twice-born, too, whereas ordinary men can be
born but once, and born moreover not of Coronis <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_20) nor even of her namesake the crow, but of
a goose! After him streamed the whole people, in all the madness of
fanatic hopes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="219:15">15</span></span>He now kept the
house for some days, in hopes that the Paphlagonians would soon be drawn
in crowds by the news. He was not disappointed; the city was filled to
overflowing with persons who had neither brains nor individuality, who
bore no resemblance to men that live by bread, and had only their
outward shape to distinguish them from sheep. In a small room he took
his seat, very imposingly attired, upon a couch. He took into his bosom
our Asclepius of Pella (a very fine and large one, as I observed), wound
its body round his neck, and let its tail hang down; there was enough of
this not

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

only to fill his lap, but to trail on the ground also; the patient
creature's head he kept hidden in his armpit, showing the linen head on
one side of his beard exactly as if it belonged to the visible body.

Picture to yourself a little chamber into which no<span
class="margnote"><span id="220:16">16</span></span> very brilliant light
was admitted, with a crowd of people from all quarters, excited,
carefully worked up, all a-flutter with expectation. As they came in,
they might naturally find a miracle in the development of that little
crawling thing of a few days ago into this great, tame, human-looking
serpent. Then they had to get on at once towards the exit, being pressed
forward by the new arrivals before they could have a good look. An exit
had been specially made just opposite the entrance, for all the world
like the Macedonian device at Babylon when Alexander was ill; he was *in
extremis*, you remember, and the crowd round the palace were eager to
take their last look and give their last greeting. Our scoundrel's
exhibition, though, is said to have been given not once, but many times,
especially for the benefit of any wealthy new-comers.

And at this point, my dear Celsus, we may, if we will be<span
class="margnote"><span id="220:17">17</span></span> candid, make some
allowance for these Paphlagonians and Pontics; the poor uneducated
'fat-heads' might well be taken in when they handled the serpent--a
privilege conceded to all who choose--and saw in that dim light its head
with the mouth that opened and shut. It was an occasion for a
Democritus, nay, for an Epicurus or a Metrodorus, perhaps, a man whose
intelligence was steeled against such assaults by scepticism and
insight, one who, if he could not detect the precise imposture, would at
any rate have been perfectly certain that, though this escaped him, the
whole thing was a lie and an impossibility.

By degrees Bithynia, Galatia, Thrace, came flocking in, every<span
class="margnote"><span id="220:18">18</span></span> one who had been
present doubtless reporting that he had

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

beheld the birth of the God, and had touched him after his marvellous
development in size and in expression. Next came pictures and models,
bronze or silver images, and the God acquired a name. By divine command,
metrically expressed, he was to be known as Glycon. For Alexander had
delivered the line:

Glycon my name, man's light, son's son to Zeus.

<span class="margnote"><span id="221:19">19</span></span>And now at last
the object to which all this had led up, the giving of oracular answers
to all applicants, could be attained. The cue was taken from Amphilochus
in Cilicia. After the death and disappearance at Thebes of his father
Amphiaraus, Amphilochus, driven from his home, made his way to Cilicia,
and there did not at all badly by prophesying to the Cilicians at the
rate of threepence an oracle. After this precedent, Alexander proclaimed
that on a stated day the God would give answers to all comers. Each
person was to write down his wish and the object of his curiosity,
fasten the packet with thread, and seal it with wax, clay, or other such
substance. He would receive these, and enter the holy place (by this
time the temple was complete, and the scene all ready), whither the
givers should be summoned in order by a herald and an acolyte; he would
learn the God's mind upon each, and return the packets with their seals
intact and the answers attached, the God being ready to give a definite
answer to any question that might be put.

<span class="margnote"><span id="221:20">20</span></span>The trick here
was one which would be seen through easily enough by a person of your
intelligence (or, if I may say so without violating modesty, of my own),
but which to the ordinary imbecile would have the persuasiveness of what
is marvellous and incredible. He contrived various methods of undoing
the seals, read the questions, answered them as seemed good, and then
folded, sealed, and returned them, to the great astonishment

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

of the recipients. And then it was, 'How could he possibly know what I
gave him carefully secured under a seal that defies imitation, unless he
were a true God, with a God's omniscience?'

Perhaps you will ask what these contrivances were; well,<span
class="margnote"><span id="222:21">21</span></span> then--the
information may be useful another time. One of them was this. He would
heat a needle, melt with it the under part of the wax, lift the seal
off, and after reading warm the wax once more with the needle--both that
below the thread and that which formed the actual seal--and re-unite the
two without difficulty. Another method employed the substance called
collyrium; this is a preparation of Bruttian pitch, bitumen, pounded
glass, wax, and mastich. He kneaded the whole into collyrium, heated it,
placed it on the seal, previously moistened with his tongue, and so took
a mould. This soon hardened; he simply opened, read, replaced the wax,
and reproduced an excellent imitation of the original seal as from an
engraved stone. One more I will give you. Adding some gypsum to the glue
used in book-binding he produced a sort of wax, which was applied still
wet to the seal, and on being taken off solidified at once and provided
a matrix harder than horn, or even iron. There are plenty of other
devices for the purpose, to rehearse which would seem like airing one's
knowledge. Moreover, in your excellent pamphlets against the magians
(most useful and instructive reading they are) you have yourself
collected enough of them--many more than those I have mentioned.

So oracles and divine utterances were the order of the day,<span
class="margnote"><span id="222:22">22</span></span> and much shrewdness
he displayed, eking out mechanical ingenuity with obscurity, his answers
to some being crabbed and ambiguous, and to others absolutely
unintelligible. He did however distribute warning and encouragement
according to his lights, and recommend treatments and diets; for he

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

had, as I originally stated, a wide and serviceable acquaintance with
drugs; he was particularly given to prescribing 'cytmides,' which were a
salve prepared from goat's fat, the name being of his own invention. For
the realization of ambitions, advancement, or successions, he took care
never to assign early dates; the formula was, 'All this shall come to
pass when it is my will, and when my prophet Alexander shall make prayer
and entreaty on your behalf.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="223:23">23</span></span>There was a
fixed charge of a shilling the oracle. And, my friend, do not suppose
that this would not come to much; he made something like £3,000 *per
annum*; people were insatiable--would take from ten to fifteen oracles
at a time. What he got he did not keep to himself, nor put it by for the
future; what with accomplices, attendants, inquiry agents, oracle
writers and keepers, amanuenses, seal-forgers, and interpreters, he had
now a host of claimants to satisfy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="223:24">24</span></span>He had begun
sending emissaries abroad to make the shrine known in foreign lands; his
prophecies, discovery of runaways, conviction of thieves and robbers,
revelations of hidden treasure, cures of the sick, restoration of the
dead to life--all these were to be advertised. This brought them running
and crowding from all points of the compass; victims bled, gifts were
presented, and the prophet and disciple came off better than the God;
for had not the oracle spoken?--

Give what ye give to my attendant priest;  
My care is not for gifts, but for my priest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="223:25">25</span></span>A time came
when a number of sensible people began to shake off their intoxication
and combine against him, chief among them the numerous Epicureans; in
the cities, the imposture with all its theatrical accessories began to
be seen through. It was now that he resorted to a measure of
intimidation; he proclaimed that Pontus was overrun with

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

atheists and Christians, who presumed to spread the most scandalous
reports concerning him; he exhorted Pontus, as it valued the God's
favour, to stone these men. Touching Epicurus, he gave the following
response. An inquirer had asked how Epicurus fared in Hades, and was
told:

Of slime is his bed,  
And his fetters of lead.

The prosperity of the oracle is perhaps not so wonderful, when one
learns what sensible, intelligent questions were in fashion with its
votaries. Well, it was war to the knife between him and Epicurus, and no
wonder. What fitter enemy for a charlatan who patronized miracles and
hated truth, than the thinker who had grasped the nature of things and
was in solitary possession of that truth? As for the Platonists, Stoics,
Pythagoreans, they were his good friends; he had no quarrel with them.
But the unmitigated Epicurus, as he used to call him, could not but be
hateful to him, treating all such pretensions as absurd and puerile.
Alexander consequently loathed Amastris beyond all the cities of Pontus,
knowing what a number of Lepidus's friends and others like-minded it
contained. He would not give oracles to Amastrians; when he once did, to
a senator's brother, he made himself ridiculous, neither hitting upon a
presentable oracle for himself, nor finding a deputy equal to the
occasion. The man had complained of colic, and what he meant to
prescribe was pig's foot dressed with mallow. The shape it took was:

In basin hallowed  
Be pigments mallowed.

I have mentioned that the serpent was often exhibited by<span
class="margnote"><span id="224:26">26</span></span> request; he was not
completely visible, but the tail and body were exposed, while the head
was concealed under the prophet's dress. By way of impressing the people
still more, he

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

announced that he would induce the God to speak, and give his responses
without an intermediary. His simple device to this end was a tube of
cranes' windpipes, which he passed, with due regard to its matching,
through the artificial head, and, having an assistant speaking into the
end outside, whose voice issued through the linen Asclepius, thus
answered questions. These oracles were called *autophones*, and were not
vouchsafed casually to any one, but reserved for officials, the rich,
and the lavish.

<span class="margnote"><span id="225:27">27</span></span>It was an
autophone which was given to Severian regarding the invasion of Armenia.
He encouraged him with these lines:

Armenia, Parthia, cowed by thy fierce spear,  
To Rome, and Tiber's shining waves, thou com’st,  
Thy brow with leaves and radiant gold encircled.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then when the
foolish Gaul took his advice and invaded, to the total destruction of
himself and his army by Othryades, the adviser expunged that oracle from
his archives and substituted the following:

Vex not th’ Armenian land; it shall not thrive;  
One in soft raiment clad shall from his bow  
Launch death, and cut thee off from life and light.

<span class="margnote"><span id="225:28">28</span></span>For it was one
of his happy thoughts to issue prophecies after the event as antidotes
to those premature utterances which had not gone right. Frequently he
promised recovery to a sick man before his death, and after it was at no
loss for second thoughts:

No longer seek to arrest thy fell disease;  
Thy fate is manifest, inevitable.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote"><span id="225:29">29</span></span>Knowing the fame of
Clarus, Didymus, and Mallus for sooth-saying

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

much like his own, he struck up an alliance with them, sending on many
of his clients to those places. So

Hie thee to Clarus now, and hear my sire.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And again,

Draw near to Branchidae and counsel take.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Or

Seek Mallus; be Amphilochus thy counsellor.

So things went within the borders of Ionia, Cilicia, Paphlagonia,<span
class="margnote"><span id="226:30">30</span></span> and Galatia. When
the fame of the oracle travelled to Italy and entered Rome, the only
question was, who should be first; those who did not come in person sent
messages, the powerful and respected being the keenest of all. First and
foremost among these was Rutilianus; he was in most respects an
excellent person, and had filled many high offices in Rome; but he
suffered from religious mania, holding the most extraordinary beliefs on
that matter; show him a bit of stone smeared with unguents or crowned
with flowers, and he would incontinently fall down and worship, and
linger about it praying and asking for blessings. The reports about our
oracle nearly induced him to throw up the appointment he then held, and
fly to Abonutichus; he actually did send messenger upon messenger. His
envoys were ignorant servants, easily taken in. They came back having
really seen certain things, relating others which they probably thought
they had seen and heard, and yet others which they deliberately invented
to curry favour with their master. So they inflamed the poor old man and
drove him into confirmed madness.

He had a wide circle of influential friends, to whom he
communicated<span class="margnote"><span id="226:31">31</span></span>
the news brought by his successive messengers, not without additional
touches of his own. All Rome was full of his tales; there was quite a
commotion, the gentlemen of the Court being much fluttered, and at once
taking measures to

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

learn something of their own fate. The prophet gave all who came a
hearty welcome, gained their goodwill by hospitality and costly gifts,
and sent them off ready not merely to report his answers, but to sing
the praises of the God and invent miraculous tales of the shrine and its
guardian.

<span class="margnote"><span id="227:32">32</span></span>This triple
rogue now hit upon an idea which would have been too clever for the
ordinary robber. Opening and reading the packets which reached him,
whenever he came upon an equivocal, compromising question, he omitted to
return the packet; the sender was to be under his thumb, bound to his
service by the terrifying recollection of the question he had written
down. You know the sort of things that wealthy and powerful personages
would be likely to ask. This blackmail brought him in a good income.

<span class="margnote"><span id="227:33">33</span></span>I should like
to quote you one or two of the answers given to Rutilianus. He had a son
by a former wife, just old enough for advanced teaching. The father
asked who should be his tutor, and was told,

Pythagoras, and the mighty battle-bard.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When the child
died a few days after, the prophet was abashed, and quite unable to
account for this summary confutation. However, dear good Rutilianus very
soon restored the oracle's credit by discovering that this was the very
thing the God had foreshown; he had not directed him to choose a living
teacher; Pythagoras and Homer were long dead, and doubtless the boy was
now enjoying their instructions in Hades. Small blame to Alexander if he
had a taste for dealings with such specimens of humanity as this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="227:34">34</span></span>Another of
Rutilianus's questions was, Whose soul he had succeeded to, and the
answer:

First thou wast Peleus' son, and next Menander;  
Then thine own self; next, a sunbeam shalt be;  
And nine score annual rounds thy life shall measure.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At seventy, he
died of melancholy, not waiting for the God to pay in full.

That was an autophone too. Another time Rutilianus consulted<span
class="margnote"><span id="228:35">35</span></span> the oracle on the
choice of a wife. The answer was express:

Wed Alexander's daughter and Selene's.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He had long ago
spread the report that the daughter he had had was by Selene: she had
once seen him asleep, and fallen in love, as is her way with handsome
sleepers. The sensible Rutilianus lost no time, but sent for the maiden
at once, celebrated the nuptials, a sexagenarian bridegroom, and lived
with her, propitiating his divine mother-in-law with whole hecatombs,
and reckoning himself now one of the heavenly company.

His finger once in the Italian pie, Alexander devoted himself<span
class="margnote"><span id="228:36">36</span></span> to getting further.
Sacred envoys were sent all over the Roman Empire, warning the various
cities to be on their guard against pestilence and conflagrations, with
the prophet's offers of security against them. One oracle in particular,
an autophone again, he distributed broadcast at a time of pestilence. It
was a single line:

Phoebus long-tressed the plague-cloud shall dispel.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This was
everywhere to be seen written up on doors as a prophylactic. Its effect
was generally disappointing; for it somehow happened that the protected
houses were just the ones to be desolated. Not that I would suggest for
a moment that the line was their destruction; but, accidentally no
doubt, it did so fall out. Possibly common people put too much
confidence in the verse, and lived carelessly without troubling to help
the oracle against its foe; were there not the words fighting their
battle, and long-tressed Phoebus discharging his arrows at the
pestilence?

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="229:37">37</span></span>In Rome itself
he established an intelligence bureau well manned with his accomplices.
They sent him people's characters, forecasts of their questions, and
hints of their ambitions, so that he had his answers ready before the
messengers reached him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="229:38">38</span></span>It was with his
eye on this Italian propaganda, too, that he took a further step. This
was the institution of mysteries, with hierophants and torch-bearers
complete. The ceremonies occupied three successive days. On the first,
proclamation was made on the Athenian model to this effect: 'If there be
any atheist or Christian or Epicurean here spying upon our rites, let
him depart in haste; and let all such as have faith in the God be
initiated and all blessing attend them.' He led the litany with,
'Christians, avaunt!' and the crowd responded, 'Epicureans, avaunt!'
Then was presented the child-bed of Leto and birth of Apollo, the bridal
of Coronis, Asclepius born. The second day, the epiphany and nativity of
the God Glycon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="229:39">39</span></span>On the third
came the wedding of Podalirius and Alexander's mother; this was called
Torch-day, and torches were used. The finale was the loves of Selene and
Alexander, and the birth of Rutilianus's wife. The torch-bearer and
hierophant was Endymion-Alexander. He was discovered lying asleep; to
him from heaven, represented by the ceiling, enter as Selene one
Rutilia, a great beauty, and wife of one of the Imperial procurators.
She and Alexander were lovers off the stage too, and the wretched
husband had to look on at their public kissing and embracing; if there
had not been a good supply of torches, things might possibly have gone
even further. Shortly after, he reappeared amidst a profound hush,
attired as hierophant; in a loud voice he called, 'Hail, Glycon!',
whereto the Eumolpidae and Ceryces of Paphlagonia, with their
clod-hopping shoes and their garlic breath, made sonorous response,
'Hail, Alexander!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="229:40">40</span></span>The torch
ceremony with its ritual skippings often enabled

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

him to bestow a glimpse of his thigh, which was thus discovered to be of
gold; it was presumably enveloped in cloth of gold, which glittered in
the lamp-light. This gave rise to a debate between two wiseacres,
whether the golden thigh meant that he had inherited Pythagoras's soul,
or merely that their two souls were alike; the question was referred to
Alexander himself, and King Glycon relieved their perplexity with an
oracle:

Waxes and wanes Pythagoras' soul: the seer's  
Is from the mind of Zeus an emanation.  
His Father sent him, virtuous men to aid,  
And with his bolt one day shall call him home.

I will now give you a conversation between Glycon and one<span
class="margnote"><span id="230:43">43</span></span> Sacerdos of Tius;
the intelligence of the latter you may gauge from his questions. I read
it inscribed in golden letters in Sacerdos's house at Tius. 'Tell me,
lord Glycon,' said he, 'who you are.' 'The new Asclepius.' 'Another,
different from the former one? Is that the meaning?' 'That it is not
lawful for you to learn.' 'And how many years will you sojourn and
prophesy among us?' 'A thousand and three.' 'And after that, whither
will you go?' 'To Bactria; for the barbarians too must be blessed with
my presence.' 'The other oracles, at Didymus and Clarus and Delphi, have
they still the spirit of your grandsire Apollo, or are the answers that
now come from them forgeries?' 'That, too, desire not to know; it is not
lawful.' 'What shall I be after this life?' 'A camel; then a horse; then
a wise man, no less a prophet than Alexander.' Such was the
conversation. There was added to it an oracle in verse, inspired by the
fact that Sacerdos was an associate of Lepidus:

Shun Lepidus; an evil fate awaits him.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As I have said,
Alexander was much afraid of Epicurus, and the solvent action of his
logic on imposture.

On one occasion, indeed, an Epicurean got himself into great<span
class="margnote"><span id="230:44">44</span></span>

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

trouble by daring to expose him before a great gathering. He came up and
addressed him in a loud voice. 'Alexander, it was you who induced
So-and-so the Paphlagonian to bring his slaves before the governor of
Galatia, charged with the murder of his son who was being educated in
Alexandria. Well, the young man is alive, and has come back, to find
that the slaves had been cast to the beasts by your machinations.' What
had happened was this. The lad had sailed up the Nile, gone on to a Red
Sea port, found a vessel starting for India, and been persuaded to make
the voyage. He being long overdue, the unfortunate slaves supposed that
he had either perished in the Nile or fallen a victim to some of the
pirates who infested it at that time; so they came home to report his
disappearance. Then followed the oracle, the sentence, and finally the
young man's return with the story of his absence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="231:45">45</span></span>All this the
Epicurean recounted. Alexander was much annoyed by the exposure, and
could not stomach so well deserved an affront; he directed the company
to stone the man, on pain of being involved in his impiety and called
Epicureans. However, when they set to work, a distinguished Pontic
called Demostratus, who was staying there, rescued him by interposing
his own body; the man had the narrowest possible escape from being
stoned to death--as he richly deserved to be; what business had he to be
the only sane man in a crowd of madmen, and needlessly make himself the
butt of Paphlagonian infatuation?

<span class="margnote"><span id="231:46">46</span></span>This was a
special case; but it was the practice for the names of applicants to be
read out the day before answers were given; the herald asked whether
each was to receive his oracle; and sometimes the reply came from
within, To perdition! One so repulsed could get shelter, fire or water,
from no man; he must be driven from land to land as a blasphemer, an
atheist, and--lowest depth of all--an Epicurean.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

In this connexion Alexander once made himself supremely<span
class="margnote"><span id="232:47">47</span></span> ridiculous. Coming
across Epicurus's *Accepted Maxims*, the most admirable of his books, as
you know, with its terse presentment of his wise conclusions, he brought
it into the middle of the market-place, there burned it on a fig-wood
fire for the sins of its author, and cast its ashes into the sea. He
issued an oracle on the occasion:

The dotard's maxims to the flames be given.

The fellow had no conception of the blessings conferred by that book
upon its readers, of the peace, tranquillity, and independence of mind
it produces, of the protection it gives against terrors, phantoms, and
marvels, vain hopes and inordinate desires, of the judgement and candour
that it fosters, or of its true purging of the spirit, not with torches
and squills and such rubbish, but with right reason, truth, and
frankness.

Perhaps the greatest example of our rogue's audacity is what<span
class="margnote"><span id="232:48">48</span></span> I now come to.
Having easy access to Palace and Court by Rutilianus's influence, he
sent an oracle just at the crisis of the German war, when M. Aurelius
was on the point of engaging the Marcomanni and Quadi. The oracle
required that two lions should be flung alive into the Danube, with
quantities of sacred herbs and magnificent sacrifices. I had better give
the words:

To rolling Ister, swoln with Heaven's rain,  
Of Cybelean thralls, those mountain beasts,  
Fling ye a pair; therewith all flowers and herbs  
Of savour sweet that Indian air doth breed.  
Hence victory, and fame, and lovely peace.

These directions were precisely followed; the lions swam across to the
enemy's bank, where they were clubbed to death by the barbarians, who
took them for dogs or a new kind of wolves; and our forces immediately
after met with a severe defeat, losing some twenty thousand men in one
engagement. This

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

was followed by the Aquileian incident, in the course of which that city
was nearly lost. In view of these results, Alexander warmed up that
stale Delphian defence of the Croesus oracle: the God had foretold a
victory, forsooth, but had not stated whether Romans or barbarians
should have it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="233:49">49</span></span>The constant
increase in the number of visitors, the inadequacy of accommodation in
the city, and the difficulty of finding provisions for consultants, led
to his introducing what he called *night oracles*. He received the
packets, slept upon them, in his own phrase, and gave answers which the
God was supposed to send him in dreams. These were generally not lucid,
but ambiguous and confused, especially when he came to packets sealed
with exceptional care. He did not risk tampering with these, but wrote
down any words that came into his head, the results obtained
corresponding well enough to his conception of the oracular. There were
regular interpreters in attendance, who made considerable sums out of
the recipients by expounding and unriddling these oracles. This office
contributed to his revenue, the interpreters paying him £250 each.

<span class="margnote"><span id="233:50">50</span></span>Sometimes he
stirred the wonder of the silly by answers to persons who had neither
brought nor sent questions, and in fact did not exist. Here is a
specimen:

Who is ’t, thou askst, that with Calligenia  
All secretly defiles thy nuptial bed?  
The slave Protogenes, whom most thou trustest.  
Him thou enjoyedst: he thy wife enjoys--  
The fit return for that thine outrage done.  
And know that baleful drugs for thee are brewed,  
Lest thou or see or hear their evil deeds.  
Close by the wall, at thy bed's head, make search.  
Thy maid Calypso to their plot is privy.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The names and
circumstantial details might stagger a Democritus, till a moment's
thought showed him the despicable trick.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

He often gave answers in Syriac or Celtic to barbarians who<span
class="margnote"><span id="234:51">51</span></span> questioned him in
their own tongue, though he had difficulty in finding compatriots of
theirs in the city. In these cases there was a long interval between
application and response, during which the packet might be securely
opened at leisure, and somebody found capable of translating the
question. The following is an answer given to a Scythian:

Morphi ebargulis for night  
Chnenchicrank shall leave the light.

Another oracle to some one who neither came nor existed<span
class="margnote"><span id="234:52">52</span></span> was in prose.
'Return the way thou earnest,' it ran; 'for he that sent thee hath this
day been slain by his neighbour Diocles, with aid of the robbers Magnus,
Celer, and Bubalus, who are taken and in chains.'

I must give you one or two of the answers that fell to my<span
class="margnote"><span id="234:53">53</span></span> share. I asked
whether Alexander was bald, and having sealed it publicly with great
care, got a night oracle in reply:

Sabardalachu malach Attis was not he.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Another time I did
up the same question--What was Homer's birthplace?--in two packets given
in under different names. My servant misled him by saying, when asked
what he came for, a cure for lung trouble; so the answer to one packet
was:

Cytmide and foam of steed the liniment give.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As for the other
packet, he got the information that the sender was inquiring whether the
land or the sea route to Italy was preferable. So he answered, without
much reference to Homer:

Fare not by sea; land-travel meets thy need.

I laid a good many traps of this kind for him; here is another.<span
class="margnote"><span id="234:54">54</span></span> I asked only one
question, but wrote outside the packet in the usual form, So-and-so's
eight Queries, giving a fictitious name

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

and sending the eight shillings. Satisfied with the payment of the money
and the inscription on the packet, he gave me eight answers to my one
question. This was, When will Alexander's imposture be detected? The
answers concerned nothing in heaven or earth, but were all silly and
meaningless together. He afterwards found out about this, and also that
I had tried to dissuade Rutilianus both from the marriage and from
putting any confidence in the oracle; so he naturally conceived a
violent dislike for me. When Rutilianus once put a question to him about
me, the answer was:

Night-haunts and foul debauch are all his joy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="235:55">55</span></span>It is true his
dislike was quite justified. On a certain occasion I was passing through
Abonutichus, with a spearman and a pikeman whom my friend the governor
of Cappadocia had lent me as an escort on my way to the sea.
Ascertaining that I was the Lucian he knew of, he sent me a very polite
and hospitable invitation. I found him with a numerous company; by good
luck I had brought my escort. He gave me his hand to kiss according to
his usual custom. I took hold of it as if to kiss, but instead bestowed
on it a sound bite that must have come near disabling it. The company,
who were already offended at my calling him Alexander instead of
Prophet, were inclined to throttle and beat me for sacrilege. But he
endured the pain like a man, checked their violence, and assured them
that he would easily tame me, and illustrate Glycon's greatness in
converting his bitterest foes to friends. He then dismissed them all,
and argued the matter with me: he was perfectly aware of my advice to
Rutilianus; why had I treated him so, when I might have been preferred
by him to great influence in that quarter? By this time I had realized
my dangerous position, and was only too glad to welcome these advances;
I presently went my way in all friendship with

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

him. The rapid change wrought in me greatly impressed the observers.

When I intended to sail, he sent me many parting gifts, and<span
class="margnote"><span id="236:56">56</span></span> offered to find us
(Xenophon and me, that is; I had sent my father and family on to
Amastris) a ship and crew--which offer I accepted in all confidence.
When the passage was half over, I observed the master in tears arguing
with his men, which made me very uneasy. It turned out that Alexander's
orders were to seize and fling us overboard; in that case his war with
me would have been lightly won. But the crew were prevailed upon by the
master's tears to do us no harm. 'I am sixty years old, as you can see,'
he said to me; 'I have lived an honest blameless life so far, and I
should not like at my time of life, with a wife and children too, to
stain my hands with blood.' And with that preface he informed us what we
were there for, and what Alexander had told him to do.

He landed us at Aegiali, of Homeric fame, and thence sailed<span
class="margnote"><span id="236:57">57</span></span> home. Some Bosphoran
envoys happened to be passing, on their way to Bithynia with the annual
tribute from their king Eupator. They listened kindly to my account of
our dangerous situation, I was taken on board, and reached Amastris
safely after my narrow escape. From that time it was war between
Alexander and me, and I left no stone unturned to get my revenge. Even
before his plot I had hated him, revolted by his abominable practices,
and I now busied myself with the attempt to expose him; I found plenty
of allies, especially in the circle of Timocrates the Heracleot
philosopher. But Avitus, the then governor of Bithynia and Pontus,
restrained me, I may almost say with prayers and entreaties. He could
not possibly spoil his relations with Rutilianus, he said, by punishing
the man, even if he could get clear evidence against him. Thus arrested
in my course, I did not persist in what must have been, considering the
disposition of the judge, a fruitless prosecution.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="237:58">58</span></span>Among instances
of Alexander's presumption, a high place must be given to his petition
to the Emperor: the name of Abonutichus was to be changed to Ionopolis;
and a new coin was to be struck, with a representation on the obverse of
Glycon, and, on the reverse, Alexander bearing the garlands proper to
his paternal grandfather Asclepius, and the famous scimetar of his
maternal ancestor Perseus.

<span class="margnote"><span id="237:59">59</span></span>He had stated
in an oracle that he was destined to live to a hundred and fifty, and
then die by a thunderbolt; he had in fact, before he reached seventy, an
end very sad for a son of Podalirius, his leg mortifying from foot to
groin and being eaten of worms; it then proved that he was bald, as he
was forced by pain to let the doctors make cooling applications to his
head, which they could not do without removing his wig.

<span class="margnote"><span id="237:60">60</span></span>So ended
Alexander's heroics; such was the catastrophe of his tragedy; one would
like to find a special providence in it, though doubtless chance must
have the credit. The funeral celebration was to be worthy of his life,
taking the form of a contest--for possession of the oracle. The most
prominent of the impostors his accomplices referred it to Rutilianus's
arbitration which of them should be selected to succeed to the prophetic
office and wear the hierophantic oracular garland. Among these was
numbered the grey-haired physician Paetus, dishonouring equally his grey
hairs and his profession. But Steward-of-the-Games Rutilianus sent them
about their business ungarlanded, and continued the defunct in
possession of his holy office.

<span class="margnote"><span id="237:61">61</span></span>My object, dear
friend, in making this small selection from a great mass of material has
been twofold. First, I was willing to oblige a friend and comrade who is
for me the pattern of wisdom, sincerity, good humour, justice,
tranquillity, and geniality. But secondly I was still more concerned (a
preference

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

which you will be very far from resenting) to strike a blow for
Epicurus, that great man whose holiness and divinity of nature were not
shams, who alone had and imparted true insight into the good, and who
brought deliverance to all that consorted with him. Yet I think casual
readers too may find my essay not unserviceable, since it is not only
destructive, but, for men of sense, constructive also.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[216:1](wl218.htm#fr_20) I have no information
on Coscinomancy or sieve-divination. 'This kind of divination was
generally practised to discover thieves . . . They tied a thread to the
sieve, by which it was upheld, then prayed to the Gods to direct and
assist them. After which they repeated the names of the person
suspected, and he at whose name the sieve whirled round or moved was
thought to have committed the fact' *Francklin's Lucian.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[217:1](wl218.htm#fr_21) In 1. 2 of the oracle,
the Italic age is the Roman Empire; the fortress prophet is one who
belongs to a place ending in -tichus (fort). ll. 3-5 mean: Take 1, 30,
5, 60 (the Greek symbols for which are the letters of the alphabet A, L,
E, X), and you will have four letters of the name of your coming
protector (alexic).

<span id="fn_20"></span>[219:1](wl218.htm#fr_22) Coronis was the mother
of Asclepius; 'corone' is Greek for a crow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Pantomime](wl219)
