[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre06)  [Next](gre08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. II.

IN those days were there great troubles in Norway. Harald the
Unshorn, <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5) son of Halfdan the Black,
was pushing forth for the kingdom. Before that he was King of the
Uplands; then he went north through the land, and had many battles
there, and ever won the day. Thereafter he harried south in the land,
and wheresoever he came, laid all under him; but when he came to
Hordaland, swarms of folk came thronging against him; and their captains
were Kiotvi the Wealthy, and Thorir Longchin, and those of South
Rogaland, and King Sulki. Geirmund Helskin was then in the west over the
Sea; nor was he in that battle, though he had a kingdom in Hordaland.

Now that autumn Onund and his fellows came from the west over the Sea;
and when Thorir Longchin and King Kiotvi heard thereof, they sent men to
meet them, and prayed them for help, and promised them honours. Then
they entered into fellowship with Thorir and his men; for they were
exceeding fain to try their strength, and said that there would they be
whereas the fight was hottest.

Now was the meeting with Harald the King in Rogaland,

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

in that firth which is called Haftsfirth; and both sides had many men.
This was the greatest battle that has ever been fought in Norway, and
hereof most Sagas tell; for of those is ever most told, of whom the
Sagas are made; and thereto came folk from all the land, and many from
other lands and swarms of vikings.

Now Onund laid his ship alongside one board of the ship of Thorir
Longchin, about the midst of the fleet, but King Harald laid his on the
other board, because Thorir was the greatest bearserk, and the stoutest
of men; so the fight was of the fiercest on either side. Then the king
cried on his bearserks for an onslaught, and they were called the
Wolf-coats, for on them would no steel bite, and when they set on nought
might withstand them. Thorir defended him very stoutly, and fell in all
hardihood on board his ship; then was it cleared from stem to stern, and
cut from the grapplings, and let drift astern betwixt the other ships.
Thereafter the king's men laid their ship alongside Onund's, and he was
in the forepart thereof and fought manly; then the king's folk said,
"Lo, a forward man in the forecastle there, let him have somewhat to
mind him how that he was in this battle." Now Onund put one foot out
over the bulwark and dealt a blow at a man, and even therewith a spear
was aimed at him, and as he put the blow from him he bent backward
withal, and one of the king's forecastle men smote at him, and the
stroke took his leg below the knee and sheared it off, and forthwith
made him unmeet for fight. Then fell the more part of the folk on board
his ship; but Onund was brought to the ship of him who is called Thrand;
he was the son of Biorn, and brother of Eyvind the Eastman; he was in
the fight against King Harald and lay on the other board of Onund's
ship.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

But now, after these things, the more part of the fleet scattered in
flight; Thrand and his men, with the other vikings, got them away each
as he might, and sailed west over the Sea; Onund went with him, and Balk
and Hallvard Sweeping; Onund was healed, but went with a wooden leg all
his life after; therefore as long as he lived was he called Onund
Treefoot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[2:\*](gre07.htm#fr_5) "Harald the Unshorn:" he
was so called at first because he made a vow not to cut his hair till he
was sole king of Norway. When he had attained to this, and Earl Rognvald
had taken him to the bath and trimmed his hair, he was called
"Fair-hair," from its length and beauty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](gre08)
