[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre01)  [Next](gre03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# PREFACE.

WE do not feel able to take in hand the wide subject of the Sagas of
Iceland within the limits of a Preface; therefore we have only to say
that we put forward this volume as the translation of an old story
founded on facts, full of dramatic interest, and setting before people's
eyes pictures of the life and manners of an interesting race of men near
akin to ourselves.

Those, to whom the subject is new, we must refer to the translations
already made of some other of these works, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) and to the notes which accompany them: a
few notes at the end of this volume may be of use to students of Saga
literature.

For the original tale we think little apology is

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

due; that it holds a very high place among the Sagas of Iceland no
students of that literature will deny; of these we think it yields only
to the story of Njal and his sons, a work in our estimation to be placed
beside the few great works of the world. Our Saga is fuller and more
complete than the tale of the other great outlaw Gisli; less frightful
than the wonderfully characteristic and strange history of Egil, the son
of Skallagrim; as personal and dramatic as that of Gunnlaug the
Worm-tongue, if it lack the rare sentiment of that beautiful story with
more detail and consistency, if with less variety, than the history of
Gudrun and her lovers in the Laxdæla; and more a work of art than that,
or than the unstrung gems of Eyrbyggja, and the great compilation of
Snorri Sturluson, the History of the Kings of Norway.

At any rate, we repeat, whatever place among the best Sagas may be given
to Grettla <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1) by readers of such things,
it must of necessity be held to be one of the best in all ways; nor will
those, we hope, of our readers who have not yet turned their attention
to the works written in the Icelandic tongue, fail

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

to be moved more or less by the dramatic power and eager interest in
human character, shown by our story-teller; we say, we hope, but we are
sure that no one of insight will disappoint us in this, when he has once
accustomed himself to the unusual, and, if he pleases, barbarous
atmosphere of these ancient stories.

As some may like to know what they are going to read about before
venturing on beginning the book, we will now give a short outline of our
Saga.

The first thirteen chapters (which sometimes are met with separately in
the Icelandic as the Saga of Onund Treefoot), we have considered as an
introduction to the story, and have accordingly distinguished them from
the main body of the book. They relate the doings of Grettir's ancestors
in Norway, in the lands West over the Sea and in Iceland, and are
interesting and in many points necessary for the understanding of the
subsequent story; one of these we note here for the reader's
convenience, viz. the consanguinity of Grettir and King Olaf the
Saint; <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) for it adds strongly to the
significance of the King's refusal to entertain Grettir at his court, or
to go further into the case of the murder- he was falsely accused of,

The genealogies of this part of the work agree

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

closely with those of the Landnáma-bók, and of the other most reliable
Sagas.

After this comes the birth of Grettir, and anecdotes (one at least
sufficiently monstrous) of his unruly childhood; then our hero kills his
first man by misadventure, and must leave Iceland; wrecked on an isle
off Norway, he is taken in there by a lord of that land, and there works
the deed that makes him a famous man; the slaying of the villanous
bearserks, namely, who would else have made wreck of the honour and
goods of Grettir's host in his absence; this great deed, we should say,
is prefaced by Grettir's first dealings with the supernatural, which
characterise this Saga, and throw a strange light on the more ordinary
matters throughout. The slaying of the bearserks is followed by a feud
which Grettir has on his hands for the slaying of a braggart who
insulted him past bearing, and so great the feud grows that Grettir at
last finds himself at enmity with Earl Svein, the ruler of Norway, and,
delivered from death by his friends, yet has to leave the land and
betake himself to Iceland again. Coming back there, and finding himself
a man of great fame, and hungry for more still, he tries to measure
himself against the greatest men in the land, but nothing comes of these
trials, for he is being reserved for a greater deed than the dealing
with mere men; his enemy is Glam the thrall; the revenant of a strange,
unearthly man who was himself killed by an evil spirit; Grettir contends
with, and slays, this monster, whose dying curse on him is the
turning-point of the story.

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

All seems fair for our hero, his last deed has made him the foremost man
in Iceland, and news now coming out of Olaf the Saint, his relative,
being King of Norway, he goes thither to get honour at his hands; but
Glam's curse works; Grettir gains a powerful enemy by slaying an
insulting braggart just as he was going on ship-board; and on the voyage
it falls out that in striving to save the life of his shipmates by a
desperate action, that he gets the reputation of having destroyed the
sons of a powerful Icelander, Thorir of Garth, with their fellows. This
evil report clings to him when he lands in Norway; and all people,
including the King from whom he hoped so much, look coldly on him; now
he offers to free himself from the false charge by the ordeal of bearing
hot iron; the King assents, and all is ready; but Glam is busy, and some
strange appearance in the church where the ordeal is to be brings all to
nothing; and the foreseeing Olaf refuses to take Grettir into his court,
because of his ill-luck. So he goes to his brother, Thorstein Dromund,
for a while, and then goes back to Iceland. But there, too, his ill-luck
had been at work, and when he lands he hears three pieces of bad news at
once; his father is dead; his eldest brother, Atli, is slain and
unatoned; and he himself has been made an outlaw by Thorir of Garth for
a deed he has never done.

He avenges his brother, and seeks here and there harbour from his
friends, but his foes are too strong for him, or some unlucky turn of
fate always pushes him off the help of men, and he has to take to the

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

wilderness with a price upon his head; and now the other part of the
curse falls on him heavier, for ever after the struggle with the ghost
he sees horrible things in the dark, and cannot bear to be alone, and
runs all kinds of risks to avoid it; and so the years of his outlawry
pass on. From time to time driven by need, and rage at his unmerited
ill-fortune, he takes to plundering those who cannot hold their own; at
other times he lives alone, and supports himself by fishing, and is
twice nearly brought to his end by hired assassins the while. Sometimes
he dwells with the friendly spirits of the land, and chiefly with
Hallmund, his friend, who saves his life in one of the desperate fights
he is forced into. But little by little all fall off from him; his
friends durst harbour him no more or are slain. Hallmund comes to a
tragic end; Grettir is driven from his lairs one after the other, and
makes up his mind to try, as a last resource, to set himself down on the
island of Drangey, which rises up sheer from the midst of Skagafirth
like a castle; he goes to his father's house, and bids farewell to his
mother, and sets off for Drangey in the company of his youngest brother,
Illugi, who will not leave him in this pinch, and a losel called
"Noise," a good joker (we are told), but a slothful, untrustworthy
poltroon. The three get out to Drangey, and possess themselves of the
live-stock on it, and for a while all goes well; the land-owners who
held the island in shares, despairing of ridding themselves of the
outlaw, give their shares or sell them to one Thorbiorn Angle, a man of
good house,

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

but violent, unpopular, and unscrupulous. This man, after trying the
obvious ways of persuasion, cajolery, and assassination, for getting the
island into his hands, at last, with the help of a certain hag, his
foster-mother, has recourse to sorcery; by means of her spells (as the
story goes) Grettir wounds himself in the leg in the third year of his
sojourn at Drangey, and though the wound speedily closes, in a week or
two gangrene supervenes, and Grettir, at last, lies nearly helpless,
watched continually by his brother Illugi. The losel, "Noise," now that
the brothers can no more stir abroad, will not take the trouble to pull
up the ladders that lead from the top of the island down to the beach;
and, amidst all this, helped by a magic storm the sorceress has raised,
Thorbiorn Angle, with a band of men, surprises the island, unroofs the
hut of the brothers, and gains ingress there, and after a short struggle
(for Grettir is already a dying man) slays the great outlaw and captures
Illugi in spite of a gallant defence; he, too, disdaining to make any
terms with the murderers of his brother, is slain, and Angle goes away
exulting, after he had mutilated the body of Grettir, with the head on
which so great a price had been put, and the sword which the dead man
had borne.

But now that the mighty man was dead, and people were relieved of their
fear of him, the minds of men turned against him who had overcome him in
a way, according to their notions, so base and unworthy, and Angle has
no easy time of it; he fails to get the head-money, and is himself
brought to trial

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

for sorcery and practising heathen rites, and the 'nithings-deed' of
slaying a man already dying, and is banished from the land.

Now comes the part so necessary to the Icelandic tale of a hero, the
revenging of his death; Angle goes to Norway, and is thought highly of
for his deed by people who did not know the whole tale; but Thorstein
Dromund, an elder half-brother of Grettir, is a lord in that land, and
Angle knowing of this feels uneasy in Norway, and at last goes away to
Micklegarth (Constantinople), to take service with the Varangians:
Thorstein hears of this and follows him, and both are together at last
in Micklegarth, but neither knows the other: at last Angle betrays
himself by showing Grettir's sword, at a 'weapon-show' of the
Varangians, and Thorstein slays him then and there with the same weapon.
Thorstein alone in a strange land, with none to speak for him, is
obliged to submit to the laws of the country, and is thrown into a
dungeon to perish of hunger and wretchedness there. From this fate he is
delivered by a great lady of the city, called Spes, who afterwards falls
in love with him; and the two meet often in spite of the watchful
jealousy of the lady's husband, who is at last so completely conquered
by a plot of hers (the sagaman here has taken an incident with little or
no change from the Romance of Tristram and Iseult), that he is obliged
to submit to a divorce and the loss of his wife's dower, and thereafter
the lovers go away together to Norway, and live there happily till old
age reminds them of their misdeeds, and they then set off together for

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

Rome and pass the rest of their lives in penitence and apart from one
another. And so the story ends, summing up the worth of Grettir the
Strong by reminding people, of his huge strength, his long endurance in
outlawry, his gift for dealing with ghosts and evil spirits, the famous
vengeance taken for him in Micklegarth; and, lastly, the fortunate life
and good end of Thorstein Dromund, his brother and avenger.

Such is the outline of this tale of a man far above his fellows in all
matters valued among his times and people, but also far above them all
in ill-luck, for that is the conception that the story-teller has
formed, of the great outlaw. To us moderns the real interest in these
records of a past state of life lies principally in seeing events true
in the main treated vividly and dramatically by people who completely
understood the manners, life, and, above all, the. turn of mind of the
actors in them. Amidst many drawbacks, perhaps, to the modern reader,
this interest is seldom or ever wanting in the historical sagas, and
least of all in our present story; the sagaman never relaxes his grasp
of Grettir's character, and he is the same man from beginning to end;
thrust this way and that by circumstances, but little altered by them;
unlucky in all things, yet made strong to bear all ill-luck; scornful of
the world, yet capable of enjoyment, and determined to make the most of
it; not deceived by men's specious ways, but disdaining to cry out
because he must needs bear with them; scorning men, yet helping them
when called on, and desirous of fame: prudent in theory, and wise in
foreseeing the inevitable

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

sequence of events, but reckless beyond the recklessness even of that
time and people, and finally capable of inspiring in others strong
affection and devotion to him in spite of his rugged self-sufficing
temper--all these traits which we find in our sagaman's Grettir seem
always the most suited to the story of the deeds that surround him, and
to our mind most skilfully and dramatically are they suggested to the
reader.

As is fitting the other characters are very much subordinate to the
principal figure, but in their way they are no less life-like; the
braggart--that inevitable foil to the hero in a saga--was never better
represented than in the Gisli of our tale; the thrall Noise, with his
carelessness, and thriftless, untrustworthy mirth, is the very pattern
of a slave; Snorri the Godi, little though there is of him, fully
sustains the prudent and crafty character. which follows him in all the
Sagas; Thorbiorn Oxmain is a good specimen of the overbearing and sour
chief, as is Atli, on the other hand, of the kindly and high-minded, if
prudent rich man; and no one, in short, plays his part like a puppet but
acts as one expects him to act, always allowing the peculiar atmosphere
of these tales; and to crown all, as the story comes to its end, the
high-souled and poetically conceived Illugi throws a tenderness on the
dreadful story of the end of the hero, contrasted as it is with that of
the gloomy, superstitious Angle.

Something of a blot from some points of view the story of Spes and
Thorstein Dromund (of which, more anon) must be considered; yet whoever
added it to the tale did so with some skill considering its

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

incongruous and superfluous nature, for he takes care that Grettir shall
not be forgotten amidst all the plots and success of the lovers; and,
whether it be accidental or not, there is to our minds something
touching in the contrast between the rude life and tragic end of the
hero, and the long, drawn out, worldly good hap and quiet hopes for
another life which fall to the lot of his happier brother.

As to the authorship of our story, it has no doubt gone through the
stages which mark the growth of the Sagas in general, that is, it was
for long handed about from mouth to mouth until it took a definite shape
in men's minds; and after it held that position for a certain time, and
had received all the necessary .polish for an enjoyable saga, was
committed to writing as it flowed ready made from the tongue of the
people; its style in common with that of all the sagas shows evidences
enough of this: for the rest the only name connected with it is that of
Sturla Thordson the Lawman, a man of good position and family, and a
prolific author, who was born in 1214 and died 1284; there is, however,
no proof that he wrote the present work, though we think the passages in
it that mention his name show clearly enough that he had something to do
with the story of Grettir: on the whole, we are inclined to think that a
story of Grettir was either written by him or under his auspices, but
that the present tale is the work of a later hand, nor do we think so
complete a saga-teller as his other undoubted works show him to have
been, would ever have finished his story with the epilogue

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

of Spes and Thorstein Dromund, steeped as that latter part is with the
spirit of the mcdiæval romances, even to the distinct appropriation of a
marked and well-known episode of the Tristram; though it must be
admitted that he had probably plenty of opportunity for being versed in
that romance, as Tristram was first translated into the tongue of Norway
in the year 1226, by Brother Robert, at the instance of King Hakon
Hakonson, the history of whose time was the favourite study of Sturla
Thordson, the results of which he has embodied in Hakonar saga, Heimskr.
(Bd. V.)

For our translation of this work we have no more to say than to
apologise for its shortcomings, and to hope, that in spite of them, it
will give some portion of the pleasure to our readers which we felt in
accomplishing it ourselves.

EIRÍKR MAGNÚSSON, WILLIAM MORRIS.

    *London*,  
*April*, 1869.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:\*](gre02.htm#fr_0) Such as 'Burnt Nial,'
Edinburgh 1861, 8vo, and 'Gisli the Outlaw,' Edinburgh, 1866, 4vo, by
Dasent the 'Saga of Viga-Glum,' London, 1866, 8vo, by Sir E. Head; the
'Heimskringla,' London, 1844, 8vo, by S. Laing; the 'Eddas,' Prose by
Dasent, Stockholm, 1842; Poetic by A. S. Cottle, Bristol, 1797, and
Thorpe, London and Halle, 1866, and the 'Saga of Gunnlaug the
Worm-tongue,' by Magnússon and Morris, in the *Fortnightly Review*, Jan.
1869.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vi:\*](gre02.htm#fr_1) Such is the
conversational title of this Saga; many of the other Sagas have their
longer title abbreviated in a like manner: Egil's saga becomes Egla,
Njal's saga Njála; Eyrbyggja saga, Laxdæla saga, Vatnsdæla saga,
Reykdæla saga, Svarfdæla saga, become Eyrbyggja, Laxdæla, Vatnsdæla,
Reykdæla, Svarfdæla (gen. plur. masc. of dælir, dale-dwellers, is forced
into a fem. sing. regularly declined, saga being understood);
furthermore, Landnáma bók (landnáma, gen. pl. neut.) the book of land
settlings, becomes Landnáma (fern. sing. regularly declined, bók being
understood); lastly, Sturlunga saga the Saga of the mighty family of the
Sturlungs, becomes Sturlunga in the same manner.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[vii:\*](gre02.htm#fr_2)

|                       |            |                  |
|-----------------------|------------|------------------|
| Onund Treefoot        | brother to | Gudbiorg         |
| \|                    |            | \|               |
| Thorgrim Greypate     |            | Gudbrand         |
| \|                    |            | \|               |
| Asmund the Greyhaired |            | Asta (mother of) |
| \|                    |            | \|               |
| Grettir the Strong.   |            | Olaf the Saint.  |

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHRONOLOGY OF THE STORY](gre03)
