[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre11)  [Next](gre13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. VII.

ONUND went south to Rogaland, and met there many of his kin and friends;
he dwelt there in secret at a man's called Kolbein. Now he heard that
the king had taken his lands to him and set a man thereover who was
called Harek, who was a farmer of the king's; so on a night

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Onund went to him, and took him in his house; there Harek was led out
and cut down, and Onund took all the chattels they found and burnt the
homestead; and thereafter he abode in many places that winter.

But that autumn Grim the hersir slew Ondott Crow, because he might not
get the heritage-money for the king; and that same night of his slaying,
Signy, his wife, brought aboard ship all her chattels, and fared with
her sons, Asmund and Asgrim, to Sighvat her father; but a little after
sent her sons to Soknadale to Hedin her foster-father; but that seemed
good to them but for a little while, and they would fain go back again
to their mother; so they departed and came at Yule-tide to Ingiald the
rusty at Hvin; he took them in because of the urgency of Gyda his wife,
and they were there the winter through. But in spring came Onund north
to Agdir, because he had heard of the slaying of Ondott Crow; but when
he found Signy he asked her what help she would have of him.

She said that she would fain have vengeance on Grim the hersir for the
slaying of Ondott. Then were the sons of Ondott sent for, and when they
met Onund Treefoot, they made up one fellowship together, and had spies
abroad on the doings of Grim. Now in the summer was a great ale-drinking
held at Grim's, because he had bidden to him Earl Audun; and when Onund
and the sons of Ondott knew thereof they went to Grim's homestead and
laid fire to the house, for they were come there unawares, and burnt
Grim the hersir therein, and nigh thirty men, and many good things they
took there withal. Then went Onund to the woods, but the sons of Ondott
took a boat of Ingiald's, their foster-father's, and rowed away therein,
and lay hid a little way off the homestead. Earl Audun came to the
feast, even as had been settled afore, and there "missed friend

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

from stead." Then he gathered men to him, and dwelt there some nights,
but nought was heard of Onund and his fellows; and the Earl slept in a
loft with two men.

Onund had full tidings from the homestead, and sent after those
brothers; and, when they met, Onund asked them whether they would watch
the farm or fall on the Earl; but they chose to set on the Earl. So they
drove beams at the loft-doors and broke them in; then Asmund caught hold
of the two who were with the Earl, and cast them down so hard that they
were well-nigh slain; but Asgrim ran at the Earl, and bade him render up
weregild for his father, since he had been in the plot and the onslaught
with Grim the hersir when Ondott Crow was slain. The Earl said he had no
money with him there, and prayed for delay of that payment. Then Asgrim
set his spear-point to the Earl-s breast and bade him pay there and
then; so the Earl took a chain from his neck, and three gold rings, and
a cloak of rich web, and gave them up. Asgrim took the goods and gave
the Earl a name, and called him Audun Goaty.

But when the bonders and neighbouring folk were ware that war was come
among them, they went abroad and would bring help to the Earl, and a
hard fight there was, for Onund had many men, and there fell many good
bonders and courtmen of the Earl. Now came the brothers, and told how
they had fared with the Earl, and Onund said that it was ill that he was
not slain, "that would have been somewhat of a revenge on the King for
our loss at his hands of fee and friends." They said that this was a
greater shame to the Earl; and therewith they went away up to Sorreldale
to Eric Alefain, a king's lord, and he took them in for all the winter.

Now at Yule they drank turn and turn about with a man called Hallstein,
who was bynamed Horse; Eric gave the

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

first feast, well and truly, and then Hallstein gave his, but thereat
was there bickering between them, and Hallstein smote Eric with a
deer-horn; Eric gat no revenge therefor, but went home straightway. This
sore misliked the sons of Ondott, and a little after Asgrim fared to
Hallstein's homestead, and went in alone, and gave him a great wound,
but those who were therein sprang up and set on Asgrim. Asgrim defended
himself well and got out of their hands in the dark; but they deemed
they had slain him.

Onund and Asmund heard thereof and supposed him dead, but deemed they
might do nought. Eric counselled them to make for Iceland, and said that
it would be of no avail to abide there in the land whenso the king
should bring matters about to his liking. So this they did, and made
them ready for Iceland and had each one ship. Hallstein lay wounded, and
died before Onund and his folk sailed. Kolbein withal, who is afore
mentioned, went abroad with Onund.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](gre13)
