[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre25)  [Next](gre27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XXI.

Of Grettir and Biorn and the Bear.

THERE was a man, hight Biorn, who was dwelling with Thorkel; he was a
man of rash temper, of good

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

birth, and somewhat akin to Thorkel; he was not well loved of men, for
he would slander much those who were with Thorkel, and in this wise he
sent many away. Grettir and he had little to do together; Biorn thought
him of little worth weighed against himself, but Grettir was unyielding,
so that things fell athwart between them. Biorn was a mightily
boisterous man, and made himself very big; many young men gat into
fellowship with him in these things, and would stray abroad by night.
Now it befell, that early in winter a savage bear ran abroad from his
winter lair, and got so grim that he spared neither man nor beast. Men
thought he had been roused by the noise that Biorn and his fellows had
made. The brute got so hard to deal with that he tore down the herds of
men, and Thorkel had the greatest hurt thereof, for he was the richest
man in the neighbourhood.

Now one day Thorkel bade his men to follow him, and search for the lair
of the bear. They found it in sheer sea-rocks; there was a high rock and
a cave before it down below, but only one track to go up to it; under
the cave were scarped rocks, and a heap of stones down by the sea, and
sure death it was to all who might fall down there. The bear lay in his
lair by day, but went abroad as soon as night fell; no fold could keep
sheep safe from him, nor could any dogs be set on him: and all this men
thought the heaviest trouble. Biorn, Thorkel's kinsman, said that the
greatest part had been done, as the lair had been found. "And now I
shall try," said he, "what sort of play we <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9.md) namesakes shall have together." Grettir
made as if he knew not what Biorn said on this matter.

Now it happened always when men went to sleep anights that Biorn
disappeared: and one night when Biorn

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

went to the lair, he was aware that the beast was there before him, and
roaring savagely. Biorn lay down in the track, and had over him his
shield, and was going to wait till the beast should stir abroad as his
manner was. Now the bear had an inkling of the man, and got somewhat
slow to move off. Biorn waxed very sleepy where he lay, and cannot wake
up, and just at this time the beast betakes himself from his lair; now
he sees where the man lies, and, hooking at him with his claw, he tears
from him the shield and throws it down over the rocks. Biorn started up
suddenly awake, takes to his legs and runs home, and it was a near thing
that the beast gat him not. This his fellows knew, for they had spies
about Biorn's ways; in the morning they found the shield, and made the
greatest jeering at all this.

At Yule Thorkel went himself, and eight of them altogether, and there
was Grettir and Biorn and other followers of Thorkel. Grettir had on a
fur-cloak, which he laid aside while they set on the beast. It was
awkward for an onslaught there, for thereat could folk come but by
spear-thrusts, and all the spear-points the bear turned off him with his
teeth.. Now Biorn urged them on much to the onset, yet he himself went
not so nigh as to run the risk of any hurt. Amid this, when men looked
least for it, Biorn suddenly seized Grettir's coat, and cast it into the
beast's lair. Now nought they could wreak on him, and had to go back
when the day was far spent. But when Grettir was going he misses his
coat, and he could see that the bear has it cast under him. Then he
said, "What man of you has wrought the jest of throwing my cloak into
the lair?"

Biorn says, "He who is like to dare to own to it."

Grettir answers, "I set no great store on such matters."

Now they, went on their way home, and when they had

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

walked awhile, the thong of Grettir's leggings brake. Thorkel bid them
wait for him; but Grettir said there was no need of that. Then said
Biorn, "Ye need not think that Grettir will run away from his coat; he
will have the honour all to himself, and will slay that beast all alone,
wherefrom we have gone back all eight of us; thus would he be such as he
is said to be: but sluggishly enow has he fared forth to-day."

"I know not," said Thorkel, "how thou wilt fare in the end, but men of
equal prowess I deem you not: lay as few burdens on him as thou mayst,
Biorn."

Biorn said, that neither of them should pick and choose words from out
his mouth.

Now, when a hill's brow was between them, Grettir went back to the pass,
for now there was no striving with others for the onset. He drew the
sword, Jokul's gift, but had a loop over the handle of the short-sword,
and slipped it up over his hand, and this he did in that he thought he
could easier have it at his will if his hand were loose. He went up into
the pass forthwith, and when the beast saw a man, it rushed against
Grettir exceeding fiercely, and smote at him with that paw which was
furthest off from the rock; Grettir hewed against the blow with the
sword, and therewith smote the paw above the claws, and took it off;
then the beast was fain to smite at Grettir with the paw that was whole,
and dropped down therewith on to the docked one, but it was shorter than
he wotted of, and withal he tumbled into to Grettir's arms. Now he
griped at the beast between the ears and held him off, so that he got
not at him to bite. And, so Grettir himself says, that herein he deemed
he had had the hardest trial of his strength, thus to hold the brute.
But now as it struggled fiercely, and the space was narrow, they both
tumbled down over the rock; the beast

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

was the heaviest of the two, and came down first upon the stone heap
below, Grettir being the uppermost, and the beast was much mangled on
its nether side. Now Grettir seized the short-sword and thrust it into
the heart of the bear, and that was his bane. Thereafter he went home,
taking with him his cloak all tattered, and withal what he had cut from
the paw of the bear. Thorkel sat a-drinking when be came into the ball,
and much men laughed at the rags of the cloak Grettir had cast over him.
Now he threw on to the table what he had chopped off the paw.

Then said Thorkel, "Where is now Biorn my kinsman? never did I see thy
irons bite the like of this, Biorn, and my will it is, that thou make
Grettir a seemly offer for this shame thou hast wrought on him."

Biorn said that was like to be long about, "and never shall I care
whether he likes it well or ill."

Then Grettir sang--

"Oft that war-god came to hall  
Frighted, when no blood did fall,  
In the dusk; who ever cried  
On the bear last autumn-tide;  
No man saw me sitting there  
Late at eve before the lair  
Yet the shaggy one to-day  
From his den I drew away."

"Sure enough," said Biorn, "thou hast fared forth well to-day, and two
tales thou tellest of us twain therefor; and well I know that thou hast
had a good hit at me."

Thorkel said, "I would, Grettir, that thou wouldst not avenge thee on
Biorn, but for him I will give a full man-gild if thereby ye may be
friends."

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Biorn said he might well turn his money to better account, than to boot
for this; "And, methinks it is wisest that in my dealings with Grettir
*one oak should have what from the other it shaves*."

Grettir said that he should like that very well. But Thorkel said, "Yet
I hope, Grettir, that thou wilt do this for my sake, not to do aught
against Biorn while ye are with me."

"That shall be," said Grettir.

Biorn said he would walk fearless of Grettir wheresoever they might
meet.

Grettir smiled mockingly, but would not take boot for Biorn. So they
were here that winter through.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[63:\*](gre26.htm#fr_9.md) Biorn is Icelandic for
bear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII: Of the Slaying of Biorn](gre27.md)
