[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre23)  [Next](gre25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XIX.

Of Yule at Haramsey, and how Grettir dealt with the Bearserks.

NOW the summer before these things Earl Erie Hakonson made ready to go
from his land west to England, to see King Knut the Mighty, his
brother-in-law, but left behind him in the rule of Norway Hakon, his
son, and gave him into the hands of Earl Svein, his brother, for the
watching and warding of his realm, for Hakon was a child in years.

But before Earl Erie went away from the land, he called together lords
and rich bonders, and many things they spoke on laws and the rule of the
land, for Earl Eric was a man good at rule. Now men thought it an
exceeding

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

ill fashion in the land that runagates or bearserks called to holm
high-born men for their fee or womankind, in such wise, that whosoever
should fall before the other should lie unatoned; hereof many got both
shame and loss of goods, and some lost their lives withal; and therefore
Earl Erie did away with all holm-gangs and outlawed all bearserks who
fared with raids and riots.

In the making of this law, the chief of all, with Earl Erie, was
Thorfinn Karrson, from Haramsey, for he was a wise man, and a dear
friend of the Earls.

Two brothers are named as being of the worst in these matters, one hight
Thorir Paunch, the other Ogmund the Evil; they were of Halogaland kin,
bigger and stronger than other men. They wrought the bearserks'-gang and
spared nothing in their fury; they would take away the wives of men and
hold them for a week or a half-month, and then bring them back to their
husbands; they robbed wheresoever they came, or did some other ill
deeds. Now Earl Erie made them outlaws through the length and breadth of
Norway, and Thorfinn was the eagerest of men in bringing about their
outlawry, therefore they deemed that they owed him ill-will enow.

So the Earl went away from the land, as is said in his Saga; but Earl
Svein bore sway over Norway. Thorfinn went home to his house, and sat at
home till just up to Yule, as is aforesaid; but at Yule he made ready to
go to his farm called Slys-firth, which is on the mainland, and thither
he had bidden many of his friends. Thorfinn's wife could not go with her
husband, for her daughter of ripe years lay ill a-bed, so they both
abode at home. Grettir was at home too, and eight house-carles. Now
Thorfinn went with thirty freedmen to the Yule-feast, whereat there was
the greatest mirth and joyance among men.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

Now Yule-eve comes on, and the weather was bright and calm; Grettir was
mostly abroad this day, and saw how ships fared north and south along
the land, for each one sought the other's home where the Yule drinking
was settled to come off. By this time the goodman's daughter was so much
better that she could walk about with her mother, and thus the day wore
on.

Now Grettir sees how a ship rows up toward the island it was not right
big, but shield-hung it was from stem to stern, and stained all above
the sea: these folk rowed smartly, and made for the boat-stands of
goodman Thorfinn, and when the keel took land, those who were therein
sprang overboard. Grettir cast up the number of the men, and they were
twelve altogether; he deemed their guise to be far from peaceful. They
took tip their ship and bore it up from the sea; thereafter they ran up
to the boat-stand, and therein was that big boat of Thorfinn, which was
never launched to sea by less than thirty men, but these twelve shot it
in one haul down to the shingle of the foreshore; and thereon they took
up their own bark and bore it into the boat-stand.

Now Grettir thought that he could see clear enough that they would make
themselves at home. But he goes down to meet them, and welcomes them
merrily, and asks who they were and what their leader was hight; he to
whom these words were spoken answered quickly, and said that his name
was Thorir, and that he was called Paunch, and that his brother was
Ogmund, and that the others were fellows of theirs.

"I deem," said Thorir, "that thy master Thorfinn has heard tell of us;
is he perchance at home?"

Grettir answered, "Lucky men are ye, and hither have come in a good
hour, if ye are the men I take you to be;

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the goodman is gone away with all his home-folk who are freemen, and
will not be home again till after Yule; but the mistress is at home, and
so is the goodman's daughter; and if I thought that I had some ill-will
to pay back, I should have chosen above all things to have come just
thus; for here are all matters in plenty whereof ye stand in need, both
beer, and all other good things."

Thorir held his peace, while Grettir let this tale run on, then he said
to Ogmund--

"How far have things come to pass other than as I guessed? and now am I
well enough minded to take revenge on Thorfinn for having made us
outlaws; and this man is ready enough of tidings, and no need have we to
drag the words out of him."

"Words all may use freely," said Grettir, "and I shall give you such
cheer as I may; and now come home with me."

They bade him have thanks therefor, and said they would take his offer.

But when they came home to the farm, Grettir took Thorir by the hand and
led him into the hall; and now was Grettir mightily full of words. The
mistress was in the hall, and had had it decked with hangings, and made
all fair and seemly; but when she heard Grettir's talk, she stood still
on the floor, and asked whom he welcomed in that earnest wise.

He answered, "Now, mistress, is it right meet to welcome these guests
merrily, for here is come goodman Thorir Paunch and the whole twelve of
them, and are minded to sit here Yule over, and a right good hap it is,
for we were few enough before."

She answered, "Am I to number these among bonders and goodmen, who are
the worst of robbers and ill-doers?

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

a large share of my goods had I given that they had no come here as at
this time; and ill dost thou reward Thorfinn, for that he took thee a
needy man from shipwreck and has held thee through the winter as a free
man."

Grettir said, "It would be better to take the wet clothes off these
guests than to scold at me; since for that thou mayst have time long
enough."

Then said Thorir, "Be not cross-grained, mistress; nought shalt thou
miss thy husband's being away, for a man shall be got in his place for
thee, yea, and for thy daughter a man, and for each of the home-women."

"That is spoken like a man," said Grettir, "nor will they thus have any
cause to bewail their lot."

Now all the women rushed forth from the hall smitten with huge dread and
weeping; then said Grettir to the bearserks, "Give into my hands what it
pleases you to lay aside of weapons and wet clothes, for the folk will
not be yielding to us while they are scared."

Thorir said he heeded not how women might squeal; "But," said he, "thee
indeed we may set apart from the other home-folk, and methinks we may
well make thee our man of trust."

"See to that yourselves," said Grettir, "but certes I do not take to all
men alike."

Thereupon they laid aside the more part of their weapons, and thereafter
Grettir said--

"Methinks it is a good rede now that ye sit down to table and drink
somewhat, for it is right likely that ye are thirsty after the rowing."

They said they were ready enough for that, but knew not where to find
out the cellar; Grettir asked if they would that he should see for
things and go about for them. The bearserks said they would be right
fain of that; so Grettir

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

fetched beer and gave them to drink; they were mightily weary, and drank
in huge draughts, and still he let them have the strongest beer that
there was, and this went on for a long time, and meanwhile he told them
many merry tales. From all this there was din enough to be heard among
them, and the home-folk were nowise fain to come to them.

Now Thorir said, "Never yet did I meet a man unknown to me, who would do
us such good deeds as this man; now, what reward wilt thou take of us
for thy work?"

Grettir answered, "As yet I look to no reward for this, but if we be
even such friends when ye go away, as it looks like we shall be, I am
minded to join fellowship with you, and though I be of less might than
some of you, yet shall I not let any man of big redes."

Hereat they were well pleased, and would settle the fellowship with
vows.

Grettir said that this they should not do, "For true is the old saw,
*Ale is another man*, nor shall ye settle this in haste any further than
as I have said, for on both sides are we men little meet to rule our
tempers."

They said that they would not undo what they had said. Withal the
evening wore on till it grew quite dark; then sees Grettir that they
were getting very heavy with drink, so he said--

"Do ye not find it time to go to sleep?"

Thorir said, "Time enough forsooth, and sure shall I be to keep to what
I have promised the mistress."

Then Grettir went forth from the hall, and cried out loudly--

"Go ye to your beds, women all, for so is goodman Thorir pleased to
bid."

They cursed him for this, and to hear them was like

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

hearkening to the noise of many wolves. Now the bearserks came forth
from the hall, and Grettir said--

"Let us go out, and I will show you Thorfinn's cloth bower."

They were willing to be led there; so they came to an out-bower
exceeding great; a door there was to it, and a strong lock thereon, and
the store-house was very strong withal; there too was a closet good and
great, and a shield panelling between the chambers; both chambers stood
high, and men went up by steps to them. Now the bearserks got riotous
and pushed Grettir about, and he kept tumbling away from them, and when
they least thought thereof, he slipped quickly out of the bower, seized
the latch, slammed the door to, and put the bolt on. Thorir and his
fellows thought at first that the door must have got locked of itself,
and paid no heed thereto; they had light with them, for Grettir had
showed them many choice things which Thorfinn owned, and these they now
noted awhile. Meantime Grettir made all speed home to the farm, and when
he came in at the door he called out loudly, and asked where the
goodwife was; she held her peace, for she did not dare to answer.

He said, "Here is somewhat of a chance of a good catch; but are there
any weapons of avail here?"

She answers, "Weapons there are, but how they may avail thee I know
not."

"Let us talk thereof anon," says he, "but now let every man do his best,
for later on no better chance shall there be."

The good wife said, "Now God were in garth if our lot might better: over
Thorfinn's bed hangs the barbed spear, the big one that was owned by
Karr the Old; there, too, is a

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

helmet and a byrni, and the short-sword, the good one and the arms will
not fail if thine heart does well."

Grettir seizes the helmet and spear, girds himself with the short-sword,
and rushed out swiftly; and the mistress called upon the house-carles,
bidding them follow such a dauntless man, four of them rushed forth and
seized their weapons, but the other four durst come nowhere nigh. Now it
is to be said of the bearserks that they thought Grettir delayed his
coming back strangely; and now they began to doubt if there were not
some guile in the matter. They rushed against the door and found it was
locked, and now they try the timber walls so that every beam creaked
again; at last they brought things so far that they broke down the
shield-panelling, got into the passage, and thence out to the steps. Now
bearserks'-gang seized them, and they howled like dogs. In that very
nick of time Grettir came up and with both hands thrust his spear at the
midst of Thorir, as he was about to get down the steps, so that it went
through him at once. Now the spear-head was both long and broad, and
Ogmund the Evil ran on to Thorir and pushed him on to Grettir's thrust,
so that all went up to the barb-ends; then the spear stood out through
Thorir's back and into Ogmund's breast, and they both tumbled dead off
the spear; then of the others each rushed down the steps as he came
forth; Grettir set on each one of them, and in turn hewed with the
sword, or thrust with the spear; but they defended themselves with logs
that lay on the green, and whatso thing they could lay hands on,
therefore the greatest danger it was to deal with them, because of their
strength, even though they were weaponless.

Two of the Halogalanders Grettir slew on the green, and then came up the
house-carles; they could not come to

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

one mind as to what weapons each should have; now they set on whenever
the bearserks gave back, but when they turned about on them, then the
house-carles slunk away up to the houses. Six vikings fell there, and of
all of them was Grettir the bane. Then the six others got off and came
down to the boat-stand, and so into it, and thence they defended
themselves with oars. Grettir now got great blows from them, so that at
all times he ran the risk of much hurt; but the house-carles went home,
and had much to say of their stout onset; the mistress bade them espy
what became of Grettir, but that was not to be got out of them. Two more
of the bearserks Grettir slew in the boatstand, but four slipped out by
him; and by this, dark night had come on; two of them ran into a
corn-barn, at the farm of Windham, which is aforenamed: here they fought
for a long time, but at last Grettir killed them both; then was he
beyond measure weary and stiff, the night was far gone, and the weather
got very cold with the drift of the snow. He was fain to leave the
search of the two vikings who were left now, so he walked home to the
farm. The mistress had lights lighted in the highest lofts at the
windows that they might guide him on his way; and so it was that he
found his road home whereas he saw the light.

But when he was come into the door, the mistress went up to him, and
bade him welcome.

"Now," she said, "thou hast reaped great glory, and freed me and my
house from a shame of which we should never have been healed, but if
thou hadst saved us."

Grettir answered, "Methinks I am much the same as I was this evening,
when thou didst cast ill words on me."

The mistress answered, "We wotted not that thou wert a man of such
prowess as we have now proved thee; now shall all things in the house be
at thy will which I may

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

bestow on thee, and which it may be seeming for thee to take; but
methinks that Thorfinn will reward thee better still when he comes
home."

Grettir answered, "Little of reward will be needed now, but I keep thine
offer till the coming of the master; and I have some hope now that ye
will sleep in peace as for the bearserks."

Grettir drank little that evening, and lay with his weapons about him
through the night. In the morning, when it began to dawn, people were
summoned together throughout the island, and a search was set on foot
for the bearserks who had escaped the night before; they were found far
on in the day under a rock, and were by then dead from cold and wounds;
then they were brought unto a tide-washed heap of stones and buried
thereunder.

After that folk went home, and the men of that island deemed themselves
brought unto fair peace.

Now when Grettir came back to the mistress, he sang this stave--

"By the sea's wash have we made  
Graves, where twelve spear-groves are laid  
I alone such speedy end,  
Unto all these folk did send.  
O fair giver forth of gold,  
Whereof can great words be told,  
'Midst the deeds one man has wrought,  
If this deed should come to nought?"

The good wife said, "Surely thou art like unto very few men who are now
living on the earth."

So she set him in the high seat, and all things she did well to him, and
now time wore on till Thorfinn's coming home was looked for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX: How Thorfinn met Grettir at Haramsey again](gre25)
