[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre32)  [Next](gre34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XXVIII.

Grettir comes out to Iceland again.

THIS summer Grettir Asmundson came out to Skagafirth: he was in those
days so famed a man for strength and prowess, that none was deemed his
like among young men. He rode home to Biarg forthwith, and Asmund
welcomed him meetly. At that time Atli managed the farming matters, and
well things befell betwixt the brothers.

But now Grettir waxed so overbearing, that he deemed that nought was too
much for him to do. At that time had many men grown into full manhood
who were young in the days when Grettir was wont to play with them on
Midfirthwater before he went abroad; one of these was Audun, who then
dwelt at Audunstead, in Willowdale, he was the Son of Asgeir, the son of
Audun, the son of Asgeir Madpate; of all men he was the strongest north
there; but he was thought to be the gentlest of neighbours. Now it came
into Grettir's mind that he had had the worst of Audun, in

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

that ball-play whereof is told before; and now he would fain try which
of the twain had ripened the most since then. For this cause Grettir
took his way from home, and fared unto Audunstead. This was in early
mowing tide; Grettir was well dight, and rode in a fair-stained saddle
of very excellent workmanship, which Thorfinn had given him; a good
horse he had withal, and all weapons of the best. Grettir came early in
the day to Audunstead, and knocked at the door. Few folk were within;
Grettir asked if Audun was at home. Men said that he had gone to fetch
victuals from the hill-dairy. Then Grettir took the bridle off his
horse; the field was unmowed, and the horse went whereas, the grass was
the highest. Grettir went into the hall, sat down on the seat-beam, and
thereon fell asleep. Soon after Audun came home, and sees a horse
grazing in the field with a fair-stained saddle on; Audun was bringing
victuals on two horses, and carried curds on one of them, in drawn-up
hides, tied round about: this fashion men called curd-bags. Audun took
the loads off the horses and carried the curd-bags in his arms into the
house.

Now it was dark before his eyes, and Grettir stretched his foot from out
the beam so that Audun fell flat down head-foremost on to the curd-bag,
whereby the bonds of the bag brake; Audun leaped up and asked who was
that rascal in the way. Grettir named himself.

Then said Audun, "Rashly hast thou done herein what is thine errand
then?"

Grettir said, "I will fight with thee."

"First I will see about my victuals," said Audun.

"That thou mayst well do," said Grettir, "if thou canst .not charge
other folk therewith."

Then Audun stooped down and caught up the curd-bag and dashed it against
Grettir's bosom, and bade him first

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

take what was sent him; and therewith was Grettir all smothered in the
curds; and a greater shame he deemed that than if Audun had given him a
great wound.

Now thereon they rushed at one another and wrestled fiercely; Grettir
set on with great eagerness, but Audun gave back before him. Yet he
feels that Grettir has outgrown him in strength. Now all things in their
way were kicked out of place, and they were borne on wrestling to and
fro throughout all the hall; neither spared his might, but still Grettir
was the toughest of the twain, and at last Audun fell, having torn all
weapons from Grettir.

Now they grapple hard with one another, and huge cracking was all around
them. Withal a great din was heard coining through the earth underneath
the farmstead, and Grettir heard some one ride up to the houses, get off
his horse, and stride in with great strides; he sees a man come up, of
goodly growth, in a red kirtle and with a helmet on his head. He took
his way into the hall, for he had heard clamorous doings there as they
were struggling together; he asked what was in the hall.

Grettir named himself, "But who asks thereof?" quoth he.

"Bardi am I hight," said the new comer.

"Art thou Bardi, the son of Gudmund, from Asbiornsness?"

"That very man am I," said Bardi; "but what art thou doing?"

Grettir said, "We, Audun and I, are playing here in sport."

"I know not as to the sport thereof," said Bardi, "nor are ye even men
either; thou art full of unfairness and overbearing, and he is easy and
good to deal with; so let him stand up forthwith."

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

Grettir said, "*Many a man stretches round the door to the lock*; and
meseems it lies more in thy way to avenge thy brother Hall <span
id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11), than to meddle in the dealings betwixt
me and Audun."

"At all times I hear this," said Bardi, "nor know I if that will be
avenged, but none the less I will that thou let Audun be at peace, for
he is a quiet man."

Grettir did so at Bardi's bidding, nathless, little did it please him.
Bardi asked for what cause they strove.

Grettir sang--

"Prithee, Audun, who can tell,  
But that now thy throat shall swell,  
That from rough hands thou shalt gain  
By our strife a certain pain.  
E'en such wrong as I have done,  
I of yore from Audun won,  
When the young, fell-creeping lad  
At his hands a choking had."

Bardi said that certes it was a matter to be borne with, if he had had
to avenge himself.

"Now I will settle matters between you," quoth Bardi;

"I will that ye part, leaving things as they are, that thereby there may
be an end of all between you."

This they let hold good, but Grettir took ill liking to Bardi and his
brothers.

Now they all rode off, and when they were somewhat on their way, Grettir
spake--

"I have heard that thou hast will to go to Burgfirth

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

this summer, and I now offer to go south with thee; and methinks that
herein I do for thee more than thou art worthy of."

Hereat was Bardi glad, and speedily said yea thereto, and bade him have
thanks for this; and thereupon they parted. But a little after Bardi
came back and said--

"I will have it known that thou goest not unless my foster-father
Thorarin will have it so, for he shall have all the rule of the faring."

"Well mightest thou, methinks, have full freedom as to thine own redes,"
said Grettir, "and my faring I will not have laid under the choice of
other folk; and I shall mislike it if thou castest me aside from thy
fellowship."

Now either went their way, and Bardi said he should let Grettir know for
sure if Thorarin would that he should fare with him, but that otherwise
he might sit quiet at home. Grettir rode home to Biarg, but Bardi to his
own house.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[86:\*](gre33.htm#fr_11) Who was killed in
Norway by the sons of Harek, and whose revenge is told of in the Saga of
the Heath slayings (existing in fragment).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX: Of the Horse-fight at Longfit](gre34)
