[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre30)  [Next](gre32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XXVI.

Of Thorstein Kuggson, and the gathering for the Bloodsuit for the
Slaying of Thorgils Makson.

THERE was a man called Thorstein, he was the son of Thorkel Kugg, the
son of Thord the Yeller, the son

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

of Olaf Feilan, the son of Thorstein the Red, the son of And the
Deep-minded. The mother of Thorstein Kuggson was Thurid the daughter of
Asgeir Madpate, Asgeir was father's brother of Asmund the Greyhaired.

Thorstein Kuggson was suitor in the case about Thorgils Makson's slaying
along with Asmund the Greyhaired, who now sent word to Thorstein that he
should come to meet him. Thorstein was a great champion, and the
wildest-tempered of men; he went at once to meet his kinsman Asmund, and
they talked the blood-suit over together. Thorstein was mightily wroth
and said that no atonement should be for this, and said they had
strength of kin enough to bring about for the slaying either outlawry or
vengeance on men. Asmund said that he would follow him in whatsoever he
would have done. They rode north to Thorvald their kinsman to pray his
aid, and he quickly gave his word and said yea thereto. So they settled
the suit against Thorgeir and Thormod; then Thorstein rode home to his
farmstead, he then farmed at Liarskogar in Hvamsveit. Skeggi farmed at
Hvam, he also joined in the suit with Thorstein. Skeggi was the son of
Thorarinn Fylsenni, the son of Thord the Yeller; the mother of Skeggi
was Fridgerd, daughter of Thord of Head.

These had a many men with them at the Thing, and pushed their suit with
great eagerness.

Asmund and Thorvald rode from the north with six tens of men, and sat at
Liarskogar many nights.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII: The Suit for the Slaying of Thorgils
Makson](gre32)
