[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre37)  [Next](gre39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

# CHAP XXXIII.

Of the doings of Glam at Thorhall-stead.

IN the spring Thorhall got serving-men, and set up house at his farm;
then the hauntings began to go off while the sun was at its height; and
so things went on to midsummer. That summer a ship came out to
Hunawater, wherein was a man named Thorgaut. He was an outlander of kin,
big and stout, and two men's strength he had. He was unhired and single,
and would fain do some work, for he was moneyless. Now Thorhall rode to
the ship, and asked Thorgaut if he would work for him. Thorgaut said
that might be, and moreover that he was not nice about work.

"Be sure in thy mind," said Thorhall, "that mannikins are of small avail
there because of the hauntings that have been going on there for one
while now; for I will not draw thee on by wiles."

Thorgaut answers, "I deem not myself given up, though I should see some
wraithlings; matters will not be light when I am scared, nor will I give
up my service for that."

Now they come speedily to a bargain, and Thorgaut is to watch the sheep
when winter comes. So the summer wore on, and Thorgaut betook himself to
the shepherding, at winter nights, and all liked him well. But ever came
Glam home and rode the house-roofs; this Thorgaut deemed sport enough,
and quoth he--

"The thrall must come nigher to scare me."

Thorhall bade him keep silence over that.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

"Better will it be that ye have no trial together."

Thorgaut said, "Surely all might is shaken out of you, nor shall I drop
down betwixt morn and eve at such talk."

Now so things go through the winter till Yule-tide. On Yule-eve the
shepherd would fare out to his sheep. Then said the good wife--

"Need is it that things go not the old way."

He answered, "Have no fear thereof, goodwife; something worth telling of
will betide if I come not back."

And thereafter he went to his sheep; and the weather was somewhat cold,
and there was much snow. Thorgaut was wont to come home when twilight
had set in, and now he came not at that time. Folk went to church as
they were wont. Men now thought things looked not unlike what they did
before; the bonder would have search made for the shepherd, but the
church-goers begged off, and said that they would not give themselves
into the hands of trolls by night; so the bonder durst not go, and the
search came to nought.

Yule-day, when men were full, they fared out and searched for the
shepherd; they first went to Glam's cairn, because men thought that from
his deeds came the loss of the herdsman. But when they came nigh to the
cairn, there they saw great tidings, for there they found the shepherd,
and his neck was broken, and every bone in him smashed. Then they
brought him to church, and no harm came to men from Thorgaut afterwards.

But Glam began afresh to wax mighty; and such deeds he wrought, that all
men fled away from Thorhall-stead, except the goodman and his goodwife.
Now the same neatherd had long been there, and Thorhall would not let
him go, because of his good will and safe ward; he was

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

well on in years, and was very loth to fare away, for he saw that all
things the bonder had went to nought from not being watched.

Now after midwinter one morning the housewife fared to the byre to milk
the cows after the wonted time; by then was it broad daylight, for none
other than the neatherd would trust themselves out before day; but he
went out at dawn. She heard great cracking in the byre, with bellowing
and roaring; she ran back crying out,, and said she knew not what
uncouth things were going on in the byre.

The bonder went out and came to the cows, which were goring one another;
so he thought it not good to go in there, but went in to the hay-barn.
There he saw where lay the neatherd, and had his head in one boose <span
id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md) and his feet in the other; and he lay
cast on his back. The bonder went up to him, and felt him all over with
his hand, and finds soon that he was dead, and the spine of him broken
asunder; it had been broken over the raised stone-edge of a boose.

Now the goodman thought there was no abiding there longer; so he fled
away from the farm with all that he might take away; but all such live
stock as was left behind Glam killed, and then he fared all over the
valley and destroyed farms up from Tongue. But Thorhall was with his
friends the rest of the winter.

No man might fare up the dale with horse or hound,

because straightway it was Slain. But when spring came, and the
sun-light was the greatest, somewhat the hauntings abated; and now would
Thorhall go back to his own land; he had no easy task in getting
servants, nathless he set up house again at Thorhall-stead; but all went
the same way

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

as before; for when autumn came, the hauntings began to wax again; the
bonder's daughter was most set on, and fared so that she died thereof.
Many redes were sought, but nought could be done; men thought it like
that all Waterdale would be laid waste if nought were found to better
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[103:\*](gre38.htm#fr_15.md) Boose, a cow-stall.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV: Grettir hears of the Hauntings](gre39.md)
