[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre36)  [Next](gre38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. XXXII.

Of the Haunting at Thorhall-stead; and how Thorhall took a Shepherd by
the rede of Skapti the Lawman, and of what befell thereafter.

THERE was a man hight Thorhall, who dwelt at Thorhall-stead, in
Shady-vale, which runs up from Waterdale. Thorhall was the son of Grim,
son of Thorhall, the son of Fridmund, who settled Shady-vale. Thorhall
had a wife hight Gudrun. Grim was their son, and Thurid their daughter;
they were well-nigh grown up.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

Thorhall was a rich man, but mostly in cattle, so that no man had so
much of live-stock as he. He was no chief, but an honest bonder he was.
Much was that place haunted, and hardly could he get a shepherd that he
deemed should serve his turn. He sought counsel of many men as to what
he might do therewith, but none gave him a rede that might serve him.
Thorhall rode each summer to the Thing, and good horses he had. But one
summer at the Althing, Thorhall went to the booth of Skapti Thorodson
the Lawman. Skapti was the wisest of men, and wholesome were his redes
when folk prayed him for them. But he and his father differed thus much,
that Thorod was foretelling, and yet was called under-handed of some
folk; but Skapti showed forth to every man what he deemed would avail
most, if it were not departed from, therefore was he called
Father-betterer."

Now Thorhall went into Skapti's booth, and Skapti greeted him well, for
he knew that he was a man rich in cattle, and he asked him what were the
tidings.

Thorhall answered, "A wholesome counsel would I have from thee."

"Little am I meet for that," said Skapti; "but what dost thou stand in
need of?"

Thorhall said, "So is the matter grown to be, that but a little while do
my shepherds avail me; for ever will they get badly hurt; but others
will not serve to the end, and now no one will take the job when he
knows what bides in the way."

Skapti answered, "Some evil things shall be there then, since men are
more unwilling to watch thy sheep than those of other men. Now,
therefore, as thou hast sought rede of me, I shall get thee a shepherd
who is hight Glam, a Swede, from Sylgsdale, who came out last summer, a
big

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

man and a strong, though he is not much to the mind of most folk."

Thorhall said he heeded that little if he watched the sheep well.

Skapti said that little would be the look out for others, if he could
not watch them, despite his strength and daring.

Then Thorhall went out from him, and this was towards the breaking up of
the Thing. Thorhall missed two dun horses, and fared himself to seek for
them; wherefore folk deem that he was no great man. He went up to
Sledgehill and south along the fell which is called Armansfell; then he
saw how a man fared down from Godi's-wood, and bore faggots on a horse.
Soon they met together, and Thorhall asked him of his name. He said that
he was called Glam. This man was great of growth, uncouth to look on;
his eyes were grey and glaring, and his hair was wolf-grey.

Thorhall stared at him somewhat when he saw this man, till he saw that
this was he to whom he had been sent.

"What work hast thou best will to do?" said Thorhall.

Glam said, "That he was of good mind to watch sheep in winter."

"Wilt thou watch my sheep?" said Thorhall. "Skapti has given thee to my
will."

"So only shall my service avail thee, if I go of my own will, for I am
evil of mood if matters mislike me," quoth Glam.

"I fear no hurt thereof," said Thorhall, "and I will that thou fare to
my house."

"That may I do," said Glam, "perchance there are some troubles there?"

"Folk deem the place haunted," said Thorhall.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

"Such bugs will not scare me," quoth Glam; "life seems to me less
irksome thereby."

"It must needs seem so," said Thorhall, "and truly it is better that a
mannikin be not there."

Thereafter they struck bargain together, and Glam is to come at winter
nights: then they parted, and Thorhall found his horses even where he
had just been searching. Thorhall rode home, and thanked Skapti for his
good deed.

Summer slipped away, and Thorhall heard nought of his shepherd, nor did
any man know aught about him but at the appointed time he came to
Thorhall-stead. The bonder greeted him well, but none of the other folk
could abide him, and the good wife least of all.

Now he took to the sheep-watching, and little trouble it seemed to give
him; he was big-voiced and husky, and all the beasts would run together
when he whooped. There was a church at Thorhall-stead, but nowise would
Glam come therein; he was a loather of church-song, and godless,
foul-tempered, and surly, and no man might abide him.

Now passed the time till it came to Yule-eve; then Glam got up and
straightway called for his meat. The good wife said--

"No Christian man is wont to eat meat this day, because that on the
morrow is the first day of Yule," says she, "wherefore must men first
fast to-day."

He answers, "Many follies have ye, whereof I see no good come, nor know
I that men fare better now than when they paid no heed to such things;
and methinks the ways of men were better when they were called heathens;
and now will I have my meat, and none of this fooling."

Then said the housewife, "I know for sure that thou shalt fare ill to
day, if thou takest up this evil turn."

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Glam bade her bring food straightway, and said that she should fare the
worse else. She durst do but as he would, and so when he was full, he
went out, growling and grumbling.

Now the weather was such, that mirk was over all, and the snow-flakes
drave down, and great din there was, and still all grew much the worse,
as the day slipped away.

Men heard the shepherd through the early morning, but less of him as the
day wore; then it took to snowing, and by evening there was a great
storm; then men went to church, and thus time drew on to night-fall, and
Glam came not home; then folk held talk, as to whether search should not
be made for him, but, because of the snowstorm and pitch darkness, that
came to nought.

Now he came not home on the night of Yule-eve; and thus men abide till
after the time of worship; but further on in the day men fared out to
the search, and found the sheep scattered wide about in fens, beaten
down by the storm, or strayed up into the mountains. Thereafter they
came on a great beaten place high up in the valley, and they thought it
was as if strong wrestling had gone on there; for that all about the
stones had been uptorn and the earth withal; now they looked closely and
saw where Glam lay a little way therefrom; he was dead, and as blue as
hell, and as great as a neat.

Huge loathing took them, at the sight of him, and they shuddered in
their souls at him, yet they strove to bring him to church, but could
get him only as far as a certain gil-edge a little way below.

Then they fared home to the farm, and told the bonder what had happed.
He asked what was like to have been Glam's bane. They said they had
tracked steps as great as if a cask-bottom had been stamped down, from
there

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

where the beaten place was, up to beneath sheer rocks which were high up
the valley, and there along went great stains of blood. Now men drew
from this, that the evil wight which had been there before had killed
Glam, but had got such wounds as had been full enough for him, for of
him none has since been ware.

The second day of Yule men went afresh to try to bring Glam to church;
drag horses were put to him, but could move him nowhere where they had
to go on even ground and not down hill; then folk had to go away
therefrom leaving things done so far.

The third day the priest fared with them, and they sought all day, but
found not Glam. The priest would go no more on such search, but the
herdsman was found whenso the priest was not in their company. Then they
let alone striving to bring him to church, and buried him there whereto
he had been brought.

A little time after men were ware that Glam lay not quiet. Folk got
great hurt therefrom, so that many fell into swoons when they saw him,
but others lost their wits thereby. But just after Yule men thought they
saw him home at the farm. Folk became exceeding afeard thereat, and many
fled there and then. Next Glam. took to riding the house-roofs at night,
so that he went nigh to breaking them in. Now he walked well-nigh night
and day, Hardly durst men fare up into the dale, though they had errands
enough there. And much scathe the men of the countryside deemed all
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII: Of the doings of Glam at Thorhall-stead](gre38)
