[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre60)  [Next](gre62.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. LVI.

Of Grettir and Thorir Redbeard.

NOW Thorir of Garth heard where Grettir had set himself down, and was
fain to set afoot some plot whereby he might be slain. There was a man
called Thorir

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

Redbeard; he was the biggest of men, and a great manslayer, and
therefore was he made outlaw throughout the land. Thorir of Garth sent
word to him, and when they met he bade him go on an errand of his, and
slay Grettir the Strong. Redbeard said that was no easy task, and that
Grettir was a wise man and a wary.

Thorir bade him make up his mind to this; "A manly task it is for so
brisk a fellow as thou; but I shall bring thee out of thine outlawry,
and therewithal give thee money enough."

So by that counsel Redbeard abode, and Thorir told him how be should go
about the winning of Grettir. So thereafter he went round the land by
the east, for thus he deemed his faring would be the less misdoubted; so
he came to Ernewaterheath when Grettir had been there a winter. But when
he met Grettir, he prayed for winter dwelling at his hands.

Grettir answered, "I cannot suffer you often to play the like play with
me that he did who came here last autumn, who bepraised me cunningly,
and when he had been here a little while lay in wait for my life; now,
therefore, I have no mind to run the risk any more of the taking in of
wood-folk."

Thorir answered, "My mind goes fully with thine in that thou deemest ill
of outlawed men: and thou wilt have heard tell of me as of a man-slayer
and a misdoer, but not as of a doer of such foul deeds as to betray my
master. Now, *ill it is ill to be*, for many deem others to do after
their own ways; nor should I have been minded to come hither, if I might
have had a choice of better things; withal I deem we shall not easily be
won while we stand together, thou mightest risk trying at first how thou
likest me, and let me go my ways whenso thou markest ill faith in me."

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Grettir answered, "Once more then will I risk it, even with thee; but
wot thou well, that if I misdoubt me of thee, that will be thy bane."

Thorir bade him do even so, and thereafter Grettir received him, and
found this, that he must have the strength of twain, what work soever he
took in hand: he was ready for anything that Grettir might set him to,
and Grettir need turn to nothing, nor had he found his life so good
since he had been outlawed, yet was he ever so wary of himself that
Thorir never got a chance against him.

Thorir Redbeard was with Grettir on the heath for two winters, and now
he began to loathe his life on the heath, and falls to thinking what
deed be shall do that Grettir will not see through; so one night in
spring a great storm arose while they were asleep; Grettir awoke
therewith, and asked where was their boat. Thorir sprang up, and ran
down to the boat, and brake it all to pieces, and threw the broken
pieces about here and there, so that it seemed as though the storm had
driven them along. Then he went into the hut, and called out aloud,

"Good things have not befallen us, my friend," said he; "for our boat is
all broken to pieces, and the nets lie a long way out in the water."

"Go and bring them in then," said Grettir, "for methinks it is with thy
goodwill that the boat is broken."

Thorir answered, "Among manly deeds swimming is the least handy to me,
but most other deeds, I think, I may do against men who are not
marvellous; thou mayest wot well enough that I was minded that thou
shouldst not have to work while I abode here, and this I would not bid
if it were in me to do it."

Then Grettir arose and took his weapons, and went to the waterside. Now
the land was so wrought there that a

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

ness ran into the water, and a great creek was on the other side, and
the water was deep right up to the shore.

Now Grettir spake: "Swim off to the nets, and let me see how skilled a
man thou art."

"I told thee before," said Thorir, "that I might not swim; and now I
know not what is gone with thy manliness and daring."

"Well, the nets I may get in," said Grettir, "but betray thou me not,
since I trust in thee."

Said Thorir, "Deem me not to be so shamed and worthless."

"Thou wilt thyself prove thyself, what thou art," said Grettir, and
therewith he put off his clothes and weapons, and swam off for the nets.
He swept them up together, and brought them to land, and cast them on to
the bank; but when he was minded to come aland, then Thorir caught up
the short-sword and drew it hastily, and ran therewith swiftly on
Grettir and smote at him as he set foot on the bank; but Grettir fell on
his back down into the water, and sank like a stone; and Thorir stood
gazing out on to the water, to keep him off from the shore if he came up
again; but Grettir dived and groped along the bottom as near as he might
to the bank, so that Thorir might not see him till he came into the
creek at his back, and got aland; and Thorir heeded him not, and felt
nought till Grettir heaved him up over his head, and cast him down so
hard that the short-sword flew out of his hand; then Grettir got hold of
it and had no words with him, but smote off his head straightway, and
this was the end of his life.

But after this would Grettir never take outlaws to him, yet hardly might
he bear to be alone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII: How Thorir of Garth set on Grettir on
Ernewaterheath](gre62.md)
