[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre69)  [Next](gre71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. LXV.

Of Guest and the Troll-wife.

NOW it is to be told of Guest, that when it drew towards midnight, he
heard great din without, and thereafter into the hall came a huge
troll-wife, with a trough in one hand and a chopper wondrous great in
the other; she peered about when she came in, and saw where Guest lay,
and ran at him; but he sprang up to meet her, and they fell a-wrestling
terribly, and struggled together for long in the hall. She was the
stronger, but he gave back with craft, and all that was before them was
broken, yea, the cross-panelling withal of the chamber. She dragged him
out through the door, and so into the outer doorway, and then he betook
himself to struggling hard against her. She was fain to drag him from
the house, but might not until they had broken away all the fittings of
the outer door, and borne them out on their shoulders: then she laboured

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

away with him down towards the river, and right down to the deep gulfs.

By then was Guest exceeding weary, yet must he either gather his might
together, or be cast by her into the gulf. All night did they contend in
such wise; never, he deemed, had he fought with such a horror for her
strength's sake; she held him to her so hard that he might turn his arms
to no account save to keep fast hold on the middle of the witch.

But now when they came to the gulf of the river he gives the hag a swing
round, and therewith got his right hand free, and swiftly seized the
short-sword that he was girt withal, and smote the troll therewith on
the shoulder, and struck off her arm; and therewithal was he free, but
she fell into the gulf and was carried down the force.

Then was Guest both stiff and weary, and lay there long on the rocks,
then he went home, as it began to grow light, and lay down in bed, and
all swollen and blue he was.

But when the goodwife came from church, she thought her house had been
somewhat roughly handled: so she went to Guest and asked what had happed
that all was broken and down-trodden. He told her all as it had
befallen: she deemed these things imported much, and asked him what man
he was in good sooth. So he told her the truth, and prayed that the
priest might be fetched, for that he would fain see him: and so it was
done.

But when Stein the priest came to Sand-heaps, he knew forthwith, that
thither was come Grettir Asmundson under the name of Guest.

So the priest asked what he deemed had become of those men who had
vanished; and Grettir said that he thought they would have gone into the
gulf: the priest said that he might not trow that, if no signs could be
seen

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

thereof: then said Grettir that later on that should be known more
thoroughly. So the priest went home.

Grettir lay many nights a-bed, and the mistress did well to him, and so
Yule-tide wore.

Now Grettir's story is that the troll-wife cast herself into the gulf
when she got her wound; but the men of Bard-dale say that day dawned on
her, while they wrestled, and that she burst, when he cut the arm from
her; and that there she stands yet on the cliff, a rock in the likeness
of a woman.

Now the dale-dwellers kept Grettir in hiding there; but in the winter
after Yule, Grettir fared to Isledale-river, and when he met the priest,
he said, "Well, priest, I see that thou hadst little faith in my tale;
now will I, that thou go with me to the river, and see what likelihood
there is of that tale being true."

So the priest did; and when they came to the force-side, they saw a cave
up under the cliff; a sheer rock that cliff was, so great that in no
place might man come up thereby, and well-nigh fifty fathoms was it down
to the water. Now they had a rope with them, but the priest said:

"A risk beyond all measure, I deem it to go down here."

"Nay," said Grettir, "it is to be done, truly, but men of the greatest
prowess are meetest therefor: now will I know what is in the force, but
thou shalt watch the rope."

The priest bade him follow his own rede, and drave a peg down into the
sward on the cliff, and heaped stones up over it, and sat thereby.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI: Of the Dweller in the Cave under the Force](gre71)
