[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre77)  [Next](gre79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

# CHAP. LXXIII.

The Handselling of Peace.

SAYS he, "*Herewith I establish peace betwixt all men, but most of all
betwixt all men and this same Guest who sits here, and so is named; that
is to say, all men of rule, and goodly bonders, and all men young, and
fit to bear arms, and all other men of the country-side of Heron-ness
Thing, whencesoever any may have come here, of men named or unnamed. Let
us handsel safety and full peace to that unknown newcomer, yclept Guest
by name, for game, wrestling, and all glee, for abiding here, and going
home, whether he has need to fare over water, or over land, or over
ferry; safety shall he have, in all steads named and unnamed, even so
long as needs be for his coming home whole, under faith holden. This
peace I establish on behoof of us, and of our kin, friends, and men of
affinity, women even as men, bondswomen, even as bondsmen, swains and
men of estate. Let him be a shamed peacebreaker, who breaks the peace,
or spills the troth settled; turned away and driven forth from God, and
good men of the kingdom of Heaven, and all Holy ones. A man not to be
borne of any man, but cast out from all, as wide as wolves stray, or
Christian men make for Churches, or heathen in God's-houses do
sacrifice, or fire burns, or earth brings forth, or a child, new-come to
speech, calls mother, or mother bears son, or the sons of men kindle
fire, or ships sweep on, or shields glitter, or the sun shines, or the
snow falls, or a Finn sweeps on skates, or a fir-tree waxes, or a falcon
flies the spring-long day with a fair wind under either wing, or the
Heavens dwindle far away, or the world is built, or the wind turns* 

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

waters seaward, or carles sow corn. Let him shun churches, and Christian
folk, and heathen men, houses and eaves, and every home but the home of
Hell. Now shall we be at peace and of one mind each with the other, and
of good-will, whether we meet on fell or foreshore, ship or snow-shoes,
earth or ice-mount, sea or swift steed, even as each found his friend on
water, or his brother on broad ways; in just such peace one with other,
as father with son, or son with father in all dealings together. Now we
lay hands together, each and all of us, to hold well this say of peace,
and all words spoken in our settled troth: As witness God and good men,
and all those who hear my words, and nigh this stead chance to stand."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIV: Of Grettir's Wrestling: and how Thorbiorn Angle
now bought the more part of Drangey](gre79)
