[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre82)  [Next](gre84) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. LXXVIII.

Of Hæring at Drangey, and the end of him.

THAT same summer a ship came to the Gangpassmouth, and therein was a man
called Hæring--a young man he was, and so lithe that there was no cliff
that he might not climb. He went to dwell with Thorbiorn Angle, and was
there on into the autumn; and he was ever

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

urging Thorbiorn to go to Drangey, saying that he would fain see whether
the cliffs were so high that none might come up them. Thorbiorn said
that he should not work for nought if he got up unto the island, and
slew Grettir, or gave him some wound; and withal he made it worth
coveting to Hæring. So they fared to Drangey, and set the eastman ashore
in a certain place, and he was to set on them unawares if he might come
up on to the island, but they laid their keel by the ladders, and fell
to talking with Grettir; and Thorbiorn asked him if he were minded now
to leave the place; but he said that to nought was his mind so made up
as to stay there.

"A great game hast thou played with us," said Thorbiorn; "but thou
seemest not much afeard for thyself."

Thus a long while they gave and took in words, and came nowise together
hereon.

But of Hæring it is to be told that he climbed the cliffs, going on the
right hand and the left, and got up by such a road as no man has gone by
before or since; but when he came to the top of the cliff, he saw where
the brothers stood, with their backs turned toward him, and thought in a
little space to win both goods and great fame; nor were they at all
aware of his ways, for they deemed that no man might come up, but there
whereas the ladders were. Grettir was talking with Thorbiorn, nor lacked
there words of the biggest on either side; but withal Illugi chanced to
look aside, and saw a man drawing anigh them.

Then he said, "Here comes a man at us, with axe raised aloft, and in
right warlike wise he seems to fare."

"Turn thou to meet him," says Grettir, "but I will watch the ladders."

So Illugi turned to meet Hæring, and when the eastman saw him, he turned
and fled here and there over the island.

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

Illugi chased him while the island lasted, but when he came forth on to
the cliff's edge Hæring leapt down thence, and every bone in him was
broken, and so ended his life; but the place where he was, lost has been
called Hæring's-leap ever since.

Illugi came back, and Grettir asked how he had parted from this one who
had doomed them to die.

"He would have nought to do," says Illugi, "with my seeing after his
affairs, but must needs break his neck over the rock; so let the bonders
pray for him as one dead."

So when Angle heard that, he bade his folk make off. "Twice have I fared
to meet Grettir, but no third time will I go, if I am nought the wiser
first; and now belike they may sit in Drangey as for me; but in my mind
it is, that Grettir will abide here but a lesser time than heretofore."

With that they went home, and men deemed this journey of theirs worser
than the first, and Grettir abode that winter in Drangey, nor in that
season did he and Thorbiorn meet again.

In those days died Skapti Thorodson the Lawman, and great scathe was
that to Grettir, for he had promised to busy himself about his acquittal
as soon as he had been twenty winters in outlawry, and this year, of
which the tale was told e'en now, was the nineteenth year thereof.

In the spring died Snorri the Godi, and many matters befell in that
season that come not into this story.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXIX: Of the Talk at the Thing about Grettir's
Outlawry](gre84)
