[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre83)  [Next](gre85.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

# CHAP. LXXIX.

Of the Talk at the Thing about Grettir's Outlawry.

THAT summer, at the Althing, the kin of Grettir spake many things
concerning his outlawry, and some deemed he had outworn the years
thereof, if he had come at all into the twentieth year; but they who had
blood-suits against him would not have it so, and said, that he had done
many an outlaws deed since he was first outlawed, and deemed his time
ought to last longer therefor.

At that time was a new lawman made, Stein, the son of Thorgest, the son
of Stein the Far-sailing, the son of Thorir Autumn-mirk; the mother of
Stein was Arnora, the daughter of Thord the Yeller; and Stein was a wise
man.

Now was he prayed for the word of decision; and he bade them search and
see whether this were the twentieth summer since Grettir was made an
outlaw, and thus it seemed to be.

But then stood forth Thorir of Garth, and brought all into dispute
again, for he found that Grettir had been one winter out here a sackless
man, amidst the times of his outlawry, and then nineteen were the
winters of his outlawry found to be. Then said the lawman that no one
should be longer in outlawry than twenty winters in all, though be had
done outlaw's deeds in that time.

"But before that, I declare no man sackless."

Now because of this was the acquittal delayed for this time, but it was
thought a sure thing that he would be made sackless the next summer. But
that misliked the Skagafirthers exceeding ill, if Grettir were to come
out of his outlawry,

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

and they bade Thorbiorn Angle do one of two things, either give back the
island or slay Grettir; but he deemed well that he had a work on his
hands, for he saw no rede for the winning of Grettir, and yet was he
fain to hold the island; and so all manner of craft he sought for the
overcoming of Grettir, if he might prevail either by guile or hardihood,
or in any wise soever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXX: Thorbiorn Angle goes with his Foster-mother out to
Drangey](gre85.md)
