[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](gre87)  [Next](gre89.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAP. LXXXIII.

How Thorbiorn Angle gathered Force and set Sail for Drangey.

THORBIORN Angle sat this while at home at Woodwick, and was ill content
in that he might not win Grettir; but when a certain space had passed
since the carline had put the sorcery into the root, she comes to talk
with Thorbiorn, and asks if he were not minded to go see Grettir. He
answers, that to nought was his mind so made up as that he would not go;
"perchance thou wilt go meet him, foster-mother," says Thorbiorn.

"Nay, I shall not go meet him," says the carline; "but I have sent my
greeting to him, and some hope I have that it has come home to him; and
good it seems to me that thou go speedily to meet him, or else shalt
thou never have such good hap as to overcome him."

Thorbiorn answered: "So many shameful journeys have I made thither, that
there I go not ever again; moreover that alone is full enough to stay
me, that such foul weather it is, that it is safe to go nowhither,
whatso the need may be."

She answered: "Ill counselled thou art, not to see how to overcome
herein. Now yet once again will I lay down a rede for, this; go thou
first and get thee strength of men, and ride to Hof to Halldor thy
brother-in-law, and take counsel of him. But if I may rule in some way
how

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

Grettir's health goes, how shall it be said that it is past hope that I
may also deal with the gale that has been veering about this while?"

Thorbiorn deemed it might well be that the carline saw further than he
had thought she might, and straightway sent up into the country-side for
men; but speedy answer there came that none of those who had given up
their shares would do aught to ease his task, and they said that
Thorbiorn should have to himself both the owning of the island and the
onset on Grettir. But Tongue-Stein gave him two of his followers, and
Hialti, his brother, sent him three men, and Eric of God-dales one, and
from his own homestead he had six. So the twelve of them ride from
Woodwick out to Hof. Halldor bade them abide there, and asked their
errand; then Thorbiorn told it as clearly as might be. Halldor asked
whose rede this might be, and Thorbiorn said that his foster-mother
urged him much thereto.

"That will bear no good," said Halldor, "because she is cunning in
sorcery, and such-like things are now forbidden."

"I may not look closely into all these matters beforehand," said
Thorbiorn, "but in somewise or other shall this thing have an end if I
may have my will. Now, how shall I go about it, so that I may come to
the island?'

"Meseems," says Halldor, "that thou trustest in somewhat, though I wot
not how good that may be. But now if thou wilt go forward with it, go
thou out to Meadness in the Fleets to Biorn my friend; a good keel he
has, so tell him of my word, that I would he should lend you the craft,
and thence ye may sail out to Drangey. But the end of your journey I see
not, if Grettir is sound and hale: yea, and be thou sure that if ye win
him not in manly wise, he leaves enough of folk behind to take up the
blood-suit

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

after him. And slay not Illugi if ye may do otherwise. But methinks I
see that all is not according to Christ's law in these redes."

Then Halldor gave them six men withal for their journey; one was called
Karr, another Thorleif, and a third Brand, but the rest are not named.

So they fared thence, eighteen in company, out to the Fleets, and came
to Meadness and gave Biorn Halldor's message, he said that it was but
due for Halldor's sake, but that he owed nought to Thorbiorn; withal it
seemed to him that they went on a mad journey, and he let them from it
all he might.

They said they might not turn back, and so went down to the sea, and put
forth the craft, and all its gear was in the boat-stand hard by; so they
made them ready for sailing, and foul enow the weather seemed to all who
stood on land. But they hoisted sail, and the craft shot swiftly far
into the firth, but when they came out into the main part thereof into
deep water, the wind abated in such wise that they deemed it blew none
too hard.

So in the evening at dusk they came to Drangey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXIV: The Slaying of Grettir Asmundson](gre89.md)
