[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia21)  [Next](teia23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

### XIX

### THE ISLAND OF DEMONS

Those American travellers who linger with delight among the narrow lanes
and picturesque, overhanging roofs of Honfleur, do not know what a
strange tragedy took place on a voyage which began in that quaint old
port three centuries and a half ago. When, in 1536, the Breton sailor
Jacques Cartier returned from his early explorations of the St.
Lawrence, which he had ascended as high as Hochelaga, King Francis I.
sent for him at the lofty old house known as the House of the
Salamander, in a narrow street of the quaint town of Lisieux. It now
seems incredible that the most powerful king in Europe should have dwelt
in such a meagre lane, yet the house still stands there as a witness;
although a visitor must now brush away the rough, ready-made garments
and fishermen's

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

overalls which overhang its door. Over that stairway, nevertheless, the
troubadours, Pierre Ronsard and Clement Marot, used to go up and down,
humming their lays or touching their viols; and through that door De
Lorge returned in glory, after leaping down into the lions' den to
rescue his lady's glove. The house still derives its name from the great
carved image of a reptile which stretches down its outer wall, from
garret to cellar, beside the doorway.

In that house the great king deigned to meet the Breton sailor, who had
set up along the St. Lawrence a cross bearing the arms of France with
the inscription *Franciscus Primus, Dei gratia Francorum Rex regnat*;
and had followed up the pious act by kidnapping the king Donnacona, and
carrying him back to France. This savage potentate was himself brought
to Lisieux to see his French fellow-sovereign; and the jovial king,
eagerly convinced, decided to send Cartier forth again, to explore for
other wonders, and perhaps bring back other kingly brethren. Meanwhile,
however, as it was getting

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

to be an affair of royalty, he decided to send also a gentleman of
higher grade than a pilot, and so selected Jean François de la Roche,
Sieur de Roberval, whom he commissioned as lieutenant and governor of
Canada and Hochelaga. Roberval was a gentleman of credit and renown in
Picardy, and was sometimes jocosely called by Francis "the little king
of Vimeu." He was commissioned at Fontainebleau, and proceeded to
superintend the building of ships at St. Malo.

Marguerite Roberval, his fair-haired and black-eyed niece, was to go
with him on the voyage, with other ladies of high birth, and also with
the widowed Madame de Noailles, her *gouvernante*. Roberval himself
remained at St. Malo to superintend the building of the ships, and
Marguerite and her *gouvernante* would sit for hours in a beautiful nook
by the shipyards, where they could overlook the vessels in rapid
construction, or else watch the wondrous swirl of the tide as it swept
in and out, leaving the harbor bare at low tide, but with eight fathoms
of water when the tide was full. The designer

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

of the ships often came, cap in hand, to ask or answer questions--one of
those frank and manly French fishermen and pilots, whom the French
novelists describe as "*un solide gaillard*," or such as Victor Hugo
paints in his "Les Travailleurs de la Mer." The son of a notary, Etienne
Gosselin was better educated than most of the young noblemen whom
Marguerite knew, and only his passion for the sea and for nautical
construction had kept him a shipbuilder. No wonder that the young
Marguerite, who had led the sheltered life of the French maiden, was
attracted by his manly look, his open face, his merry blue eyes, and
curly hair. There was about her a tinge of romance, which made her heart
an easier thing to reach for such a lover than for one within her own
grade; and as the voyage itself was a world of romance, a little more or
less of the romantic was an easy thing to add. Meanwhile Madame de
Noailles read her breviary and told her beads and took little naps,
wholly ignorant of the drama that was beginning its perilous unfolding
before her. When the Sieur de Roberval

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

returned, the shipbuilder became a mere shipbuilder again.

Three tall ships sailed from Honfleur on August 22, 1541, and on one of
them, *La Grande Hermine*,--so called to distinguish it from a smaller
boat of that name, which had previously sailed with Cartier,--were the
Sieur de Roberval, his niece, and her *gouvernante*. She also had with
her a Huguenot nurse, who had been with her from a child, and cared for
her devotedly. Roberval naturally took with him, for future needs, the
best shipbuilder of St. Malo, Etienne Gosselin. The voyage was long, and
there is reason to think that the Sieur de Roberval was not a good
sailor, while as to the *gouvernante*, she may have been as helpless as
the seasick chaperon of yachting excursions. Like them, she suffered the
most important events to pass unobserved, and it was not till too late
that she discovered, what more censorious old ladies on board had
already seen, that her young charge lingered too often and too long on
the quarter-deck when Etienne Gosselin was planning ships for the uncle.
When she found it out, she was roused

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

to just indignation; but being, after all, but a kindly dowager, with a
heart softened by much reading of the interminable tales of Madame de
Scudéry, she only remonstrated with Marguerite, wept over her little
romance, and threatened to break the sad news to the Sieur de Roberval,
yet never did so. Other ladies were less considerate; it all broke
suddenly upon the angry uncle; the youth was put in irons, and
threatened with flogging, and forbidden to approach the quarter-deck
again. But love laughs at locksmiths; Gosselin was relieved of his irons
in a day or two because he could not be spared from his work in
designing the forthcoming ship, and as both he and Marguerite were of a
tolerably determined nature, they invoked, through the old nurse, the
aid of a Huguenot minister on board, who had before sailed with Cartier
to take charge of the souls of some Protestant vagabonds on the ship,
and who was now making a second trip for the same reason. That night,
after dark, he joined the lovers in marriage; within twenty-four hours
Roberval had heard of it, and had vowed a vengeance quick and sure.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

The next morning, under his orders, the vessel lay to under the lee of a
rocky island, then known to the sailors as l’Isle des Demons from the
fierce winds that raged round it. There was no house there, no living
person, no tradition of any; only rocks, sands, and deep forests. With
dismay, the ship's company heard that it was the firm purpose of
Roberval to put the offending bride on shore, giving her only the old
nurse for company, and there to leave her with provisions for three
months, trusting to some other vessel to take the exiled women away
within that time. The very ladies whose love of scandal had first
revealed to him the alleged familiarities, now besought him with many
tears to abandon the thought of a doom so terrible. Vainly Madame de
Noailles implored mercy for the young girl from a penalty such as was
never imposed in any of Madame de Scudéry's romances; vainly the
Huguenot minister and the Catholic chaplain, who had fought steadily on
questions of doctrine during the whole voyage, now united in appeals for
pardon. At least they implored him to let

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

the offenders have a man-servant or two with them to protect them
against wild beasts or buccaneers. He utterly refused until, at last
wearied out, his wild nature yielded to one of those sudden impulses
which were wont to sweep over it; and he exclaimed, "Is it that they
need a man-servant, then? Let this insolent caitiff, Gosselin, be
relieved of his irons and sent on shore. Let him be my niece's servant
or, since a Huguenot marriage is as good as any in the presence of bears
and buccaneers, let her call the hound her husband, if she likes. I have
done with her; and the race from which she came disowns her forever."

Thus it was done. Etienne was released from his chains and sent on
shore. An arquebus and ammunition were given him; and resisting the
impulse to send his first shot through the heart of his tyrant, he
landed, and the last glimpse seen of the group as the *Grande Hermine*
sailed away, was the figure of Marguerite sobbing on his shoulder, and
of the unhappy nurse, now somewhat plethoric, and certainly not the
person to be selected as a pioneer, sitting

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

upon a rock, weeping profusely. The ship's sails filled, the angry
Roberval never looked back on his deserted niece, and the night closed
down upon the lonely Isle of Demons, now newly occupied by three
unexpected settlers, two of whom at least were happy in each other.

A few boxes of biscuits, a few bottles of wine, had been put on shore
with them, enough to feed them for a few weeks. They had brought flint
and steel to strike fire, and some ammunition. The chief penalty of the
crime did not lie, after all, in the cold and the starvation and the
wild beasts and the possible visits of pirates; it lay in the fact that
it was the Island of Demons where they were to be left; and in that
superstitious age this meant everything that was terrible. For the first
few nights of their stay, they fancied that they heard superhuman voices
in every wind that blew, every branch that creaked against another
branch; and they heard, at any rate, more substantial sounds from the
nightly wolves or from the bears which ice-floes had floated to that
northern

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

isle. They watched Roberval sail away, he rejoicing, as the old legend
of Thevet says, at having punished them without soiling his hands with
their blood (*ioueux de les auior puniz sans se souiller les mains en
leurs sang*). They built as best they could a hut of boughs and strewed
beds of leaves, until they had killed wild beasts enough to prepare
their skins. Their store of hard bread lasted them but a little while,
but there were fruits around them, and there was fresh water near by.
"Yet it was terrible," says Thevet's old narrative, "to hear the
frightful sounds which the evil spirits made around them, and how they
tried to break down their abode, and showed themselves in various forms
of frightful animals; yet at last, conquered by the constancy and
perseverance of these repentant Christians, the tormentors afflicted or
disquieted them no more, save that often in the night they heard cries
so loud that it seemed as if more than five thousand men were assembled
together" (*plus de cent mil homes qui fussent ensemble*).

So passed many months of desolation, and

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

alas! the husband was the first to yield. Daily he climbed the rocks to
look for vessels; each night he descended sadder and sadder; he waked
while the others slept. Feeling that it was he who had brought distress
upon the rest, he concealed his depression, but it soon was past
concealing; he only redoubled his care and watching as his wife grew the
stronger of the two; and he faded slowly away and died. His wife had
nothing to sustain her spirits except the approach of maternity--she
would live for her child. When the child was born and baptized in the
name of the Holy Church, though without the Church's full ceremonies,
Marguerite felt the strength of motherhood; became a better huntress, a
better provider. A new sorrow came; in the sixteenth or seventeenth
month of her stay, the old nurse died also, and not long after the baby
followed. Marguerite now seemed to herself deserted, even by Heaven
itself; she was alone in that northern island without comradeship; her
husband, child, and nurse gone; dependent for very food on the rapidly
diminishing supply of ammunition. Her head swam; for months she saw
visions almost

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

constantly, which only strenuous prayer banished, and only the acquired
habit of the chase enabled her, almost mechanically, to secure meat to
support life. Fortunately, those especial sights and sounds of demons
which had haunted her imagination during the first days and nights on
the island, did not recur; but the wild beasts gathered round her the
more when there was only one gun to alarm them; and she once shot three
bears in a day,--one a white bear, of which she secured the skin.

What imagination can depict the terrors of those lonely days and still
lonelier nights? Most persons left as solitary tenants of an island have
dwelt, like Alexander Selkirk, in regions nearer the tropics, where
there was at least a softened air, a fertile soil, and the Southern
Cross above their heads; but to be solitary in a prolonged winter, to be
alone with the Northern Lights,--this offered peculiar terrors. To be
ice-bound, to hear the wolves in their long and dreary howl, to protect
the very graves of her beloved from being dug up, to watch the floating
icebergs, not knowing what new and savage visitor might be borne by

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

them to the island, what a complication of terror was this for
Marguerite!

For two years and five months in all she dwelt upon the Isle of Demons,
the last year wholly alone. Then, as she stood upon the shore, some
Breton fishing-smacks, seeking codfish, came in sight. Making signals
with fire and calling for aid, she drew them nearer; but she was now
dressed in furs only, and seemed to them but one of the fancied demons
of the island. Beating up slowly and watchfully toward the shore, they
came within hearing of her voice and she told her dreary tale. At last
they took her in charge, and bore her back to France with the bearskins
she had prepared; and taking refuge in the village of Nautron, in a
remote province (Perigord), where she could escape the wrath of
Roberval, she told her story to Thevet, the explorer, to the Princess
Marguerite of Navarre (sister of Francis I.), and to others. Thevet
tells it in his "Cosmographie," and Marguerite of Navarre in her "Cent
Nouvelles Nouvelles."

She told Thevet that after the first two months, the demons came to her
no more, until she was

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

left wholly alone; then they renewed their visits, but not continuously,
and she felt less fear. Thevet also records of her this touching
confession, that when the time came for her to embark, in the Breton
ship, for home, there came over her a strong impulse to refuse the
embarkation, but rather to die in that solitary place, as her husband,
her child, and her servant had already died. This profound touch of
human nature does more than anything else to confirm the tale as
substantially true. Certain it is that the lonely island which appeared
so long on the old maps as the Isle of Demons (l’Isola de Demoni)
appears differently in later ones as the Lady's Island (l’Isle de la
Demoiselle).

The Princess Marguerite of Navarre, who died in 1549, seems also to have
known her namesake at her retreat in Perigord, gives some variations
from Thevet's story, and describes her as having been put on shore with
her husband, because of frauds which he had practised on Roberval; nor
does she speak of the nurse or of the child. But she gives a similar
description of Marguerite's stay on the island, after

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

his death, and says, that although she lived what might seem a bestial
life as to her body, it was a life wholly angelic as regarded her soul
(*aînsî vivant, quant au corps, de vie bestiale, et quant à l’esprit, de
vie angelîcque*). She had, the princess also says, a mind cheerful and
content, in a body emaciated and half dead. She was afterwards received
with great honor in France, according to the princess, and was
encouraged to establish a school for little children, where she taught
reading and writing to the daughters of high-born families. "And by this
honest industry," says the princess, "she supported herself during the
remainder of her life, having no other wish than to exhort every one to
love and confidence towards God, offering them as an example, the great
pity which he had shown for her."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Bimini and the Fountain of Youth](teia23)
