[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia05)  [Next](teia07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

### III

### THE SWAN-CHILDREN OF LIR

KING LIR of Erin had four young children who were cared for tenderly at
first by their stepmother, the new queen; but there came a time when she
grew jealous of the love their father bore them, and resolved that she
would endure it no longer. Sometimes there was murder in her heart, but
she could not bear the thought of that wickedness, and she resolved at
last to choose another way to rid herself of them. One day she took them
to drive in her chariot:--Finola, who was eight years old, with her
three younger brothers,--Aodh, Fiacre, and little Conn, still a baby.
They were beautiful children, the legend says, with skins white and soft
as swans' feathers, and with large blue eyes and very sweet voices.
Reaching a lake, she told them that they might bathe in the clear

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

water; but so soon as they were in it she struck them with a fairy
wand,--for she was of the race of the Druids, who had magical
power,--and she turned them into four beautiful snow-white swans. But
they still had human voices, and Finola said to her, "This wicked deed
of thine shall be punished, for the doom that awaits thee will surely be
worse than ours." Then Finola asked, "How long shall we be in the shape
of swans?" "For three hundred years," said the woman, "on smooth Lake
Darvra; then three hundred years on the sea of Moyle" (this being the
sea between Ireland and Scotland); "and then three hundred years at Inis
Glora, in the Great Western Sea" (this was a rocky island in the
Atlantic). "Until the Tailkenn (St. Patrick) shall come to Ireland and
bring the Christian faith, and until you hear the Christian bell, you
shall not be freed. Neither your power nor mine can now bring you back
to human shape; but you shall keep your human reason and your Gaelic
speech, and you shall sing music so sweet that all who hear it shall
gladly listen."

She left them, and ere long their father, King

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Lir, came to the shore and heard their singing. He asked how they came
to have human voices. "We are thy four children," said Finola, "changed
into swans by our stepmother's jealousy." "Then come and live with me,"
said her sorrowing father. "We are not permitted to leave the lake," she
said, "or live with our people any more. But we are allowed to dwell
together and to keep our reason and our speech, and to sing sweet music
to you." Then they sang, and the king and all his followers were at
first amazed and then lulled to sleep.

Then King Lir returned and met the cruel stepmother at her father's
palace. When her father, King Bove, was told what she had done, he was
hot with anger. "This wicked deed," he said, "shall bring severer
punishment on thee than on the innocent children, for their suffering
shall end, but thine never shall." Then King Bove asked her what form of
existence would be most terrible to her. She replied, "That of a demon
of the air." "Be it so," said her father, who had also Druidical power.
He struck her with his wand, and she became a bat, and flew

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

away with a scream, and the legend says, "She is still a demon of the
air and shall be a demon of the air until the end of time."

After this, the people of all the races that were in Erin used to come
and encamp by the lake and listen to the swans. The happy were made
happier by the song, and those who were in grief or illness or pain
forgot their sorrows and were lulled to rest. There was peace in all
that region, while war and tumult filled other lands. Vast changes took
place in three centuries--towers and castles rose and fell, villages
were built and destroyed, generations were born and died;--and still the
swan-children lived and sang, until at the end of three hundred years
they flew away, as was decreed, to the stormy sea of Moyle; and from
that time it was made a law that no one should kill a swan in Erin.

Beside the sea of Moyle they found no longer the peaceful and wooded
shores they had known, but only steep and rocky coasts and a wild, wild
sea. There came a great storm one night, and the swans knew that they
could not keep together, so they resolved that if separated they would
meet

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

at a rock called Carricknarone. Finola reached there first, and took her
brothers under her wings, all wet, shivering, and exhausted. Many such
nights followed, and in one terrible winter storm, when they nestled
together on Carricknarone, the water froze into solid ice around them,
and their feet and wings were so frozen to the rock that when they moved
they left the skin of their feet, the quills of their wings, and the
feathers of their breasts clinging there. When the ice melted, and they
swam out into the sea, their bodies smarted with pain until the feathers
grew once more.

One day they saw a glittering troop of horsemen approaching along the
shore and knew that they were their own kindred, though from far
generations back, the Dedannen or Fairy Host. They greeted each other
with joy, for the Fairy Host had been sent to seek for the swans; and on
returning to their chiefs they narrated what had passed, and the chiefs
said, "We cannot help them, but we are glad they are living; and we know
that at last the enchantment will be broken and that they will be freed
from their

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

sorrows." So passed their lives until Finola sang, one day, "The Second
Woe has passed--the second period of three hundred years," when they
flew out on the broad ocean, as was decreed, and went to the island of
Inis Glora. There they spent the next three hundred years, amid yet
wilder storms and yet colder winds. No more the peaceful shepherds and
living neighbors were around them; but often the sailor and fisherman,
in his little coracle, saw the white gleam of their wings or heard the
sweet notes of their song and knew that the children of Lir were near.

But the time came when the nine hundred years of banishment were ended,
and they might fly back to their father's old home, Finnahà. Flying for
days above the sea, they alighted at the palace once so well known, but
everything was changed by time--even the walls of their father's palace
were crumbled and rain-washed. So sad was the sight that they remained
one day only, and flew back to Inis Glora, thinking that if they must be
forever solitary, they would live where they had lived last, not where
they had been reared.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

One May morning, as the children of Lir floated in the air around the
island of Inis Glora, they heard a faint bell sounding across the
eastern sea. The mist lifted, and they saw afar off, beyond the waves, a
vision of a stately white-robed priest, with attendants around him on
the Irish shore. They knew that it must be St. Patrick, the Tailkenn, or
Tonsured One, who was bringing, as had been so long promised,
Christianity to Ireland. Sailing through the air, above the blue sea,
towards their native coast, they heard the bell once more, now near and
distinct, and they knew that all evil spirits were fleeing away, and
that their own hopes were to be fulfilled. As they approached the land,
St. Patrick stretched his hand and said, "Children of Lir, you may tread
your native land again." And the sweet swan-sister, Finola, said, "If we
tread our native land, it can only be to die, after our life of nine
centuries. Baptize us while we are yet living." When they touched the
shore, the weight of all those centuries fell upon them; they resumed
their human bodies, but they appeared old and pale and wrinkled. Then
St. Patrick baptized

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

them, and they died; but, even as he did so, a change swiftly came over
them; and they lay side by side, once more children, in their white
night-clothes, as when their father Lir, long centuries ago, had kissed
them at evening and seen their blue eyes close in sleep and had touched
with gentle hand their white foreheads and their golden hair. Their time
of sorrow was ended and their last swan-song was sung; but the cruel
stepmother seems yet to survive in her bat-like shape, and a single
glance at her weird and malicious little face will lead us to doubt
whether she has yet fully atoned for her sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Usheen in the Island of Youth](teia07)
