[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia16)  [Next](teia18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

### XIV

### THE ISLE OF SATAN'S HAND

The prosperous farmer Conall Ua Corra in the province of Connaught had
everything to make him happy except that he and his wife had no children
to cheer their old age and inherit their estate. Conall had prayed for
children, and one day said in his impatience that he would rather have
them sent by Satan than not have them at all. A year or two later his
wife had three sons at a birth, and when these sons came to maturity,
they were so ridiculed by other young men, as being the sons of Satan,
that they said, "If such is really our parentage, we will do Satan's
work." So they collected around them a few villains and began plundering
and destroying the churches in the neighborhood and thus injuring half
the church buildings in the country. At last they resolved to visit also
the church of Clothar, to

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

destroy it, and to kill if necessary their mother's father, who was the
leading layman of the parish. When they came to the church, they found
the old man on the green in front of it, distributing meat and drink to
his tenants and the people of the parish. Seeing this, they postponed
their plans until after dark and in the meantime went home with their
grandfather, to spend the night at his house. They went to rest, and the
eldest, Lochan, had a terrible dream in which he saw first the joys of
heaven and then the terrors of future punishment, and then he awoke in
dismay. Waking his brothers, he told them his dream, and that he now saw
that they had been serving evil masters and making war upon a good one.
Such was his bitterness of remorse that he converted them to his views,
and they agreed to go to their grandfather in the morning, renounce
their sinful ways and ask his pardon.

This they did, and he advised them to go to a celebrated saint, Finnen
of Clonard, and take him as their spiritual guide. Laying aside their
armor and weapons, they went to Clonard, where all the people, dreading
them and knowing

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

their wickedness, fled for their lives, except the saint himself, who
came forward to meet them. With him the three brothers undertook the
most austere religious exercises, and after a year they came to St.
Finnen and asked his punishment for their former crimes. "You cannot,"
he said, "restore to life those you have slain, but you can at least
restore the buildings you have devastated and ruined." So they went and
repaired many churches, after which they resolved to go on a pilgrimage
upon the great Atlantic Ocean. They built for themselves therefore a
curragh or coracle, covered with hides three deep. It was capable of
carrying nine persons, and they selected five out of the many who wished
to join the party. There were a bishop, a priest, a deacon, a musician,
and the man who had modelled the boat; and with these they pushed out to
sea.

It had happened some years before that in a quarrel about a deer hunt,
the men of Ross had killed the king. It had been decided that, by way of
punishment, sixty couples of the people of Ross should be sent out to
sea, two

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

and two, in small boats, to meet what fate they might upon the deeps.
They were watched that they might not land again, and for many years
nothing more had been heard from them. The most pious task which these
repenting pilgrims could undertake, it was thought, would be to seek
these banished people. They resolved to spread their sail and let
Providence direct their course. They went, therefore, northwest on the
Atlantic, where they visited several wonderful islands, on one of which
there was a great bird which related to them, the legend says, the whole
history of the world, and gave them a great leaf from a tree--the leaf
being as large as an ox-hide, and being preserved for many years in one
of the churches after their return. At the next island they heard sweet
human voices, and found that the sixty banished couples had established
their homes there.

The pilgrims then went onward in their hidebound boat until they reached
the coast of Spain, and there they landed and dwelt for a time. The
bishop built a church, and the priest officiated in it, and the organist
took

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

charge of the music. All prospered; yet the boat-builder and the three
brothers were never quite contented, for they had roamed the seas too
long; and they longed for a new enterprise for their idle valor. They
thought they had found this when one day they found on the sea-coast a
group of women tearing their hair, and when they asked the explanation,
"Señor," said an old woman, "our sons and our husbands have again fallen
into the hand of Satan." At this the three brothers were startled, for
they remembered well how they used, in youth, to rank themselves as
Satan's children. Asking farther, they learned that a shattered boat
they saw on the beach was one of a pair of boats which had been carried
too far out to sea, and had come near an islet which the sailors called
*Isla de la Man Satanaxio*, or The Island of Satan's Hand. It appeared
that in that region there was an islet so called, always surrounded by
chilly mists and water of a deadly cold; that no one had ever reached
it, as it constantly changed place; but that a demon hand sometimes
uprose from it,

 

<span id="img_13800"></span>

[![''A demon hand sometimes uprose from the islet and plucked away men
and even whole boats, which when once grasped, usually by night, where
never seen again, but perished helplessly.''--p. 139](tn/13800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13800.jpg)  
''A demon hand sometimes uprose from the islet and plucked away men and
even whole boats, which when once grasped, usually by night, where never
seen again, but perished helplessly.''--p. 139  

 

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

and plucked away men and even whole boats, which, when once grasped,
usually by night, were never seen again, but perished helplessly,
victims of Satan's Hand.

When the voyagers laughed at this legend, the priest of the village
showed them, on the early chart of Bianco, the name of "De la Man
Satanagio," and on that of Beccaria the name "Satanagio" alone, both
these being the titles of islands. Not alarmed at the name of Satan, as
being that of one whom they had supposed, in their days of darkness, to
be their patron, they pushed boldly out to sea and steered westward, a
boat-load of Spanish fishermen following in their wake. Passing island
after island of green and fertile look, they found themselves at last in
what seemed a less favored zone--as windy as the "roaring forties," and
growing chillier every hour. Fogs gathered quickly, so that they could
scarcely see the companion boat, and the Spanish fishermen called out to
them, "Garda da la Man do Satanaxio!" ("Look out for Satan's hand!")

As they cried, the fog became denser yet,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

and when it once parted for a moment, something that lifted itself high
above them, like a gigantic hand, showed itself an instant, and then
descended with a crushing grasp upon the boat of the Spanish fishermen,
breaking it to pieces, and dragging some of the men below the water,
while others, escaping, swam through the ice-cold waves, and were with
difficulty taken on board the coracle; this being all the harder because
the whole surface of the water was boiling and seething furiously.
Rowing away as they could from this perilous neighborhood, they lay on
their oars when the night came on, not knowing which way to go.
Gradually the fog cleared away, the sun rose clearly at last, and
wherever they looked on the deep they saw no traces of any island, still
less of the demon hand. But for the presence among them of the fishermen
they had picked up, there was nothing to show that any casualty had
happened.

That day they steered still farther to the west with some repining from
the crew, and at night the same fog gathered, the same deadly

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

chill came on. Finding themselves in shoal water, and apparently near
some island, they decided to anchor the boat; and as the man in the bow
bent over to clear away the anchor, something came down upon him with
the same awful force, and knocked him overboard. His body could not be
recovered, and as the wind came up, they drove before it until noon of
the next day, seeing nothing of any land and the ocean deepening again.
By noon the fog cleared, and they saw nothing, but cried with one voice
that the boat should be put about, and they should return to Spain. For
two days they rowed in peace over a summer sea; then came the fog again
and they laid on their oars that night. All around them dim islands
seemed to float, scarcely discernible in the fog; sometimes from the top
of each a point would show itself, as of a mighty hand, and they could
hear an occasional plash and roar, as if this hand came downwards. Once
they heard a cry, as if of sailors from another vessel. Then they
strained their eyes to gaze into the fog, and a whole island seemed to
be turning

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

itself upside down, its peak coming down, while its base went uppermost,
and the whole water boiled for leagues around, as if both earth and sea
were upheaved.

The sun rose upon this chaos of waters. No demon hand was anywhere
visible, nor any island, but a few icebergs were in sight, and the
frightened sailors rowed away and made sail for home. It was rare to see
icebergs so far south, and this naturally added to the general dismay.
Amid the superstition of the sailors, the tales grew and grew, and all
the terrors became mingled. But tradition says that there were some
veteran Spanish sailors along that coast, men who had sailed on longer
voyages, and that these persons actually laughed at the whole story of
Satan's Hand, saying that any one who had happened to see an iceberg
topple over would know all about it. It was more generally believed,
however, that all this was mere envy and jealousy; the daring fishermen
remained heroes for the rest of their days; and it was only within a
century or two that the island of Satanaxio disappeared from the charts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Antillia, the Island of the Seven Cities](teia18)
