[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia10)  [Next](teia12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### VIII

### SIR LANCELOT OF THE LAKE

SIR LANCELOT, the famous knight, was the son of a king and queen against
whom their subjects rebelled; the king was killed, the queen taken
captive, when a fairy rose in a cloud of mist and carried away the
infant Lancelot from where he had been left beneath a tree. The queen,
after weeping on the body of her husband, looked round and saw a lady
standing by the water-side, holding the queen's child in her arms.
"Fair, sweet friend," said the queen, "give me back my child." The fairy
made no reply, but dived into the water; and the queen was taken to an
abbey, where she was known as the Queen of Great Griefs. The Lady of the
Lake took the child to her own home, which was an island in the middle
of the sea and surrounded by impassable walls. From this the lady had
her

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

name of Dame du Lac, or the Lady of the Lake (or Sea), and her foster
son was called Lancelot du Lac, while the realm was called Meidelant, or
the Land of Maidens.

Lancelot dwelt thenceforward in the castle, on the island. When he was
eight years old he received a tutor who was to instruct him in all
knightly knowledge; he learned to use bow and spear and to ride on
horseback, and some cousins of his were also brought thither by the Lady
of the Lake to be his comrades. When he was eighteen he wished to go to
King Arthur's court that he might be a knight.

On the eve of St. John, as King Arthur returned from the chase, and by
the high road approached Camelot, he met a fair company. In the van went
two youths, leading two white mules, one freighted with a silken
pavilion, the other with robes proper for a newly made knight; the mules
bore two chests, holding the hauberk and the iron boots. Next came two
squires, clad in white robes and mounted on white horses, carrying a
silver shield and a shining helmet; after these, two others, with a
sword

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

in a white sheath and a white charger. Behind followed squires and
servants in white coats, three damsels dressed in white, the two sons of
King Bors; and, last of all, the fairy with the youth she loved. Her
robe was of white samite lined with ermine; her white palfrey had a
silver bit, while her breastplate, stirrups, and saddle were of ivory,
carved with figures of ladies and knights, and her white housings
trailed on the ground.

When she perceived the king, she responded to his salutation, and said,
after she had lowered her wimple and displayed her face: "Sir, may God
bless the best of kings! I come to implore a boon, which it shall cost
you nothing to grant." "Damsel, even it should cost me dear, you should
not be refused; what is it you would have me do?" "Sir, dub this varlet
a knight, and array him in the arms he bringeth, whenever he desireth."
"Your mercy, damsel! to bring me such a youth! Assuredly, I will dub him
whenever he will; but it shameth me to abandon my custom, for 'tis my
wont to furnish with garments and

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

arms such as come thither to receive chivalry." The lady replied that
she desired the youth to carry the arms she had intended him to wear,
and if she were refused, she would address herself elsewhere. Sir Ewain
said that so fair a youth ought not to be denied, and the king yielded
to her entreaty. She returned thanks, and bade the varlet retain the
mules and the charger, with the two squires; and after that, she
prepared to return as she had come, in spite of the urgency of the king,
who had begged her to remain in his court. "At least," he cried, "tell
us by what name are you known ?" "Sir," she answered, "I am called the
Lady of the Lake."

For a long way, Lancelot escorted the fairy, who said to him as she took
leave: "King's son, you are derived from lineage the most noble on
earth; see to it that your worth be as great as your beauty. To-morrow
you will ask the king to bestow on you knighthood; when you are armed,
you will not tarry in his house a single night. Abide in one place no
longer than you can help, and refrain from

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

declaring your name until others proclaim it. Be prepared to accomplish
every adventure, and never let another man complete a task which you
yourself have undertaken." With that, she gave him a ring that had the
property of dissolving enchantment, and commended him to God.

On the morrow, Lancelot arrayed himself in his fairest robes, and sued
for knighthood, as he had been commanded to do. Sir Ewain attended him
to court, where they dismounted in front of the palace; the king and
queen advanced to meet them; each took Sir Ewain by a hand, and seated
him on a couch, while the varlet stood in their presence on the rushes
that strewed the floor. All gazed with pleasure, and the queen prayed
that God might make him noble, for he possessed as much beauty as was
possible for man to have.

After this he had many perilous adventures; he fought with giants and
lions; he entered an enchanted castle and escaped; he went to a well in
the forest, and, striking three times on a cymbal with a hammer hung
there for the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

purpose, called forth a great giant, whom he slew, afterwards marrying
his daughter. Then he went to rescue the queen of the realm, Gwenivere,
from captivity. In order to reach the fortress where she was prisoner,
he had to ride in a cart with a dwarf; to follow a wheel that rolled
before him to show him the way, or a ball that took the place of the
wheel; he had to walk on his hands and knees across a bridge made of a
drawn sword; he suffered greatly. At last he rescued the queen, and
later than this he married Elaine, the daughter of King Pelles, and her
father gave to them the castle of Blyaunt in the Joyous Island, enclosed
in iron, and with a deep water all around it. There Lancelot challenged
all knights to come and contend with him, and he jousted with more than
five hundred, overcoming them all, yet killing none, and at last he
returned to Camelot, the place of King Arthur's court.

One day he was called from the court to an abbey, where three nuns
brought to him a beautiful boy of fifteen, asking that he might be made
a knight. This was Sir Lancelot's

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

own son, Galahad, whom he had never seen, and did not yet know. That
evening Sir Lancelot remained at the abbey with the boy, that he might
keep his vigil there, and on the morrow's dawn he was made a knight. Sir
Lancelot put on one of his spurs, and Bors, Lancelot's cousin, the
other, and then Sir Lancelot said to the boy, "Fair son, attend me to
the court of the king;" but the abbess said, "Sir, not now, but we will
send him when it shall be time."

On Whitsunday, at the time called "underne," which was nine in the
morning, King Arthur and his knights sat at the Round Table, where on
every seat there was written, in letters of gold, the name of a knight
with "here ought to sit he," or "he ought to sit here;" and thus went
the inscriptions until they came to one seat (or *siège* in French)
called the "Siege Perilous," where they found newly written letters of
gold, saying that this seat could not be occupied until four hundred and
fifty years after the death of Christ; and that was this very day. Then
there came news

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

of a marvellous stone which had been seen above the water, with a sword
sticking in it bearing the letters, "Never shall man take me hence, but
only he by whose side I ought to hang, and he shall be the best knight
of the world." Then two of the knights tried to draw the sword and
failed to draw it, and Sir Lancelot, who was thought the best knight in
all the world, refused to attempt it. Then they went back to their seats
around the table.

Then when all the seats but the "Siege Perilous" were full, the hall was
suddenly darkened; and an old man clad in white, whom nobody knew, came
in, with a young knight in red armor, wearing an empty scabbard at his
side, who said, "Peace be with you, fair knights." The old man said, "I
bring you here a young knight that is of kings' lineage," and the king
said, "Sir, ye are right heartily welcome." Then the old man bade the
young knight to remove his armor, and he wore a red garment, while the
old man placed on his shoulders a mantle of fine ermine, and said, "Sir,
follow after." Then the old man led him to the "Siege

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Perilous," next to
Sir Lancelot, and lifted the cloth and read, "Here sits Sir Galahad,"
and the youth sat down. Upon this, all the knights of the Round Table
marvelled greatly at Sir Galahad, that he dared to sit in that seat, and
he so tender of age. Then King Arthur took him by the hand and led him
down to the river to see the adventure of the stone. "Sir," said the
king to Sir Galahad, "here is a great marvel, where right good knights
have tried and failed." "Sir," said Sir Galahad, "that is no marvel, for
the adventure was not theirs, but mine; I have brought no sword with me,
for here by my side hangs the scabbard," and he laid his hand on the
sword and lightly drew it from the stone.

It was not until long after, and when they both had had many adventures,
that Sir Lancelot discovered Galahad to be his son. Sir Lancelot once
came to the sea-strand and found a ship without sails or oars, and
sailed away upon it. Once, when he touched at an island, a young knight
came on board to whom Lancelot said, "Sir, you are welcome," and when
the young

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

knight asked his name, told him, "My name is Sir Lancelot du Lac."
"Sir," he said, "then you are welcome, for you are my father." "Ah,"
said Lancelot, "are you Sir Galahad?" Then the young knight kneeled down
and asked his blessing, and they embraced each other, and there was
great joy between them, and they told each other all their deeds. So
dwelt Sir Lancelot and Sir Galahad together within that ship for half a
year, and often they arrived at islands far from men where there were
but wild beasts, and they found many adventures strange and perilous
which they brought to an end.

When Sir Lancelot at last died, his body was taken to Joyous-Gard, his
home, and there it lay in state in the choir, with a hundred torches
blazing above it; and while it was there, came his brother Sir Ector de
Maris, who had long been seeking Lancelot. When he heard such noise and
saw such lights in the choir, he alighted and came in; and Sir Bors went
towards him and told him that his brother Lancelot was lying dead. Then
Sir Ector threw his shield and sword and helm from him, and when he
looked

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

on Sir Lancelot's face he fell down in a swoon, and when he rose he
spoke thus: "Ah, Sir Lancelot," said he, "thou wert dead of all Christen
knights! And now I dare say, that, Sir Lancelot, there thou liest, thou
wert never matched of none earthly knight's hands; and thou wert the
curtiest knight that ever beare shield; and thou wert the truest friend
to thy lover that ever bestrood horse, and thou wert the truest lover of
a sinful man that ever loved woman; and thou wert the kindest man that
ever strooke with sword; and thou wert the goodliest person that ever
came among presse of knights; and thou wert the meekest man and the
gentlest that ever eate in hall among ladies; and thou wert the sternest
knight to thy mortall foe that ever put speare in the rest."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The Half-Man](teia12.md)
