[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia11)  [Next](teia13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### IX

### THE HALF-MAN

KING ARTHUR in his youth was fond of all manly exercises, especially of
wrestling, an art in which he found few equals. The old men who had been
the champions of earlier days, and who still sat, in summer evenings,
watching the youths who tried their skill before them, at last told him
that he had no rival in Cornwall, and that his only remaining competitor
elsewhere was one who had tired out all others.

"Where is he?" said Arthur.

"He dwells," an old man said, "on an island whither you will have to go
and find him. He is of all wrestlers the most formidable. You will think
him at first so insignificant as to be hardly worth a contest; you will
easily throw him at the first trial; but after a while you will find him
growing stronger; he seeks out all

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

your weak points as by magic; he never gives up; you may throw him again
and again, but he will conquer you at last."

"His name! his name!" said Arthur.

"His name," they answered, "is Hanner Dyn; his home is everywhere, but
on his own island you will be likely to find him sooner or later. Keep
clear of him, or he will get the best of you in the end, and make you
his slave as he makes slaves of others whom he has conquered."

Far and wide over the ocean the young Arthur sought; he touched at
island after island; he saw many weak men who did not dare to wrestle
with him, and many strong ones whom he could always throw, until at last
when he was far out under the western sky, he came one day to an island
which he had never before seen and which seemed uninhabited. Presently
there came out from beneath an arbor of flowers a little miniature man,
graceful and quick-moving as an elf. Arthur, eager in his quest, said to
him, "In what island dwells Hanner Dyn?" "In this island," was the
answer. "Where is

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

he?" said Arthur. "I am he," said the laughing boy, taking hold of his
hand.

"What did they mean by calling you a wrestler?" said Arthur.

"Oh," said the child coaxingly, "I am a wrestler. Try me."

The king took him and tossed him in the air with his strong arms, till
the boy shouted with delight. He then took Arthur by the hand and led
him about the island--showed him his house and where the gardens and
fields were. He showed him the rows of men toiling in the meadows or
felling trees. "They all work for me," he said carelessly. The king
thought he had never seen a more stalwart set of laborers. Then the boy
led him to the house, asked him what his favorite fruits were, or his
favorite beverages, and seemed to have all at hand. He was an
unaccountable little creature; in size and years he seemed a child; but
in his activity and agility he seemed almost a man. When the king told
him so, he smiled, as winningly as ever, and said, "That is what they
call me--Hanner Dyn, The Half-Man." Laughing merrily, he

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

helped Arthur into his boat and bade him farewell, urging him to come
again. The King sailed away, looking back with something like affection
on his winsome little playmate.

It was months before Arthur came that way again. Again the merry child
met him, having grown a good deal since their earlier meeting. "How is
my little wrestler?" said Arthur. "Try me," said the boy; and the king
tossed him again in his arms, finding the delicate limbs firmer, and the
slender body heavier than before, though easily manageable. The island
was as green and more cultivated, there were more men working in the
fields, and Arthur noticed that their look was not cheerful, but rather
as of those who had been discouraged and oppressed.

It was, however, a charming sail to the island, and, as it became more
familiar, the king often bade his steersman guide the pinnace that way.
He was often startled with the rapid growth and increased strength of
the laughing boy, Hanner Dyn, while at other times he seemed much as
before and appeared to have made but little progress. The youth seemed
never tired of wrestling;

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

he always begged the king for a trial of skill, and the king rejoiced to
see how readily the young wrestler caught at the tricks of the art; so
that the time had long passed when even Arthur's strength could toss him
lightly in the air, as at first. Hanner Dyn was growing with incredible
rapidity into a tall young fellow, and instead of the weakness that
often comes with rapid growth, his muscles grew ever harder and harder.
Still merry and smiling, he began to wrestle in earnest, and one day, in
a moment of carelessness, Arthur received a back fall, perhaps on moist
ground, and measured his length. Rising with a quick motion, he laughed
at the angry faces of his attendants and bade the boy farewell. The men
at work in the fields glanced up, attracted by the sound of voices, and
he saw them exchange looks with one another.

Yet he felt his kingly dignity a little impaired, and hastened ere long
to revisit the island and teach the saucy boy another lesson. Months had
passed, and the youth had expanded into a man of princely promise, but
with the same sunny look. His shoulders

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

were now broad, his limbs of the firmest mould, his eye clear, keen,
penetrating. "Of all the wrestlers I have ever yet met," said the king,
"this younker promises to be the most formidable. I can easily throw him
now, but what will he be a few years hence?" The youth greeted him
joyously, and they began their usual match. The sullen serfs in the
fields stopped to watch them, and an aged Druid priest, whom Arthur had
brought with him, to give the old man air and exercise in the boat,
opened his weak eyes and closed them again.

As they began to wrestle, the king felt, by the very grasp of the
youth's arms, by the firm set of his foot upon the turf, that this was
to be unlike any previous effort. The wrestlers stood after the old
Cornish fashion, breast to breast, each resting his chin on the other's
shoulder. They grasped each other round the body, each setting his left
hand above the other's right. Each tried to force the other to touch the
ground with both shoulders and one hip, or with both hips and one
shoulder;

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

or else to compel the other to relinquish his hold for an
instant--either of these successes giving the victory. Often as Arthur
had tried the art, he never had been so matched before. The competitors
swayed this way and that, writhed, struggled, half lost their footing
and regained it, yet neither yielded. All the boatmen gathered
breathlessly around, King Arthur's men refusing to believe their eyes,
even when they knew their king was in danger. A stranger group was that
of the sullen farm-laborers, who left their ploughs and spades, and,
congregating on a rising ground, watched without any expression of
sympathy the contest that was going on. An old wrestler from Cornwall,
whom Arthur had brought with him, was the judge; and according to the
habit of the time, the contest was for the best two bouts in three. By
the utmost skill and strength, Arthur compelled Hanner Dyn to lose his
hold for one instant in the first trial, and the King was pronounced the
victor.

The second test was far more difficult; the boy, now grown to a man, and
seeming to grow

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

older and stronger before their very eyes, twice forced Arthur to the
ground either with hip or shoulder, but never with both, while the crowd
closed in breathlessly around; and the half-blind old Druid, who had
himself been a wrestler in his youth, and who had been brought ashore to
witness the contest, called warningly aloud, "Save thyself, O king!" At
this Arthur roused his failing strength to one final effort, and,
griping his rival round the waist with a mighty grasp, raised him bodily
from the ground and threw him backward till he fell flat, like a log, on
both shoulders and both hips; while Arthur himself fell fainting a
moment later. Nor did he recover until he found himself in the boat, his
head resting on the knees of the aged Druid, who said to him, "Never
again, O king! must you encounter the danger you have barely escaped.
Had you failed, you would have become subject to your opponent, whose
strength has been maturing for years to overpower you. Had you yielded,
you would, although a king, have become but as are those dark-browed men
who till his

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

fields and do his bidding. For know you not what the name Hanner Dyn
means? It means--Habit; and the force of habit, at first weak, then
growing constantly stronger, ends in conquering even kings!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. King Arthur at Avalon](teia13.md)
