[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia07)  [Next](teia09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

### V

### BRAN THE BLESSED

The mighty king Bran, a being of gigantic size, sat one day on the
cliffs of his island in the Atlantic Ocean, near to Hades and the Gates
of Night, when he saw ships sailing towards him and sent men to ask what
they were. They were a fleet sent by Matholweh, the king of Ireland, who
had sent to ask for Branwen, Bran's sister, as his wife. Without moving
from his rock Bran bid the monarch land, and sent Branwen back with him
as queen.

But there came a time when Branwen was ill-treated at the palace; they
sent her into the kitchen and made her cook for the court, and they
caused the butcher to come every day (after he had cut up the meat) and
give her a blow on the ear. They also drew up all their boats on the
shore for three years, that she might not send

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

for her brother. But she reared a starling in the cover of the
kneading-trough, taught it to speak, and told it how to find her
brother; and then she wrote a letter describing her sorrows and bound it
to the bird's wing, and it flew to the island and alighted on Bran's
shoulder, "ruffling its feathers" (says the Welsh legend) "so that the
letter was seen, and they knew that the bird had been reared in a
domestic manner." Then Bran resolved to cross the sea, but he had to
wade through the water, as no ship had yet been built large enough to
hold him; and he carried all his musicians (pipers) on his shoulders. As
he approached the Irish shore, men ran to the king, saying that they had
seen a forest on the sea, where there never before had been a tree, and
that they had also seen a mountain which moved. Then the king asked
Branwen, the queen, what it could be. She answered, "These are the men
of the Island of the Mighty, who have come hither to protect me." "What
is the forest?" they asked. "The yards and masts of ships." "What
mountain is that by the side of the ships?" "It is Bran my brother,
coming to the

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

shoal water and rising." "What is the lofty ridge with the lake on each
side?" "That is his nose," she said, "and the two lakes are his fierce
eyes."

Then the people were terrified: there was yet a river for Bran to pass,
and they broke down the bridge which crossed it, but Bran laid himself
down and said, "Who will be a chief, let him be a bridge." Then his men
laid hurdles on his back, and the whole army crossed over; and that
saying of his became afterwards a proverb. Then the Irish resolved, in
order to appease the mighty visitor, to build him a house, because he
had never before had one that would hold him; and they decided to make
the house large enough to contain the two armies, one on each side. They
accordingly built this house, and there were a hundred pillars, and the
builders treacherously hung a leathern bag on each side of each pillar
and put an armed man inside of each, so that they could all rise by
night and kill the sleepers. But Bran's brother, who was a suspicious
man, asked the builders what was in the first bag. "Meal, good soul,"
they

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

answered; and he, putting his hand in, felt a man's head and crushed it
with his mighty fingers, and so with the next and the next and with the
whole two hundred. After this it did not take long to bring on a quarrel
between the two armies, and they fought all day.

After this great fight between the men of Ireland and the men of the
Isles of the Mighty there were but seven of these last who escaped,
besides their king Bran, who was wounded in the foot with a poisoned
dart. Then he knew that he should soon die, but he bade the seven men to
cut off his head and told them that they must always carry it with
them--that it would never decay and would always be able to speak and be
pleasant company for them. "A long time will you be on the road," he
said. "In Harlech you will feast seven years, the birds of Rhiannon
singing to you all the while. And at the Island of Gwales you will dwell
for fourscore years, and you may remain there, bearing the head with you
uncorrupted, until you open the door that looks towards the mainland;
and after you have once opened that door you can stay no longer, but

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

must set forth to London to bury the head, leaving it there to look
toward France."

So they went on to Harlech and there stopped to rest, and sat down to
eat and drink. And there came three birds, which began singing a certain
song, and all the songs they had ever heard were unpleasant compared
with it; and the songs seemed to them to be at a great distance from
them, over the sea, yet the notes were heard as distinctly as if they
were close by; and it is said that at this repast they continued seven
years. At the close of this time they went forth to an island in the sea
called Gwales. There they found a fair and regal spot overlooking the
ocean and a spacious hall built for them. They went into it and found
two of its doors open, but the third door, looking toward Cornwall, was
closed. "See yonder," said their leader Manawydan; "that is the door we
may not open." And that night they regaled themselves and were joyful.
And of all they had seen of food laid before them, and of all they had
heard said, they remembered nothing; neither of that, nor of any sorrow
whatsoever. There they remained

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

fourscore years, unconscious of having ever spent a time more joyous and
mirthful. And they were not more weary than when first they came,
neither did they, any of them, know the time they had been there. It was
not more irksome for them to have the head with them, than if Bran the
Blessed had been with them himself. And because of these fourscore
years, it was called "The Entertaining of the Noble Head."

One day said Heilwyn the son of Gwyn, "Evil betide me, if I do not open
the door to know if that is true which is said concerning it." So he
opened the door and looked towards Cornwall. And when they had looked
they were as conscious of all the evils they had ever sustained, and of
all the friends and companions they had ever lost, and of all the misery
that had befallen them, as if all had happened in that very spot; and
especially of the fate of their lord. And because of their perturbation
they could not rest, but journeyed forth with the head towards London.
And they buried the head in the White Mount.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

The island called Gwales is supposed to be that now named Gresholm,
eight or ten miles off the coast of Pembrokeshire; and to this day the
Welsh sailors on that coast talk of the Green Meadows of Enchantment
lying out at sea west of them, and of men who had either landed on them
or seen them suddenly vanishing. Some of the people of Milford used to
declare that they could sometimes see the Green Islands of the fairies
quite distinctly; and they believed that the fairies went to and fro
between their islands and the shore through a subterranean gallery under
the sea. They used, indeed, to make purchases in the markets of Milford
or Langhorne, and this they did sometimes without being seen and always
without speaking, for they seemed to know the prices of the things they
wished to buy and always laid down the exact sum of money needed. And
indeed, how could the seven companions of the Enchanted Head have spent
eighty years of incessant feasting on an island of the sea, without
sometimes purchasing supplies from the mainland?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Castle of the Active Door](teia09.md)
