[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia20)  [Next](teia22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

### XVIII

### THE GUARDIANS OF THE ST. LAWRENCE

When in 1611 the Sieur de Champlain went back to France to report his
wonderful explorations in Canada, he was soon followed by a young
Frenchman named Vignan, who had spent a whole winter among the Indians,
in a village where there was no other white man. This was a method often
adopted by the French for getting more knowledge of Indian ways and
commanding their confidence. Vignan had made himself a welcome guest in
the cabins, and had brought away many of their legends, to which he
added some of his own. In particular, he declared that he had penetrated
into the interior until he had come upon a great lake of salt water, far
to the northwest. This was, as it happened, the very thing which the
French government and all Europe had most hoped to find. They

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

had always believed that sooner or later a short cut would be discovered
across the newly found continent, a passage leading to the Pacific Ocean
and far Cathay. This was the dream of all French explorers, and of
Champlain in particular, and his interest was at once excited by
anything that looked toward the Pacific. Now Vignan had prepared himself
with just the needed information. He said that during his winter with
the Indians he had made the very discovery needed; that he had ascended
the river Ottawa, which led to a body of salt water so large that it
seemed like an ocean; that he had just seen on its shores the wreck of
an English ship, from which eighty men had been taken and slain by the
savages, and that they had with them an English boy whom they were
keeping to present to Champlain.

This tale about the English ship was evidently founded on the recent
calamities of Henry Hudson, of which Vignan had heard some garbled
account, and which he used as coloring for his story. The result was
that Champlain was thoroughly

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

interested in the tale, and that Vignan was cross-examined and tested,
and was made at last to certify to the truth of it before two notaries
of Rochelle. Champlain privately consulted the chancellor de Sillery,
the old Marquis de Brissac, and others, who all assured him that the
matter should be followed up; and he resolved to make it the subject of
an exploration without delay. He sailed in one vessel, and Vignan in
another, the latter taking with him an ardent young Frenchman, Albert de
Brissac.

M. de Vignan, talking with the young Brissac on the voyage, told him
wonderful tales of monsters which were, he said, the guardians of the
St. Lawrence River. There was, he said, an island in the bay of
Chaleurs, near the mouth of that river, where a creature dwelt, having
the form of a woman and called by the Indians Gougou. She was very
frightful, and so enormous that the masts of the vessel could not reach
her waist. She had already eaten many savages and constantly continued
to do so, putting them first into a great pocket to await her hunger.
Some of those who had escaped said that this

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

pocket was large enough to hold a whole ship. This creature habitually
made dreadful noises, and several savages who came on board claimed to
have heard them. A man from St. Malo in France, the Sieur de Prevert,
confirmed this story, and said that he had passed so near the den of
this frightful being, that all on board could hear its hissing, and all
hid themselves below, lest it should carry them off. This naturally made
much impression upon the young Sieur de Brissac, and he doubtless wished
many times that he had stayed at home. On the other hand, he observed
that both M. de Vignan and M. de Prevert took the tale very coolly and
that there seemed no reason why he should distrust himself if they did
not. Yet he was very glad when, after passing many islands and narrow
straits, the river broadened and they found themselves fairly in the St.
Lawrence and past the haunted Bay of Chaleurs. They certainly heard a
roaring and a hissing in the distance, but it may have been the waves on
the beach.

But this was not their last glimpse of the supposed guardians of the St.
Lawrence. As the

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

ship proceeded farther up the beautiful river, they saw one morning a
boat come forth from the woods, bearing three men dressed to look like
devils, wrapped in dogs' skins, white and black, their faces besmeared
as black as any coals, with horns on their heads more than a yard long,
and as this boat passed the ship, one of the men made a long address,
not looking towards them. Then they all three fell flat in the boat,
when Indians rowed out to meet them and guided them to a landing.

Then many Indians collected in the woods and began a loud talk which
they could hear on board the ships and which lasted half an hour. Then
two of their leaders came towards the shore, holding their hands upward
joined together, and meanwhile carrying their hats under their upper
garments and showing great reverence. Looking upward they sometimes
cried, "Jesus, Jesus," or "Jesus Maria." Then the captain asked them
whether anything ill had happened, and they said in French, "Nenni est
il bon," meaning that it was not good. Then they said that their god
Cudraigny had spoken in

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hochelaga
(Montreal) and had sent these three men to show to them that there was
so much snow and ice in the country that he who went there would die.
This made the Frenchmen laugh, saying in reply that their god Cudraigny
was but a fool and a noddy and knew not what he said. "Tell him," said a
Frenchman, "that Christ will defend them from all cold, if they will
believe in him." The Indians then asked the captain if he had spoken
with Jesus. He answered No; but that his priests had, and they had
promised fair weather. Hearing this, they thanked the captain and told
the other Indians in the woods, who all came rushing out, seeming to be
very glad. Giving great shouts, they began to sing and dance as they had
done before. They also began to bring to the ships great stores of fish
and of bread made of millet, casting it into the French boats so thickly
that it seemed to fall from heaven. Then the Frenchmen went on shore,
and the people came clustering about them, bringing children in their
arms to be touched, as if to hallow them. Then the captain in return
arranged the women in order

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

and gave them beads made of tin, and other trifles, and gave knives to
the men. All that night the Indians made great fires and danced and sang
along the shore. But when the Frenchmen had finally reached the mouth of
the Ottawa and had begun to ascend it, under Vignan's guidance, they had
reasons to remember the threats of the god Cudraigny.

Ascending the Ottawa in canoes, past cataracts, boulders, and
precipices, they at last, with great labor, reached the island of
Allumette, at a distance of two hundred and twenty-five miles. Often it
was impossible to carry their canoes past waterfalls, because the
forests were so dense, so that they had to drag the boats by ropes,
wading among rocks or climbing along precipices. Gradually they left
behind them their armor, their provisions, and clothing, keeping only
their canoes; they lived on fish and wild fowl, and were sometimes
twenty-four hours without food. Champlain himself carried three French
arquebuses or short guns, three oars, his cloak, and many smaller
articles; and was harassed by dense clouds of mosquitoes all the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

time. Vignan, Brissac, and the rest were almost as heavily loaded. The
tribe of Indians whom they at last reached had chosen the spot as being
inaccessible to their enemies; and thought that the newcomers had fallen
from the clouds.

When Champlain inquired after the salt sea promised by Vignan, he
learned to his indignation that the whole tale was false. Vignan had
spent a winter at the very village where they were, but confessed that
he had never gone a league further north. The Indians knew of no such
sea, and craved permission to torture and kill him for his deceptions;
they called him loudly a liar, and even the children took up the cry and
jeered at him. They said, "Do you not see that he meant to cause your
death? Give him to us, and we promise you that he shall not lie any
more." Champlain defended him from their attacks, bore it all
philosophically, and the young Brissac went back to France, having given
up hope of reaching the salt sea, except, as Champlain himself coolly
said, "in imagination." The guardians of the St. Lawrence had at least
exerted their spell to

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

the extent of saying, Thus far and no farther. Vignan never admitted
that he had invented the story of the Gougou, and had bribed the Indians
who acted the part of devils,--and perhaps he did not,--but it is
certain that neither the giantess nor the god Cudraigny has ever again
been heard from.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. The Island of Demons](teia22)
