[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia08)  [Next](teia10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### VI

### THE CASTLE OF THE ACTIVE DOOR

Perfect is my chair in Caer Sidi;  
Plague and age hurt not who's in it--  
They know, Manawydan and Pryderi.  
Three organs round a fire sing before it,  
And about its points are ocean's streams  
And the abundant well above it--  
Sweeter than white wine the drink in it.

Peredur, the knight, rode through the wild woods of the Enchanted Island
until he arrived on clear ground outside the forest. Then he beheld a
castle on level ground in the middle of a meadow; and round the castle
flowed a stream, and inside the castle there were large and spacious
halls with great windows. Drawing nearer the castle, he saw it to be
turning more rapidly than any wind blows. On the ramparts he saw archers
shooting so vigorously that no armor would protect against them; there
were also men blowing horns so loud that

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the earth appeared to tremble; and at the gates were lions, in iron
chains, roaring so violently that one might fancy that the castle and
the woods were ready to be uprooted. Neither the lions nor the warriors
resisted Peredur, but he found a woman sitting by the gate, who offered
to carry him on her back to the hall. This was the queen Rhiannon, who,
having been accused of having caused the death of her child, was
sentenced to remain seven years sitting by the gate, to tell her story
to every one, and to offer to carry all strangers on her back into the
castle.

But so soon as Peredur had entered it, the castle vanished away, and he
found himself standing on the bare ground. The queen Rhiannon was left
beside him, and she remained on the island with her son Pryderi and his
wife. Queen Rhiannon married for her second husband a person named
Manawydan. One day they ascended a mound called Arberth which was well
known for its wonders, and as they sat there they heard a clap of
thunder, followed by mist so thick that they could not see one another.
When it grew light again, they looked around

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

them and found that all dwellings and animals had vanished; there was no
smoke or fire anywhere or work of human hands; all their household had
disappeared, and there were left only Pryderi and Manawydan with their
wives. Wandering from place to place, they found no human beings; but
they lived by hunting, fishing, and gathering wild honey. After visiting
foreign lands, they returned to their island home. One day when they
were out hunting, a wild boar of pure white color sprang from a bush,
and as they saw him they retreated, and they saw also the Turning
Castle. The boar, watching his opportunity, sprang into it, and the dogs
followed, and Pryderi said, "I will go into this castle and get tidings
of the dogs." "Go not," said Manawydan; "whoever has cast a spell over
this land and deprived us of our dwelling has placed this castle here."
But Pryderi replied, "Of a truth I cannot give up my dogs." So he
watched for the opportunity and went in. He saw neither boar nor dogs,
neither man nor beast; but on the centre of the castle floor he saw a
fountain with marble work around it, and on the margin

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

of the fountain a golden bowl upon a marble slab, and in the air hung
chains, of which he could see no end. He was much delighted with the
beauty of the gold and the rich workmanship of the bowl and went up to
lay hold of it. The moment he touched it, his fingers clung to the bowl,
and his feet to the slab; and all his joyousness forsook him so that he
could not utter a word. And thus he stood.

Manawydan waited for him until evening, but hearing nothing either of
him or of the dogs, he returned home. When he entered, Rhiannon, who was
his wife and who was also Pryderi's mother, looked at him. "Where," she
said, "are Pryderi and the dogs?" "This is what has happened to me," he
said; and he told her. "An evil companion hast thou been," she said,
"and a good companion hast thou lost." With these words she went out and
proceeded towards the Castle of the Active Door. Getting in, she saw
Pryderi taking hold of the bowl, and she went towards him. "What dost
thou here?" she said, and she took hold of the bowl for herself; and
then her hands became fast to it, and

 

<span id="img_04200"></span>

[![''The hands of Pryderi and Rhiannon were held fast by the enchanted
bowl, and their feet by the enchanted slab; and their joyousness forsook
them, and they could not utter a word.''--p. 42](tn/04200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04200.jpg)  
''The hands of Pryderi and Rhiannon were held fast by the enchanted
bowl, and their feet by the enchanted slab; and their joyousness forsook
them, and they could not utter a word.''--p. 42  

 

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

her feet to the slab, and she could not speak a word. Then came thunder
and a fall of mist; thereupon the Castle of the Active Door vanished and
never was seen again. Rhiannon and Pryderi also vanished.

When Kigva, the wife of Pryderi, saw this, she sorrowed so that she
cared not if she lived or died. No one was left on the island but
Manawydan and herself. They wandered away to other lands and sought to
earn their living; then they came back to their island, bringing with
them one bag of wheat which they planted. It throve and grew, and when
the time of harvest came it was most promising, so that Manawydan
resolved to reap it on the morrow. At break of day he came back to
begin; but found nothing left but straw. Every stalk had been cut close
to the ground and carried away.

Going to another field, he found it ripe, but on coming in the morning
he found but the straw. "Some one has contrived my ruin," he said; "I
will watch the third field to see what happens. He who stole the first
will come to steal this."

He remained through the evening to watch the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

grain, and at midnight he heard loud thunder. He looked and saw coming a
host of mice such as no man could number; each mouse took a stalk of the
wheat and climbed it, so that it bent to the ground; then each mouse cut
off the ear and ran away with it. They all did this, leaving the stalk
bare, and there was not a single straw for which there was not a mouse.
He struck among them, but could no more fix his sight on any of them,
the legend says, than on flies and birds in the air, except one which
seemed heavier than the rest, and moved slowly. This one he pursued and
caught, put it in his glove and tied it with a string. Taking it home,
he showed it to Kigva, and told her that he was going to hang the mouse
next day. She advised against it, but he persisted, and on the next
morning took the animal to the top of the Mound of Arberth, where he
placed two wooden forks in the ground, and set up a small gallows.

While doing this, he saw a clerk coming to him in old, threadbare
clothes. It was now seven years since he had seen a human being

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

there, except the friends he had lost and Kigva who survived them. The
clerk bade him good day and said he was going back to his country from
England, where he had been singing. Then the clerk asked Manawydan what
he was doing. "Hanging a thief," said he; and when the clerk saw that it
was a mouse, he offered a pound to release it, but Manawydan refused.
Then a priest came riding up and offered him three pounds to release the
mouse; but this offer was declined. Then he made a noose round the
mouse's neck, and while he did this, a bishop's whole retinue came
riding towards him. The bishop seemed, like everybody else, to be very
desirous of rescuing the mouse; he offered first seven pounds, and then
twenty-four, and then added all his horses and equipages; but Manawydan
still refused. The bishop finally asked him to name any price he
pleased. "The liberation of Rhiannon and Pryderi," he said. "Thou shalt
have it," said the bishop. "And the removal of the enchantment," said
Manawydan. "That also," said the bishop, "if you will only restore the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

mouse." "Why?" said the other. "Because," said the bishop, "she is my
wife." "Why did she come to me?" asked Manawydan. "To steal," was the
reply. "When it was known that you were inhabiting the island, my
household came to me, begging me to transform them into mice. The first
and second nights they came alone, but the third night my wife and the
ladies of the court wished also to accompany them, and I transformed
them also; and now you have promised to let her go." "Not so," said the
other, "except with a promise that there shall be no more such
enchantment practised, and no vengeance on Pryderi and Rhiannon, or on
me." This being promised, the bishop said, "Now wilt thou release my
wife?" "No, by my faith," said Manawydan, "not till I see Pryderi and
Rhiannon free before my eyes." "Here they are coming," said the bishop;
and when they had been embraced by Manawydan, he let go the mouse; the
bishop touched it with a wand, and it became the most beautiful young
woman that ever was seen. "Now look

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

round upon the country," said the bishop, "and see the dwellings and the
crops returned," and the enchantment was removed.

"The Land of Illusion and the Realm of Glamour" is the name given by the
old romancers to the south-west part of Wales, and to all the islands
off the coast. Indeed, it was believed, ever since the days of the Greek
writer, Plutarch, that some peculiar magic belonged to these islands;
and every great storm that happened among them was supposed to be caused
by the death of one of the wondrous enchanters who dwelt in that region.
When it was over, the islanders said, "Some one of the mighty has passed
away."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Merlin the Enchanter](teia10)
