<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn07)  [Next](dbn09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

# VI    THE GREAT LAKES AND ZYMBABWE

We have already seen how a branch of the conquering Bantus turned
eastward by the Great Lakes and thus reached the sea and eventually both
the Nile and South Africa.

This brought them into the ancient and mysterious land far up the Nile,
south of Ethiopia. Here lay the ancient Punt of the Egyptians (whether
we place it in Somaliland or, as seems far more likely, around the Great
Lakes) and here, as the Egyptians thought, their civilization began. The
earliest inhabitants of the land were apparently of the Bushman or
Hottentot type of Negro. These were gradually pushed southward and
westward by the intrusion of the Nilotic Negroes. Five thousand years
before Christ the mulatto Egyptians were in the Nile valley below the
First Cataract. The Negroes were in the Nile valley down as far as the
Second Cataract and between the First and Second Cataracts were Negroes
into whose veins Semitic blood had penetrated more or less. These mixed
elements became the ancestors of the modern Somali, Gala, Bishari, and
Beja and spread Negro blood into Arabia beyond the Red Sea. The Nilotic
Negroes to the south early became great traders in ivory, gold, leopard
skins, gums, beasts, birds, and slaves, and they opened up systematic
trade between Egypt and the Great Lakes.

The result was endless movement and migration both in ancient and modern
days, which makes the cultural history of the Great Lakes region very
difficult to understand. Three great elements are, however, clear:
first, the Egyptian element, by the northward migration of the Negro
ancestors of predynastic Egypt and the southern conquests and trade of
dynastic Egypt; second, the Semitic influence from Arabia and Persia;
third, the Negro influences from western and central Africa.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

The migration of the Bantu is the first clearly defined movement of
modern times. As we have shown, they began to move southward at least a
thousand years before Christ, skirting the Congo forests and wandering
along the Great Lakes and down to the Zambesi. What did they find in
this land?

We do not know certainly, but from what we do know we may reconstruct
the situation in this way: the primitive culture of the Hottentots of
Punt had been further developed by them and by other stronger Negro
stocks until it reached a highly developed culture. Widespread
agriculture, and mining of gold, silver, and precious stones started a
trade that penetrated to Asia and North Africa. This may have been the
source of the gold of the Ophir.

The state that thus arose became in time strongly organized; it employed
slave labor in crushing the hard quartz, sinking pits, and carrying
underground galleries; it carried out a system of irrigation and built
stone buildings and fortifications. There exists to-day many remains of
these building operations in the Kalahari desert and in northern
Rhodesia. Five hundred groups, covering over an area of one hundred and
fifty thousand square miles, lie between the Limpopo and Zambesi rivers.
Mining operations have been carried on in these plains for generations,
and one estimate is that at least three hundred and seventy-five million
dollars' worth of gold had been extracted. Some have thought that the
older workings must date back to one or even three thousand years before
the Christian era.

"There are other mines," writes De Barros in the seventeenth
century, <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) "in a district called
Toroa, which is otherwise known as the kingdom of Butua, whose ruler is
a prince, by name Burrow, a vassal of Benomotapa. This land is near the
other which we said consisted of extensive plains, and those ruins are
the oldest that are known in that region. They are all in a plain, in
the middle of which stands a square fortress, all of dressed stones
within and without, well wrought and of marvelous size, without any lime
showing the joinings, the walls of which are over twenty-five hands
thick, but the height is not so great compared to the thickness. And
above the gateway of that edifice is an inscription which some Moorish
\[Arab\] traders who were there could not read, nor say what writing it
was. All these structures the people of this country call Symbaoe

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[Zymbabwe\],
which with them means a court, for every place where Benomotapa stays is
so called."

Later investigation has shown that these buildings were in many cases
carefully planned and built fortifications. At Niekerk, for instance,
nine or ten hills are fortified on concentric walls thirty to fifty feet
in number, with a place for the village at the top. The buildings are
forts, miniature citadels, and also workshops and cattle kraals. Iron
implements and handsome pottery were found here, and close to the
Zambesi there are extraordinary fortifications. Farther south at Inyanga
there is less strong defense, and at Umtali there are no fortifications,
showing that builders feared invasion from the north.

These people worked in gold, silver, tin, copper, and bronze and made
beautiful pottery. There is evidence of religious significance in the
buildings, and what is called the temple was the royal residence and
served as a sort of acropolis. The surrounding residences in the valley
were evidently occupied by wealthy traders and were not fortified. Here
the gold was received from surrounding districts and bartered with
traders.

As usual there have been repeated attempts to find an external and
especially an Asiatic origin for this culture. So far, however,
archeological research seems to confirm its African origin. The
implements, weapons, and art are characteristically African and there is
no evident connection with outside sources. How far back this
civilization dates it is difficult to say, a great deal depending upon
the dating of the iron age in South Africa. If it was the same as in the
Mediterranean regions, the earliest limit was 1000 B.C.; it might,
however, have been much earlier, especially if, as seems probable, the
use of iron originated in Africa. On the other hand the culmination of
this culture has been placed by some as late as the modern middle ages.

What was it that overthrew this civilization? Undoubtedly the same sort
of raids of barbarous warriors that we have known in our day. For
instance, in 1570 there came upon the country of Mozambique, Farther up
the coast, "such an inundation of pagans that they could not be
numbered. They came from that part of Monomotapa where is the great lake
from which spring these great rivers. They left no other signs of the
towns they passed but the heaps of ruins and the bones of inhabitants."
So, too, it is told how the Zimbas came, "a strange people never before
seen there, who, leaving their

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

own country, traversed a great part of this Ethiopia like a scourge of
God, destroying every living thing they came across. They were twenty
thousand strong and marched without children or women," just as four
hundred years later the Zulu impi marched. Again in 1602 a horde of
people came from the interior called the Cabires, or cannibals. They
entered the kingdom of Monomotapa, and the reigning king, being weak,
was in great terror. Thus gradually the Monomotapa fell, and its power
was scattered until the Kaffir-Zulu raids of our day. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)

The Arab writer, Macoudi, in the tenth century visited the East African
coast somewhere north of the equator. He found the Indian Sea at that
time frequented by Arab and Persian vessels, but there were no Asiatic
settlements on the African shore. The Bantu, or as he calls them, Zenji,
inhabited the country as far south as Sofala, where they bordered upon
the Bushmen. These Bantus were under a ruler with the dynastic title of
Waklimi. He was paramount over all the other tribes of the north and
could put three hundred thousand men in the field. They used oxen as
beasts of burden and the country produced gold in abundance, while
panther skin was largely used for clothing. Ivory was sold to Asia and
the Bantu used iron for personal adornment instead of gold or silver.
They rode on their oxen, which ran with great speed, and they ate millet
and boney and the flesh of animals.

Inland among the Bantu arose later the line of rulers called the
Monomotapa among the gifted Makalanga. Their state was very extensive,
ranging from the coast far into the interior and from Mozambique down to
the Limpopo. It was strongly organized, with feudatory allied states,
and carried on an extensive commerce by means of the traders on the
coast. The kings were converted to nominal Christianity by the
Portuguese.

There are indications of trade between Nupe in West Africa and Sofala on
the cast coast, and certainly trade between Asia and East Africa is
earlier than the beginning of the Christian era. The Asiatic traders
settled on the coast and by means of mulatto and Negro merchants brought
Central Africa into contact with Arabia, India, China, and Malaysia.

The coming of the Asiatics was in this wise: Zaide, great-grandson of
Ali, nephew and son-in-law of Mohammed, was banished from

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arabia as a
heretic. He passed over to Africa and formed temporary settlements. His
people mingled with the blacks, and the resulting mulatto traders, known
as the Emoxaidi, seem to have wandered as far south as the equator. Soon
other Arabian families came over on account of oppression and founded
the towns of Magadosho and Brava, both not far north of the equator. The
first town became a place of importance and other settlements were made.
The Emoxaidi, whom the later immigrants regarded as heretics, were
driven inland and became the interpreting traders between the coast and
the Bantu. Some wanderers from Magadosho came into the Port of Sofala
and there learned that gold could be obtained. This led to a small Arab
settlement at that place.

Seventy years later, and about fifty years before the Norman conquest of
England, certain Persians settled at Kilwa in East Africa, led by Ali,
who had been despised in his land because he was the son of a black
Abyssinian slave mother. Kilwa, because of this, eventually became the
most important commercial station on the East African coast, and in this
and all these settlements a very large mulatto population grew up, so
that very soon the whole settlement was indistinguishable in color from
the Bantu.

In 1330 Ibn Batuta visited Kilwa. He found an abundance of ivory and
some gold and heard that the inhabitants of Kilwa had gained victories
over the Zenji or Bantu. Kilwa had at that time three hundred mosques
and was "built of handsome houses of stone and lime, and very lofty,
with their windows like those of the Christians; in the same way it has
streets, and these houses have got terraces, and the wood-work is with
the masonry, with plenty of gardens, in which there are many fruit trees
and much water." <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31) Kilwa after a time
captured Sofala, seizing it from Magadosho. Eventually Kilwa became
mistress of the island of Zanzibar, of Mozambique, and of much other
territory. The forty-third ruler of Kilwa after Ali was named Abraham,
and he was ruling when the Portuguese arrived. The latter reported that
these people cultivated rice and cocoa, built ships, and had
considerable commerce with Asia. All the people, of whatever color, were
Mohammedans, and the richer were clothed in gorgeous robes of silk and
velvet. They traded with the inland Bantus and met numerous tribes,
receiving gold, ivory, millet, rice, cattle, poultry, and honey.

On the islands the Asiatics were independent, but on the main

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

lands south of Kilwa the sheiks ruled only their own people, under the
overlordship of the Bantus, to whom they were compelled to pay large
tribute each year.

Vasco da Gama doubled the Cape of Good Hope in 1497 and went north on
the east coast as far as India. In the next ten years the Portuguese had
occupied more than six different points on that coast, including
Sofala. <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32)

Thus civilization waxed and waned in East Africa among prehistoric
Negroes, Arab and Persian mulattoes on the coast, in the Zend or Zeng
empire of Bantu Negroes, and later in the Bantu rule of the Monomotapa.
And thus, too, among later throngs of the fiercer, warlike Bantu, the
ancient culture of the land largely died. Yet something survived, and in
the modern Bantu state, language, and industry can be found clear links
that establish the essential identity of the absorbed peoples with the
builders of Zymbabwe.

So far we have traced the history of the lands into which the southward
stream of invading Bantus turned, and have followed them to the Limpopo
River. We turn now to the lands north from Lake Nyassa.

The aboriginal Negroes sustained in prehistoric time invasions from the
northeast by Negroids of a type like the ancient Egyptians and like the
modern Gallas, Masai, and Somalis. To these migrations were added
attacks from the Nile Negroes to the north and the Bantu invaders from
the south. This has led to great differences among the groups of the
population and in their customs. Some are fierce mountaineers, occupying
hilly plateaus six thousand feet above the sea level; others, like the
Wa Swahili, are traders on the coast. There are the Masai,
chocolate-colored and frizzly-haired, organized for war and cattle
lifting; and Negroids like the Gallas, who, blending with the Bantus,
have produced the race of modern Uganda.

It was in this region that the kingdom of Kitwara was founded by the
Calla chief, Kintu. About the beginning of the nineteenth century the
empire was dismembered, the largest share falling to Uganda. The ensuing
history of Uganda is of great interest. When King Mutesa came to the
throne in 1862, he found Mohammedan influences in his land and was
induced to admit English Protestants

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

and French Catholics. Uganda thereupon became an extraordinary religious
battlefield between these three beliefs. Mutesa's successor, Mwanga,
caused an English bishop to be killed in 1885, believing (as has since
proven quite true) that the religion he offered would be used as a cloak
for conquest. The final result was that, after open war between the
religions, Uganda was made an English protectorate in 1894.

The Negroes of Uganda are an intelligent people who had organized a
complex feudal state. At the head stood the king, and under him twelve
feudal lords. The present king, Daudi Chua, is the young grandson of
Mutesa and rules under the overlordship of England.

Many things show the connection between Egypt and this part of Africa.
The same glass beads are found in Uganda and Upper Egypt, and similar
canoes are built. Harps and other instruments bear great resemblance.
Finally the Bahima, as the Galla invaders are called, are startlingly
Egyptian in type; at the same time they are undoubtedly Negro in hair
and color. Perhaps we have here the best racial picture of what ancient
Egyptian and upper Nile regions were in predynastic times and later.

Thus in outline was seen the mission of The People--La Bantu as they
called themselves. They migrated, they settled, they tore down, and they
learned, and they in turn were often overthrown by succeeding tribes of
their own folk. They rule with their tongue and their power all Africa
south of the equator, save where the Europeans have entered. They have
never been conquered, although the gold and diamond traders have sought
to debauch them, and the ivory and rubber capitalists have cruelly
wronged their weaker groups. They are the Africans with whom the world
of to-morrow must reckon, just as the world of yesterday knew them to
its cost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[47:1](dbn08.htm#fr_29) Quoted in Bent: *Ruined
Cities of Mashonaland*, pp. 203 ff.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[49:1](dbn08.htm#fr_30) Cf. "Ethiopia Oriental,"
by J. Dos Santos, in Theal's *Records of South Africa*, Vol. VII.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[50:1](dbn08.htm#fr_31) Barbosa, quoted in
Keane, II, 482.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[51:1](dbn08.htm#fr_32) It was called Sofala,
from an Arabic word, and may be associated with the Ophir of Solomon.
So, too, the river Sabi, a little off Sofala, may be associated with the
name of the Queen of Sheba, whose lineage was supposed to be perpetuated
in the powerful Monomotapa as well as the Abyssinians.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. The War of Races at Land's End](dbn09)

</div>
