<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn05)  [Next](dbn07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

# IV    THE NIGER AND ISLAM

The Arabian expression "Bilad es Sudan" (Land of the Blacks) was applied
to the whole region south of the Sahara, from the Atlantic to the Nile.
It is a territory some thirty-five hundred miles by six hundred miles,
containing two million square miles, and has to-day a population of
perhaps eighty million. It is thus two-thirds the size of the United
States and quite as thickly settled. In the western Sudan the Niger
plays the same role as the Nile in the east. In this chapter we follow
the history of the Niger.

The history of this part of Africa was probably something as follows:
primitive man, entering Africa from Arabia, found the Great Lakes,
spread in the Nile valley, and wandered westward to the Niger. Herodotus
tells of certain youths who penetrated the desert to the Niger and found
there a city of black dwarfs. Succeeding migrations of Negroes and
Negroids pushed the dwarfs gradually into the inhospitable forests and
occupied the Sudan, pushing on to the Atlantic. Here the newcomers,
curling northward, met the Mediterranean race coming down across the
western desert, while to the southward the Negro came to the Gulf of
Guinea and the thick forests of the Congo valley. Indigenous
civilizations arose on the west coast in Yoruba and Benin, and contact
of these with the Mediterranean race in the desert, and with Egyptian
and Arab from the east, gave rise to centers of Negro culture in the
Sudan at Ghana and Melle and in Songhay, Nupe, the Hausa states, and
Bornu.

The history of the Sudan thus leads us back again to Ethiopia, that
strange and ancient center of world civilization whose inhabitants in
the ancient world were considered to be the most pious and the oldest of
men. From this center the black originators of African culture, and to a
large degree of world culture, wandered not simply down the Nile, but
also westward. These Negroes developed the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

original substratum of culture which later influences modified but never
displaced.

We know that Egyptian Pharaohs in several cases ventured into the
western Sudan and that Egyptian influences are distinctly traceable,
Greek and Byzantine culture and Phœnician and Carthaginian trade also
penetrated, while Islam finally made this whole land her own. Behind all
these influences, however, stood from the first an indigenous Negro
culture. The stone figures of Sherbro, the megaliths of Gambia, the art
and industry of the west coast are all too deep and original evidences
of civilization to be merely importations from abroad.

Nor was the Sudan the inert recipient of foreign influence when it came.
According to credible legend, the "Great King" at Byzantium imported
glass, tin, silver, bronze, cut stones, and other treasure from the
Sudan. Embassies were sent and states like Nupe recognized the
suzerainty of the Byzantine emperor. The people of Nupe especially were
filled with pride when the Byzantine people learned certain kinds of
work in bronze and glass from them, and this intercourse was only
interrupted by the Mohammedan conquest.

To this ancient culture, modified somewhat by Byzantine and Christian
influences, came Islam. It approached from the northwest, coming
stealthily and slowly and being banded on particularly by the Mandingo
Negroes. About 1000-1200 A.D. the situation was this: Ghana was on the
edge of the desert in the north, Mandingoland [between](errata.htm#0)
the Niger and the Senegal in the south and the western Sahara, Djolof
was in the west on the Senegal, and the Songhay on the Niger in the
center. The Mohammedans came chiefly as traders and found a trade
already established. Here and there in the great cities were districts
set aside for these new merchants, and the Mohammedans gave frequent
evidence of their respect for these black nations.

Islam did not found new states, but modified and united Negro states
already ancient; it did not initiate new commerce, but developed a
widespread trade already established. It is, as Frobenius says, "easily
proved from chronicles written in Arabic that Islam was only effective
in fact as a fertilizer and stimulant. The essential point is the
resuscitative and invigorative concentration of Negro power in the
service of a new era and a Moslem propaganda, as well as the reaction
thereby produced." <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

Early in the eighth century Islam had conquered North Africa and
converted the Berbers. Aided by black soldiers, the Moslems crossed into
Spain; in the following century Berber and Arab armies crossed the west
end of the Sahara and came to Negroland. Later in the eleventh century
Arabs penetrated the Sudan and Central Africa from the east, filtering
through the Negro tribes of Darfur, Kanem, and neighboring regions. The
Arabs were too nearly akin to Negroes to draw an absolute color line.
Antar, one of the great pre-Islamic poets of Arabia, was the son of a
black woman, and one of the great poets at the court of Haroun al
Raschid was black. In the twelfth century a learned Negro poet resided
at Seville, and Sidjilmessa, the last town in Lower Morocco toward the
desert, was founded in 757 by a Negro who ruled over the Berber
inhabitants. Indeed, many towns in the Sudan and the desert were thus
ruled, and felt no incongruity in this arrangement. They say, to be
sure, that the Moors destroyed Audhoghast because it paid tribute to the
black town of Ghana, but this was because the town was heathen and not
because it was black. On the other hand, there is a story that a Berber
king overthrew one of the cities of the Sudan and all the black women
committed suicide, being too proud to allow themselves to fall into the
hands of white men.

In the west the Moslems first came into touch with the Negro kingdom of
Ghana. Here large quantities of gold were gathered in early days, and we
have names of seventy-four rulers before 300 A.D. running through
twenty-one generations. This would take us back approximately a thousand
years to 700 B.C., or about the time that Pharaoh Necho of Egypt sent
out the Phœnician expedition which circumnavigated Africa, and possibly
before the time when Hanno, the Carthaginian, explored the west coast of
Africa.

By the middle of the eleventh century Ghana was the principal kingdom in
the western Sudan. Already the town had a native and a Mussulman
quarter, and was built of wood and stone with surrounding gardens. The
king had an army of two hundred thousand and the wealth of the country
was great. A century later the king had become Mohammedan in faith and
had a palace with sculptures and glass windows. The great reason for
this development was the desert trade. Gold, skins, ivory, kola nuts,
gums, honey, wheat, and cotton were exported, and the whole
Mediterranean coast traded in the Sudan. Other and lesser black kingdoms
like Tekrou, Silla, and Masina surrounded Ghana.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

In the early part of the thirteenth century the prestige of Ghana began
to fall before the rising Mandingan kingdom to the west. Melle, as it
was called, was founded in 1235 and formed an open door for Moslem and
Moorish traders. The new kingdom, helped by its expanding trade, began
to grow, and Islam slowly surrounded the older Negro culture west,
north, and east. However, a great mass of the older heathen culture,
pushing itself upward from the Guinea coast, stood firmly against Islam
down to the nineteenth century.

Steadily Mohammedanism triumphed in the growing states which almost
encircled the protagonists of ancient Atlantic culture. Mandingan Melle
eventually supplanted Ghana in prestige and power after Ghana had been
overthrown by the heathen Su Su from the south.

The territory of Melle lay southeast of Ghana and some five hundred
miles north of the Gulf of Guinea. Its kings were known by the title of
Mansa, and from the middle of the thirteenth century to the middle of
the fourteenth the Mellestine, as its dominion was called, was the
leading power in the land of the blacks. Its greatest king, Mari Jalak
(Mansa Musa), made his pilgrimage to Mecca in 1324, with a caravan of
sixty thousand persons, including twelve thousand young slaves gowned in
figured cotton and Persian silk. He took eighty camel loads of gold dust
(worth about five million dollars) to defray his expenses, and greatly
impressed the people of the East with his magnificence.

On his return he found that Timbuktu had been sacked by the Mossi, but
he rebuilt the town and filled the new mosque with learned blacks from
the University of Fez. Mansa Musa reigned twenty-five years and "was
distinguished by his ability and by the holiness of his life. The
justice of his administration was such that the memory of it still
lives." <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) The Mellestine preserved its
preëminence until the beginning of the sixteenth century, when the rod
of Sudanese empire passed to Songhay, the largest and most famous of the
black empires.

The known history of Songhay covers a thousand years and three dynasties
and centers in the great bend of the Niger. There were thirty kings of
the First Dynasty, reigning from 700 to 1335. During the reign of one of
these the Songhay kingdom became the vassal kingdom of Melle, then at
the height of its glory. In addition to this the Mossi crossed the
valley, plundered Timbuktu in 1339, and

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

separated Jenne, the original seat of the Songhay, from the main empire.
The sixteenth king was converted to Mohammedanism in 1009, and after
that all the Songhay princes were Mohammedans. Mansa Musa took two young
Songhay princes to the court of Melle to be educated in 1326. These boys
when grown ran away and founded a new dynasty in Songhay, that of the
Sonnis, in 1355. Seventeen of these kings reigned, the last and greatest
being Sonni Ali, who ascended the throne in 1464. Melle was at this time
declining, other cities like Jenne, with its seven thousand villages,
were rising, and the Tuaregs (Berbers with Negro blood) had captured
Timbuktu.

Sonni Ali was a soldier and began his career with the conquest of
Timbuktu in 1469. He also succeeded in capturing Jenne and attacked the
Mossi and other enemies on all sides. Finally he concentrated his forces
for the destruction of Melle and subdued nearly the whole empire on the
west bend of the Niger. In summing up Sonni Ali's military career the
chronicle says of him, "He surpassed all his predecessors in the numbers
and valor of his soldiery. His conquests were many and his renown
extended from the rising to the setting of the sun. If it is the will of
God, he will be long spoken of." <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)

Sonni Ali was a Songhay Negro whose father was a Berber. He was
succeeded by a full-blooded black, Mohammed Abou Bekr, who had been his
prime minister. Mohammed was bailed as "Askia" (usurper) and is best
known as Mohammed Askia. He was strictly orthodox where Ali was rather a
scoffer, and an organizer where Ali was a warrior. On his pilgrimage to
Mecca in 1495 there was nothing of the barbaric splendor of Mansa Musa,
but a brilliant group of scholars and holy men with a small escort of
fifteen hundred soldiers and nine hundred thousand dollars in gold. He
stopped and consulted with scholars and politicians and studied matters
of taxation, weights and measures, trade, religious tolerance, and
manners. In Cairo, where he was invested by the reigning caliph of
Egypt, he may have heard of the struggle of Europe for the trade of the
Indies, and perhaps of the parceling of the new world between Portugal
and Spain. He returned to the Sudan in 1497, instituted a standing army
of slaves, undertook a holy war against the indomitable Mossi, and
finally marched against the Hausa. He subdued these cities and even
imposed the rule of black men on the Berber town of Agades,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

a rich city of merchants and artificers with stately mansions. In fine
Askia, during his reign, conquered and consolidated an empire two
thousand miles long by one thousand wide at its greatest diameters; a
territory as large as all Europe. The territory was divided into four
vice royalties, and the system of Melle, with its semi-independent
native dynasties, was carried out. His empire extended from the Atlantic
to Lake Chad and from the salt mines of Tegazza and the town of Augila
in the north to the 10th degree of north latitude toward the south.

It was a six months' journey across the empire and, it is said, "he was
obeyed with as much docility on the farthest limits of the empire as he
was in his own palace, and there reigned everywhere great plenty and
absolute peace." <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) The University of
Sankore became a center of learning in correspondence with Egypt and
North Africa and had a swarm of black Sudanese students. Law,
literature, grammar, geography and surgery were studied. Askia the Great
reigned thirty-six years and his dynasty continued on the throne until
after the Moorish conquest in 1591.

Meanwhile, to the eastward, two powerful states appeared. They never
disputed the military supremacy of Songhay, but their industrial
development was marvelous. The Hausa states were formed by seven
original cities, of which Kano was the oldest and Katsena the most
famous. Their greatest leaders, Mohammed Rimpa and Ahmadu Kesoke, arose
in the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. The land was subject to
the Songhay, but the cities became industrious centers of smelting,
weaving, and dyeing. Katsena especially, in the middle of the sixteenth
century, is described as a place thirteen or fourteen miles in
circumference, divided into quarters for strangers, for visitors from
various other states, and for the different trades and industries, as
saddlers, shoemakers, dyers, etc.

Beyond the Hausa states and bordering on Lake Chad was Bornu. The people
of Bornu had a large infiltration of Berber blood, but were
predominantly Negro. Berber mulattoes had been kings in early days, but
they were soon replaced by black men. Under the early kings, who can be
traced back to the third century, these people had ruled nearly all the
territory between the Nile and Lake Chad. The country was known as
Kanem, and the pagan dynasty of Dugu reigned there from the middle of
the ninth to the end of the eleventh century. Mohammedanism was
introduced from Egypt

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

at the end of the eleventh century, and under the Mohammedan kings Kanem
became one of the first powers of the Sudan. By the end of the twelfth
century the armies of Kanem were very powerful and its rulers were known
as "Kings of Kanem and Lords of Bornu." In the thirteenth century the
kings even dared to invade the southern country down toward the valley
of the Congo.

Meantime great things were happening in the world beyond the desert, the
ocean, and the Nile. Arabian Mohammedanism had succumbed to the wild
fanaticism of the Seljukian Turks. These new conquerors were not only
firmly planted at the gates of Vienna, but had swept the shores of the
Mediterranean and sent all Europe scouring the seas for their lost trade
connections with the riches of India. Religious zeal, fear of conquest,
and commercial greed inflamed Europe against the Mohammedan and led to
the discovery of a new world, the riches of which poured first on Spain.
Oppression of the Moors followed, and in 1502 they were driven back into
Africa, despoiled and humbled. Here the Spaniards followed and harassed
them and here the Turks, fighting the Christians, captured the
Mediterranean ports and cut the Moors off [permanently](errata.htm#1)
from Europe. In the slow years that followed, huddled in Northwest
Africa, they became a decadent people and finally cast their eyes toward
Negroland.

The Moors in Morocco had come to look upon the Sudan as a gold mine, and
knew that the Sudan was especially dependent upon salt. In 1545 Morocco
claimed the principal salt mines at Tegazza, but the reigning Askia
refused to recognize the claim.

When the Sultan Elmansour came to the throne of Morocco, he increased
the efficiency of his army by supplying it with fire arms and cannon.
Elmansour determined to attack the Sudan and sent four hundred men under
Pasha Djouder, who left Morocco in 1590. The Songhay, with their bows
and arrows, were helpless against powder and shot, and they were
defeated at Tenkadibou April 12, 1591, Askia Ishak, the king, offered
terms, and Djouder Pasha referred them to Morocco. The sultan, angry
with his general's delay, deposed him and sent another, who crushed and
treacherously murdered the king and set up a puppet. Thereafter there
were two Askias, one under the Moors at Timbuktu and one who maintained
himself in the Hausa states, which the Moors could not subdue. Anarchy
reigned in Songhay. The Moors tried to put down disorder with a high
hand, drove out and murdered the distinguished men of

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Timbuktu, and as a
result let loose a riot of robbery and decadence throughout the Sudan.
Pasha now succeeded Pasha with revolt and misrule until in 1612 the
soldiers elected their own Pasha and deliberately shut themselves up in
the Sudan by cutting off approach from the north.

Hausaland and Bornu were still open to Turkish and Mohammedan influence
from the east, and the Gulf of Guinea to the slave trade from the south,
but the face of the finest Negro civilization the modern world had ever
produced was veiled from Europe and given to the defilement of wild
Moorish soldiers. In 1623 it is written "excesses of every kind are now
committed unchecked by the soldiery," and "the country is profoundly
convulsed and oppressed." <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) The
Tuaregs marched down from the desert and deprived the Moors of many of
the principal towns. The rest of the empire of the Songhay was by the
end of the eighteenth century divided among separate Moorish chiefs, who
bought supplies from the Negro peasantry and were "at once the vainest,
proudest, and perhaps the most bigoted, ferocious, and intolerant of all
the nations of the south." <span id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21) They
lived a nomadic life, plundering the Negroes. To such depths did the
mighty Songhay fall.

As the Songhay declined a new power arose in the nineteenth century, the
Fula. The Fula, who vary in race from Berber mulattoes to full-blooded
Negroes, may be the result of a westward migration of some people like
the "Leukoæthiopi" of Pliny, or they may have arisen from the migration
of Berber mulattoes in the western oases, driven south by Romans and
Arabs.

These wandering herdsmen lived on the Senegal River and the ocean in
very early times and were not heard of until the nineteenth century. By
this time they had changed to a Negro or dark mulatto people and lived
scattered in small communities between the Atlantic and Darfur. They
were without political union or national sentiment, but were all
Mohammedans. Then came a sudden change, and led by a religious fanatic,
these despised and persecuted people became masters of the central
Sudan. They were the ones who at last broke down that great wedge of
resisting Atlantic culture, after it had been undermined and
disintegrated by the American slave trade.

Thus Islam finally triumphed in the Sudan and the ancient culture

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

combined with the new. In the Sudan to-day one may find evidences of the
union of two classes of people. The representatives of the older
civilization dwell as peasants in small communities, carrying on
industries and speaking a large number of different languages. With them
or above them is the ruling Mohammedan caste, speaking four main
languages: Mandingo, Hausa, Fula, and Arabic. These latter form the
state builders. Negro blood predominates among both classes, but
naturally there is more Berber blood among the Mohammedan invaders.

Europe during the middle ages had some knowledge of these movements in
the Sudan and Africa. Melle and Songhay appear on medieval maps. In
literature we have many allusions: the mulatto king, Feirifis, was one
of Wolfram von Eschenbach's heroes; Prester John furnished endless lore;
Othello, the warrior, and the black king represented by medieval art as
among the three wise men, and the various black Virgin Marys' all show
legendary knowledge of what African civilization was at that time doing.

It is a curious commentary on modern prejudice that most of this
splendid history of civilization and uplift is unknown to-day, and men
confidently assert that Negroes have no history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[28:1](dbn06.htm#fr_16) Frobenius: *Voice of
Africa*, II, 359-360.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[30:1](dbn06.htm#fr_17) Ibn Khaldun, quoted in
Lugard, p. 128.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[31:1](dbn06.htm#fr_18) Quoted in Lugard, p.
180.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[32:1](dbn06.htm#fr_19) Es-Sa’di, quoted by
Lugard, p. 199.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[34:1](dbn06.htm#fr_20) Lugard, p. 373.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[34:2](dbn06.htm#fr_21) Mungo Park, quoted in
Lugard, p. 374.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Guinea and Congo](dbn07)

</div>
