<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn12)  [Next](dbn14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

# XI    THE NEGRO IN THE UNITED STATES

There were half a million slaves in the confines of the United States
when the Declaration of Independence declared "that all men are created
equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness." The land that thus magniloquently heralded its advent into
the family of nations had supported the institution of human slavery for
one hundred and fifty-seven years and was destined to cling to it
eighty-seven years longer.

The greatest experiment in Negro slavery as a modern industrial system
was made on the mainland of North America and in the confines of the
present United States. And this experiment was on such a scale and so
long-continued that it is profitable for study and reflection. There
were in the United States in its dependencies, in 1910, 9,828,294
persons of acknowledged Negro descent, not including the considerable
infiltration of Negro blood which is not acknowledged and often not
known. To-day the number of persons called Negroes is probably about ten
and a quarter million. These persons are almost entirely descendants of
African slaves, brought to America in the sixteenth, seventeenth,
eighteenth, and nineteenth centuries.

The importation of Negroes to the mainland of North America was small
until the British got the coveted privilege of the Asiento in 1713.
Before that Northern States like New York had received some slaves from
the Dutch, and New England had early developed a trade by which she
imported a number of house servants. Ships went out to the African coast
with rum, sold the rum, and brought the slaves to the West Indies; there
they exchanged the slaves for sugar and molasses and brought the
molasses back to New England, to be made into rum for further exploits.
After the Asiento treaty

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

the Negro population increased in the eighteenth century from about
50,000 in 1710 to 220,000 in 1750 and to 462,000 in 1770. When the
colonies became independent, the foreign slave trade was soon made
illegal; but illicit trade, annexation of territory and natural increase
enlarged the Negro population from a little over a million at the
beginning of the nineteenth century to four and a half millions at the
outbreak of the Civil War and to about ten and a quarter millions in
1914.

The present so-called Negro population of the United States is:

1\. A mixture of the various African populations, Bantu, Sudanese,
west-coast Negroes, some dwarfs, and some traces of Arab, Berber, and
Semitic blood.

2\. A mixture of these strains with the blood of white Americans through
a system of concubinage of colored women in slavery days, together with
some legal intermarriage,

The figures as to mulattoes <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89) have
been from time to time officially acknowledged to be understatements.
Probably one-third of the Negroes of the United States have distinct
traces of white blood. This blending of the races has led to interesting
human types, but racial prejudice has hitherto prevented any scientific
study of the matter. In general the Negro population in the United
States is brown in color, darkening to almost black and shading off in
the other direction to yellow and white, and is indistinguishable in
some cases from the white population.

Much has been written of the black man in America, but most of this has
been from the point of view of the whites, so that we know of the effect
of Negro slavery on the whites, the strife among the whites for and
against abolition, and the consequent problem of the Negro so far as the
white population is concerned.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

This chapter, however, is dealing with the matter more from the point of
view of the Negro group itself, and seeking to show what slavery meant
to them, how they reacted against it, what they did to secure their
freedom, and what they are doing with their partial freedom to-day.

The slaves landing from 1619 onward were received by the colonies at
first as laborers, on the same plane as other laborers. For a long time
there was in law no distinction between the indented white servant from
England and the black servant from Africa, except in the term of their
service. Even here the distinction was not always observed, some of the
whites being kept beyond term of their service and Negroes now and then
securing their freedom. Gradually the planters realized the advantage of
laborers held for life, but they were met by certain moral difficulties.
The opposition to slavery had from the first been largely stilled when
it was stated that this was a method of converting the heathen to
Christianity. The corollary was that when a slave was converted he
became free. Up to 1660 or thereabouts it seemed accepted in most
colonies and in the English West Indies that baptism into a Christian
church would free a Negro slave. Masters therefore, were reluctant in
the seventeenth century to have their slaves receive Christian
instruction. Massachusetts first apparently legislated on this matter by
enacting in 1641 that slavery should be confined to captives in just
wars "and such strangers as willingly sell themselves or are sold to
us," <span id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90) meaning by "strangers"
apparently heathen, but saying nothing as to the effect of conversion.
Connecticut adopted similar legislation in 1650, and Virginia declared
in 1661 that Negroes "are incapable of making satisfaction" for time
lost in running away by lengthening their time of services, thus
implying that they were slaves for life. Maryland declared in 1663 that
Negro slaves should serve *durante vita*, but it was not until 1667 that
Virginia finally plucked up courage to attack the issue squarely and
declared by law: "Baptism doth not alter the condition of the person as
to his bondage or freedom, in order that diverse masters freed from this
doubt may more carefully endeavor the propagation of
Christianity." <span id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_91)

The transplanting of the Negro from his African clan life to the West
Indian plantation was a social revolution. Marriage became

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

geographical and transient, while women and girls were without
protection.

The private home as a self-protective, independent unit did not exist.
That powerful institution, the polygamous African home, was almost
completely destroyed, and in its place in America arose sexual
promiscuity, a weak community life, with common dwelling, meals, and
child nurseries. The internal slave trade tended further to weaken
natural ties. A small number of favored house servants and artisans were
raised above this--had their private homes, came in contact with the
culture of the master class, and assimilated much of American
civilization. This was, however, exceptional; broadly speaking, the
greatest social effect of American slavery was to substitute for the
polygamous Negro home a new polygamy less guarded, less effective, and
less civilized.

At first sight it would seem that slavery completely destroyed every
vestige of spontaneous movement among the Negroes. This is not strictly
true. The vast power of the priest in the African state is well known;
his realm alone--the province of religion and medicine--remained largely
unaffected by the plantation system. The Negro priest, therefore, early
became an important figure on the plantation and found his function as
the interpreter of the supernatural, the comforter of the sorrowing, and
as the one who expressed, rudely but picturesquely, the longing and
disappointment and resentment of a stolen people. From such beginnings
arose and spread with marvelous rapidity the Negro church, the first
distinctively Negro American social institution. It was not at first by
any means a Christian church, but a mere adaptation of those rites of
fetish which in America is termed obe worship, or "voodooism." <span
id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) Association and missionary effort soon
gave these rites a veneer of Christianity and gradually, after two
centuries, the church became Christian, with a simple Calvinistic creed,
but with many of the old customs still clinging to the services. It is
this historic fact, that the Negro church of to-day bases itself upon
the sole surviving social institution of the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> African
fatherland, that accounts for its extraordinary growth and vitality.

The slave codes at first were really labor codes based on an attempt to
reëstablish in America the waning feudalism of Europe. The laborers were
mainly black and were held for life. Above them came the artisans, free
whites with a few blacks, and above them the master class. The feudalism
called for the plantation system' and the plantation system as developed
in America, and particularly in Virginia, was at first a feudal domain.
On these plantations the master was practically supreme. The slave codes
in early days were but moderately harsh, allowing punishment by the
master, but restraining him in extreme cases and providing for care of
the slaves and of the aged. With the power, however, solely in the bands
of the master class, and with the master supreme on his own plantation,
his power over the slave was practically what he wished it to be. In
some cases the cruelty was as great as on the worst West Indian
plantations. In other cases the rule was mild and paternal.

Up through this American feudalism the Negro began to rise. He learned
in the eighteenth century the English language, be began to be
identified with the Christian church, he mingled his blood to a
considerable extent with the master class. The house servants
particularly were favored, in some cases receiving education, and the
number of free Negroes gradually increased.

Present-day students are often puzzled at the apparent contradictions of
Southern slavery. One hears, on the one hand, of the staid and gentle
patriarchy, the wide and sleepy plantations with lord and retainers,
ease and happiness; on the other hand one hears of barbarous cruelty and
unbridled power and wide oppression of men. Which is the true picture?
The answer is simple: both are true. They are not opposite sides of the
same shield; they are different shields. They are pictures, on the one
hand, of house service in the great country seats and in the towns, and
on the other hand of the field laborers who raised the great tobacco,
rice, and cotton crops. We have thus not only carelessly mixed pictures
of what were really different kinds of slavery, but of that which
represented different degrees in the development of the economic system.
House service was the older feudal idea of personal retainership,
developed in Virginia and Carolina in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries. It had all the advantages and disadvantages of such a system;
the advantage

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of the strong personal tie and disadvantage of unyielding caste
distinctions, with the resultant immoralities. At its worst, however, it
was a matter primarily of human relationships.

Out of this older type of slavery in the northern South there developed,
during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, in the southern South
the type of slavery which corresponds to the modern factory system in
its worst conceivable form. It represented production of a staple
product on a large scale; between the owner and laborer were interposed
the overseer and the drivers. The slaves were whipped and driven to a
mechanical task system. Wide territory was needed, so that at last
absentee landlordship was common. It was this latter type of slavery
that marked the cotton kingdom, and the extension of the area of this
system southward and westward marked the aggressive world-conquering
visions of the slave barons. On the other hand it was the milder and far
different Virginia house service and the personal retainership of town
life in which most white children grew up; it was this that impressed
their imaginations and which they have so vividly portrayed. The
Negroes, however, knew the other side, for it was under the harsher,
heartless driving of the fields that fully nine-tenths of them lived.

There early began to be some internal development and growth of
self-consciousness among the Negroes: for instance, in New England towns
Negro "governors" were elected. This was partly an African custom
transplanted and partly an endeavor to put the regulation of the slaves
into their own hands. Negroes voted in those days: for instance, in
North Carolina until 1835 the Constitution extended the franchise to
every freeman, and when Negroes were disfranchised in 1835, several
hundred colored men were deprived of the vote. In fact, as Albert
Bushnell Hart says, "In the colonies freed Negroes, like freed
indentured white servants, acquired property, founded families, and came
into the political community if they had the energy, thrift, and fortune
to get the necessary property." <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93)

The humanitarian movement of the eighteenth century was active toward
Negroes, because of the part which they played in the Revolutionary War.
Negro regiments and companies were raised in Connecticut and Rhode
Island, and a large number of Negroes were members of the continental
armies elsewhere. Individual Negroes

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

distinguished themselves. It is estimated that five thousand Negroes
fought in the American armies.

The mass of the Americans considered at the time of the adoption of the
Constitution that Negro slavery was doomed. There soon came a series of
laws emancipating slaves in the North: Vermont began in 1779, followed
by judicial decision in Massachusetts in 1780 and gradual emancipation
in Pennsylvania beginning the same year; emancipation was accomplished
in New Hampshire in 1783, and in Connecticut and Rhode Island in 1784.
The momentous exclusion of slavery in the Northwest Territory took place
in 1787, and gradual emancipation began in New York and New Jersey in
1799 and 1804.

Beneficial and insurance societies began to appear among colored people.
Nearly every town of any size in Virginia in the early eighteenth
century had Negro organizations for caring for the sick and burying the
dead. As the number of free Negroes increased, particularly in the
North, these financial societies began to be openly formed. One of the
earliest was the Free African Society of Philadelphia. This eventually
became the present African Methodist Church, which has to-day half a
million members and over eleven million dollars' worth of property.

Negroes began to be received into the white church bodies in separate
congregations, and before 1807 there is the record of the formation of
eight such Negro churches. This brought forth leaders who were usually
preachers in these churches. Richard Allen, the founder of the African
Methodist Church, was one; Lot Carey, one of the founders of Liberia,
was another. In the South there was John Chavis, who passed through a
regular course of studies at what is now Washington and Lee University.
He started a school for young white men in North Carolina and had among
his pupils a United States senator, sons of a chief justice of North
Carolina, a governor of the state, and many others. He was a
full-blooded Negro, but a Southern writer says that "all accounts agree
that John Chavis was a gentleman. He was received socially among the
best whites and asked to table." <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)

In the war of 1812 thirty-three hundred Negroes helped Jackson win the
battle of New Orleans, and numbers fought in New York State and in the
navy under Perry, Charming, and others. Phyllis

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wheatley, a Negro
girl, wrote poetry, and the mulatto, Benjamin Banneker, published one of
the first American series of almanacs.

In fine, it seemed in the early years of the nineteenth century that
slavery in the United States would gradually disappear and that the
Negro would have, in time, a man's chance. A change came, however,
between 1820 and 1830, and it is directly traceable to the industrial
revolution of the nineteenth century.

Between 1738 and 1830 there had come a remarkable series of inventions
which revolutionized the methods of making cloth. This series included
the invention of the fly shuttle, the carding machine, the steam engine,
and the power loom. The world began to look about for a cheaper and
larger supply of fiber for weaving. It was found in the cotton plant,
and the southern United States was especially adapted to its culture.
The invention of the cotton gin removed the last difficulties. The South
now had a crop which could be attended to by unskilled labor and for
which there was practically unlimited demand. There was land, and rich
land, in plenty. The result was that the cotton crop in the United
States increased from 8,000 bales in 1790 to 650,000 bales in 1820, to
2,500,000 bales in 1850, and to 4,000,000 bales in 1860.

In this growth one sees the economic foundation of the new slavery in
the United States, which rose in the second decade of the nineteenth
century. Manifestly the fatal procrastination in dealing with slavery in
the eighteenth century received in the nineteenth century its terrible
reward. The change in the attitude toward slavery was manifest in
various ways. The South no longer excused slavery, but began to defend
it as an economic system. The enforcement of the slave trade laws became
notoriously lax and there was a tendency to make slave codes harsher.

This led to retaliation on the part of the Negroes. There had not been
in the United States before this many attempts at insurrection. The
slaves were distributed over a wide territory, and before they became
intelligent enough to coöperate the chance of emancipation was held
before them. Several small insurrections are alluded to in South
Carolina early in the eighteenth century, and one by Cato at Stono in
1740 caused widespread alarm. The Negro plot in New York in 1712 put the
city into hysterics. There was no further plotting on any scale until
the Haytian revolt, when Gabriel in Virginia made an abortive attempt.
In 1822 a free Negro, Denmark Vesey, in South Carolina, failed in a
well-laid plot, and ten years after that,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

in 1831, Nat Turner led his insurrection in Virginia and killed
fifty-one persons. The result of this insurrection was to crystallize
tendencies toward harshness which the economic revolution was making
advisable.

A wave of legislation passed over the South, prohibiting the slaves from
learning to read and write, forbidding Negroes to preach, and
interfering with Negro religious meetings. Virginia declared in 1831
that neither slaves nor free Negroes, might preach, nor could they
attend religious service at night without permission. In North Carolina
slaves and free Negroes were forbidden to preach, exhort, or teach "in
any prayer meeting or other association for worship where slaves of
different families are collected together" on penalty of not more than
thirty-nine lashes. Maryland and Georgia and other states had similar
laws.

The real effective revolt of the Negro against slavery was not, however,
by fighting, but by running away, usually to the North, which had been
recently freed from slavery. From the beginning of the nineteenth
century slaves began to escape in considerable numbers. Four
geographical paths were chiefly followed: one, leading southward, was
the line of swamps along the coast from Norfolk, Virginia, to the
northern border of Florida. This gave rise to the Negro element among
the Indians in Florida and led to the two Seminole wars of 1817 and
1835. These wars were really slave raids to make the Indians give up the
Negro and half-breed slaves domiciled among them. The wars cost the
United States ten million dollars and two thousand lives.

The great Appalachian range, with its abutting mountains, was the safest
path northward. Through Tennessee and Kentucky and the heart of the
Cumberland Mountains, using the limestone caverns, was the third route,
and the valley of the Mississippi was the western tunnel.

These runaways and the freedmen of the North soon began to form a group
of people who sought to consider the problem of slavery and the destiny
of the Negro in America. They passed through many psychological changes
of attitude in the years from 1700 to 1850. At first, in the early part
of the eighteenth century, there was but one thought: revolt and
revenge. The development of the latter half of the century brought an
attitude of hope and adjustment and emphasized the differences between
the slave and the free Negro. The first part of the nineteenth century
brought two movements: among the free Negroes an effort at
self-development

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

and protection through organization; among slaves and recent fugitives a
distinct reversion to the older idea of revolt.

As the new industrial slavery, following the rise of the cotton kingdom,
began to press harder, a period of storm and stress ensued in the black
world, and in 1829 came the first full-voiced, almost hysterical protest
of a Negro against slavery and the color line in David Walker's Appeal,
which aroused Southern legislatures to action.

The decade 1830-40 was a severe period of trial. Not only were the
chains of slavery tighter in the South, but in the North the free Negro
was beginning to feel the ostracism and competition of white workingmen,
native and foreign. In Philadelphia, between 1829 and 1849, six mobs of
hoodlums and foreigners murdered and maltreated Negroes. In the Middle
West harsh black laws which had been enacted in earlier days were hauled
from their hiding places and put into effect. No Negro was allowed to
settle in Ohio unless he gave bond within twenty days to the amount of
five thousand dollars to guarantee his good behavior and support.
Harboring or concealing fugitives was heavily fined, and no Negro could
give evidence in any case where a white man was party. These. laws began
to be enforced in 1829 and for three days riots went on in Cincinnati
and Negroes were shot and killed. Aroused, the Negroes sent a deputation
to Canada where they were offered asylum. Fully two thousand migrated
from Ohio. Later large numbers from other parts of the United States
joined them.

In 1830-31 the first Negro conventions were called in Philadelphia to
consider the desperate condition of the Negro population, and in 1833
the convention met again and local societies were formed. The first
Negro paper was issued in New York in 1827, while later emancipation in
the British West Indies brought some cheer in the darkness.

A system of separate Negro schools was established and the little band
of abolitionists led by Garrison and others appeared. In spite of all
the untoward circumstances, therefore, the internal development of the
free Negro in the North went on. The Negro population increased
twenty-three per cent between 1830 and 1840; Philadelphia had, in 1838,
one hundred small beneficial societies, while Ohio Negroes had ten
thousand acres of land. The slave mutiny on the Creole, the
establishment of the Negro Odd Fellows, and the growth of the Negro
churches all indicated advancement.

Between 1830 and 1850 the concerted coöperation to assist fugitives

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

came to be known as the Underground Railroad. It was an organization not
simply of white philanthropists, but the coöperation of Negroes in the
most difficult part of the work made it possible. Hundreds of Negroes
visited the slave states to entice the slaves away, and the list of
Underground Railroad operators given by Siebert contains one hundred and
twenty-eight names of Negroes. In Canada and in the northern United
States there was a secret society, known as the League of Freedom, which
especially worked to help slaves run away. Harriet Tubman was one of the
most energetic of these slave conductors and brought away several
thousand slaves. William Lambert, a colored man, was reputed between
1829 and 1862 to have aided in the escape of thirty thousand.

The decade 1840-50 was a period of hope and uplift for the Negro group,
with clear evidences of distinct self-assertion and advance. A few
well-trained lawyers and physicians appeared, and colored men took their
place among the abolition orators. The catering business in Philadelphia
and other cities fell largely into their hands, and some small merchants
arose here and there. Above all, Frederick Douglass made his first
speech in 1841 and thereafter became one of the most prominent figures
in the abolition crusade. A new series of national conventions began to
assemble late in the forties, and the delegates were drawn from the
artisans and higher servants, showing a great increase of efficiency in
the rank and file of the free Negroes.

By 1850 the Negroes had increased to three and a half million. Those in
Canada were being organized in settlements and were accumulating
property. The escape of fugitive slaves was systematized and some of the
most representative conventions met. One particularly, in 1854, grappled
frankly with the problem of emigration. It looked as though it was going
to be impossible for Negroes to remain in the United States and be free.
As early as 1788 a Negro union of Newport, Rhode Island, had proposed a
general exodus to Africa. John and Paul Cuffe, after petitioning for the
right to vote in 1780, started in 1815 for Africa, organizing an
expedition at their own expense which cost four thousand dollars. Lot
Carey organized the African Mission Society in 1813, and the first Negro
college graduate went to Liberia in 1829 and became superintendent of
public schools. The Colonization Society encouraged this migration, and
the Negroes themselves had organized the Canadian exodus.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

The Rochester Negro convention in 1853 pronounced against migration, but
nevertheless emissaries were sent in various directions to see what
inducements could be offered. One went to the Niger valley, one to
Central America, and one to Hayti. The Haytian trip was successful and
about two thousand black emigrants eventually settled in Hayti.

Delaney, who went to Africa, concluded a treaty with eight kings
offering inducements to Negroes, but nothing came of it. In 1853 Negroes
like Purvis and Barbadoes helped in the formation of the American
Anti-slavery society, and for a while colored men coöperated with John
Brown and probably would have given him considerable help if they had
thoroughly known his plans. As it was, six or seven of his twenty-two
followers were Negroes.

Meantime the slave power was impelled by the high price of slaves and
the exhaustion of cotton land to make increased demands. Slavery was
forced north of Mason and Dixon's line in 1820; a new slave empire with
thousands of slaves was annexed in 1850, and a fugitive slave law was
passed which endangered the liberty of every free Negro; finally a
determined attempt was made to force slavery into the Northwest in
competition with free white labor, and less effective but powerful
movements arose to annex more slave territory to the south and to reopen
the African slave trade.

It looked like a triumphal march for the slave barons, but each step
cost more than the last. Missouri gave rise to the early abolitionist
movement. Mexico and the fugitive slave law aroused deep opposition in
the North, and Kansas developed an attack upon the free labor system,
not simply of the North, but of the civilized world. The result was war;
but the war was not against slavery. It was fought to protect free white
laborers against the competition of slaves, and it was thought possible
to do this by segregating slavery.

The first thing that vexed the Northern armies on Southern soil during
the war was the question of the disposition of the fugitive slaves, who
immediately began to arrive in increasing numbers. Butler confiscated
them, Fremont freed them, and Halleck caught and returned them; but
their numbers swelled to such large proportions that the mere economic
problem of their presence overshadowed everything else, especially after
the Emancipation Proclamation. Lincoln was glad to have them come after
once he realized their strength to the Confederacy.

The Emancipation Proclamation was forced, not simply by the

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

necessity of paralyzing industry in the South, but also by the necessity
of employing Negro soldiers. During the first two years of the war no
one wanted Negro soldiers. It was declared to be a "white man's war."
General Hunter tried to raise a regiment in South Carolina, but the War
Department disavowed the act. In Louisiana the Negroes were anxious to
enlist, but were held off. In the meantime the war did not go as well as
the North had hoped, and on the twenty-sixth of January, 1863, the
Secretary of War authorized the Governor of Massachusetts to raise two
regiments of Negro troops. Frederick Douglass and others began the work
with enthusiasm, and in the end one hundred and eighty-seven thousand
Negroes enlisted in the Northern armies, of whom seventy thousand were
killed and wounded. The conduct of these troops was exemplary. They were
indispensable in camp duties and brave on the field, where they fought
in two hundred and thirteen battles. General Banks wrote, "Their conduct
was heroic. No troops could be more determined or more daring." <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95)

The assault on Fort Wagner, led by a thousand black soldiers under the
white Colonel Shaw, is one of the greatest deeds of desperate bravery on
record. On the other hand the treatment of Negro soldiers when captured
by the Confederates was barbarous. At Fort Pillow, after the surrender
of the federal troops, the colored regiment was indiscriminately
butchered and some of them were buried alive.

Abraham Lincoln said, "The slightest knowledge of arithmetic will prove
to any man that the rebel armies cannot be destroyed with Democratic
strategy. It would sacrifice all the white men of the North to do it.
There are now in the service of the United States near two hundred
thousand able-bodied colored men, most of them under arms, defending and
acquiring Union territory. . . . Abandon all the posts now garrisoned by
black men; take two hundred thousand men from our side and put them in
the battlefield or cornfield against us, and we would be compelled to
abandon the war in three weeks." <span id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_96)
Emancipation thus came as a war measure to break the power of the
Confederacy, preserve the Union, and gain the sympathy of the civilized
world.

However, two hundred and forty-four years of slavery could not be

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

stopped by edict. There were legal difficulties, the whole slow problem
of economic readjustment, and the subtle and far-reaching questions of
future race relations.

The peculiar circumstances of emancipation forced the legal and
political difficulties to the front, and these were so striking that
they have since obscured the others in the eyes of students. Quite
unexpectedly and without forethought the nation had emancipated four
million slaves. Once the deed was done, the majority of the nation was
glad and recognized that this was, after all, the only result of a
fearful four years' war which in any degree justified it. But how was
the result to be secured for all time? There were three possibilities:
(1) to declare the slave free and leave him at the mercy of his former
masters; (2) to establish a careful government guardianship designed to
guide the slave from legal to real economic freedom; (3) to give the
Negro the political power to guard himself as well as he could during
this development. It is very easy to forget that the United States
government tried each one of these in succession and was literally
forced to adopt the third, because the first had utterly failed and the
second was thought too "paternal" and especially too costly. To leave
the Negroes helpless after a paper edict of emancipation was manifestly
impossible. It would have meant that the war had been fought in vain.

Carl Schurz, who traversed the South just after the war, said, "A
veritable reign of terror prevailed in many parts of the South. The
Negro found scant justice in the local courts against the white man. He
could look for protection only to the military forces of the United
States still garrisoning the states lately in rebellion and to the
Freedmen's Bureau." <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97) This Freedmen's
Bureau was proposed by Charles Sumner. If it had been presented to-day
instead of fifty years ago, it would have been regarded as a proposal
far less revolutionary than the state insurance of England and Germany.
A half century ago, however, and in a country which gave the *laisser
faire* economics their extremest trial, the Freedmen's Bureau struck the
whole nation as unthinkable, save as a very temporary expedient and to
relieve the more pointed forms of distress following war. Yet the
proposals of the Bureau were both simple and sensible:

1\. To oversee the making and enforcement of wage contracts for
freedmen.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

2\. To appear in the courts as the freedmen's best friend.

3\. To furnish the freedmen with a minimum of land and of capital.

4\. To establish schools.

5\. To furnish such institutions of relief as hospitals, outdoor relief
stations, etc.

How a sensible people could expect really to conduct a slave into
freedom with less than this it is hard to see. Even with such tutelage
extending over a period of two or three decades, the ultimate end had to
be enfranchisement and political and social freedom for those freedmen
who attained a certain set standard. Otherwise the whole training had
neither object nor guarantee. Precisely on this account the former
masters opposed the Freedmen's Bureau with all their influence. They did
not want the Negro trained or really freed, and they criticized
mercilessly the many mistakes of the new Bureau.

The North at first thought to pay for the main cost of the Freedmen's
Bureau by confiscating the property of former slave owners; but finding
this not in accordance with law, they realized that they were embarking
on an enterprise which bade fair to add many millions to the already
staggering cost of the war. When, therefore, they saw that the abolition
of slavery could not be left to the white South and could not be done by
the North without time and money, they determined to put the
responsibility on the Negro himself. This was without a doubt a
tremendous experiment, but with all its manifest mistakes it succeeded
to an astonishing degree. It made the immediate reëstablisbment of the
old slavery impossible, and it was probably the only quick method of
doing this. It gave the freedmen's sons a chance to begin their
education. It diverted the energy of the white South slavery to the
recovery of political power, and in this interval, small as it was, the
Negro took his first steps toward economic freedom.

The difficulties that stared reconstruction politicians in the face were
these: (1) They must act quickly. (2) Emancipation had increased the
political power of the South by one-sixth. Could this increased
political power be put in the hands of those who, in defense of slavery,
had disrupted the Union? (3) How was the abolition of slavery to be made
effective? (4) What was to be the political position of the freedmen?

The Freedmen's Bureau in its short life accomplished a great task.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Carl Schurz, in
1865, felt warranted in saying that "not half of the labor that has been
done in the South this year, or will be done there next year, would have
been or would be done but for the exertions of the Freedmen's Bureau. .
. . No other agency except one placed there by the national government
could have wielded that moral power whose interposition was so necessary
to prevent Southern society from falling at once into the chaos of a
general collision between its different elements." <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) Notwithstanding this the Bureau was
temporary, was regarded as a makeshift, and soon abandoned.

Meantime partial Negro suffrage seemed not only just, but almost
inevitable. Lincoln, in 1864, "cautiously" suggested to Louisiana's
private consideration "whether some of the colored people may not be let
in as, for instance, the very intelligent, and especially those who
fought gallantly in our ranks. They would pro ably help in some trying
time to come, to keep the jewel of liberty in the family of freedom."
Indeed, the "family of freedom" in Louisiana being somewhat small just
then, who else was to be intrusted with the "jewel"? Later and for
different reasons Johnson, in 1865, wrote to Mississippi, "If you could
extend the elective franchise to all persons of color who can read the
Constitution of the United States in English and write their name, and
to all persons of color who own real estate valued at not less than two
hundred and fifty dollars, and pay taxes thereon, you would completely
disarm the adversary and set an example the other states will follow.
This you can do with perfect safety, and you thus place the Southern
States, in reference to free persons of color, upon the same basis with
the free states. I hope and trust your convention will do this."

The Negroes themselves began to ask for the suffrage. The Georgia
convention in Augusta (1866) advocated "a proposition to give those who
could write and read well and possessed a certain property qualification
the right of suffrage." The reply of the South to these suggestions was
decisive. In Tennessee alone was any action attempted that even
suggested possible Negro suffrage in the future, and that failed. In all
other states the "Black Codes" adopted were certainly not reassuring to
the friends of freedom. To be sure, it was not a time to look for calm,
cool, thoughtful action on the part of the white South. Their economic
condition was pitiable, their fear of Negro freedom genuine. Yet it was
reasonable to expect from them something less than repression and utter
reaction toward

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

slavery. To some extent this expectation was fulfilled. The abolition of
slavery was recognized on the statute book, and the civil rights of
owning property and appearing as a witness in cases in which he was a
party were generally granted the Negro; yet with these in many cases
went harsh and unbearable regulations which largely neutralized the
concessions and certainly gave ground for an assumption that, once free,
the South would virtually reenslave the Negro. The colored people
themselves naturally feared this, protesting, as in Mississippi,
"against the reactionary policy prevailing and expressing the fear that
the legislature will pass such proscriptive laws as will drive the
freedmen from the state, or practically reënslave them."

The codes spoke for themselves. As Burgess says, "Almost every act,
word, or gesture of the Negro, not consonant with good taste and good
manners as well as good morals, was made a crime or misdemeanor for
which he could first be fined by the magistrates and then be consigned
to a condition of almost slavery for an indefinite time, if he could not
pay the bill." <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99)

All things considered, it seems probable that, if the South had been
permitted to have its way in 1865, the harshness of Negro slavery would
have been mitigated so as to make slave trading difficult, and so as to
make it possible for a Negro to hold property and appear in some cases
in court; but that in most other respects the blacks would have remained
in slavery.

What could prevent this? A Freedmen's Bureau established for ten,
twenty, or forty years, with a careful distribution of land and capital
and a system of education for the children, might have prevented such an
extension of slavery. But the country would not listen to such a
comprehensive plan. A restricted grant of the suffrage voluntarily made
by the states would have been a reassuring proof of a desire to treat
the freedmen fairly and would have balanced in part, at least, the
increased political power of the South. There was no such disposition
evident.

In Louisiana, for instance, under the proposed reconstruction "not one
Negro was allowed to vote, though at that very time the wealthy
intelligent free colored people of the state paid taxes on property
assessed at fifteen million dollars and many of them were well known for
their patriotic zeal and love for the Union." <span
id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_100)

Thus the arguments for universal Negro suffrage from the start

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

were strong and are still strong, and no one would question their
strength were it not for the assumption that the experiment failed.
Frederick Douglass said to President Johnson, "Your noble and humane
predecessor placed in our hands the sword to assist in saving the
nation, and we do hope that you, his able successor, will favorably
regard the placing in our bands the ballot with which to save
ourselves." <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)

Carl Schurz wrote, "It is idle to say that it will be time to speak of
Negro suffrage when the whole colored race will be educated, for the
ballot may be necessary to him to secure his education." <span
id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102)

The granting of full Negro suffrage meant one of two alternatives to the
South: (1) The uplift of the Negro for sheer self-preservation. This is
what Schurz and the saner North expected. As one Southern school
superintendent said, "The elevation of this class is a matter of prime
importance, since a ballot in the hands of a black citizen is quite as
potent as in the bands of a white one." Or (2) Negro suffrage meant a
determined concentration of Southern effort by actual force to deprive
the Negro of the ballot or nullify its use. This last is what really
happened. But even in this case, so much energy was taken in keeping the
Negro from voting that the plan for keeping him in virtual slavery and
denying him education partially failed. It took ten years to nullify
Negro suffrage in part and twenty years to escape the fear of federal
intervention. In these twenty years a vast number of Negroes had arisen
so far as to escape slavery forever. Debt peonage could be fastened on
part of the rural South and was; but even here the new Negro landholder
appeared. Thus despite everything the Fifteenth Amendment, and that
alone, struck the death knell of slavery.

The steps toward the Fifteenth Amendment were taken slowly. First
Negroes were allowed to take part in reconstructing the state
governments. This was inevitable if loyal governments were to be
obtained. Next the restored state governments were directed to
enfranchise all citizens, black or white, or have their representation
in Congress cut down proportionately. Finally the United States said the
last word of simple justice: the states may regulate the suffrage, but
no state may deprive a person of the right to vote simply because he is
a Negro or has been a slave.

For such reasons the Negro was enfranchised. What was the result?

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> No language has
been spared to describe these results as the worst imaginable. This is
not true. There were bad results, and bad results arising from Negro
suffrage; but those results were not so bad as usually painted, nor was
Negro suffrage the prime cause of many of them. Let us not forget that
the white South believed it to be of vital interest to its welfare that
the experiment of Negro suffrage should fail ignominiously and that
almost to a man the whites were willing to insure this failure either by
active force or passive acquiescence; that besides this there were, as
might be expected, men, black and white, Northern and Southern, only too
eager to take advantage of such a situation for feathering their own
nests. Much evil must result in such case; but to charge the evil to
Negro suffrage is unfair. It may be charged to anger, poverty, venality,
and ignorance, but the anger and poverty were the almost inevitable
aftermath of war; the venality was much greater among whites than
Negroes both North and South, and while ignorance was the curse of
Negroes, the fault was not theirs and they took the initiative to
correct it.

The chief charges against the Negro governments are extravagance, theft,
and incompetency of officials. There is no serious charge that these
governments threatened civilization or the foundations of social order.
The charge is that they threatened property and that they were
inefficient. These charges are in part undoubtedly true, but they are
often exaggerated. The South had been terribly impoverished and saddled
with new social burdens. In other words, states with smaller resources
were asked not only to do a work of restoration, but a larger social
work. The property holders were aghast. They not only demurred, but,
predicting ruin and revolution, they appealed to secret societies, to
intimidation, force, and murder. They refused to believe that these
novices in government and their friends were aught but scamps and fools.
Under the circumstances occurring directly after the war, the wisest
statesman would have been compelled to resort to increased taxation and
would have, in turn, been execrated as extravagant, dishonest, and
incompetent. It is easy, therefore, to see what flaming and incredible
stories of Reconstruction governments could gain wide currency and
belief. In fact the extravagance, although great, was not universal, and
much of it was due to the extravagant spirit pervading the whole country
in a day of inflated currency and speculation.

That the Negroes led by the astute thieves, became at first tools

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

and received some small share of the spoils is true. But two
considerations must be added: much of the legislation which resulted in
fraud was represented to the Negroes as good legislation, and thus their
votes were secured by deliberate misrepresentation. Take, for instance,
the land frauds of South Carolina. A wise Negro leader of that state,
advocating the state purchase of farm lands, said, "One of the greatest
of slavery bulwarks was the infernal plantation system, one man owning
his thousand, another his twenty, another fifty thousand acres of land.
This is the only way by which we will break up that system, and I
maintain that our freedom will be of no effect if we allow it to
continue. What is the main cause of the prosperity of the North? It is
because every man has his own farm and is free and independent. Let the
lands of the South be similarly divided." <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103)

From such arguments the Negroes were induced to aid a scheme to buy land
and distribute it. Yet a large part of eight hundred thousand dollars
appropriated was wasted and went to the white landholders' pockets.

The most inexcusable cheating of the Negroes took place through the
Freedmen's Bank. This bank was incorporated by Congress in 1865 and had
in its list of incorporators some of the greatest names in America
including Peter Cooper, William Cullen Bryan and John Jay. Yet the bank
was allowed to fail in 1874 owing the freedmen their first savings of
over three millions of dollars. They have never been reimbursed.

Many Negroes were undoubtedly venal, but more were ignorant and
deceived. The question is: Did they show any signs of a disposition to
learn to better things? The theory of democratic government is not that
the will of the people is always right, but rather that normal human
beings of average intelligence will, if given a chance, learn the right
and best course by bitter experience. This is precisely what the Negro
voters showed indubitable signs of doing. First they strove for schools
to abolish ignorance, and second, a large and growing number of them
revolted against the extravagance and stealing that marred the beginning
of Reconstruction, and joined with the best elements to institute
reform. The greatest stigma on the white South is not that it opposed
Negro' suffrage and resented theft and incompetence, but that, when it
saw the reform movements growing and even in some cases triumphing, and
a larger

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

and larger number of black voters learning to vote for honesty and
ability, it still preferred a Reign of Terror to a campaign of education
and disfranchised Negroes instead of punishing rascals.

No one has expressed this more convincingly than a Negro who was himself
a member of the Reconstruction legislature of South Carolina, and who
spoke at the convention which disfranchised him against one of the
onslaughts of Tillman. "We were eight years in power. We had built
school houses, established charitable institutions, built and maintained
the penitentiary system, provided for the education of the deaf and
dumb, rebuilt the jails and court houses, rebuilt the bridges, and
reëstablished the ferries. In short, we had reconstructed the state and
placed it upon the road to prosperity, and at the same time, by our acts
of financial reform, transmitted to the Hampton government an
indebtedness not greater by more than two and a half million dollars
than was the bonded debt of the state in 1868, before the Republican
Negroes and their white allies came into power." <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104)

So, too, in Louisiana in 1872, and in Mississippi later, the better
element of the Republicans triumphed at the polls and, joining with the
Democrats, instituted reforms, repudiated the worst extravagance, and
started toward better things. Unfortunately there was one thing that the
white South feared more than Negro dishonesty, ignorance, and
incompetency, and that was Negro honesty, knowledge, and efficiency.

In the midst of all these difficulties the Negro governments in the
South accomplished much of positive good. We may recognize three things
which Negro rule gave to the South: (1) democratic government, (2) free
public schools, (3) new social legislation.

In general, the words of Judge Albion W. Tourgee, a white "carpet
bagger," are true when he says of the Negro governments, "They obeyed
the Constitution of the United States and annulled the bonds of states,
counties, and cities which had been issued to carry on the War of
Rebellion and maintain armies in the field against the Union. They
instituted a public school system in a realm where public schools had
been unknown. They opened the ballot box and the jury box to thousands
of white men who had been debarred from them by a lack of earthly
possessions. They introduced home rule into the South. They abolished
the whipping post, the branding iron, the stocks, and other barbarous
forms of punishment

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

which had up to that time prevailed. They reduced capital felonies from
about twenty to two or three. In an age of extravagance they were
extravagant in the sums appropriated for public works. In all of that
time no man's rights of persons were invaded under the forms of law.
Every Democrat's life, home, fireside, and business were safe. No man
obstructed any white man's way to the ballot box, interfered with his
freedom of speech, or boycotted him on account of his political
faith." <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105)

A thorough study of the legislation accompanying these constitutions and
its changes since shows the comparatively small amount of change in law
and government which the overthrow of Negro rule brought about. There
were sharp and often hurtful economies introduced, marking the return of
property to power; there was a sweeping change of officials, but the
main body of Reconstruction legislation stood. The Reconstruction
democracy brought forth new leaders and definitely overthrew the old
Southern aristocracy. Among these new men were Negroes of worth and
ability. John R. Lynch, when Speaker of the Mississippi House of
Representatives, was given a public testimonial by Republicans and
Democrats, and the leading white paper said, "His bearing in office had
been so proper, and his rulings in such marked contrasts to the partisan
conduct of the ignoble whites of his party who have aspired to be
leaders of the blacks, that the conservatives cheerfully joined in the
testimonial." <span id="fr_106"></span>[2](#fn_106)

Of the colored treasurer of South Carolina the white Governor
Chamberlain said, "I have never heard one word or seen one act of Mr.
Cardoza's which did not confirm my confidence in his personal integrity
and his political honor and zeal for the honest administration of the
state government. On every occasion, and under all circumstances, he has
been against fraud and robbery and in favor of good measures and good
men." <span id="fr_107"></span>[3](#fn_107)

Jonathan C. Gibbs, a colored man and the first state superintendent of
instruction in Florida, was a graduate of Dartmouth. He established the
system and brought it to success, dying in harness in 1874. Such
men--and there were others--ought not to be forgotten or confounded with
other types of colored and white Reconstruction leaders.

There is no doubt that the thirst of the black man for knowledge,

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

a thirst which has been too persistent and durable to be mere curiosity
or whim, gave birth to the public school system of the South. It was the
question upon which black voters and legislators insisted more than
anything else, and while it is possible to find some vestiges of free
schools in some of the Southern States before the war, yet a universal,
well-established system dates from the day that the black man got
political power.

Finally, in legislation covering property, the wider functions Of the
state, the punishment of crime and the like, it is sufficient to say
that the laws on these points established by Reconstruction legislatures
were not only different from and even revolutionary to the laws in the
older South, but they were so wise and so well suited to the needs of
the new South that, in spite of a retrogressive movement following the
overthrow of the Negro governments, the mass of this legislation, with
elaborations and development, still stands on the statute books of the
South. <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108)

The triumph of reaction in the South inaugurated a new era in which we
may distinguish three phases: the renewed attempt to reduce the Negroes
to serfdom, the rise of the Negro metayer, and the economic
disfranchisement of the Southern working class.

The attempt to replace individual slavery had been frustrated by the
Freedmen's Bureau and the Fifteenth Amendment. The disfranchisement of
1876 was followed by the widespread rise of "crime" peonage. Stringent
laws on vagrancy, guardianship, and labor contracts were enacted and
large discretion given judge and jury in cases of petty crime. As a
result Negroes were systematically arrested on the slightest pretext and
the labor of convicts leased to private parties. This "convict lease
system" was almost universal in the South until about 1890, when its
outrageous abuses and cruelties aroused the whole country. It still
survives over wide areas, and is not only responsible for the impression
that the Negro is a natural criminal, but also for the inability of the
Southern courts to perform their normal functions after so long a
prostitution to ends far removed from justice.

In more normal economic lines the employers began with the labor
contract system. Before the war they owned labor, land, and subsistence.
After the war they still held the land and subsistence.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The laborer was
hired and the subsistence "advanced" to him while the crop was growing.
The fall of the Freedmen's Bureau hindered the transmutation of this
system into a modern wage system, and allowed the laborers to be cheated
by high interest charges on the subsistence advanced and actual cheating
often in book accounts.

The black laborers became deeply dissatisfied under this system and
began to migrate from the country to the cities, where there was an
increasing demand for labor. The employing farmers complained bitterly
of the scarcity of labor and of Negro "laziness," and secured the
enactment of harsher vagrancy and labor contract laws, and statutes
against the "enticement" of laborers. So severe were these laws that it
was often impossible for a laborer to stop work without committing a
felony. Nevertheless competition compelled the landholders to offer more
inducements to the farm hand. The result was the rise of the black share
tenant: the laborer securing better wages saved a little capital and
began to hire land in parcels of forty to eighty acres, furnishing his
own tools and seed and practically raising his own subsistence. In this
way the whole face of the labor contract in the South was, in the decade
1880-90, in process of change from a nominal wage contract to a system
of tenantry. The great plantations were apparently broken up into forty
and eighty acre farms with black farmers. To many it seemed that
emancipation was accomplished, and the black folk were especially filled
with joy and hope.

It soon was evident, however, that the change was only partial. The
landlord still held the land in large parcels. He rented this in small
farms to tenants, but retained direct control. In theory the laborer was
furnishing capital, but in the majority of cases he was borrowing at
least a part of this capital from some merchant.

The retail merchant in this way entered on the scene as middle man
between landlord and laborer. He guaranteed the landowner his rent and
relieved him of details by taking over the furnishing of supplies to the
laborer. He tempted the laborer by a larger stock of more attractive
goods, made a direct contract with him, and took a mortgage on the
growing crop. Thus he soon became the middle man to whom the profit of
the transaction largely flowed, and he began to get rich.

If the new system benefited the merchant and the landlord, it also
brought some benefits to the black laborers. Numbers of these were still
held in peonage, and the mass were laborers working for scant

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

board and clothes; but above these began to rise a large number of
independent tenants and farm owners.

In 1890, therefore, the South was faced by this question: Are we willing
to allow the Negro to advance as a free worker, peasant farmer, metayer,
and small capitalist, with only such handicaps as naturally impede the
poor and ignorant, or is it necessary to erect further artificial
barriers to restrain the advance of the Negroes? The answer was clear
and unmistakable. The advance of the freedmen had been too rapid and the
South feared it; every effort must be made to "keep the Negro in his
place" as a servile caste.

To this end the South strove to make the disfranchisement of the Negroes
effective and final. Up to this time disfranchisement was illegal and
based on intimidation. The new laws passed between 1890 and 1910 sought
on their face to base the right to vote on property and education in
such a way as to exclude poor and illiterate Negroes and admit all
whites. In fact they could be administered so as to exclude nearly all
Negroes. To this was added a series of laws designed publicly to
humiliate and stigmatize Negro blood: as, for example, separate railway
cars; separate seats in street cars, and the like; these things were
added to the separation in schools and churches, and the denial of
redress to seduced colored women, which had long been the custom in the
South. All these new enactments meant not simply separation, but
subordination, caste, humiliation, and flagrant injustice.

To all this was added a series of labor laws making the exploitation of
Negro labor more secure. All this legislation had to be accomplished in
the face of the labor movement throughout the world, and particularly in
the South, where it was beginning to enter among the white workers. This
was accomplished easily, however, by an appeal to race prejudice. No
method of inflaming the darkest passions of men was unused. The lynching
mob was given its glut of blood and egged on by purposely exaggerated
and often wholly invented tales of crime on the part of perhaps the most
peaceful and sweet-tempered race the world has ever known. Under the
flame of this outward noise went the more subtle and dangerous work. The
election laws passed in the states where three-fourths of the Negroes
live, were so ingeniously framed that a black university graduate could
be prevented from voting and the most ignorant white hoodlum could be
admitted to the polls. Labor laws were so arranged that imprisonment for
debt was possible and leaving an

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

employer could be made a penitentiary offense. Negro schools were cut
off with small appropriations or wholly neglected, and a determined
effort was made with wide success to see that no Negro had any voice
either in the making or the administration of local, state, or national
law.

The acquiescence of the white labor vote of the South was further
insured by throwing white and black laborers, so far as possible, into
rival competing groups and making each feel that the one was the cause
of the other's troubles. The neutrality of the white people of the North
was secured through their fear for the safety of large investments in
the South, and through the fatalistic attitude common both in America
and Europe toward the possibility of real advance on the part of the
darker nations.

The reaction of the Negro Americans upon this wholesale and open attempt
to reduce them to serfdom has been interesting. Naturally they began to
organize and protest and in some cases to appeal to the courts. Then, to
their astonishment, there arose a colored leader, Mr. Booker T.
Washington, who advised them to yield to disfranchisement and caste and
wait for greater economic strength and general efficiency before
demanding full rights as American citizens. The white South naturally
agreed with Mr. Washington, and the white North thought they saw here a
chance for peace in the racial conflict and safety for their Southern
investments.

For a time the colored people hesitated. They respected Mr. Washington
for shrewdness and recognized the wisdom of his homely insistence on
thrift and hard work; but gradually they came to see more and more
clearly that, stripped of political power and emasculated by caste, they
could never gain sufficient economic strength to take their place as
modern men. They also realized that any lull in their protests would be
taken advantage of by Negro haters to push their caste program. They
began, therefore, with renewed persistence to fight for their
fundamental rights as American citizens. The struggle tended at first to
bitter personal dissension within the group. But wiser counsels and the
advice of white friends eventually prevailed and raised it to the broad
level of a fight for the fundamental principles of democracy. The
launching of the "Niagara Movement" by twenty-nine daring colored men in
1905, followed by the formation of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People in 1910, marked an epoch in the advance of
the Negro. This latter organization, with its monthly organ, *The* 

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Crisis*, is now
waging a nation-wide fight for justice to Negroes. Other organizations,
and a number of strong Negro weekly papers are aiding in this fight.
What has been the net result of this struggle of half a century?

In 1863 there were about five million persons of Negro descent in the
United States. Of these, four million and more were just being released
from slavery. These slaves could be bought and sold, could move from
place to place only with permission, were forbidden to learn to read or
write, and legally could never hold property or marry. Ninety per cent
were totally illiterate, and only one adult in six was a nominal
Christian.

Fifty years later, in 1913, there were in the United States ten and a
quarter million persons of Negro descent, an increase of one hundred and
five per cent. Legal slavery has been abolished leaving, however,
vestiges in debt slavery, peonage, and the convict lease system. The
mass of the freedmen and their sons have

1\. Earned a living as free and partially free laborers.

2\. Shared the responsibilities of government.

3\. Developed the internal organization of their race.

4\. Aspired to spiritual self-expression.

The Negro was freed as a penniless, landless, naked, ignorant laborer.
There were a few free Negroes who owned property in the South, and a
larger number who owned property in the North; but ninety-nine per cent
of the race in the South were penniless field hands and servants.

To-day there are two and a half million laborers, the majority of whom
are efficient wage earners. Above these are more than a million servants
and tenant farmers; skilled and semi-skilled workers make another
million and at the top of the economic column are 600,000 owners and
managers of farms and businesses, cash tenants, officials, and
professional men. This makes a total of 5,192,535 colored breadwinners
in 1910.

More specifically these breadwinners include 218,972 farm owners and
319,346 cash farm tenants and managers. There were in all 62,755 miners,
288,141 in the building and hand trades; 28,515 workers in clay, glass,
and stone; 41,739 iron and steel workers; 134,102 employees on railways;
62,822 draymen, cab drivers, and liverymen; 133,245 in wholesale and
retail trade; 32,170 in the public service; and 69,471 in professional
service, including 29,750 teachers, 17,495 clergymen, and 4,546
physicians, dentists, trained

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

nurses, etc. Finally, we must not forget 2,175,000 Negro homes, with
their housewives, and 1,620,000 children in school.

Fifty years ago the overwhelming mass of these people were not only
penniless, but were themselves assessed as real estate. By 1875 the
Negroes probably had gotten hold of something between 2,000,000 and
4,000,000 acres of land through their bounties as soldiers and the low
price of land after the war. By 1880 this was increased to about
6,000,000 acres; in 1890 to about 8,000,000 acres; in 1900 to over
12,000,000 acres. In 1910 this land had increased to nearly 20,000,000
acres, a realm as large as Ireland.

The 120,738 farms owned by Negroes in 1890 increased to 218,972 in 1910,
or eighty-one per cent. The value of these farms increased from
$179,796,639 in 1900 to $440,992,439 in 1910; Negroes owned in 1910
about 500,000 homes out of a total of 2,175,000. Their total property in
1900 was estimated at $300,000,000 by the American Economic Association.
On the same basis of calculation it would be worth to-day not less than
$860,000,000.

Despite the disfranchisement of three-fourths of his voting population,
the Negro to-day is a recognized part of the American government. He
holds 7,500 offices in the executive service of the nation, besides
furnishing four regiments in the army and a large number of sailors. In
the state and municipal service be holds nearly 20,000 other offices,
and he furnishes 500,000 of the votes which rule the Union.

In these same years the Negro has relearned the lost art of
organization. Slavery was the almost absolute denial of initiative and
responsibility. To-day Negroes have nearly 40,000 churches, with
edifices worth at least $75,000,000 and controlling nearly 4,000,000
members. They raise themselves $7,500,000 a year for these churches.

There are 200 private schools and colleges managed and almost entirely
supported by Negroes, and these and other public and private Negro
schools have received in 40 years $45,000,000 of Negro money in taxes
and donations. Five millions a year are raised by Negro secret and
beneficial societies which hold at least $6,000,000 in real estate.
Negroes support wholly or in part over 100 old folks' homes and
orphanages, 30 hospitals, and 500 cemeteries. Their organized commercial
life is extending rapidly and includes over 22,000 small retail
businesses and 40 banks.

Above and beyond this material growth has gone the spiritual

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

uplift of a great human race. From contempt and amusement they have
passed to the pity, perplexity, and fear on the part of their neighbors,
while within their own souls they have arisen from apathy and timid
complaint to open protest and more and more manly self-assertion. Where
nine-tenths of them could not read or write in 1860, to-day over
two-thirds can; they have 300 papers and periodicals, and their voice
and expression are compelling attention.

Already in poetry, literature, music, and painting the work of Americans
of Negro descent has gained notable recognition. Instead of being led
and defended by others, as in the past, American Negroes are gaining
their own leaders, their own voices, their own ideals. Self-realization
is thus coming slowly but surely to another of the world's great races,
and they are to-day girding themselves to fight in the van of progress,
not simply for their own rights as men, but for the ideals of the
greater world in which they live: the emancipation of women, universal
peace, democratic government, the socialization of wealth, and human
brotherhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_89"></span>[111:1](dbn13.htm#fr_89) The figures given by
the census are as follows:

1850, mulattoes formed 11.2 per cent of the total Negro population.

1860, mulattoes formed 13.2 per cent of the total Negro population.

18 70, mulattoes formed 12 per cent of the total Negro population.

1890, mulattoes formed 15.2 per cent of the total Negro population.

1910, mulattoes formed 20.9 per cent of the total Negro population.

Or in actual numbers:

1850, 405,751 mulattoes.

1860, 588,352 mulattoes.

1870, 585,601 mulattoes.

1890, 1,132,060 mulattoes.

1910, 2,050,686 mulattoes.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[112:1](dbn13.htm#fr_90) Cf. "The Spanish Jurist
Solorzaris," quoted in Helps: *Spanish Conquest*, IV, 381.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[112:2](dbn13.htm#fr_91) Hurd: *Law of Freedom
and Bondage*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[113:1](dbn13.htm#fr_92) "Obi (Obeah, Obiah, or
Obia) is the adjective; Obe or Obi, the noun. It is of African origin,
probably connected with Egyptian Ob, Aub, or Obron, meaning 'serpent.'
Moses forbids Israelites ever to consult the demon Ob, i.e., 'Charmer,
Wizard.' The Witch of Endor is called Oub or Ob. Oubaois is the name of
the Baselisk al Serpent, emblem of the Sun, and, according to Horns.
Appollo, 'the Ancient Deity of Africa.'"-Edwards: *West Indies*, ed.
1819, II, 106-119. Cf. Johnston: *Negro in the New World*, pp. 65-66;
also *Atlanta University Publications*, No. 8, pp. 5-6.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[115:1](dbn13.htm#fr_93) *Boston Transcript*,
March 24, 1906.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[116:1](dbn13.htm#fr_94) Bassett: *North
Carolina*, pp. 73-76.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[122:1](dbn13.htm#fr_95) Cf. Wilson: *The Black
Phalanx*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[122:2](dbn13.htm#fr_96) Wilson: *The Black
Phalanx*, p. 108.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[123:1](dbn13.htm#fr_97) *American Historical
Review*, Vol. XV.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[125:1](dbn13.htm#fr_98) Report to President
Johnson.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[126:1](dbn13.htm#fr_99) *Reconstruction and the
Constitution*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[126:2](dbn13.htm#fr_100) Brewster: *Sketches*,
etc.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[127:1](dbn13.htm#fr_101) McPherson:
*Reconstruction*, p. 52.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[127:2](dbn13.htm#fr_102) Report to the
President, 1865.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[129:1](dbn13.htm#fr_103) *American Historical
Review*, Vol. XV, No. 4.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[130:1](dbn13.htm#fr_104) *Occasional Papers*,
American Negro Academy, No. 6.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[131:1](dbn13.htm#fr_105) *Occasional Papers*,
American Negro Academy, No. 6.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[131:2](dbn13.htm#fr_106) *Jackson (Miss.)
Clarion*, April 24, 1873.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[131:3](dbn13.htm#fr_107) Allen: *Governor
Chamberlain's Administration*, p. 82.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[132:1](dbn13.htm#fr_108) Reconstruction
Constitutions, practically unaltered, were kept in Florida, 1868-85,
seventeen years; Virginia, 1870-1902, thirty-two years; South Carolina,
1868-95, twenty-seven years; Mississippi, 1868-90, twenty-two years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Negro Problems](dbn14)

</div>
