<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn10)  [Next](dbn12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

# IX    THE TRADE IN MEN

Color was never a badge of slavery in the ancient or medieval world, nor
has it been in the modern world outside of Christian states. Homer sings
of a black man, a "reverend herald"

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Of visage solemn, sad, but sable hue,  
Short, woolly curls, o’erfleeced his bending head, . . .  
Eurybiates, in whose large soul alone,  
Ulysses viewed an image of his own.

</div>

Greece and Rome had their chief supplies of slaves from Europe and Asia.
Egypt enslaved races of all colors, and if there were more blacks than
others among her slaves, there were also more blacks among her nobles
and Pharaohs, and both facts are explained by her racial origin and
geographical position. The fall of Rome led to a cessation of the slave
trade, but after a long interval came the white slave trade of the
Saracens and Moors, and finally the modern trade in Negroes.

Slavery as it exists universally among primitive people is a system
whereby captives in war are put to tasks about the homes and in the
fields, thus releasing the warriors for systematic fighting and the
women for leisure. Such slavery has been common among all peoples and
was wide-spread in Africa. The relative number of African slaves under
these conditions was small and the labor not hard; they were members of
the family and might and did often rise to high position in the tribe.

Remembering that in the fifteenth century there was no great disparity
between the civilization of Negroland and that of Europe, what made the
striking difference in subsequent development? European civilization,
cut off by physical barriers from further incursions of barbaric races,
settled more and more to systematic industry and

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

to the domination of one religion; African culture and industries were
threatened by powerful barbarians from the west and central regions of
the continent and by the Moors in the north, and Islam had only
partially converted the leading peoples.

When, therefore, a demand for workmen arose in America, European
exportation was limited by religious ties and economic stability.
African exportation was encouraged not simply by the Christian attitude
toward heathen, but also by the Moslem enmity toward the unconverted
Negroes. Two great modern religions, therefore, agreed at least in the
policy of enslaving heathen blacks, while the overthrow of black Askias
by the Moors at Tenkadibou brought that economic chaos among the
advanced Negro peoples and movement among the more barbarous tribes
which proved of prime advantage to the development of a systematic trade
in men.

The modern slave trade began with the Mohammedan conquests in Africa,
when heathen Negroes were seized to supply the harems, and as soldiers
and servants. They were bought from the masters and seized in war, until
the growing wealth and luxury of the conquerors demanded larger numbers.
Then Negroes from the Egyptian Sudan, Abyssinia, and Zanzibar began to
pass into Arabia, Persia, and India in increased numbers. As Negro
kingdoms and tribes rose to power they found the slave trade lucrative
and natural, since the raids in which slaves were captured were ordinary
inter-tribal wars. It was not until the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries that the demand for slaves in Christian lands made slaves the
object, and not the incident, of African wars.

In Mohammedan countries there were gleams of hope in slavery. In fiction
and in truth the black slave had a chance. Once converted to Islam, he
became a brother to the best, and the brotherhood of the faith was not
the sort of idle lie that Christian slave masters made it. In Arabia
black leaders arose like Antar; in India black slaves carved out
principalities where their descendants still rule.

Some Negro slaves were brought to Europe by the Spaniards in the
fourteenth century, and a small trade was continued by the Portuguese,
who conquered territory from the "tawny" Moors of North Africa in the
early fifteenth century. Later, after their severe repulse at
Al-Kasr-Al-Kabu, the Portuguese began to creep down the west coast in
quest of trade. They reached the River of Gold in 1441, and their story
is that their leader seized certain free Moors and the next year
exchanged them for ten black slaves, a target of hide,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

ostrich eggs, and some gold dust. The trade was easily justified on the
ground that the Moors were Mohammedans and refused to be converted to
Christianity, while heathen Negroes would be better subjects for
conversion and stronger laborers. In the next few years a small number
of Negroes continued to be imported into Spain and Portugal as servants.
We find, for instance, in 1474, that Negro slaves were common in
Seville. There is a letter from Ferdinand and Isabella in the year 1474
to a celebrated Negro, Juan de Valladolid, commonly called the "Negro
Count", (El Conde Negro), nominating him to the office of "Mayoral of
the Negroes" in Seville. The slaves were apparently treated kindly,
allowed to keep their own dances and festivals, and to have their own
chief, who represented them in the courts, as against their own masters,
and settled their private quarrels.

Between 1455 and 1492 little mention is made of slaves in the trade with
Africa. Columbus is said to have suggested Negroes for America, but
Ferdinand and Isabella refused. Nevertheless, by 1501, we have the first
incidental mention of Negroes going to America in a declaration that
Negro slaves "born in the power of Christians were to be allowed to pass
to the Indies, and the officers of the royal revenue were to receive the
money to be paid for their permits."

About 1501 Ovando, Governor of Spanish America, was objecting to Negro
slaves and "solicited that no Negro slaves should be sent to Hispaniola,
for they fled amongst the Indians and taught them bad customs, and never
could be captured." Nevertheless a letter from the king to Ovando, dated
Segovia, the fifteenth of September, 1505, says, "I will send more Negro
slaves as you request; I think there may be a hundred. At each time a
trustworthy person will go with them who may have some share in the gold
they may collect and may promise them ease if they work well." <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69) There is a record of a hundred slaves
being sent out this very year, and Diego Columbus was notified of fifty
to he sent from Seville for the mines in 1510.

After this time frequent notices show that Negroes were common in the
new world. <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) When Pizarro, for
instance, had been slain in Peru, his body was dragged to the cathedral
by two Negroes. After the battle of Anaquito the head of the viceroy was
cut off by a Negro, and during the great earthquake in Guatemala a most
remarkable figure was a gigantic Negro seen in various parts of the
city.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nunez had thirty
Negroes with him on the top of the Sierras, and there was rumor of an
aboriginal tribe of Negroes in South America. One of the last acts of
King Ferdinand was to urge that no more Negroes be sent to the West
Indies, but under Charles V, Bishop Las Casas drew up a plan of assisted
migration to America and asked in 1517 the right for immigrants to
import twelve Negro slaves, in return for which the Indians were to be
freed.

Las Casas, writing in his old age, owns his error: "This advice that
license should be given to bring Negro slaves to these lands, the
Clerigo Casas first gave, not considering the injustice with which the
Portuguese take them and make them slaves; which advice, after he had
apprehended the nature of the thing, be would not have given for all he
had in the world. For he always held that they had been made slaves
unjustly and tyrannically; for the same reason holds good of them as of
the Indians." <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71)

As soon as the plan was broached a Savoyard, Lorens de Gomenot, Governor
of Bresa, obtained a monopoly of this proposed trade and shrewdly sold
it to the Genoese for twenty-five thousand ducats. Other monopolies were
granted in 1523, 1527, and 1528. <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72)
Thus the American trade became established and gradually grew, passing
successively into the hands of the Portuguese, the Dutch, the French,
and the English.

At first the trade was of the same kind and volume as that already
passing northward over the desert routes. Soon, however, the American
trade developed. A strong, unchecked demand for brute labor in the West
Indies and on the continent of America grew until it culminated in the
eighteenth century, when Negro slaves were crossing the Atlantic at the
rate of fifty to one hundred thousand a year. This called for slave
raiding on a scale that drew upon every part of Africa--upon the west
coast, the western and Egyptian Sudan, the valley of the Congo,
Abyssinia, the lake regions, the east coast, and Madagascar. Not simply
the degraded and weaker types of Negroes were seized, but the strong
Bantu, the Mandingo and Songhay, the Nubian and Nile Negroes, the Fula,
and even the Asiatic Malay, were represented in the raids.

There was thus begun in modern days a new slavery and slave trade. It
was different from that of the past, because 'more and more it came in
time to be founded on racial caste, and this caste was

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

made the foundation of a new industrial system. For four hundred years,
from 1450 to 1850, European civilization carried on a systematic trade
in human beings of such tremendous proportions that the physical,
economic, and moral effects are still plainly to be remarked throughout
the world. To this must be added the large slave trade of Mussulman
lands, which began with the seventh century and raged almost unchecked
until the end of the nineteenth century.

These were not days of decadence, but a period that gave the world
Shakespeare, Martin Luther, and Raphael, Haroun-al-Raschid and Abraham
Lincoln. It was the day of the greatest expansion of two of the world's
most pretentious religions and of the beginnings of the modern
organization of industry. In the midst of this advance and uplift this
slave trade and slavery spread more human misery, inculcated more
disrespect for and neglect of humanity, a greater callousness to
suffering, and more petty, cruel, human hatred than can well be
calculated. We may excuse and palliate it, and write history so as to
let men forget it; it remains the most inexcusable and despicable blot
on modern human history.

The Portuguese built the first slave-trading fort at Elmina, on the Gold
Coast, in 1482, and extended their trade down the west coast and up the
east coast. Under them the abominable traffic grew larger and larger,
until it became far the most important in money value of all the
commerce of the Zambesi basin. There could be no extension of
agriculture, no mining, no progress of any kind where it was so
extensively carried on. <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73)

It was the Dutch, however, who launched the oversea slave trade as a
regular institution. They began their fight for freedom from Spain in
1579; in 1595, as a war measure against Spain, who at that time was
dominating Portugal, they made their first voyage to Guinea. By 1621
they had captured Portugal's various slave forts on the west coast and
they proceeded to open sixteen forts along the coast of the Gulf of
Guinea. Ships sailed from Holland to Africa, got slaves in exchange for
their goods, carried the slaves to the West Indies or Brazil, and
returned home laden with sugar. In 1621 the private companies trading in
the west were all merged into the Dutch West India Company, which sent
in four years fifteen thousand four hundred and thirty Negroes to
Brazil, carried on war with Spain, supplied even the English
plantations, and gradually became the great slave carrier of the day.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

The commercial supremacy of the Dutch early excited the envy and
emulation of the English. The Navigation Ordinance of 1651 was aimed at
them, and two wars were necessary to wrest the slave trade from them and
place it in the hands of the English. The final terms of peace, among
other things, surrendered New Netherlands to England and opened the way
for England to become henceforth the world's greatest slave trader.

The English trade began with Sir John Hawkins' voyages in 1562 and
later, in which "the Jesus, our chiefe shippe" played a leading part.
Desultory trade was kept up by the English until the middle of the
seventeenth century, when English chartered slave-trading companies
began to appear. In 1662 the "Royal Adventurers," including the king,
the queen dowager, and the Duke of York, invested in the trade, and
finally the Royal African Company, which became the world's chief slave
trader, was formed in 1672 and carried on a growing trade for a quarter
of a century. Jamaica had finally been captured and held by Oliver
Cromwell in 1655 and formed a West Indian base for the trade in men.

The chief contract for trade in Negroes was the celebrated "Asiento" or
agreement of the King of Spain to the importation of slaves into Spanish
domains. The Pope's Bull or Demarkation, 1493, debarred Spain from
African possessions, and compelled her to contract with other nations
for slaves, This contract was in the hands of the Portuguese in 1600; in
1640 the Dutch received it, and in 1701 the French. The War of the
Spanish Succession brought this monopoly to England.

This Asiento of 1713 was an agreement between England and Spain by which
the latter granted the former a monopoly of the Spanish colonial slave
trade for thirty years, and England engaged to supply the colonies
within that time with at least one hundred and forty-four thousand
slaves at the rate of forty-eight hundred per year. The English counted
this prize as the greatest result of the Treaty of Utrecht (1713), which
ended the mighty struggle against the power of Louis XIV. The English
held the monopoly until the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748), although
they had to go to war over it in 1739.

From this agreement the slave traders reaped a harvest. The trade
centered at Liverpool, and that city's commercial greatness was built
largely on this foundation. In 1709 it sent out one slaver of thirty
tons' burden; encouraged by Parliamentary subsidies which

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

amounted to nearly half a million dollars between 1729 and 1750, the
trade amounted to fifty-three ships in 1751; eighty-six in 1765, and at
the beginning of the nineteenth century one hundred and eighty-five,
which carried forty-nine thousand two hundred and thirteen slaves in one
year.

The slave trade thus begun by the Portuguese, enlarged by the Dutch, and
carried to its culmination by. the English centered on the west coast
near the seat of perhaps the oldest and most interesting culture of
Africa. It came at a critical time. The culture of Yoruba, Benin,
Mossiland, and Nupe had exhausted itself in a desperate attempt to stem
the on-coming flood of Mohammedan culture. It has succeeded in
maintaining its small, loosely federated city-states suited to trade,
industry, and art. It had developed strong resistance toward the Sudan
state builders toward the north, as in the case of the fighting Mossi;
but behind this warlike resistance Jay the peaceful city life which gave
industrial ideas to Byzantium and shared something of Ethiopian and
Mediterranean culture.

The first advent of the slave traders increased and encouraged native
industry, as is evidenced by the bronze work of Benin; but soon this was
pushed into the background, for it was not bronze metal but bronze flesh
that Europe wanted. A new tyranny, bloodthirsty, cruel, and built on
war, forced itself forward in the Niger delta. The powerful state of
Dahomey arose early in the eighteenth century and became a devastating
tyranny, reaching its highest power early in the nineteenth century.
Ashanti, a similar kingdom, began its conquests in 1719 and grew with
the slave trade. Thus state building in West Africa began to replace the
city economy, but it was a state built on war and on war supported and
encouraged largely for the sake of trade in human flesh. The native
industries were changed and disorganized. Family ties and government
were weakened. Far into the heart of Africa this devilish
disintegration, coupled with Christian rum and Mohammedan raiding,
penetrated. The face of Africa was turned south on these slave traders
instead of northward toward the Mediterranean, where for two thousand
years and more Europe and Africa had met in legitimate trade and mutual
respect. The full significance of the battle of Tenkadibou, which
overthrew the Askias, was now clear, Hereafter Africa for centuries was
to appear before the world, not as the land of gold and ivory, of Mansa
Musa and Meroe, but as a bound and captive slave, dumb and degraded.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

The natural desire to avoid a painful subject has led historians to
gloss over the details of the slave trade and leave the impression that
it was a local west-coast phenomenon and confined to a few years. It
was, on the contrary, continent wide and centuries long and an economic,
social, and political catastrophe probably unparalleled in human
history.

The exact proportions of the slave trade can be estimated only
approximately. From 1680 to 1688 we know that the English African
Company alone sent 249 ships to Africa, shipped there 60,783 Negro
slaves, and after losing 14,387 on the middle passage, delivered 46,396
in America.

It seems probable that 25,000 Negroes a year arrived in America between
1698 and 1707. After the Asiento of 1713 this number rose to 30,000
annually, and before the Revolutionary War it had reached at least
40,000 and perhaps 100,000 slaves a year.

The total number of slaves imported is not known. Dunbar estimates that
nearly 900,000 came to America in the sixteenth century, 2,750,000 in
the seventeenth, 7,000,000 in the eighteenth, and over 4,000,000 in the
nineteenth, perhaps 15,000,000 in all. Certainly it seems that at least
10,000,000 Negroes were expatriated. Probably every slave imported
represented on the average five corpses in Africa or on the high seas.
The American slave trade, therefore, meant the elimination of at least
60,000,000 Negroes from their fatherland. The Mohammedan slave trade
meant the expatriation or forcible migration in Africa of nearly as many
more. It would be conservative, then, to say that the slave trade cost
Negro Africa 100,000,000 souls. And yet people ask to-day the cause of
the stagnation of culture in that land since 1600!

Such a large number of slaves could be supplied only by organized slave
raiding in every comer of Africa. The African continent gradually became
revolutionized. Whole regions were depopulated, whole tribes
disappeared; villages were built in caves and on bills or in forest
fastnesses; the character of peoples like those of Benin developed their
worst excesses of cruelty instead of the already flourishing arts of
peace. The dark, irresistible grasp of fetish took firmer hold on men's
minds.

Further advances toward civilization became impossible. Not only was
there the immense demand for slaves which had its outlet on the west
coast, but the slave caravans were streaming up through the desert to
the Mediterranean coast and down the valley of the Nile

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

to the centers of Mohammedanism. It was a rape of a continent to an
extent never paralleled in ancient or modern times.

In the American trade there was not only the horrors of the slave raid,
which lined the winding paths of the African jungles with bleached
bones, but there was also the horrors of what was called the "middle
passage," that is, the voyage across the Atlantic. As Sir William Dolben
said, "The Negroes were chained to each other hand and foot, and stowed
so close that they were not allowed above a foot and a half for each in
breadth. Thus crammed together like herrings in a barrel, they
contracted putrid and fatal disorders; so that they who came to inspect
them in a morning had occasionally to pick dead slaves out of their
rows, and to unchain their carcases from the bodies of their wretched
fellow-sufferers to whom they had been fastened." <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74)

It was estimated that out of every one hundred lot shipped from Africa
only about fifty lived to be effective laborers across the sea, and
among the whites more seamen died in that trade in one year than in the
whole remaining trade of England in two. The full realization of the
horrors of the slave trade was slow in reaching the ears and conscience
of the modern world, just as to-day the treatment of dark natives in
European colonies is brought to publicity with the greatest difficulty.
The first move against the slave trade in England came in Parliament in
1776, but it was not until thirty-one years later, in 1807, that the
trade was banned through the arduous labors of Clarkson, Wilberforce,
Sharpe, and others.

Denmark had already abolished the trade, and the United States attempted
to do so the following year. Portugal and Spain were induced to abolish
the trade between 1815 and 1830. Notwithstanding these laws, the
contraband trade went on until the beginning of the Civil War in
America. The reasons for this were the enormous profit of the trade and
the continued demand of the American slave barons who had no sympathy
with the efforts to stop their source of cheap labor supply.

However, philanthropy was not working alone to overthrow Negro slavery
and the slave trade. It was seen, first in England and later in other
countries, that slavery as an industrial system could not be made to
work satisfactorily in modern times. Its cost was too great, and one of
the causes of this cost was the slave insurrections

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

from the very beginning, when the slaves rose on the plantation of Diego
Columbus down to the Civil War in America. Actual and potential slave
insurrection in the West Indies, in North and South America, kept the
slave owners in apprehension and turmoil, or called for a police system
difficult to maintain. In North America revolt finally took the form of
organized running away to the North, and this, with the growing scarcity
of suitable land and the moral revolt, led to the Civil War and the
disappearance of the American slave trade.

There was still, however, the Mohammedan slave trade to deal with, and
this has been the work of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
In the last quarter of the nineteenth century ten thousand slaves
annually were being distributed on the southern and eastern coast of the
Mediterranean and at the great slave market in Bornu.

On the east coast of Africa in 186z nineteen thousand slaves were passed
into Zanzibar and thence into Arabia and Persia. As late as 1880, three
thousand annually were being thus transplanted, but now the trade is
about stopped. To-day the only centers of actual slave trading may be
said to be the cocoa plantations of the Portuguese Islands on the west
coast of Africa, and the Congo Free State.

Such is the story of the Rape of Ethiopia--a sordid, pitiful, cruel
tale. Raphael painted, Luther preached, Corneille wrote, and Milton
sung; and through it all, for four hundred years, the dark captives
wound to the sea amid the bleaching bones of the dead; for four hundred
years the sharks followed the scurrying ships; for four hundred years
America was strewn with the living and dying millions of a transplanted
race; for four hundred years Ethiopia stretched forth her hands unto
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[88:1](dbn11.htm#fr_69) Cf. Helps: *Spanish
Conquest*, IV, 401.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[88:2](dbn11.htm#fr_70) Helps, *op. cit.*, I,
219-220.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[89:1](dbn11.htm#fr_71) Helps, *op. cit.*, II,
18-19.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[89:2](dbn11.htm#fr_72) Helps, *op. cit.*, III,
211-212.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[90:1](dbn11.htm#fr_73) Theal: *History and
Ethnography of South Africa before 1795*, I, 476.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[94:1](dbn11.htm#fr_74) Ingram: *History of
Slavery*, p. 112.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. The West Indies and Latin America](dbn12)

</div>
