<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dbn11)  [Next](dbn13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486414434/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Negro*, by W.E.B. Du Bois, \[1915\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

# X    THE WEST INDIES AND LATIN AMERICA

That was a wonderful century, the fifteenth, when men realized that
beyond the scowling waste of western waters were dreams come true.
Curious and yet crassly human it is that, with all this poetry and
romance, arose at once the filthiest institution of the modern world and
the costliest. For on Negro slavery in America was built, not simply the
abortive cotton kingdom, but the foundations of that modern imperialism
which is based on the despising of backward men.

According to some accounts Alonzo, "the Negro," piloted one of the ships
of Columbus, and certainly there was Negro blood among his sailors. As
early as 1528 there were nearly ten thousand Negroes in the new world.
We hear of them in all parts. In Honduras, for instance, a Negro is sent
to burn a native village; in 1555 the town council of Santiago de Chile
voted to allow an enfranchised Negro possession of land in the town, and
evidently treated him just as white applicants were treated. D’Allyon,
who explored the coast of Virginia in the first quarter of the sixteenth
century, used Negro slaves (who afterward revolted) to build his ships
and help in exploration; Balboa had with him thirty Negroes, who, in
1513, helped to build the first ships on the Pacific coast; Cortez had
three hundred Negro porters in 1522.

Before. 1530 there were enough Negroes in Mexico to lead to an
insurrection, where the Negroes fought desperately, but were overcome
and their ringleaders executed. Later the followers of another Negro
insurgent, Bayano, were captured and sent back to Spain. Negroes founded
the town of Santiago del Principe in 1570, and in 1540 a Negro slave of
Hernandez de Alarcon was the only one of the party to carry a message
across the country to the Zunis of New Mexico. A Negro, Stephen
Dorantes, discovered New Mexico. This

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Stephen or
"Estevanico" was sent ahead by certain Spanish friars to the "Seven
Cities of Cibola." "As soon as Stephen had left said friars, he
determined to earn all the reputation and honor for himself, and that
the boldness and daring of having alone discovered those villages of
high stories so much spoken of throughout that country should be
attributed to him; and carrying along with him the people who followed
him, he endeavored to cross the wilderness which is between Cibola and
the country he had gone through, and he was so far ahead of the friars
that when they arrived at Chichilticalli, which is on the edge of the
wilderness, he was already at Cibola, which is eighty leagues of
wilderness beyond." But the Indians of the new and strange country took
alarm and concluded that Stephen "must be a spy or guide for some
nations who intended to come and conquer them, because it seemed to them
unreasonable for him to say that the people were white in the country
from which he came, being black himself and being sent by them." <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75)

Slaves imported under the Asiento treaties went to all parts of the
Americas. Spanish America had by the close of the eighteenth century ten
thousand in Santo Domingo, eighty-four thousand in Cuba, fifty thousand
in Porto Rico, sixty thousand in Louisiana and Florida, and sixty
thousand in Central and South America.

The history of the Negro in Spanish America centered in Cuba, Venezuela,
and Central America. In the sixteenth century slaves began to arrive in
Cuba and Negroes joined many of the exploring expeditions from there to
various parts of America. The slave trade greatly increased in the
latter part of the eighteenth century, and after the revolution in Hayti
large numbers of French emigrants from that island settled in Cuba. This
and Spanish greed increased the harshness of slavery and eventually led
to revolt among the Negroes. In 1844 Governor O'Donnell began a cruel
persecution of the blacks on account of a plot discovered among them.
Finally in 1866 the Ten Years' War broke out in which Negro and white
rebels joined. They demanded the abolition of slavery and equal
political rights for natives and foreigners, whites and blacks. The war
was cruel and bloody but ended in 1878 with the abolition of slavery,
while a further uprising the following year secured civil rights for
Negroes. Spanish economic oppression continued, however, and the leading
chiefs of the Ten Years' War including such

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

leaders as the mulatto, Antonio Maceo, with large numbers of Negro
soldiers, took the field again in 1895. The result was the freeing of
Cuba by the intervention of the United States. Negro regiments from the
United States played here a leading role. A number of leaders in Cuba in
political, industrial, and literary lines have been men of Negro
descent.

Slavery was abolished by Guatemala in 1824 and by Mexico in 1829.
Argentine, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, and Paraguay ceased to recognize it
about 1825. Between 1840 and 1845 it came to an end in Colombia,
Venezuela, and Ecquador. Bolivar, Paez, Sucre, and other South American
leaders used Negro soldiers in fighting for freedom (1814-16), and Hayti
twice at critical times rendered assistance and received Bolivar twice
as a refugee.

Brazil was the center of Portuguese slavery, but slaves were not
introduced in large numbers until about 1720, when diamonds were
discovered in the territory above Rio Janeiro. Gradually the seaboard
from Pernambuco to Rio Janeiro and beyond became filled with Negroes,
and although the slave trade north of the equator was theoretically
abolished by Portugal in 1815 and south of the equator in 1830, and by
Brazil in these regions in 1826 and 1830, nevertheless between 1825 and
1850 over a million and a quarter of Negroes were introduced. Not until
Brazil abolished slavery in 1888 did the importation wholly cease.
Brazilian slavery allowed the slave to purchase his freedom, and the
color line was not strict. Even in the eighteenth century there were
black clergy and bishops; indeed the Negro clergy seem to have been on a
higher moral level than the whites.

Insurrection was often attempted, especially among the Mohammedan
Negroes around Bahia. In 1695 a tribe of revolted slaves held out for a
long time. In 1719 a widespread conspiracy failed, but many of the
leaders fled to the forest. In 1828 a thousand rose in revolt at Bahia,
and again in 1830. From 1831 to 1837 revolt was in the air, and in 1835
came the great revolt of the Mohammedans, who attempted to enthrone a
queen. The Negroes fought with furious bravery, but were finally
defeated.

By 1872 the number of free Negroes had very greatly increased, so that
emancipation did not come as a shock. While Mohammedan Negroes still
gave trouble and were in some cases sent back to Africa, yet on the
whole emancipation was peaceful, and whites, Negroes, and Indians are
to-day amalgamating into a new race. "At

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

the present moment there is scarcely a lowly or a highly placed federal
or provincial official at the head of or within any of the great
departments of state that has not more or less Negro or Amer-Indian
blood in his veins." <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

Lord Bryce says, "It is hardly too much to say that along the coast from
Rio to Bahia and Pernambuco, as well as in parts of the interior behind
these two cities, the black population predominates. . . . The Brazilian
lower class intermarries freely with the black people; the Brazilian
middle class intermarries with mulattoes and Quadroons. Brazil is the
one country in the world, besides the Portuguese colonies on the east
and west coasts of Africa, in which a fusion of the European and African
races is proceeding unchecked by law or custom. The doctrines of human
equality and human solidarity have here their perfect work. The result
is so far satisfactory that there is little or no class friction. The
white man does not lynch or maltreat the Negro; indeed I have never
heard of a lynching anywhere in South America except occasionally as
part of a political convulsion. The Negro is not accused of insolence
and does not seem to develop any more criminality than naturally belongs
to any ignorant population with loose notions of morality and property.

'What ultimate effect the intermixture of blood will have on the
European element in Brazil I will not venture to predict. If one may
judge from a few remarkable cases, it will not necessarily reduce the
intellectual standard. One of the ablest and most refined Brazilians I
have known had some color; and other such cases have been mentioned to
me. Assumptions and preconceptions must be eschewed, however plausible
they may seem." <span id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77)

A Brazilian writer said at the First Races Congress: "The coöperation of
the *metis* <span id="fr_78"></span>[3](#fn_78) in the advance of Brazil
is notorious and far from inconsiderable. They played the chief part
during many years in Brazil in the campaign for the abolition of
slavery. I could quote celebrated names of more than one of these metis
who put themselves at the head of the literary movement. They fought
with firmness and intrepidity in the press and on the platform. They
faced with courage the gravest perils to which they were exposed in
their struggle against the powerful slave owners, who had the protection
of a conservative government. They gave evidence of sentiments of

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

patriotism, self-denial, and appreciation during the long campaign in
Paraguay, fighting heroically at the boarding of the ships in the naval
battle of Riachuelo and in the attacks on the Brazilian army, on
numerous occasions in the course of this long South American war. It was
owing to their support that the republic was erected on the ruins of the
empire." <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79)

The Dutch brought the first slaves to the North American continent. John
Rolfe relates that the last of August, 1619, there came to Virginia "a
Dutch man of warre that sold us twenty Negars." <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80) This was probably one of the ships of the
numerous private Dutch trading companies which early entered into the
developed and the lucrative African slave trade. Although the Dutch thus
commenced the continental slave trade they did not actually furnish a
very large number of slaves to-the English colonies outside the West
Indies. A small trade had by 1698 brought a few thousand to New York and
still fewer to New Jersey.

The Dutch found better scope for slaves in Guiana, which they settled in
1616. Sugar cane became the staple crop, but the Negroes early began to
revolt and the Dutch brought in East Indian coolies. The slaves were
badly treated and the runaways joined the revolted Bush Negroes in the
interior. From 1715 to 1775 there was continuous fighting with the Bush
Negroes or insurrections, until at last in 1749 a formal treaty between
sixteen hundred Negroes and the Dutch was made. Immediately a new group
revolted under a Mohammedan, Arabi, and they obtained land and liberty.
In 1763 the coast Negroes revolted. They were checked, but made terms
and settled in the interior. The Bush Negroes fought against both French
and English to save Guiana to the Dutch, but Guiana was eventually
divided between the three. The Bush Negroes still maintain their
independence and vigor.

The French encouraged settlements in the West Indies in the seventeenth
century, but at last, finding that French immigrants would not come,
they began about 1642 to import Negroes. Owing to wars with England,
slaves were supplied by the Dutch and Portuguese, although the Royal
Senegal Company held the coveted Asiento from 1701 to 1713.

It was in the island of Hayti, however, that French slavery centered.
Pirates from many nations, but chiefly French, began to frequent

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the island, and in 1663 the French annexed the eastern part, thus
dividing the island between France and Spain. By 1680 there were so many
slaves and mulattoes that Louis XIV issued his celebrated Code Noir,
which was notable in compelling bachelor masters, fathers of slave
children, to marry their concubines. Children followed the condition of
the mother as to slavery or freedom; they could have no property; harsh
punishments were provided for, but families could not be separated by
sale except in the case of grown children; emancipation with full civil
rights was made possible for any slave twenty years of age or more. When
Louisiana was settled and the Alabama coast, slaves were introduced
there. Louisiana was transferred to Spain in 1762, against the
resistance of both settlers and slaves, but Spain took possession in
1769 and introduced more Negroes.

Later, in Hayti, a more liberal policy encouraged trade; war was over
and capital and slaves poured in. Sugar, coffee, chocolate, indigo,
dyes, and spices were raised. There were large numbers of mulattoes,
many of whom were educated in France, and many masters married Negro
women who had inherited large properties, just as in the United States
to-day white men are marrying eagerly the landed Indian women in the
West. When white immigration increased in 1749, however, prejudice arose
against these mulattoes and severe laws were passed depriving them of
civil rights, entrance into the professions, and the right to hold
office; severe edicts were enforced as to clothing, names, and social
intercourse. Finally, after 1777, mulattoes were forbidden to come to
France.

When the French Revolution broke out, the Haytians managed to send two
delegates to Paris. Nevertheless the planters maintained the upper hand,
and one of the colored delegates, Oge, on returning, started a small
rebellion. He and his companions were killed with great brutality. This
led the French government to grant full civil rights to free Negroes,
Immediately planters and free Negroes flew to arms against each other
and then, suddenly, August 22, 1791, the black slaves, of whom there
were four hundred and fifty-two thousand, arose in revolt to help the
free Negroes.

For many years runaway slaves had hidden in the mountains under their
own chiefs. One of the earliest of these chiefs was Polydor, in 1724,
who was succeeded by Macandal. The great chief of these runaways or
"Maroons" at the time of the slave revolt was Jean François, who was
soon succeeded by Biassou.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

Pierre Dominic Toussaint, known as Toussaint L’Ouverture, joined these
Maroon bands, where he was called "the doctor of the armies of the
king," and soon became chief aid to Jean François and Biassou. Upon
their deaths Toussaint rose to the chief command. He acquired complete
control over the blacks, not only in military matters, but in politics
and social organization; "the soldiers regarded him as a superior being,
and the farmers prostrated themselves before him. All his generals
trembled before him (Dessalines did not dare to look in his face), and
all the world trembled before his generals." <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81)

The revolt once started, blacks and mulattoes murdered whites without
mercy and the whites retaliated. Commissioners were sent from France,
who asked simply civil rights for freedmen, and not emancipation. Indeed
that was all that Toussaint himself had as yet demanded. The planters
intrigued with the British and this, together with the beheading of the
king (an impious act in the eyes of Negroes), induced Toussaint to join
the Spaniards. In 1793 British troops were landed and the French
commissioners in desperation declared the slaves emancipated. This at
once won back Toussaint from the Spaniards. He became supreme in the
north, while Rigaud, leader of the mulattoes, held the south and the
west. By 1798 the British, having lost most of their forces by yellow
fever, surrendered Mole St. Nicholas to Toussaint and departed. Rigaud
finally left for France, and Toussaint in 1800 was master of Hayti. He
promulgated a constitution under which Hayti was to be a self-governing
colony; all men were equal before the law, and trade was practically
free. Toussaint was to be president for life, with the power to name his
successor.

Napoleon Bonaparte, master of France, had at this time dreams of a great
American empire, and replied to Toussaint's new government by sending
twenty-five thousand men under his brother-in-law to subdue the
presumptuous Negroes, as a preliminary step to his occupation and
development of the Mississippi valley. Fierce fighting and yellow fever
decimated the French, but matters went hard with the Negroes too, and
Toussaint finally offered to yield. He was courteously received with
military honors and then, as soon as possible, treacherously seized,
bound, and sent to France. He was imprisoned at Fort Joux and died,
perhaps of poison, after studied humiliations, April 7, 1803.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

Thus perished the greatest of American Negroes and one of the great men
of all time, at the age of fifty-six. A French planter said, "God in his
terrestrial globe did not commune with a purer spirit." <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) Wendell Phillips said, "Some doubt the
courage of the Negro. Go to Hayti and stand on those fifty thousand
graves of the best soldiers France ever had and ask them what they think
of the Negro's sword. I would call him Napoleon, but Napoleon made his
way to empire over broken oaths and through a sea of blood. This man
never broke his word. I would call him Cromwell, but Cromwell was only a
soldier, and the state he founded went down with him into his grave. I
would call him Washington, but the great Virginian held slaves. This man
risked his empire rather than permit the slave trade in the humblest
village of his dominions. You think me a fanatic, for you read history,
not with your eyes, but with your prejudices. But fifty years hence,
when Truth gets a bearing, the Muse of history will put Phocion for the
Greek, Brutus for the Roman, Hampden for the English, La Fayette for
France, choose Washington as the bright, consummate flower of our
earlier civilization, then, dipping her pen in the sunlight, will write
in the clear blue, above them all, the name of the soldier, the
statesman, the martyr, Toussaint L’Ouverture."

The treacherous killing of Toussaint did not conquer Hayti. In 1802 and
1803 some forty thousand French soldiers died of war and fever. A new
colored leader, Dessalines, arose and all the eight thousand remaining
French surrendered to the blockading British fleet.

The effect of all this was far-reaching. Napoleon gave up his dream of
American empire and sold Louisiana for a song. "Thus, all of Indian
Territory, all of Kansas and Nebraska and Iowa and Wyoming and Montana
and the Dakotas, and most of Colorado and Minnesota, and all of
Washington and Oregon states, came to us as the indirect work of a
despised Negro. Praise, if you will, the work of a Robert Livingstone or
a Jefferson, but to-day let us not forget our debt to Toussaint
L’Ouverture, who was indirectly the means of America's expansion by the
Louisiana Purchase of 1803." <span id="fr_83"></span>[2](#fn_83)

With the freedom of Hayti in 1801 came a century of struggle to fit the
people for the freedom they had won. They were yet slaves, crushed by a
cruel servitude, without education or religious instruction.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Haytian
leaders united upon Dessalines to maintain the independence of the
republic. Dessalines, like Toussaint and his lieutenant Christophe, was
noted in slavery days for his severity toward his fellows and the
discipline which he insisted on. He had other characteristics of African
chieftains. "There were seasons when he broke through his natural
sullenness and showed himself open, affable, and even generous. His
vanity was excessive and manifested itself in singular
perversities." <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) He was a man of great
personal bravery and succeeded in maintaining the independence of Hayti,
which had already cost the Frenchmen fifty thousand lives.

On January 1, 1804, at the place whence Toussaint had been treacherously
seized and sent to France, the independence of Hayti was declared by the
military leaders. Dessalines was made governor-general for life and
afterward proclaimed himself emperor. This was not an act of
grandiloquence and mimicry. "It is truer to say that in it both
Dessalines and later Christophe were actuated by a clear insight into
the social history and peculiarities of their people. There was nothing
in the constitution which did not have its companion in Africa, where
the organization of society was despotic, with elective hereditary
chiefs, royal families, polygamic marriages, councils, and
regencies." <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85)

The population was divided into soldiers and laborers. The territory was
parceled out to chiefs, and the laborers were bound to the soil and
worked under rigorous inspection; part of the products were reserved for
their support, and the rest went to the chiefs, the king, the general
government, and the army. The army was under stern discipline and
military service was compulsory. Women did much of the agricultural
labor. Under Toussaint the administration of this system was committed
to Dessalines, who carried it out with rigor; it was afterward followed
by Christophe. The latter even imported four thousand Negroes from
Africa, from whom he formed a national guard for patrolling the land.
These regulations brought back for a time a large part of the former
prosperity of the island.

The severity with which Dessalines enforced the laws soon began to turn
many against him. The educated mulattoes especially objected to
submission to the savage African mores. Dessalines started to suppress
their revolt, but was killed in ambush in October, 1806.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

Great Britain now began to intrigue for a protectorate over the island
and the Spanish end of the island threatened attack. These difficulties
were overcome, but at a cost of great internal strain. After the death
of Dessalines it seemed that Hayti was about to dissolve into a number
of petty subdivisions. At one time Christophe was ruling as king in the
north, Petion as president at Port au Prince, Rigaud in the south, and a
semi-brigand, Goman, in the extreme southwest. Very soon, however, the
rivalry narrowed down to Petion and Christophe. Petion was a man of
considerable ability and did much, not simply for Hayti, but for South
America. Already as early as 1779, before the revolution in Hayti, the
Haytian Negroes had helped the United States. The British had captured
Savannah in 1778. The French fleet appeared on the coast of Georgia late
that year and was ordered to recruit men in Hayti. Eight hundred young
freedmen, blacks and mulattoes, offered to take part in the expedition,
and they fought valiantly in the siege and covered themselves with
glory. It was this legion that made the charge on the British and saved
the retreating American army. Among the men who fought there was
Christophe.

When Simon Bolivar, Commodore Aury, and many Venezuelan families were
driven from their country in 1815, they and their ships took temporary
refuge in Hayti. Notwithstanding the embarrassed condition of the
republic, Petion received them and gave them four thousand rifles with
ammunition, provisions, and last and best a printing press. He also
settled some international quarrels among members of the groups, and
Bolivar expressed himself afterward as being "overwhelmed with
magnanimous favors." <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)

Petion died in 1818 and was succeeded by his friend Boyer. Christophe
committed suicide the following year and Boyer became not simply ruler
of western Hayti, but also, by arrangement with the eastern end of the
island, gained the mastery there, where they were afraid of Spanish
aggression. Thus from 1822 to 1843 Boyer, a man of much ability, ruled
the whole of the island and gained the recognition of Haytian
independence from France and other nations.

France, under Charles X, demanded an indemnity of thirty million dollars
to reimburse the planters for confiscated lands and property. This Hayti
tried to pay, but the annual installment was a tremendous burden to the
impoverished country. Further negotiations

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

were entered into. Finally in 1838 France recognized the independence of
the republic and the indemnity was reduced to twelve million dollars.
Even this was a large burden for Hayti, and the payment of it for years
crippled the island.

The United States and Great Britain in 1825-26 recognized the
independence of Hayti. A concordat was arranged with the Pope for
governing the church in Hayti, and finally in 1860 the church placed
under the French hierarchy. Thus Boyer did unusually well; but his
necessary concessions to France weakened his influence at home, and
finally an earthquake, which destroyed several towns in 1842, raised the
superstitious of the populace against him. He resigned in 1843, leaving
the treasury well filled; but with his withdrawal the Spanish portion of
the island was lost to Hayti.

The subsequent history of Hayti since 1843 has been the struggle of a
small divided country to maintain political independence. The rich
resources of the country called for foreign capital, but outside capital
meant political influence from abroad, which the little nation rightly
feared. Within, the old antagonism between the freedman and the slave
settled into a color line between the mulatto and the black, which for a
time meant the difference between educated liberalism and reactionary
ignorance. This difference has largely disappeared, but some vestiges of
the color line remain. The result has been reaction and savagery under
Soulouque, Dominique, and Nord Alexis, and decided advance under
presidents like Nissage-Saget, Solomon, Legitime, and Hyppolite.

In political life Hayti is still in the sixteenth century; but in
economic life she has succeeded in placing on their own little farms the
happiest and most contented peasantry in the world, after raising them
from a veritable hell of slavery. If modern capitalistic greed can be
restrained from interference until the best elements of Hayti secure
permanent political leadership the triumph of the revolution will be
complete.

In other parts of the French-American dominion the slaves achieved
freedom also by insurrection. In Guadeloupe they helped the French drive
out the British, and thus gained emancipation. In Martinique it took
three revolts and a civil war to bring freedom.

The English slave empire in America centered in the Bermudas, Barbadoes,
Jamaica and the lesser islands, and in the United States. Barbadoes
developed a savage slave code, and the result was attempted slave
insurrections in 1674, 1692, and 1702. These were

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

not successful, but a rising in 1816 destroyed much property under the
leadership of a mulatto, Washington Franklin, and the repeal of bad laws
and eventual enfranchisement of the colored people followed. One
Barbadian mulatto, Sir Conrad Reeves, has held the position of chief
justice in the island and was knighted. A Negro insurrection in Dominica
under Farcel greatly exercised England in 1791 and 1794 and delayed
slave trade abolition; in 1844 and 1847 further uprisings took place,
and these continued from 1853 to 1893.

The chief island domain of English slavery was Jamaica. It was Oliver
Cromwell who, in his zeal for God and the slave trade, sent an
expedition to seize Hayti. His fleet, driven off there, took Jamaica in
1655. The English found the mountains already infested with runaway
slaves known as "Maroons," and more Negroes joined them when the English
arrived. In 1663 the freedom of the Maroons was acknowledged, land was
given them, and their leader, Juan de Bolas, was made a colonel in the
militia. He was killed, however, in the following year, and from 1664 to
1738 the three thousand or more black Maroons fought the British Empire
in guerrilla warfare. Soldiers, Indians, and dogs were sent against
them, and finally in 1738 Captain Cudjo and other chiefs made a formal
treaty of peace with Governor Trelawney. They were granted twenty-five
hundred acres and their freedom was recognized.

The peace lasted until 1795, when they rebelled again and gave the
British a severe drubbing, besides murdering planters. Bloodhounds again
were imported. The Maroons offered to surrender on the express condition
that none of their number should be deported from the island, as the
legislature wished. General Walpole hesitated, but could get peace on no
other terms and gave his word. The Maroons surrendered their arms, and
immediately the whites seized six hundred of the ringleaders and
transported them to the snows of Nova Scotia! The legislature then voted
a sword worth twenty-five hundred dollars to General Walpole, which he
indignantly refused to accept. Eventually these exiled Maroons found
their way to Sierra Leone, West Africa, in time to save that colony to
the British crown. <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87)

The pressing desire for peace with the Maroons on the part of the white
planters arose from the new sugar culture introduced in 1673. A greatly
increased demand for slaves followed, and between

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1700 and 1786 six
hundred and ten thousand slaves were imported; nevertheless, so severely
were they driven, that there were only three hundred thousand Negroes in
Jamaica in the latter year.

Despite the Moravian missions and other efforts late in the eighteenth
century, unrest among the Jamaica slaves and freedmen grew and was
increased by the anti-slavery agitation in England and the revolt in
Hayti. There was an insurrection in 1796; and in 1831 again the Negroes
of northwest Jamaica, impatient because of the slow progress of the
emancipation, arose in revolt and destroyed nearly three and a half
million dollars' worth of property, well-nigh ruining the planters
there. The next year two hundred and fifty-five thousand slaves were set
free, for which the planters were paid nearly thirty million dollars.
There ensued a discouraging condition of industry. The white officials
sent out in these days were arbitrary and corrupt. Little was done for
the mass of the people and there was outrageous over-taxation.
Nevertheless the backwardness of the colony was attributed to the Negro.
Governor Eyre complained in 1865 that the young and strong were good for
nothing and were filling the jails; but a simultaneous report by a
missionary told the truth concerning the officials. This aroused the
colored people, and a mulatto, George William Gordon, called a meeting.
Other meetings were afterward held, and finally the Negro peasantry
began a riot in 1861, in which eighteen people were killed, only a few
of whom were white.

The result was that Governor Eyre tried and executed by court-martial
354 persons, and in addition to this killed without trial 85, a total of
439. One thousand Negro homes were burned to the ground and thousands of
Negroes flogged or mutilated. Children had their brains dashed out,
pregnant women were murdered, and Gordon was tried by court-martial and
hanged. In fact the punishment was, as the royal commissioners said,
"reckless and positively barbarous." <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88)

This high-handed act aroused England. Eyre was not punished, but the
island was made a crown colony in 1866, and given representation in the
legislature in 1886.

In the island of St. Vincent, Indians first sought to enslave the
fugitive Negroes wrecked there, but the Negroes took the Carib women and
then drove the Indian men away. These "black Caribs" fought with
Indians, English, and others for three quarters of a

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

century, until the Indians were exterminated. The British took
possession in 1763. The black Caribs resisted, and after hard fighting
signed a treaty in 1773, receiving one-third of the island as their
property. They afterward helped the French against the British, and were
finally deported to the island of Ruatan, off Honduras. In Trinidad and
British Guiana there have been mutinies and rioting of slaves and a
curious mingling of races.

Other parts of South America must be dismissed briefly, because of
insufficient data. Colombia and Venezuela, with perhaps eight million
people, have at least one-third of their population of Negro and Indian
descent. Here Simon Bolivar with his Negro, mulatto, and Indian forces
began the war that liberated South America. Central America has a
smaller proportion of Negroids, perhaps one hundred thousand in all.
Bolivia and Peru have small amounts of Negro blood, while Argentine and
Uruguay have very little. The Negro population in these lands is
everywhere in process of rapid amalgamation with whites and Indians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[97:1](dbn12.htm#fr_75). H. O. Flipper's
translation of Castaneda de Nafera's narrative.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[99:1](dbn12.htm#fr_76) Johnston: *Negro in the
New World*, p. 109.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[99:2](dbn12.htm#fr_77) Bryce: *South America*,
pp. 479-480.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[99:3](dbn12.htm#fr_78) I.e., mulattoes.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[100:1](dbn12.htm#fr_79) *Inter-Racial
Problems*, p. 381.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[100:2](dbn12.htm#fr_80) Smith: *General History
of Virginia*.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[102:1](dbn12.htm#fr_81) La Croix: *Mémoires sur
la Révolution*, I, 253, 408.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[103:1](dbn12.htm#fr_82) Marquis d’Hermonas. Cf.
Johnston: *Negro in the New World*, p. 158.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[103:2](dbn12.htm#fr_83) DeWitt Talmage, in
*Christian Herald*, November 18, 1906.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[104:1](dbn12.htm#fr_84) Aimes: *African
Institutions in America* (reprinted from *Journal of American Folk
Lore*), p. 25.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[104:2](dbn12.htm#fr_85) Brown: *History of San
Domingo*, II, 158-159.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[105:1](dbn12.htm#fr_86) See Leger: *Hayti*,
Chap. XI.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[107:1](dbn12.htm#fr_87) Cf. Chapter V, [p.
69](dbn10.htm#page_69).

<span id="fn_88"></span>[108:1](dbn12.htm#fr_88) Johnston: *Negro in the
New World*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. The Negro in the United States](dbn13)

</div>
