[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cap04)  [Next](cap06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_06"></span> [![](tn/06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06.jpg)  
Cupid on the Cypress Tree

# Part IV.

The God being burned in this sort, and perceiving that promise and faith
was broken, he fled away without utterance of any word, from the eyes
and hands of his most unhappy wife. But Psyche fortuned to catch him, as
he was rising, by the right thigh, and held him fast as he flew about in
the air, until such time that constrained by weariness she let go and
fell down upon the ground. But Cupid followed her down, and lighted upon
the top of a cypress tree, and angerly spake unto her in this manner: "O
simple Psyche, consider with thyself, how I, little regarding the
commandment of my mother, who willed me that thou shouldst be married to
a man of base and miserable condition, did come myself from heaven to
love thee, and wounded my own body with my proper weapons to have thee
to my spouse. And did I seem a beast unto thee, that thou shouldst go
about to cut off my head with a razor, who loved thee so well? Did not I
always give thee in charge? did not I gently will thee to beware? But
those cursed aiders and counsellors of thine, shall be worthily rewarded
for their pains. As for thee, thou shalt be sufficiently punished by my
absence." When he had spoken these words, he took his flight into the
air.

Then Psyche fell flat on the ground, and as long as she might see her
husband, she cast her eyes after him into the air, weeping and lamenting
piteously; but when he was gone out of her sight, she threw herself into
the next running river, for the great anguish and dolour that she was
in, for the lack of her husband. Howbeit the water would not suffer her
to be drowned, but took pity upon her, in the honour of Cupid which
accustomed to broil and burn the river, and so threw her upon the bank
amongst the herbs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V](cap06)
