[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cap05)  [Next](cap07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_07"></span> [![](tn/07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07.jpg)  
Pan and Psyche

# Part V

Then Pan, the rustical God, sitting on the riverside, embracing and
teaching the Goddess Canna to tune her songs and pipes, by whom were
feeding the young and tender goats, after that he perceived Psyche in so
sorrowful case, not ignorant, I know not by what means, of her miserable
estate, endeavoured to pacify her in this sort: "O fair maid, I am a
rustic and rude herdsman, howbeit, by reason of my old age, expert in
many things; for as far as I can learn by conjecture, which, according
as wise men do term, is called divination, I perceive by your uncertain
gait, your pale hue, your sobbing sighs, and your watery eyes, that you
are greatly in love. Wherefore hearken to me, and go not about to slay
yourself, nor weep not at all, but rather adore and worship the great
God Cupid, and win him unto you by your gentle promise of service." When
the God of Shepherds had spoken these words, she gave no answer but made
reverence unto him as to a God, and so departed.

After that Psyche had gone a little way, she fortuned unawares to come
to a city where the husband of one of her sisters did dwell; which when
Psyche did understand, she caused that her sister had knowledge of her
coming, and so they met together, and after great embracing and
salutation, the sister of Psyche demanded the cause of her travel
thither. "Marry," quoth she, "do not you remember the counsel that you
gave me, whereby you would that I should kill the beast, who under
colour of my husband did lie with me every night? You shall understand,
that as soon as I brought forth the lamp to see and behold his shape, I
perceived that he was the son of Venus, even Cupid himself that lay with
me. Then I, being stroken with great pleasure, and desirous to embrace
him, could not thoroughly assuage my delight, but alas! by evil chance,
the boiling oil of the lamp fortuned to fall on his shoulder, which
caused him to awake, who, seeing me armed with fire and weapon, gan say:
'How darest thou be so bold as to do so great a mischief? Depart from
me, and take such things as thou didst bring: for I will have thy sister
(and named you) to my wife, and she shall be placed in my felicity.' And
by and by he commanded Zephyrus to carry me away from the bounds of his
house."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VI](cap07)
