[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lus00)  [Next](lus02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

### EDITOR’S PREFACE.

IN undertaking, at the publishers’ request, the function of editor of
Mickle’s Lusiad, I have compared the translation with the original, and,
in some places, where another translation seemed preferable to, or more
literal than, Mickle’s, I have, in addition, given that rendering in a
foot-note. Moreover, I have supplied the arguments to the several
cantos, given a few more explanatory notes, and added a table of
contents.

"The late ingenious translator of the Lusiad," says Lord
Strangford, <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md) "has portrayed the
character, and narrated the misfortunes of our poet, in a manner more
honourable to his feelings as a man than to his accuracy in point of
biographical detail. It is with diffidence that the present writer
essays to correct his errors; but, as the real circumstances of the life
of Camoëns are mostly to be found in his own minor compositions, with
which Mr. Mickle was unacquainted, he trusts that certain information
will atone for his presumption."

As Lord Strangford professes to have better and more recent sources of
information regarding the illustrious, but

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

unfortunate, bard of Portugal, I make no apology for presenting to the
reader an abstract of his lordship’s memoir. Much further information
will be found, however, in an able article contained in No. 53 of the
Quarterly Review for July, 1822, from the pen, I believe, of the poet
Southey. "The family of Camoëns was illustrious," says Lord Strangford,
"and originally Spanish. They were long settled at Cadmon, a castle in
Galicia, from which they probably derived their patronymic appellation.
However, there are some who maintain that their name alluded to a
certain wonderful bird, <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) whose
mischievous sagacity discovered and punished the smallest deviation from
conjugal fidelity. A lady of the house of Cadmon, whose conduct had been
rather indiscreet, demanded to be tried by this extraordinary judge. Her
innocence was proved, and, in gratitude to the being who had restored
him to matrimonial felicity, the contented husband adopted his name." It
would appear that in a dispute between the families of Cadmon and De
Castera, a cavalier of the latter family was slain. This happened in the
fourteenth century. A long train of persecution followed, to escape
which, Ruy de Camoëns, having embraced the cause of Ferdinand, removed
with his family into Portugal, about A.D. 1370. His son, Vasco de
Camoëns, was highly distinguished by royal favour, and had the honour of
being the ancestor of our poet, who descended from him in the fourth
generation. Luis de Camoëns, the author of the Lusiad, was born at
Lisbon about A.D. 1524. His misfortunes began with his birth--he never
saw a father’s smile--for Simon Vasco de Camoëns perished by shipwreck
in the very year which

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

gave being to his illustrious son. The future poet was sent to the
university of Coimbra--then at the height of its fame,--"and maintained
there by the provident care of his surviving parent."

"Love," says Lord Strangford, "is very nearly allied to devotion, and it
was in the exercise of the latter, that Camoëns was introduced to the
knowledge of the former. In the Church of Christ’s Wounds at Lisbon, on
11th April, 1542, Camoëns first beheld Doña Caterina de Atayde, the
object of his purest and earliest attachment . . . and it was not long
before Camoëns enjoyed an opportunity of declaring his affection, with
all the romantic ardour of eighteen and of a poet." The peculiar
situation of the lady, as one of the maids of honour to the queen,
imposed a restraint upon her admirer which soon became intolerable; and
he, for having violated the sanctity of the royal precincts, was in
consequence banished from the court. Whatever may have been the nature
of his offence, "it furnished a pretext to the young lady’s relations
for terminating an intercourse which worldly considerations rendered
highly imprudent."

But Love consoled his votary: his mistress, on the morning of his
departure, confessed the secret of her long-concealed affection, and the
sighs of grief were soon lost in those of mutual delight. The hour of
parting was, perhaps, the sweetest of our poet’s existence.

Camoëns removed to Santarem, but speedily returned to Lisbon, was a
second time detected, and again driven into exile. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2.md)

The voice of Love inspired our poet "with the glorious resolution of
conquering the obstacles which fortune had

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

placed between him and felicity." He obtained permission, therefore, to
accompany King John III. in an expedition then fitting out against the
Moors in Africa. In one of the engagements with the enemy our hero had
the misfortune to lose "his right eye, by some splinters from the deck
of the vessel in which he was stationed. Many of his most pathetic
compositions were written during this campaign, and the toils of a
martial life were sweetened by the recollection of her for whose sake
they were endured. His heroic conduct at length procured his recall to
court," but to find, alas, that his mistress was no more.

Disappointed in his hope of obtaining any recognition of his valiant
deeds, he now resolved, under the burning sun of India, to seek that
independence which his own country denied. "The last words I uttered,"
says Camoëns, "on board the vessel before leaving, were those of Scipio:
‘Ungrateful country! thou shalt not even possess my bones.’" "Some,"
says Lord Strangford, "attribute his departure to a very different
cause, and assert that he quitted his native shores on account of an
intrigue in which he was detected with the beautiful wife of a
Portuguese gentleman. Perhaps," says Lord Strangford, "this story may
not be wholly unfounded." On his arrival in India he contributed by his
bravery to the success of an expedition carried on by the King of
Cochin, and his allies, the Portuguese, against the Pimento Islands; and
in the following year (1555) he accompanied Manuel de Vasconcelos in an
expedition to the Red Sea. Here he explored the wild regions of East
Africa, and stored his mind with ideas of scenery, which afterwards
formed some of the most finished pictures of the Lusiad.

On his return to Goa, Camoëns devoted his whole attention to the
completion of his poem; but an unfortunate satire which, under the title
of *Disparates na India*, or Follies in India, he wrote against the
vices and corruptions

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

of the Portuguese authorities in Goa, so roused the indignation of the
viceroy that the poet was banished to China.

Of his adventures in China, and the temporary prosperity he enjoyed
there, while he held the somewhat uncongenial office of *Provedor dos
defuntos*, *i.e*., Trustee for deceased persons, Mickle has given an
ample account in the introduction to the Lusiad. During those years
Camoëns completed his poem, about half of which was written before he
left Europe. According to a tradition, not improbable in itself, he
composed great part of it in a natural grotto which commands a splendid
view of the city and harbour of Macao. An engraving of it may be seen in
Ouseley’s Oriental Collections, and another will be found in Sir G.
Staunton’s Account of the Embassy to China.

A little temple, in the Chinese style, has been erected upon the rock,
and the ground around it has been ornamented by Mr. Fitzhugh, one of our
countrymen, from respect to the memory of the poet. The years that he
passed in Macao were probably the happiest of his life. Of his departure
for Europe, and his unfortunate shipwreck at the mouth of the river
Meekhaun, <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3.md) in Cochin China, Mickle has
also given a sufficient account.

Lord Strangford has related, on the authority of Sousa, that while our
poet was languishing in poverty at Lisbon, "a cavalier, named Ruy de
Camera, called on him one day, asking him to finish for him a poetical
version of the seven penitential psalms. Raising his head from his
wretched pallet, and pointing to his faithful Javanese attendant, he
exclaimed, ‘Alas, when I was a poet, I was young, and happy, and blest
with the love of ladies; but now I am a forlorn, deserted wretch.
See--there stands my poor Antonio,

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

vainly supplicating fourpence to purchase a little coals--I have them
not to give him.’ The cavalier, as Sousa relates, closed both his heart
and his purse, and quitted the room. Such were the grandees of
Portugal." Camoëns sank under the pressure of penury and disease, and
died in an alms-house, early in 1579, and was buried in the church of
Sta. Anna of the Franciscan Friars. Over his grave Gonzalo Coutinho
placed the following inscription:--

"HERE LIES LUIS DE CAMOËNS.

HE EXCELLED ALL THE POETS OF HIS TIME.

HE LIVED POOR AND MISERABLE, AND HE DIED SO.

MDLXXIX."

The translator of the Lusiad was born, in 1734, at Langholm, in
Dumfriesshire, where his father, a good French scholar, was the
Presbyterian minister. At the age of sixteen William Julius Mickle was
removed, to his great dislike, from school, and sent into the
counting-house of a relation of his mother’s, a brewer, where, against
his inclination, he remained five years. He subsequently, for family
reasons, became the head of the firm, and carried on the business. It is
not to be wondered at, however, that with his dislike to business in
general and to this one in particular, he did not succeed; and it is
quite reasonable to suppose that the cause of his failure, and
subsequent pecuniary embarrassments, arose from his having devoted those
hours to his poetical studies which should have been dedicated to
business. Mickle obtained afterwards the appointment of corrector of the
Clarendon Press in Oxford, and died at Wheatly, in Oxfordshire, in 1789.

Southey speaks of Mickle (*Quarterly Review*, liii. p. 29) as a man of
genius who had ventured upon the chance of living by his literary
labours, and says that he "did not over-rate the powers which he was
conscious of possessing, knew that he could rely upon himself for their
due

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

exertion, and had sufficient worldly prudence to look out for a subject
which was likely to obtain notice and patronage." His other poems,
Pollio, Sir Martyn, etc., with the exception of his Cumnor Hall, are not
held in high estimation.

Describing the several poetic versions of the Lusiad, Mr. Musgrave
says, <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4.md) of Fanshaw’s version, that "its
language is antiquated, and in many instances it travesties the
original, and seldom long sustains the tone of epic gravity suited to
the poem. It is, however," says he, "more faithful than the translation
of Mickle, but it would be ungenerous," he adds, "to dwell on the
paraphrastic licences which abound in Mickle’s performance, and on its
many interpolations and omissions. Mr. Mickle thought, no doubt," says
Musgrave, "that by this process he should produce a poem which in its
perusal might afford a higher gratification. Nor am I prepared to say
that by all readers this would be deemed a miscalculation. Let it not be
supposed, however, that I wish to detract from the intrinsic merit of
his translation. It is but an act of justice to admit, that it contains
many passages of exquisite beauty, and that it is a performance which
discovers much genius, a cultivated taste, and a brilliant imagination.
Many parts of the original are rendered with great facility, elegance,
and fidelity. In poetical elegance I presume not to enter into
competition with him."

For his own performance Musgrave claims the merit of greater fidelity to
the original; but in respect of harmony, in true poetic grace, and
sublimity of diction, his translation will bear no comparison with
Mickle’s version; for even Southey, in the article before quoted, though
very hard upon his interpolations, admits that, "Mickle was a

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

man of genius . . . a man whom we admire and respect; whose memory is
without a spot, and whose name will live among the English poets."
(*Quarterly Review*, liii. p. 29.)

It only remains for me to say, that in order to place the reader in a
position to judge of the merits of this sublime effort of genius, I have
distinguished Mickle’s longer interpolations by printing them in Bk. i.
p. 24, in *Italics*, and in the first 300 lines of Bk. ix. by calling
the attention of the reader to the interpolation by means of a footnote.
The notes are, in general, left as written by the translator, except in
some cases where it seemed advisable to curtail them. Original notes are
indicated by the abbreviation "*Ed*."

THE EDITOR.

     LONDON, 1877.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:\*](lus01.htm#fr_0.md) *Poems of Luis de
Camoëns, with Remarks on his Life and Writings*. By Lord Viscount
Strangford. Fifth edition. London, 1808.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[viii:\*](lus01.htm#fr_1.md) The Camaõ. Formerly
every well-regulated family in Spain retained one of these terrible
attendants. The infidelity of its mistress was the only circumstance
which could deprive it of life, This odious distrust of female honour is
ever characteristic of a barbarous age.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[ix:\*](lus01.htm#fr_2.md) The laws of Portugal were
peculiarly severe against those who carried on a love-intrigue within
the palace: "they punished the offence with death. Joam I. suffered one
of his favourites to be burnt alive for it.--*Ed*.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xi:\*](lus01.htm#fr_3.md) The Maekhaun, or
Camboja.--*Ed*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xiii:\*](lus01.htm#fr_4.md) Thomas Moore Musgrave’s
translation of The Lusiad is in blank verse, and is dedicated to the
Earl of Chichester. 1 vol. 8vo. Murray: 1826.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Life of Camoëns](lus02.md)
